CHAPTER IV.
THE GALE.


I found my uncle at the gable end, watching the signs of the weather,
with a pipe in his fingers.

“Uncle,” said I, “there were men ashore at Sandag Bay—”

I had no time to go further; indeed, I not only forgot my words, but
even my weariness, so strange was the effect on Uncle Gordon. He
dropped his pipe and fell back against the end of the house with his
jaw fallen, his eyes staring, and his long face as white as paper. We
must have looked at one another silently for a quarter of a minute,
before he made answer in this extraordinary fashion: “Had he a hair kep
on?”

I knew as well as if I had been there that the man who now lay buried
at Sandag had worn a hairy cap, and that he had come ashore alive. For
the first and only time I lost toleration for the man who was my
benefactor and the father of the woman I hoped to call my wife.

“These were living men,” said I, “perhaps Jacobites, perhaps the
French, perhaps pirates, perhaps adventurers come here to seek the
Spanish treasure ship; but, whatever they may be, dangerous at least to
your daughter and my cousin. As for your own guilty terrors, man, the
dead sleeps well where you have laid him. I stood this morning by his
grave; he will not wake before the trump of doom.”

My kinsman looked upon me, blinking, while I spoke; then he fixed his
eyes for a little on the ground, and pulled his fingers foolishly; but
it was plain that he was past the power of speech.

“Come,” said I. “You must think for others. You must come up the hill
with me, and see this ship.”

He obeyed without a word or a look, following slowly after my impatient
strides. The spring seemed to have gone out of his body, and he
scrambled heavily up and down the rocks, instead of leaping, as he was
wont, from one to another. Nor could I, for all my cries, induce him to
make better haste. Only once he replied to me complainingly, and like
one in bodily pain: “Ay, ay, man, I’m coming.” Long before we had
reached the top, I had no other thought for him but pity. If the crime
had been monstrous the punishment was in proportion.

At last we emerged above the sky-line of the hill, and could see around
us. All was black and stormy to the eye; the last gleam of sun had
vanished; a wind had sprung up, not yet high, but gusty and unsteady to
the point; the rain, on the other hand, had ceased. Short as was the
interval, the sea already ran vastly higher than when I had stood there
last; already it had begun to break over some of the outward reefs, and
already it moaned aloud in the sea-caves of Aros. I looked, at first,
in vain for the schooner.

“There she is,” I said at last. But her new position, and the course
she was now lying, puzzled me. “They cannot mean to beat to sea,” I
cried.

“That’s what they mean,” said my uncle, with something like joy; and
just then the schooner went about and stood upon another tack, which
put the question beyond the reach of doubt. These strangers, seeing a
gale on hand, had thought first of sea-room. With the wind that
threatened, in these reef-sown waters and contending against so violent
a stream of tide, their course was certain death.

“Good God!” said I, “they are all lost.”

“Ay,” returned my uncle, “a’—a’ lost. They hadnae a chance but to rin
for Kyle Dona. The gate they’re gaun the noo, they couldnae win through
an the muckle deil were there to pilot them. Eh, man,” he continued,
touching me on the sleeve, “it’s a braw nicht for a shipwreck! Twa in
ae twalmonth! Eh, but the Merry Men’ll dance bonny!”

I looked at him, and it was then that I began to fancy him no longer in
his right mind. He was peering up to me, as if for sympathy, a timid
joy in his eyes. All that had passed between us was already forgotten
in the prospect of this fresh disaster.

“If it were not too late,” I cried with indignation, “I would take the
coble and go out to warn them.”

“Na, na,” he protested, “ye maunnae interfere; ye maunnae meddle wi’
the like o’ that. It’s His”—doffing his bonnet—“His wull. And, eh, man!
but it’s a braw nicht for’t!”

Something like fear began to creep into my soul and, reminding him that
I had not yet dined, I proposed we should return to the house. But no;
nothing would tear him from his place of outlook.

“I maun see the hail thing, man, Cherlie,” he explained—and then as the
schooner went about a second time, “Eh, but they han’le her bonny!” he
cried. “The _Christ-Anna_ was naething to this.”

Already the men on board the schooner must have begun to realise some
part, but not yet the twentieth, of the dangers that environed their
doomed ship. At every lull of the capricious wind they must have seen
how fast the current swept them back. Each tack was made shorter, as
they saw how little it prevailed. Every moment the rising swell began
to boom and foam upon another sunken reef; and ever and again a breaker
would fall in sounding ruin under the very bows of her, and the brown
reef and streaming tangle appear in the hollow of the wave. I tell you,
they had to stand to their tackle: there was no idle men aboard that
ship, God knows. It was upon the progress of a scene so horrible to any
human-hearted man that my misguided uncle now pored and gloated like a
connoisseur. As I turned to go down the hill, he was lying on his belly
on the summit, with his hands stretched forth and clutching in the
heather. He seemed rejuvenated, mind and body.

When I got back to the house already dismally affected, I was still
more sadly downcast at the sight of Mary. She had her sleeves rolled up
over her strong arms, and was quietly making bread. I got a bannock
from the dresser and sat down to eat it in silence.

“Are ye wearied, lad?” she asked after a while.

“I am not so much wearied, Mary,” I replied, getting on my feet, “as I
am weary of delay, and perhaps of Aros too. You know me well enough to
judge me fairly, say what I like. Well, Mary, you may be sure of this:
you had better be anywhere but here.”

“I’ll be sure of one thing,” she returned: “I’ll be where my duty is.”

“You forget, you have a duty to yourself,” I said.

“Ay, man?” she replied, pounding at the dough; “will you have found
that in the Bible, now?”

“Mary,” I said solemnly, “you must not laugh at me just now. God knows
I am in no heart for laughing. If we could get your father with us, it
would be best; but with him or without him, I want you far away from
here, my girl; for your own sake, and for mine, ay, and for your
father’s too, I want you far—far away from here. I came with other
thoughts; I came here as a man comes home; now it is all changed, and I
have no desire nor hope but to flee—for that’s the word—flee, like a
bird out of the fowler’s snare, from this accursed island.”

She had stopped her work by this time.

“And do you think, now,” said she, “do you think, now, I have neither
eyes nor ears? Do ye think I havenae broken my heart to have these
braws (as he calls them, God forgive him!) thrown into the sea? Do ye
think I have lived with him, day in, day out, and not seen what you saw
in an hour or two? No,” she said, “I know there’s wrong in it; what
wrong, I neither know nor want to know. There was never an ill thing
made better by meddling, that I could hear of. But, my lad, you must
never ask me to leave my father. While the breath is in his body, I’ll
be with him. And he’s not long for here, either: that I can tell you,
Charlie—he’s not long for here. The mark is on his brow; and better
so—maybe better so.”

I was a while silent, not knowing what to say; and when I roused my
head at last to speak, she got before me.

“Charlie,” she said, “what’s right for me, neednae be right for you.
There’s sin upon this house and trouble; you are a stranger; take your
things upon your back and go your ways to better places and to better
folk, and if you were ever minded to come back, though it were twenty
years syne, you would find me aye waiting.”

“Mary Ellen,” I said, “I asked you to be my wife, and you said as good
as yes. That’s done for good. Wherever you are, I am; as I shall answer
to my God.”

As I said the words, the wind suddenly burst out raving, and then
seemed to stand still and shudder round the house of Aros. It was the
first squall, or prologue, of the coming tempest, and as we started and
looked about us, we found that a gloom, like the approach of evening,
had settled round the house.

“God pity all poor folks at sea!” she said. “We’ll see no more of my
father till the morrow’s morning.”

And then she told me, as we sat by the fire and hearkened to the rising
gusts, of how this change had fallen upon my uncle. All last winter he
had been dark and fitful in his mind. Whenever the Roost ran high, or,
as Mary said, whenever the Merry Men were dancing, he would lie out for
hours together on the Head, if it were at night, or on the top of Aros
by day, watching the tumult of the sea, and sweeping the horizon for a
sail. After February the tenth, when the wealth-bringing wreck was cast
ashore at Sandag, he had been at first unnaturally gay, and his
excitement had never fallen in degree, but only changed in kind from
dark to darker. He neglected his work, and kept Rorie idle. They two
would speak together by the hour at the gable end, in guarded tones and
with an air of secrecy and almost of guilt; and if she questioned
either, as at first she sometimes did, her inquiries were put aside
with confusion. Since Rorie had first remarked the fish that hung about
the ferry, his master had never set foot but once upon the mainland of
the Ross. That once—it was in the height of the springs—he had passed
dryshod while the tide was out; but, having lingered overlong on the
far side, found himself cut off from Aros by the returning waters. It
was with a shriek of agony that he had leaped across the gut, and he
had reached home thereafter in a fever-fit of fear. A fear of the sea,
a constant haunting thought of the sea, appeared in his talk and
devotions, and even in his looks when he was silent.

Rorie alone came in to supper; but a little later my uncle appeared,
took a bottle under his arm, put some bread in his pocket, and set
forth again to his outlook, followed this time by Rorie. I heard that
the schooner was losing ground, but the crew were still fighting every
inch with hopeless ingenuity and course; and the news filled my mind
with blackness.

A little after sundown the full fury of the gale broke forth, such a
gale as I have never seen in summer, nor, seeing how swiftly it had
come, even in winter. Mary and I sat in silence, the house quaking
overhead, the tempest howling without, the fire between us sputtering
with raindrops. Our thoughts were far away with the poor fellows on the
schooner, or my not less unhappy uncle, houseless on the promontory;
and yet ever and again we were startled back to ourselves, when the
wind would rise and strike the gable like a solid body, or suddenly
fall and draw away, so that the fire leaped into flame and our hearts
bounded in our sides. Now the storm in its might would seize and shake
the four corners of the roof, roaring like Leviathan in anger. Anon, in
a lull, cold eddies of tempest moved shudderingly in the room, lifting
the hair upon our heads and passing between us as we sat. And again the
wind would break forth in a chorus of melancholy sounds, hooting low in
the chimney, wailing with flutelike softness round the house.

It was perhaps eight o’clock when Rorie came in and pulled me
mysteriously to the door. My uncle, it appeared, had frightened even
his constant comrade; and Rorie, uneasy at his extravagance, prayed me
to come out and share the watch. I hastened to do as I was asked; the
more readily as, what with fear and horror, and the electrical tension
of the night, I was myself restless and disposed for action. I told
Mary to be under no alarm, for I should be a safeguard on her father;
and wrapping myself warmly in a plaid, I followed Rorie into the open
air.

The night, though we were so little past midsummer, was as dark as
January. Intervals of a groping twilight alternated with spells of
utter blackness; and it was impossible to trace the reason of these
changes in the flying horror of the sky. The wind blew the breath out
of a man’s nostrils; all heaven seemed to thunder overhead like one
huge sail; and when there fell a momentary lull on Aros, we could hear
the gusts dismally sweeping in the distance. Over all the lowlands of
the Ross, the wind must have blown as fierce as on the open sea; and
God only knows the uproar that was raging around the head of Ben Kyaw.
Sheets of mingled spray and rain were driven in our faces. All round
the isle of Aros the surf, with an incessant, hammering thunder, beat
upon the reefs and beaches. Now louder in one place, now lower in
another, like the combinations of orchestral music, the constant mass
of sound was hardly varied for a moment. And loud above all this
hurly-burly I could hear the changeful voices of the Roost and the
intermittent roaring of the Merry Men. At that hour, there flashed into
my mind the reason of the name that they were called. For the noise of
them seemed almost mirthful, as it out-topped the other noises of the
night; or if not mirthful, yet instinct with a portentous joviality.
Nay, and it seemed even human. As when savage men have drunk away their
reason, and, discarding speech, bawl together in their madness by the
hour; so, to my ears, these deadly breakers shouted by Aros in the
night.

Arm in arm, and staggering against the wind, Rorie and I won every yard
of ground with conscious effort. We slipped on the wet sod, we fell
together sprawling on the rocks. Bruised, drenched, beaten, and
breathless, it must have taken us near half an hour to get from the
house down to the Head that overlooks the Roost. There, it seemed, was
my uncle’s favourite observatory. Right in the face of it, where the
cliff is highest and most sheer, a hump of earth, like a parapet, makes
a place of shelter from the common winds, where a man may sit in quiet
and see the tide and the mad billows contending at his feet. As he
might look down from the window of a house upon some street
disturbance, so, from this post, he looks down upon the tumbling of the
Merry Men. On such a night, of course, he peers upon a world of
blackness, where the waters wheel and boil, where the waves joust
together with the noise of an explosion, and the foam towers and
vanishes in the twinkling of an eye. Never before had I seen the Merry
Men thus violent. The fury, height, and transiency of their spoutings
was a thing to be seen and not recounted. High over our heads on the
cliff rose their white columns in the darkness; and the same instant,
like phantoms, they were gone. Sometimes three at a time would thus
aspire and vanish; sometimes a gust took them, and the spray would fall
about us, heavy as a wave. And yet the spectacle was rather maddening
in its levity than impressive by its force. Thought was beaten down by
the confounding uproar—a gleeful vacancy possessed the brains of men, a
state akin to madness; and I found myself at times following the dance
of the Merry Men as it were a tune upon a jigging instrument.

I first caught sight of my uncle when we were still some yards away in
one of the flying glimpses of twilight that chequered the pitch
darkness of the night. He was standing up behind the parapet, his head
thrown back and the bottle to his mouth. As he put it down, he saw and
recognised us with a toss of one hand fleeringly above his head.

“Has he been drinking?” shouted I to Rorie.

“He will aye be drunk when the wind blaws,” returned Rorie in the same
high key, and it was all that I could do to hear him.

“Then—was he so—in February?” I inquired.

Rorie’s “Ay” was a cause of joy to me. The murder, then, had not sprung
in cold blood from calculation; it was an act of madness no more to be
condemned than to be pardoned. My uncle was a dangerous madman, if you
will, but he was not cruel and base as I had feared. Yet what a scene
for a carouse, what an incredible vice, was this that the poor man had
chosen! I have always thought drunkenness a wild and almost fearful
pleasure, rather demoniacal than human; but drunkenness, out here in
the roaring blackness, on the edge of a cliff above that hell of
waters, the man’s head spinning like the Roost, his foot tottering on
the edge of death, his ear watching for the signs of ship-wreck, surely
that, if it were credible in any one, was morally impossible in a man
like my uncle, whose mind was set upon a damnatory creed and haunted by
the darkest superstitions. Yet so it was; and, as we reached the bight
of shelter and could breathe again, I saw the man’s eyes shining in the
night with an unholy glimmer.

“Eh, Charlie, man, it’s grand!” he cried. “See to them!” he continued,
dragging me to the edge of the abyss from whence arose that deafening
clamour and those clouds of spray; “see to them dancin’, man! Is that
no wicked?”

He pronounced the word with gusto, and I thought it suited with the
scene.

“They’re yowlin’ for thon schooner,” he went on, his thin, insane voice
clearly audible in the shelter of the bank, “an’ she’s comin’ aye
nearer, aye nearer, aye nearer an’ nearer an’ nearer; an’ they ken’t,
the folk kens it, they ken wool it’s by wi’ them. Charlie, lad, they’re
a’ drunk in yon schooner, a’ dozened wi’ drink. They were a’ drunk in
the _Christ-Anna_, at the hinder end. There’s nane could droon at sea
wantin’ the brandy. Hoot awa, what do you ken?” with a sudden blast of
anger. “I tell ye, it cannae be; they droon withoot it. Ha’e,” holding
out the bottle, “tak’ a sowp.”

I was about to refuse, but Rorie touched me as if in warning; and
indeed I had already thought better of the movement. I took the bottle,
therefore, and not only drank freely myself, but contrived to spill
even more as I was doing so. It was pure spirit, and almost strangled
me to swallow. My kinsman did not observe the loss, but, once more
throwing back his head, drained the remainder to the dregs. Then, with
a loud laugh, he cast the bottle forth among the Merry Men, who seemed
to leap up, shouting to receive it.

“Ha’e, bairns!” he cried, “there’s your han’sel. Ye’ll get bonnier nor
that, or morning.”

Suddenly, out in the black night before us, and not two hundred yards
away, we heard, at a moment when the wind was silent, the clear note of
a human voice. Instantly the wind swept howling down upon the Head, and
the Roost bellowed, and churned, and danced with a new fury. But we had
heard the sound, and we knew, with agony, that this was the doomed ship
now close on ruin, and that what we had heard was the voice of her
master issuing his last command. Crouching together on the edge, we
waited, straining every sense, for the inevitable end. It was long,
however, and to us it seemed like ages, ere the schooner suddenly
appeared for one brief instant, relieved against a tower of glimmering
foam. I still see her reefed mainsail flapping loose, as the boom fell
heavily across the deck; I still see the black outline of the hull, and
still think I can distinguish the figure of a man stretched upon the
tiller. Yet the whole sight we had of her passed swifter than
lightning; the very wave that disclosed her fell burying her for ever;
the mingled cry of many voices at the point of death rose and was
quenched in the roaring of the Merry Men. And with that the tragedy was
at an end. The strong ship, with all her gear, and the lamp perhaps
still burning in the cabin, the lives of so many men, precious surely
to others, dear, at least, as heaven to themselves, had all, in that
one moment, gone down into the surging waters. They were gone like a
dream. And the wind still ran and shouted, and the senseless waters in
the Roost still leaped and tumbled as before.

How long we lay there together, we three, speechless and motionless, is
more than I can tell, but it must have been for long. At length, one by
one, and almost mechanically, we crawled back into the shelter of the
bank. As I lay against the parapet, wholly wretched and not entirely
master of my mind, I could hear my kinsman maundering to himself in an
altered and melancholy mood. Now he would repeat to himself with
maudlin iteration, “Sic a fecht as they had—sic a sair fecht as they
had, puir lads, puir lads!” and anon he would bewail that “a’ the gear
was as gude’s tint,” because the ship had gone down among the Merry Men
instead of stranding on the shore; and throughout, the name—the
_Christ-Anna_—would come and go in his divagations, pronounced with
shuddering awe. The storm all this time was rapidly abating. In half an
hour the wind had fallen to a breeze, and the change was accompanied or
caused by a heavy, cold, and plumping rain. I must then have fallen
asleep, and when I came to myself, drenched, stiff, and unrefreshed,
day had already broken, grey, wet, discomfortable day; the wind blew in
faint and shifting capfuls, the tide was out, the Roost was at its
lowest, and only the strong beating surf round all the coasts of Aros
remained to witness of the furies of the night.




