CHAPTER III.
LAND AND SEA IN SANDAG BAY.


I was early afoot next morning; and as soon as I had a bite to eat, set
forth upon a tour of exploration. Something in my heart distinctly told
me that I should find the ship of the Armada; and although I did not
give way entirely to such hopeful thoughts, I was still very light in
spirits and walked upon air. Aros is a very rough islet, its surface
strewn with great rocks and shaggy with fernland heather; and my way
lay almost north and south across the highest knoll; and though the
whole distance was inside of two miles it took more time and exertion
than four upon a level road. Upon the summit, I paused. Although not
very high—not three hundred feet, as I think—it yet outtops all the
neighbouring lowlands of the Ross, and commands a great view of sea and
islands. The sun, which had been up some time, was already hot upon my
neck; the air was listless and thundery, although purely clear; away
over the north-west, where the isles lie thickliest congregated, some
half-a-dozen small and ragged clouds hung together in a covey; and the
head of Ben Kyaw wore, not merely a few streamers, but a solid hood of
vapour. There was a threat in the weather. The sea, it is true, was
smooth like glass: even the Roost was but a seam on that wide mirror,
and the Merry Men no more than caps of foam; but to my eye and ear, so
long familiar with these places, the sea also seemed to lie uneasily; a
sound of it, like a long sigh, mounted to me where I stood; and, quiet
as it was, the Roost itself appeared to be revolving mischief. For I
ought to say that all we dwellers in these parts attributed, if not
prescience, at least a quality of warning, to that strange and
dangerous creature of the tides.

I hurried on, then, with the greater speed, and had soon descended the
slope of Aros to the part that we call Sandag Bay. It is a pretty large
piece of water compared with the size of the isle; well sheltered from
all but the prevailing wind; sandy and shoal and bounded by low
sand-hills to the west, but to the eastward lying several fathoms deep
along a ledge of rocks. It is upon that side that, at a certain time
each flood, the current mentioned by my uncle sets so strong into the
bay; a little later, when the Roost begins to work higher, an undertow
runs still more strongly in the reverse direction; and it is the action
of this last, as I suppose, that has scoured that part so deep. Nothing
is to be seen out of Sandag Bay, but one small segment of the horizon
and, in heavy weather, the breakers flying high over a deep sea reef.

From half-way down the hill, I had perceived the wreck of February
last, a brig of considerable tonnage, lying, with her back broken, high
and dry on the east corner of the sands; and I was making directly
towards it, and already almost on the margin of the turf, when my eyes
were suddenly arrested by a spot, cleared of fern and heather, and
marked by one of those long, low, and almost human-looking mounds that
we see so commonly in graveyards. I stopped like a man shot. Nothing
had been said to me of any dead man or interment on the island; Rorie,
Mary, and my uncle had all equally held their peace; of her at least, I
was certain that she must be ignorant; and yet here, before my eyes,
was proof indubitable of the fact. Here was a grave; and I had to ask
myself, with a chill, what manner of man lay there in his last sleep,
awaiting the signal of the Lord in that solitary, sea-beat
resting-place? My mind supplied no answer but what I feared to
entertain. Shipwrecked, at least, he must have been; perhaps, like the
old Armada mariners, from some far and rich land over-sea; or perhaps
one of my own race, perishing within eyesight of the smoke of home. I
stood awhile uncovered by his side, and I could have desired that it
had lain in our religion to put up some prayer for that unhappy
stranger, or, in the old classic way, outwardly to honour his
misfortune. I knew, although his bones lay there, a part of Aros, till
the trumpet sounded, his imperishable soul was forth and far away,
among the raptures of the everlasting Sabbath or the pangs of hell; and
yet my mind misgave me even with a fear, that perhaps he was near me
where I stood, guarding his sepulchre, and lingering on the scene of
his unhappy fate.

Certainly it was with a spirit somewhat over-shadowed that I turned
away from the grave to the hardly less melancholy spectacle of the
wreck. Her stem was above the first arc of the flood; she was broken in
two a little abaft the foremast—though indeed she had none, both masts
having broken short in her disaster; and as the pitch of the beach was
very sharp and sudden, and the bows lay many feet below the stern, the
fracture gaped widely open, and you could see right through her poor
hull upon the farther side. Her name was much defaced, and I could not
make out clearly whether she was called _Christiania_, after the
Norwegian city, or _Christiana_, after the good woman, Christian’s
wife, in that old book the “Pilgrim’s Progress.” By her build she was a
foreign ship, but I was not certain of her nationality. She had been
painted green, but the colour was faded and weathered, and the paint
peeling off in strips. The wreck of the mainmast lay alongside, half
buried in sand. She was a forlorn sight, indeed, and I could not look
without emotion at the bits of rope that still hung about her, so often
handled of yore by shouting seamen; or the little scuttle where they
had passed up and down to their affairs; or that poor noseless angel of
a figure-head that had dipped into so many running billows.

I do not know whether it came most from the ship or from the grave, but
I fell into some melancholy scruples, as I stood there, leaning with
one hand against the battered timbers. The homelessness of men and even
of inanimate vessels, cast away upon strange shores, came strongly in
upon my mind. To make a profit of such pitiful misadventures seemed an
unmanly and a sordid act; and I began to think of my then quest as of
something sacrilegious in its nature. But when I remembered Mary, I
took heart again. My uncle would never consent to an imprudent
marriage, nor would she, as I was persuaded, wed without his full
approval. It behoved me, then, to be up and doing for my wife; and I
thought with a laugh how long it was since that great sea-castle, the
_Espirito Santo_, had left her bones in Sandag Bay, and how weak it
would be to consider rights so long extinguished and misfortunes so
long forgotten in the process of time.

I had my theory of where to seek for her remains. The set of the
current and the soundings both pointed to the east side of the bay
under the ledge of rocks. If she had been lost in Sandag Bay, and if,
after these centuries, any portion of her held together, it was there
that I should find it. The water deepens, as I have said, with great
rapidity, and even close along-side the rocks several fathoms may be
found. As I walked upon the edge I could see far and wide over the
sandy bottom of the bay; the sun shone clear and green and steady in
the deeps; the bay seemed rather like a great transparent crystal, as
one sees them in a lapidary’s shop; there was naught to show that it
was water but an internal trembling, a hovering within of sun-glints
and netted shadows, and now and then a faint lap and a dying bubble
round the edge. The shadows of the rocks lay out for some distance at
their feet, so that my own shadow, moving, pausing, and stooping on the
top of that, reached sometimes half across the bay. It was above all in
this belt of shadows that I hunted for the _Espirito Santo_; since it
was there the undertow ran strongest, whether in or out. Cool as the
whole water seemed this broiling day, it looked, in that part, yet
cooler, and had a mysterious invitation for the eyes. Peer as I
pleased, however, I could see nothing but a few fishes or a bush of
sea-tangle, and here and there a lump of rock that had fallen from
above and now lay separate on the sandy floor. Twice did I pass from
one end to the other of the rocks, and in the whole distance I could
see nothing of the wreck, nor any place but one where it was possible
for it to be. This was a large terrace in five fathoms of water, raised
off the surface of the sand to a considerable height, and looking from
above like a mere outgrowth of the rocks on which I walked. It was one
mass of great sea-tangles like a grove, which prevented me judging of
its nature, but in shape and size it bore some likeness to a vessel’s
hull. At least it was my best chance. If the _Espirito Santo_ lay not
there under the tangles, it lay nowhere at all in Sandag Bay; and I
prepared to put the question to the proof, once and for all, and either
go back to Aros a rich man or cured for ever of my dreams of wealth.

I stripped to the skin, and stood on the extreme margin with my hands
clasped, irresolute. The bay at that time was utterly quiet; there was
no sound but from a school of porpoises somewhere out of sight behind
the point; yet a certain fear withheld me on the threshold of my
venture. Sad sea-feelings, scraps of my uncle’s superstitions, thoughts
of the dead, of the grave, of the old broken ships, drifted through my
mind. But the strong sun upon my shoulders warmed me to the heart, and
I stooped forward and plunged into the sea.

It was all that I could do to catch a trail of the sea-tangle that grew
so thickly on the terrace; but once so far anchored I secured myself by
grasping a whole armful of these thick and slimy stalks, and, planting
my feet against the edge, I looked around me. On all sides the clear
sand stretched forth unbroken; it came to the foot of the rocks,
scoured into the likeness of an alley in a garden by the action of the
tides; and before me, for as far as I could see, nothing was visible
but the same many-folded sand upon the sun-bright bottom of the bay.
Yet the terrace to which I was then holding was as thick with strong
sea-growths as a tuft of heather, and the cliff from which it bulged
hung draped below the water-line with brown lianas. In this complexity
of forms, all swaying together in the current, things were hard to be
distinguished; and I was still uncertain whether my feet were pressed
upon the natural rock or upon the timbers of the Armada treasure-ship,
when the whole tuft of tangle came away in my hand, and in an instant I
was on the surface, and the shores of the bay and the bright water swam
before my eyes in a glory of crimson.

I clambered back upon the rocks, and threw the plant of tangle at my
feet. Something at the same moment rang sharply, like a falling coin. I
stooped, and there, sure enough, crusted with the red rust, there lay
an iron shoe-buckle. The sight of this poor human relic thrilled me to
the heart, but not with hope nor fear, only with a desolate melancholy.
I held it in my hand, and the thought of its owner appeared before me
like the presence of an actual man. His weather-beaten face, his
sailor’s hands, his sea-voice hoarse with singing at the capstan, the
very foot that had once worn that buckle and trod so much along the
swerving decks—the whole human fact of him, as a creature like myself,
with hair and blood and seeing eyes, haunted me in that sunny, solitary
place, not like a spectre, but like some friend whom I had basely
injured. Was the great treasure ship indeed below there, with her guns
and chain and treasure, as she had sailed from Spain; her decks a
garden for the seaweed, her cabin a breeding place for fish, soundless
but for the dredging water, motionless but for the waving of the tangle
upon her battlements—that old, populous, sea-riding castle, now a reef
in Sandag Bay? Or, as I thought it likelier, was this a waif from the
disaster of the foreign brig—was this shoe-buckle bought but the other
day and worn by a man of my own period in the world’s history, hearing
the same news from day to day, thinking the same thoughts, praying,
perhaps, in the same temple with myself? However it was, I was assailed
with dreary thoughts; my uncle’s words, “the dead are down there,”
echoed in my ears; and though I determined to dive once more, it was
with a strong repugnance that I stepped forward to the margin of the
rocks.

A great change passed at that moment over the appearance of the bay. It
was no more that clear, visible interior, like a house roofed with
glass, where the green, submarine sunshine slept so stilly. A breeze, I
suppose, had flawed the surface, and a sort of trouble and blackness
filled its bosom, where flashes of light and clouds of shadow tossed
confusedly together. Even the terrace below obscurely rocked and
quivered. It seemed a graver thing to venture on this place of
ambushes; and when I leaped into the sea the second time it was with a
quaking in my soul.

I secured myself as at first, and groped among the waving tangle. All
that met my touch was cold and soft and gluey. The thicket was alive
with crabs and lobsters, trundling to and fro lopsidedly, and I had to
harden my heart against the horror of their carrion neighbourhood. On
all sides I could feel the grain and the clefts of hard, living stone;
no planks, no iron, not a sign of any wreck; the _Espirito Santo_ was
not there. I remember I had almost a sense of relief in my
disappointment, and I was about ready to leave go, when something
happened that sent me to the surface with my heart in my mouth. I had
already stayed somewhat late over my explorations; the current was
freshening with the change of the tide, and Sandag Bay was no longer a
safe place for a single swimmer. Well, just at the last moment there
came a sudden flush of current, dredging through the tangles like a
wave. I lost one hold, was flung sprawling on my side, and,
instinctively grasping for a fresh support, my fingers closed on
something hard and cold. I think I knew at that moment what it was. At
least I instantly left hold of the tangle, leaped for the surface, and
clambered out next moment on the friendly rocks with the bone of a
man’s leg in my grasp.

Mankind is a material creature, slow to think and dull to perceive
connections. The grave, the wreck of the brig, and the rusty
shoe-buckle were surely plain advertisements. A child might have read
their dismal story, and yet it was not until I touched that actual
piece of mankind that the full horror of the charnel ocean burst upon
my spirit. I laid the bone beside the buckle, picked up my clothes, and
ran as I was along the rocks towards the human shore. I could not be
far enough from the spot; no fortune was vast enough to tempt me back
again. The bones of the drowned dead should henceforth roll undisturbed
by me, whether on tangle or minted gold. But as soon as I trod the good
earth again, and had covered my nakedness against the sun, I knelt down
over against the ruins of the brig, and out of the fulness of my heart
prayed long and passionately for all poor souls upon the sea. A
generous prayer is never presented in vain; the petition may be
refused, but the petitioner is always, I believe, rewarded by some
gracious visitation. The horror, at least, was lifted from my mind; I
could look with calm of spirit on that great bright creature, God’s
ocean; and as I set off homeward up the rough sides of Aros, nothing
remained of my concern beyond a deep determination to meddle no more
with the spoils of wrecked vessels or the treasures of the dead.

I was already some way up the hill before I paused to breathe and look
behind me. The sight that met my eyes was doubly strange.

For, first, the storm that I had foreseen was now advancing with almost
tropical rapidity. The whole surface of the sea had been dulled from
its conspicuous brightness to an ugly hue of corrugated lead; already
in the distance the white waves, the “skipper’s daughters,” had begun
to flee before a breeze that was still insensible on Aros; and already
along the curve of Sandag Bay there was a splashing run of sea that I
could hear from where I stood. The change upon the sky was even more
remarkable. There had begun to arise out of the south-west a huge and
solid continent of scowling cloud; here and there, through rents in its
contexture, the sun still poured a sheaf of spreading rays; and here
and there, from all its edges, vast inky streamers lay forth along the
yet unclouded sky. The menace was express and imminent. Even as I
gazed, the sun was blotted out. At any moment the tempest might fall
upon Aros in its might.

The suddenness of this change of weather so fixed my eyes on heaven
that it was some seconds before they alighted on the bay, mapped out
below my feet, and robbed a moment later of the sun. The knoll which I
had just surmounted overflanked a little amphitheatre of lower hillocks
sloping towards the sea, and beyond that the yellow arc of beach and
the whole extent of Sandag Bay. It was a scene on which I had often
looked down, but where I had never before beheld a human figure. I had
but just turned my back upon it and left it empty, and my wonder may be
fancied when I saw a boat and several men in that deserted spot. The
boat was lying by the rocks. A pair of fellows, bareheaded, with their
sleeves rolled up, and one with a boathook, kept her with difficulty to
her moorings for the current was growing brisker every moment. A little
way off upon the ledge two men in black clothes, whom I judged to be
superior in rank, laid their heads together over some task which at
first I did not understand, but a second after I had made it out—they
were taking bearings with the compass; and just then I saw one of them
unroll a sheet of paper and lay his finger down, as though identifying
features in a map. Meanwhile a third was walking to and fro, polling
among the rocks and peering over the edge into the water. While I was
still watching them with the stupefaction of surprise, my mind hardly
yet able to work on what my eyes reported, this third person suddenly
stooped and summoned his companions with a cry so loud that it reached
my ears upon the hill. The others ran to him, even dropping the compass
in their hurry, and I could see the bone and the shoe-buckle going from
hand to hand, causing the most unusual gesticulations of surprise and
interest. Just then I could hear the seamen crying from the boat, and
saw them point westward to that cloud continent which was ever the more
rapidly unfurling its blackness over heaven. The others seemed to
consult; but the danger was too pressing to be braved, and they bundled
into the boat carrying my relies with them, and set forth out of the
bay with all speed of oars.

I made no more ado about the matter, but turned and ran for the house.
Whoever these men were, it was fit my uncle should be instantly
informed. It was not then altogether too late in the day for a descent
of the Jacobites; and may be Prince Charlie, whom I knew my uncle to
detest, was one of the three superiors whom I had seen upon the rock.
Yet as I ran, leaping from rock to rock, and turned the matter loosely
in my mind, this theory grew ever the longer the less welcome to my
reason. The compass, the map, the interest awakened by the buckle, and
the conduct of that one among the strangers who had looked so often
below him in the water, all seemed to point to a different explanation
of their presence on that outlying, obscure islet of the western sea.
The Madrid historian, the search instituted by Dr. Robertson, the
bearded stranger with the rings, my own fruitless search that very
morning in the deep water of Sandag Bay, ran together, piece by piece,
in my memory, and I made sure that these strangers must be Spaniards in
quest of ancient treasure and the lost ship of the Armada. But the
people living in outlying islands, such as Aros, are answerable for
their own security; there is none near by to protect or even to help
them; and the presence in such a spot of a crew of foreign
adventurers—poor, greedy, and most likely lawless—filled me with
apprehensions for my uncle’s money, and even for the safety of his
daughter. I was still wondering how we were to get rid of them when I
came, all breathless, to the top of Aros. The whole world was shadowed
over; only in the extreme east, on a hill of the mainland, one last
gleam of sunshine lingered like a jewel; rain had begun to fall, not
heavily, but in great drops; the sea was rising with each moment, and
already a band of white encircled Aros and the nearer coasts of
Grisapol. The boat was still pulling seaward, but I now became aware of
what had been hidden from me lower down—a large, heavily sparred,
handsome schooner, lying to at the south end of Aros. Since I had not
seen her in the morning when I had looked around so closely at the
signs of the weather, and upon these lone waters where a sail was
rarely visible, it was clear she must have lain last night behind the
uninhabited Eilean Gour, and this proved conclusively that she was
manned by strangers to our coast, for that anchorage, though good
enough to look at, is little better than a trap for ships. With such
ignorant sailors upon so wild a coast, the coming gale was not unlikely
to bring death upon its wings.




