CHAPTER III.
DEATH


Year after year went away into nothing, with great explosions and
outcries in the cities on the plain: red revolt springing up and being
suppressed in blood, battle swaying hither and thither, patient
astronomers in observatory towers picking out and christening new
stars, plays being performed in lighted theatres, people being carried
into hospital on stretchers, and all the usual turmoil and agitation of
men’s lives in crowded centres. Up in Will’s valley only the winds and
seasons made an epoch; the fish hung in the swift stream, the birds
circled overhead, the pine-tops rustled underneath the stars, the tall
hills stood over all; and Will went to and fro, minding his wayside
inn, until the snow began to thicken on his head. His heart was young
and vigorous; and if his pulses kept a sober time, they still beat
strong and steady in his wrists. He carried a ruddy stain on either
cheek, like a ripe apple; he stooped a little, but his step was still
firm; and his sinewy hands were reached out to all men with a friendly
pressure. His face was covered with those wrinkles which are got in
open air, and which rightly looked at, are no more than a sort of
permanent sunburning; such wrinkles heighten the stupidity of stupid
faces; but to a person like Will, with his clear eyes and smiling
mouth, only give another charm by testifying to a simple and easy life.
His talk was full of wise sayings. He had a taste for other people; and
other people had a taste for him. When the valley was full of tourists
in the season, there were merry nights in Will’s arbour; and his views,
which seemed whimsical to his neighbours, were often enough admired by
learned people out of towns and colleges. Indeed, he had a very noble
old age, and grew daily better known; so that his fame was heard of in
the cities of the plain; and young men who had been summer travellers
spoke together in _cafés_ of Will o’ the Mill and his rough philosophy.
Many and many an invitation, you may be sure, he had; but nothing could
tempt him from his upland valley. He would shake his head and smile
over his tobacco-pipe with a deal of meaning. “You come too late,” he
would answer. “I am a dead man now: I have lived and died already.
Fifty years ago you would have brought my heart into my mouth; and now
you do not even tempt me. But that is the object of long living, that
man should cease to care about life.” And again: “There is only one
difference between a long life and a good dinner: that, in the dinner,
the sweets come last.” Or once more: “When I was a boy, I was a bit
puzzled, and hardly knew whether it was myself or the world that was
curious and worth looking into. Now, I know it is myself, and stick to
that.”

He never showed any symptom of frailty, but kept stalwart and firm to
the last; but they say he grew less talkative towards the end, and
would listen to other people by the hour in an amused and sympathetic
silence. Only, when he did speak, it was more to the point and more
charged with old experience. He drank a bottle of wine gladly; above
all, at sunset on the hill-top or quite late at night under the stars
in the arbour. The sight of something attractive and unatttainable
seasoned his enjoyment, he would say; and he professed he had lived
long enough to admire a candle all the more when he could compare it
with a planet.

One night, in his seventy-second year, he awoke in bed in such
uneasiness of body and mind that he arose and dressed himself and went
out to meditate in the arbour. It was pitch dark, without a star; the
river was swollen, and the wet woods and meadows loaded the air with
perfume. It had thundered during the day, and it promised more thunder
for the morrow. A murky, stifling night for a man of seventy-two!
Whether it was the weather or the wakefulness, or some little touch of
fever in his old limbs, Will’s mind was besieged by tumultuous and
crying memories. His boyhood, the night with the fat young man, the
death of his adopted parents, the summer days with Marjory, and many of
those small circumstances, which seem nothing to another, and are yet
the very gist of a man’s own life to himself—things seen, words heard,
looks misconstrued—arose from their forgotten corners and usurped his
attention. The dead themselves were with him, not merely taking part in
this thin show of memory that defiled before his brain, but revisiting
his bodily senses as they do in profound and vivid dreams. The fat
young man leaned his elbows on the table opposite; Marjory came and
went with an apronful of flowers between the garden and the arbour; he
could hear the old parson knocking out his pipe or blowing his resonant
nose. The tide of his consciousness ebbed and flowed: he was sometimes
half-asleep and drowned in his recollections of the past; and sometimes
he was broad awake, wondering at himself. But about the middle of the
night he was startled by the voice of the dead miller calling to him
out of the house as he used to do on the arrival of custom. The
hallucination was so perfect that Will sprang from his seat and stood
listening for the summons to be repeated; and as he listened he became
conscious of another noise besides the brawling of the river and the
ringing in his feverish ears. It was like the stir of horses and the
creaking of harness, as though a carriage with an impatient team had
been brought up upon the road before the courtyard gate. At such an
hour, upon this rough and dangerous pass, the supposition was no better
than absurd; and Will dismissed it from his mind, and resumed his seat
upon the arbour chair; and sleep closed over him again like running
water. He was once again awakened by the dead miller’s call, thinner
and more spectral than before; and once again he heard the noise of an
equipage upon the road. And so thrice and four times, the same dream,
or the same fancy, presented itself to his senses: until at length,
smiling to himself as when one humours a nervous child, he proceeded
towards the gate to set his uncertainty at rest.

From the arbour to the gate was no great distance, and yet it took Will
some time; it seemed as if the dead thickened around him in the court,
and crossed his path at every step. For, first, he was suddenly
surprised by an overpowering sweetness of heliotropes; it was as if his
garden had been planted with this flower from end to end, and the hot,
damp night had drawn forth all their perfumes in a breath. Now the
heliotrope had been Marjory’s favourite flower, and since her death not
one of them had ever been planted in Will’s ground.

“I must be going crazy,” he thought. “Poor Marjory and her
heliotropes!”

And with that he raised his eyes towards the window that had once been
hers. If he had been bewildered before, he was now almost terrified;
for there was a light in the room; the window was an orange oblong as
of yore; and the corner of the blind was lifted and let fall as on the
night when he stood and shouted to the stars in his perplexity. The
illusion only endured an instant; but it left him somewhat unmanned,
rubbing his eyes and staring at the outline of the house and the black
night behind it. While he thus stood, and it seemed as if he must have
stood there quite a long time, there came a renewal of the noises on
the road: and he turned in time to meet a stranger, who was advancing
to meet him across the court. There was something like the outline of a
great carriage discernible on the road behind the stranger, and, above
that, a few black pine-tops, like so many plumes.

“Master Will?” asked the new-comer, in brief military fashion.

“That same, sir,” answered Will. “Can I do anything to serve you?”

“I have heard you much spoken of, Master Will,” returned the other;
“much spoken of, and well. And though I have both hands full of
business, I wish to drink a bottle of wine with you in your arbour.
Before I go, I shall introduce myself.”

Will led the way to the trellis, and got a lamp lighted and a bottle
uncorked. He was not altogether unused to such complimentary
interviews, and hoped little enough from this one, being schooled by
many disappointments. A sort of cloud had settled on his wits and
prevented him from remembering the strangeness of the hour. He moved
like a person in his sleep; and it seemed as if the lamp caught fire
and the bottle came uncorked with the facility of thought. Still, he
had some curiosity about the appearance of his visitor, and tried in
vain to turn the light into his face; either he handled the lamp
clumsily, or there was a dimness over his eyes; but he could make out
little more than a shadow at table with him. He stared and stared at
this shadow, as he wiped out the glasses, and began to feel cold and
strange about the heart. The silence weighed upon him, for he could
hear nothing now, not even the river, but the drumming of his own
arteries in his ears.

“Here’s to you,” said the stranger, roughly.

“Here is my service, sir,” replied Will, sipping his wine, which
somehow tasted oddly.

“I understand you are a very positive fellow,” pursued the stranger.

Will made answer with a smile of some satisfaction and a little nod.

“So am I,” continued the other; “and it is the delight of my heart to
tramp on people’s corns. I will have nobody positive but myself; not
one. I have crossed the whims, in my time, of kings and generals and
great artists. And what would you say,” he went on, “if I had come up
here on purpose to cross yours?”

Will had it on his tongue to make a sharp rejoinder; but the politeness
of an old innkeeper prevailed; and he held his peace and made answer
with a civil gesture of the hand.

“I have,” said the stranger. “And if I did not hold you in a particular
esteem, I should make no words about the matter. It appears you pride
yourself on staying where you are. You mean to stick by your inn. Now I
mean you shall come for a turn with me in my barouche; and before this
bottle’s empty, so you shall.”

“That would be an odd thing, to be sure,” replied Will, with a chuckle.
“Why, sir, I have grown here like an old oak-tree; the Devil himself
could hardly root me up: and for all I perceive you are a very
entertaining old gentleman, I would wager you another bottle you lose
your pains with me.”

The dimness of Will’s eyesight had been increasing all this while; but
he was somehow conscious of a sharp and chilling scrutiny which
irritated and yet overmastered him.

“You need not think,” he broke out suddenly, in an explosive, febrile
manner that startled and alarmed himself, “that I am a stay-at-home,
because I fear anything under God. God knows I am tired enough of it
all; and when the time comes for a longer journey than ever you dream
of, I reckon I shall find myself prepared.”

The stranger emptied his glass and pushed it away from him. He looked
down for a little, and then, leaning over the table, tapped Will three
times upon the forearm with a single finger. “The time has come!” he
said solemnly.

An ugly thrill spread from the spot he touched. The tones of his voice
were dull and startling, and echoed strangely in Will’s heart.

“I beg your pardon,” he said, with some discomposure. “What do you
mean?”

“Look at me, and you will find your eyesight swim. Raise your hand; it
is dead-heavy. This is your last bottle of wine, Master Will, and your
last night upon the earth.”

“You are a doctor?” quavered Will.

“The best that ever was,” replied the other; “for I cure both mind and
body with the same prescription. I take away all pain and I forgive all
sins; and where my patients have gone wrong in life, I smooth out all
complications and set them free again upon their feet.”

“I have no need of you,” said Will.

“A time comes for all men, Master Will,” replied the doctor, “when the
helm is taken out of their hands. For you, because you were prudent and
quiet, it has been long of coming, and you have had long to discipline
yourself for its reception. You have seen what is to be seen about your
mill; you have sat close all your days like a hare in its form; but now
that is at an end; and,” added the doctor, getting on his feet, “you
must arise and come with me.”

“You are a strange physician,” said Will, looking steadfastly upon his
guest.

“I am a natural law,” he replied, “and people call me Death.”

“Why did you not tell me so at first?” cried Will. “I have been waiting
for you these many years. Give me your hand, and welcome.”

“Lean upon my arm,” said the stranger, “for already your strength
abates. Lean on me as heavily as you need; for though I am old, I am
very strong. It is but three steps to my carriage, and there all your
trouble ends. Why, Will,” he added, “I have been yearning for you as if
you were my own son; and of all the men that ever I came for in my long
days, I have come for you most gladly. I am caustic, and sometimes
offend people at first sight; but I am a good friend at heart to such
as you.”

“Since Marjory was taken,” returned Will, “I declare before God you
were the only friend I had to look for.” So the pair went arm-in-arm
across the courtyard.

One of the servants awoke about this time and heard the noise of horses
pawing before he dropped asleep again; all down the valley that night
there was a rushing as of a smooth and steady wind descending towards
the plain; and when the world rose next morning, sure enough Will o’
the Mill had gone at last upon his travels.




MARKHEIM


“Yes,” said the dealer, “our windfalls are of various kinds. Some
customers are ignorant, and then I touch a dividend on my superior
knowledge. Some are dishonest,” and here he held up the candle, so that
the light fell strongly on his visitor, “and in that case,” he
continued, “I profit by my virtue.”

Markheim had but just entered from the daylight streets, and his eyes
had not yet grown familiar with the mingled shine and darkness in the
shop. At these pointed words, and before the near presence of the
flame, he blinked painfully and looked aside.

The dealer chuckled. “You come to me on Christmas Day,” he resumed,
“when you know that I am alone in my house, put up my shutters, and
make a point of refusing business. Well, you will have to pay for that;
you will have to pay for my loss of time, when I should be balancing my
books; you will have to pay, besides, for a kind of manner that I
remark in you to-day very strongly. I am the essence of discretion, and
ask no awkward questions; but when a customer cannot look me in the
eye, he has to pay for it.” The dealer once more chuckled; and then,
changing to his usual business voice, though still with a note of
irony, “You can give, as usual, a clear account of how you came into
the possession of the object?” he continued. “Still your uncle’s
cabinet? A remarkable collector, sir!”

And the little pale, round-shouldered dealer stood almost on tip-toe,
looking over the top of his gold spectacles, and nodding his head with
every mark of disbelief. Markheim returned his gaze with one of
infinite pity, and a touch of horror.

“This time,” said he, “you are in error. I have not come to sell, but
to buy. I have no curios to dispose of; my uncle’s cabinet is bare to
the wainscot; even were it still intact, I have done well on the Stock
Exchange, and should more likely add to it than otherwise, and my
errand to-day is simplicity itself. I seek a Christmas present for a
lady,” he continued, waxing more fluent as he struck into the speech he
had prepared; “and certainly I owe you every excuse for thus disturbing
you upon so small a matter. But the thing was neglected yesterday; I
must produce my little compliment at dinner; and, as you very well
know, a rich marriage is not a thing to be neglected.”

There followed a pause, during which the dealer seemed to weigh this
statement incredulously. The ticking of many clocks among the curious
lumber of the shop, and the faint rushing of the cabs in a near
thoroughfare, filled up the interval of silence.

“Well, sir,” said the dealer, “be it so. You are an old customer after
all; and if, as you say, you have the chance of a good marriage, far be
it from me to be an obstacle. Here is a nice thing for a lady now,” he
went on, “this hand glass—fifteenth century, warranted; comes from a
good collection, too; but I reserve the name, in the interests of my
customer, who was just like yourself, my dear sir, the nephew and sole
heir of a remarkable collector.”

The dealer, while he thus ran on in his dry and biting voice, had
stooped to take the object from its place; and, as he had done so, a
shock had passed through Markheim, a start both of hand and foot, a
sudden leap of many tumultuous passions to the face. It passed as
swiftly as it came, and left no trace beyond a certain trembling of the
hand that now received the glass.

“A glass,” he said hoarsely, and then paused, and repeated it more
clearly. “A glass? For Christmas? Surely not?”

“And why not?” cried the dealer. “Why not a glass?”

Markheim was looking upon him with an indefinable expression. “You ask
me why not?” he said. “Why, look here—look in it—look at yourself! Do
you like to see it? No! nor I—nor any man.”

The little man had jumped back when Markheim had so suddenly confronted
him with the mirror; but now, perceiving there was nothing worse on
hand, he chuckled. “Your future lady, sir, must be pretty hard
favoured,” said he.

“I ask you,” said Markheim, “for a Christmas present, and you give me
this—this damned reminder of years, and sins and follies—this
hand-conscience! Did you mean it? Had you a thought in your mind? Tell
me. It will be better for you if you do. Come, tell me about yourself.
I hazard a guess now, that you are in secret a very charitable man?”

The dealer looked closely at his companion. It was very odd, Markheim
did not appear to be laughing; there was something in his face like an
eager sparkle of hope, but nothing of mirth.

“What are you driving at?” the dealer asked.

“Not charitable?” returned the other, gloomily. “Not charitable; not
pious; not scrupulous; unloving, unbeloved; a hand to get money, a safe
to keep it. Is that all? Dear God, man, is that all?”

“I will tell you what it is,” began the dealer, with some sharpness,
and then broke off again into a chuckle. “But I see this is a love
match of yours, and you have been drinking the lady’s health.”

“Ah!” cried Markheim, with a strange curiosity. “Ah, have you been in
love? Tell me about that.”

“I,” cried the dealer. “I in love! I never had the time, nor have I the
time to-day for all this nonsense. Will you take the glass?”

“Where is the hurry?” returned Markheim. “It is very pleasant to stand
here talking; and life is so short and insecure that I would not hurry
away from any pleasure—no, not even from so mild a one as this. We
should rather cling, cling to what little we can get, like a man at a
cliff’s edge. Every second is a cliff, if you think upon it—a cliff a
mile high—high enough, if we fall, to dash us out of every feature of
humanity. Hence it is best to talk pleasantly. Let us talk of each
other: why should we wear this mask? Let us be confidential. Who knows,
we might become friends?”

“I have just one word to say to you,” said the dealer. “Either make
your purchase, or walk out of my shop!”

“True true,” said Markheim. “Enough, fooling. To business. Show me
something else.”

The dealer stooped once more, this time to replace the glass upon the
shelf, his thin blond hair falling over his eyes as he did so. Markheim
moved a little nearer, with one hand in the pocket of his greatcoat; he
drew himself up and filled his lungs; at the same time many different
emotions were depicted together on his face—terror, horror, and
resolve, fascination and a physical repulsion; and through a haggard
lift of his upper lip, his teeth looked out.

“This, perhaps, may suit,” observed the dealer: and then, as he began
to re-arise, Markheim bounded from behind upon his victim. The long,
skewerlike dagger flashed and fell. The dealer struggled like a hen,
striking his temple on the shelf, and then tumbled on the floor in a
heap.

Time had some score of small voices in that shop, some stately and slow
as was becoming to their great age; others garrulous and hurried. All
these told out the seconds in an intricate, chorus of tickings. Then
the passage of a lad’s feet, heavily running on the pavement, broke in
upon these smaller voices and startled Markheim into the consciousness
of his surroundings. He looked about him awfully. The candle stood on
the counter, its flame solemnly wagging in a draught; and by that
inconsiderable movement, the whole room was filled with noiseless
bustle and kept heaving like a sea: the tall shadows nodding, the gross
blots of darkness swelling and dwindling as with respiration, the faces
of the portraits and the china gods changing and wavering like images
in water. The inner door stood ajar, and peered into that leaguer of
shadows with a long slit of daylight like a pointing finger.

From these fear-stricken rovings, Markheim’s eyes returned to the body
of his victim, where it lay both humped and sprawling, incredibly small
and strangely meaner than in life. In these poor, miserly clothes, in
that ungainly attitude, the dealer lay like so much sawdust. Markheim
had feared to see it, and, lo! it was nothing. And yet, as he gazed,
this bundle of old clothes and pool of blood began to find eloquent
voices. There it must lie; there was none to work the cunning hinges or
direct the miracle of locomotion—there it must lie till it was found.
Found! ay, and then? Then would this dead flesh lift up a cry that
would ring over England, and fill the world with the echoes of pursuit.
Ay, dead or not, this was still the enemy. “Time was that when the
brains were out,” he thought; and the first word struck into his mind.
Time, now that the deed was accomplished—time, which had closed for the
victim, had become instant and momentous for the slayer.

The thought was yet in his mind, when, first one and then another, with
every variety of pace and voice—one deep as the bell from a cathedral
turret, another ringing on its treble notes the prelude of a waltz-the
clocks began to strike the hour of three in the afternoon.

The sudden outbreak of so many tongues in that dumb chamber staggered
him. He began to bestir himself, going to and fro with the candle,
beleaguered by moving shadows, and startled to the soul by chance
reflections. In many rich mirrors, some of home design, some from
Venice or Amsterdam, he saw his face repeated and repeated, as it were
an army of spies; his own eyes met and detected him; and the sound of
his own steps, lightly as they fell, vexed the surrounding quiet. And
still, as he continued to fill his pockets, his mind accused him with a
sickening iteration, of the thousand faults of his design. He should
have chosen a more quiet hour; he should have prepared an alibi; he
should not have used a knife; he should have been more cautious, and
only bound and gagged the dealer, and not killed him; he should have
been more bold, and killed the servant also; he should have done all
things otherwise: poignant regrets, weary, incessant toiling of the
mind to change what was unchangeable, to plan what was now useless, to
be the architect of the irrevocable past. Meanwhile, and behind all
this activity, brute terrors, like the scurrying of rats in a deserted
attic, filled the more remote chambers of his brain with riot; the hand
of the constable would fall heavy on his shoulder, and his nerves would
jerk like a hooked fish; or he beheld, in galloping defile, the dock,
the prison, the gallows, and the black coffin.

Terror of the people in the street sat down before his mind like a
besieging army. It was impossible, he thought, but that some rumour of
the struggle must have reached their ears and set on edge their
curiosity; and now, in all the neighbouring houses, he divined them
sitting motionless and with uplifted ear—solitary people, condemned to
spend Christmas dwelling alone on memories of the past, and now
startingly recalled from that tender exercise; happy family parties
struck into silence round the table, the mother still with raised
finger: every degree and age and humour, but all, by their own hearths,
prying and hearkening and weaving the rope that was to hang him.
Sometimes it seemed to him he could not move too softly; the clink of
the tall Bohemian goblets rang out loudly like a bell; and alarmed by
the bigness of the ticking, he was tempted to stop the clocks. And
then, again, with a swift transition of his terrors, the very silence
of the place appeared a source of peril, and a thing to strike and
freeze the passer-by; and he would step more boldly, and bustle aloud
among the contents of the shop, and imitate, with elaborate bravado,
the movements of a busy man at ease in his own house.

But he was now so pulled about by different alarms that, while one
portion of his mind was still alert and cunning, another trembled on
the brink of lunacy. One hallucination in particular took a strong hold
on his credulity. The neighbour hearkening with white face beside his
window, the passer-by arrested by a horrible surmise on the
pavement—these could at worst suspect, they could not know; through the
brick walls and shuttered windows only sounds could penetrate. But
here, within the house, was he alone? He knew he was; he had watched
the servant set forth sweet-hearting, in her poor best, “out for the
day” written in every ribbon and smile. Yes, he was alone, of course;
and yet, in the bulk of empty house above him, he could surely hear a
stir of delicate footing—he was surely conscious, inexplicably
conscious of some presence. Ay, surely; to every room and corner of the
house his imagination followed it; and now it was a faceless thing, and
yet had eyes to see with; and again it was a shadow of himself; and yet
again behold the image of the dead dealer, reinspired with cunning and
hatred.

At times, with a strong effort, he would glance at the open door which
still seemed to repel his eyes. The house was tall, the skylight small
and dirty, the day blind with fog; and the light that filtered down to
the ground story was exceedingly faint, and showed dimly on the
threshold of the shop. And yet, in that strip of doubtful brightness,
did there not hang wavering a shadow?

Suddenly, from the street outside, a very jovial gentleman began to
beat with a staff on the shop-door, accompanying his blows with shouts
and railleries in which the dealer was continually called upon by name.
Markheim, smitten into ice, glanced at the dead man. But no! he lay
quite still; he was fled away far beyond earshot of these blows and
shoutings; he was sunk beneath seas of silence; and his name, which
would once have caught his notice above the howling of a storm, had
become an empty sound. And presently the jovial gentleman desisted from
his knocking, and departed.

Here was a broad hint to hurry what remained to be done, to get forth
from this accusing neighbourhood, to plunge into a bath of London
multitudes, and to reach, on the other side of day, that haven of
safety and apparent innocence—his bed. One visitor had come: at any
moment another might follow and be more obstinate. To have done the
deed, and yet not to reap the profit, would be too abhorrent a failure.
The money, that was now Markheim’s concern; and as a means to that, the
keys.

He glanced over his shoulder at the open door, where the shadow was
still lingering and shivering; and with no conscious repugnance of the
mind, yet with a tremor of the belly, he drew near the body of his
victim. The human character had quite departed. Like a suit
half-stuffed with bran, the limbs lay scattered, the trunk doubled, on
the floor; and yet the thing repelled him. Although so dingy and
inconsiderable to the eye, he feared it might have more significance to
the touch. He took the body by the shoulders, and turned it on its
back. It was strangely light and supple, and the limbs, as if they had
been broken, fell into the oddest postures. The face was robbed of all
expression; but it was as pale as wax, and shockingly smeared with
blood about one temple. That was, for Markheim, the one displeasing
circumstance. It carried him back, upon the instant, to a certain
fair-day in a fishers’ village: a gray day, a piping wind, a crowd upon
the street, the blare of brasses, the booming of drums, the nasal voice
of a ballad singer; and a boy going to and fro, buried over head in the
crowd and divided between interest and fear, until, coming out upon the
chief place of concourse, he beheld a booth and a great screen with
pictures, dismally designed, garishly coloured: Brown-rigg with her
apprentice; the Mannings with their murdered guest; Weare in the
death-grip of Thurtell; and a score besides of famous crimes. The thing
was as clear as an illusion; he was once again that little boy; he was
looking once again, and with the same sense of physical revolt, at
these vile pictures; he was still stunned by the thumping of the drums.
A bar of that day’s music returned upon his memory; and at that, for
the first time, a qualm came over him, a breath of nausea, a sudden
weakness of the joints, which he must instantly resist and conquer.

He judged it more prudent to confront than to flee from these
considerations; looking the more hardily in the dead face, bending his
mind to realise the nature and greatness of his crime. So little a
while ago that face had moved with every change of sentiment, that pale
mouth had spoken, that body had been all on fire with governable
energies; and now, and by his act, that piece of life had been
arrested, as the horologist, with interjected finger, arrests the
beating of the clock. So he reasoned in vain; he could rise to no more
remorseful consciousness; the same heart which had shuddered before the
painted effigies of crime, looked on its reality unmoved. At best, he
felt a gleam of pity for one who had been endowed in vain with all
those faculties that can make the world a garden of enchantment, one
who had never lived and who was now dead. But of penitence, no, not a
tremor.

With that, shaking himself clear of these considerations, he found the
keys and advanced towards the open door of the shop. Outside, it had
begun to rain smartly; and the sound of the shower upon the roof had
banished silence. Like some dripping cavern, the chambers of the house
were haunted by an incessant echoing, which filled the ear and mingled
with the ticking of the clocks. And, as Markheim approached the door,
he seemed to hear, in answer to his own cautious tread, the steps of
another foot withdrawing up the stair. The shadow still palpitated
loosely on the threshold. He threw a ton’s weight of resolve upon his
muscles, and drew back the door.

The faint, foggy daylight glimmered dimly on the bare floor and stairs;
on the bright suit of armour posted, halbert in hand, upon the landing;
and on the dark wood-carvings, and framed pictures that hung against
the yellow panels of the wainscot. So loud was the beating of the rain
through all the house that, in Markheim’s ears, it began to be
distinguished into many different sounds. Footsteps and sighs, the
tread of regiments marching in the distance, the chink of money in the
counting, and the creaking of doors held stealthily ajar, appeared to
mingle with the patter of the drops upon the cupola and the gushing of
the water in the pipes. The sense that he was not alone grew upon him
to the verge of madness. On every side he was haunted and begirt by
presences. He heard them moving in the upper chambers; from the shop,
he heard the dead man getting to his legs; and as he began with a great
effort to mount the stairs, feet fled quietly before him and followed
stealthily behind. If he were but deaf, he thought, how tranquilly he
would possess his soul! And then again, and hearkening with ever fresh
attention, he blessed himself for that unresting sense which held the
outposts and stood a trusty sentinel upon his life. His head turned
continually on his neck; his eyes, which seemed starting from their
orbits, scouted on every side, and on every side were half-rewarded as
with the tail of something nameless vanishing. The four-and-twenty
steps to the first floor were four-and-twenty agonies.

On that first storey, the doors stood ajar, three of them like three
ambushes, shaking his nerves like the throats of cannon. He could never
again, he felt, be sufficiently immured and fortified from men’s
observing eyes, he longed to be home, girt in by walls, buried among
bedclothes, and invisible to all but God. And at that thought he
wondered a little, recollecting tales of other murderers and the fear
they were said to entertain of heavenly avengers. It was not so, at
least, with him. He feared the laws of nature, lest, in their callous
and immutable procedure, they should preserve some damning evidence of
his crime. He feared tenfold more, with a slavish, superstitions
terror, some scission in the continuity of man’s experience, some
wilful illegality of nature. He played a game of skill, depending on
the rules, calculating consequence from cause; and what if nature, as
the defeated tyrant overthrew the chess-board, should break the mould
of their succession? The like had befallen Napoleon (so writers said)
when the winter changed the time of its appearance. The like might
befall Markheim: the solid walls might become transparent and reveal
his doings like those of bees in a glass hive; the stout planks might
yield under his foot like quicksands and detain him in their clutch;
ay, and there were soberer accidents that might destroy him: if, for
instance, the house should fall and imprison him beside the body of his
victim; or the house next door should fly on fire, and the firemen
invade him from all sides. These things he feared; and, in a sense,
these things might be called the hands of God reached forth against
sin. But about God himself he was at ease; his act was doubtless
exceptional, but so were his excuses, which God knew; it was there, and
not among men, that he felt sure of justice.

When he had got safe into the drawing-room, and shut the door behind
him, he was aware of a respite from alarms. The room was quite
dismantled, uncarpeted besides, and strewn with packing cases and
incongruous furniture; several great pier-glasses, in which he beheld
himself at various angles, like an actor on a stage; many pictures,
framed and unframed, standing, with their faces to the wall; a fine
Sheraton sideboard, a cabinet of marquetry, and a great old bed, with
tapestry hangings. The windows opened to the floor; but by great good
fortune the lower part of the shutters had been closed, and this
concealed him from the neighbours. Here, then, Markheim drew in a
packing case before the cabinet, and began to search among the keys. It
was a long business, for there were many; and it was irksome, besides;
for, after all, there might be nothing in the cabinet, and time was on
the wing. But the closeness of the occupation sobered him. With the
tail of his eye he saw the door—even glanced at it from time to time
directly, like a besieged commander pleased to verify the good estate
of his defences. But in truth he was at peace. The rain falling in the
street sounded natural and pleasant. Presently, on the other side, the
notes of a piano were wakened to the music of a hymn, and the voices of
many children took up the air and words. How stately, how comfortable
was the melody! How fresh the youthful voices! Markheim gave ear to it
smilingly, as he sorted out the keys; and his mind was thronged with
answerable ideas and images; church-going children and the pealing of
the high organ; children afield, bathers by the brookside, ramblers on
the brambly common, kite-flyers in the windy and cloud-navigated sky;
and then, at another cadence of the hymn, back again to church, and the
somnolence of summer Sundays, and the high genteel voice of the parson
(which he smiled a little to recall) and the painted Jacobean tombs,
and the dim lettering of the Ten Commandments in the chancel.

And as he sat thus, at once busy and absent, he was startled to his
feet. A flash of ice, a flash of fire, a bursting gush of blood, went
over him, and then he stood transfixed and thrilling. A step mounted
the stair slowly and steadily, and presently a hand was laid upon the
knob, and the lock clicked, and the door opened.

Fear held Markheim in a vice. What to expect he knew not, whether the
dead man walking, or the official ministers of human justice, or some
chance witness blindly stumbling in to consign him to the gallows. But
when a face was thrust into the aperture, glanced round the room,
looked at him, nodded and smiled as if in friendly recognition, and
then withdrew again, and the door closed behind it, his fear broke
loose from his control in a hoarse cry. At the sound of this the
visitant returned.

“Did you call me?” he asked, pleasantly, and with that he entered the
room and closed the door behind him.

Markheim stood and gazed at him with all his eyes. Perhaps there was a
film upon his sight, but the outlines of the new comer seemed to change
and waver like those of the idols in the wavering candle-light of the
shop; and at times he thought he knew him; and at times he thought he
bore a likeness to himself; and always, like a lump of living terror,
there lay in his bosom the conviction that this thing was not of the
earth and not of God.

And yet the creature had a strange air of the commonplace, as he stood
looking on Markheim with a smile; and when he added: “You are looking
for the money, I believe?” it was in the tones of everyday politeness.

Markheim made no answer.

“I should warn you,” resumed the other, “that the maid has left her
sweetheart earlier than usual and will soon be here. If Mr. Markheim be
found in this house, I need not describe to him the consequences.”

“You know me?” cried the murderer.

The visitor smiled. “You have long been a favourite of mine,” he said;
“and I have long observed and often sought to help you.”

“What are you?” cried Markheim: “the devil?”

“What I may be,” returned the other, “cannot affect the service I
propose to render you.”

“It can,” cried Markheim; “it does! Be helped by you? No, never; not by
you! You do not know me yet; thank God, you do not know me!”

“I know you,” replied the visitant, with a sort of kind severity or
rather firmness. “I know you to the soul.”

“Know me!” cried Markheim. “Who can do so? My life is but a travesty
and slander on myself. I have lived to belie my nature. All men do; all
men are better than this disguise that grows about and stifles them.
You see each dragged away by life, like one whom bravos have seized and
muffled in a cloak. If they had their own control—if you could see
their faces, they would be altogether different, they would shine out
for heroes and saints! I am worse than most; myself is more overlaid;
my excuse is known to me and God. But, had I the time, I could disclose
myself.”

“To me?” inquired the visitant.

“To you before all,” returned the murderer. “I supposed you were
intelligent. I thought—since you exist—you would prove a reader of the
heart. And yet you would propose to judge me by my acts! Think of it;
my acts! I was born and I have lived in a land of giants; giants have
dragged me by the wrists since I was born out of my mother—the giants
of circumstance. And you would judge me by my acts! But can you not
look within? Can you not understand that evil is hateful to me? Can you
not see within me the clear writing of conscience, never blurred by any
wilful sophistry, although too often disregarded? Can you not read me
for a thing that surely must be common as humanity—the unwilling
sinner?”

“All this is very feelingly expressed,” was the reply, “but it regards
me not. These points of consistency are beyond my province, and I care
not in the least by what compulsion you may have been dragged away, so
as you are but carried in the right direction. But time flies; the
servant delays, looking in the faces of the crowd and at the pictures
on the hoardings, but still she keeps moving nearer; and remember, it
is as if the gallows itself was striding towards you through the
Christmas streets! Shall I help you; I, who know all? Shall I tell you
where to find the money?”

“For what price?” asked Markheim.

“I offer you the service for a Christmas gift,” returned the other.

Markheim could not refrain from smiling with a kind of bitter triumph.
“No,” said he, “I will take nothing at your hands; if I were dying of
thirst, and it was your hand that put the pitcher to my lips, I should
find the courage to refuse. It may be credulous, but I will do nothing
to commit myself to evil.”

“I have no objection to a death-bed repentance,” observed the visitant.

“Because you disbelieve their efficacy!” Markheim cried.

“I do not say so,” returned the other; “but I look on these things from
a different side, and when the life is done my interest falls. The man
has lived to serve me, to spread black looks under colour of religion,
or to sow tares in the wheat-field, as you do, in a course of weak
compliance with desire. Now that he draws so near to his deliverance,
he can add but one act of service—to repent, to die smiling, and thus
to build up in confidence and hope the more timorous of my surviving
followers. I am not so hard a master. Try me. Accept my help. Please
yourself in life as you have done hitherto; please yourself more amply,
spread your elbows at the board; and when the night begins to fall and
the curtains to be drawn, I tell you, for your greater comfort, that
you will find it even easy to compound your quarrel with your
conscience, and to make a truckling peace with God. I came but now from
such a deathbed, and the room was full of sincere mourners, listening
to the man’s last words: and when I looked into that face, which had
been set as a flint against mercy, I found it smiling with hope.”

“And do you, then, suppose me such a creature?” asked Markheim. “Do you
think I have no more generous aspirations than to sin, and sin, and
sin, and, at the last, sneak into heaven? My heart rises at the
thought. Is this, then, your experience of mankind? or is it because
you find me with red hands that you presume such baseness? and is this
crime of murder indeed so impious as to dry up the very springs of
good?”

“Murder is to me no special category,” replied the other. “All sins are
murder, even as all life is war. I behold your race, like starving
mariners on a raft, plucking crusts out of the hands of famine and
feeding on each other’s lives. I follow sins beyond the moment of their
acting; I find in all that the last consequence is death; and to my
eyes, the pretty maid who thwarts her mother with such taking graces on
a question of a ball, drips no less visibly with human gore than such a
murderer as yourself. Do I say that I follow sins? I follow virtues
also; they differ not by the thickness of a nail, they are both scythes
for the reaping angel of Death. Evil, for which I live, consists not in
action but in character. The bad man is dear to me; not the bad act,
whose fruits, if we could follow them far enough down the hurtling
cataract of the ages, might yet be found more blessed than those of the
rarest virtues. And it is not because you have killed a dealer, but
because you are Markheim, that I offer to forward your escape.”

“I will lay my heart open to you,” answered Markheim. “This crime on
which you find me is my last. On my way to it I have learned many
lessons; itself is a lesson, a momentous lesson. Hitherto I have been
driven with revolt to what I would not; I was a bond-slave to poverty,
driven and scourged. There are robust virtues that can stand in these
temptations; mine was not so: I had a thirst of pleasure. But to-day,
and out of this deed, I pluck both warning and riches—both the power
and a fresh resolve to be myself. I become in all things a free actor
in the world; I begin to see myself all changed, these hands the agents
of good, this heart at peace. Something comes over me out of the past;
something of what I have dreamed on Sabbath evenings to the sound of
the church organ, of what I forecast when I shed tears over noble
books, or talked, an innocent child, with my mother. There lies my
life; I have wandered a few years, but now I see once more my city of
destination.”

“You are to use this money on the Stock Exchange, I think?” remarked
the visitor; “and there, if I mistake not, you have already lost some
thousands?”

“Ah,” said Markheim, “but this time I have a sure thing.”

“This time, again, you will lose,” replied the visitor quietly.

“Ah, but I keep back the half!” cried Markheim.

“That also you will lose,” said the other.

The sweat started upon Markheim’s brow. “Well, then, what matter?” he
exclaimed. “Say it be lost, say I am plunged again in poverty, shall
one part of me, and that the worse, continue until the end to override
the better? Evil and good run strong in me, haling me both ways. I do
not love the one thing, I love all. I can conceive great deeds,
renunciations, martyrdoms; and though I be fallen to such a crime as
murder, pity is no stranger to my thoughts. I pity the poor; who knows
their trials better than myself? I pity and help them; I prize love, I
love honest laughter; there is no good thing nor true thing on earth
but I love it from my heart. And are my vices only to direct my life,
and my virtues to lie without effect, like some passive lumber of the
mind? Not so; good, also, is a spring of acts.”

But the visitant raised his finger. “For six-and-thirty years that you
have been in this world,” said be, “through many changes of fortune and
varieties of humour, I have watched you steadily fall. Fifteen years
ago you would have started at a theft. Three years back you would have
blenched at the name of murder. Is there any crime, is there any
cruelty or meanness, from which you still recoil?—five years from now I
shall detect you in the fact! Downward, downward, lies your way; nor
can anything but death avail to stop you.”

“It is true,” Markheim said huskily, “I have in some degree complied
with evil. But it is so with all: the very saints, in the mere exercise
of living, grow less dainty, and take on the tone of their
surroundings.”

“I will propound to you one simple question,” said the other; “and as
you answer, I shall read to you your moral horoscope. You have grown in
many things more lax; possibly you do right to be so—and at any
account, it is the same with all men. But granting that, are you in any
one particular, however trifling, more difficult to please with your
own conduct, or do you go in all things with a looser rein?”

“In any one?” repeated Markheim, with an anguish of consideration.
“No,” he added, with despair, “in none! I have gone down in all.”

“Then,” said the visitor, “content yourself with what you are, for you
will never change; and the words of your part on this stage are
irrevocably written down.”

Markheim stood for a long while silent, and indeed it was the visitor
who first broke the silence. “That being so,” he said, “shall I show
you the money?”

“And grace?” cried Markheim.

“Have you not tried it?” returned the other. “Two or three years ago,
did I not see you on the platform of revival meetings, and was not your
voice the loudest in the hymn?”

“It is true,” said Markheim; “and I see clearly what remains for me by
way of duty. I thank you for these lessons from my soul; my eyes are
opened, and I behold myself at last for what I am.”

At this moment, the sharp note of the door-bell rang through the house;
and the visitant, as though this were some concerted signal for which
he had been waiting, changed at once in his demeanour.

“The maid!” he cried. “She has returned, as I forewarned you, and there
is now before you one more difficult passage. Her master, you must say,
is ill; you must let her in, with an assured but rather serious
countenance—no smiles, no overacting, and I promise you success! Once
the girl within, and the door closed, the same dexterity that has
already rid you of the dealer will relieve you of this last danger in
your path. Thenceforward you have the whole evening—the whole night, if
needful—to ransack the treasures of the house and to make good your
safety. This is help that comes to you with the mask of danger. Up!” he
cried; “up, friend; your life hangs trembling in the scales: up, and
act!”

Markheim steadily regarded his counsellor. “If I be condemned to evil
acts,” he said, “there is still one door of freedom open—I can cease
from action. If my life be an ill thing, I can lay it down. Though I
be, as you say truly, at the beck of every small temptation, I can yet,
by one decisive gesture, place myself beyond the reach of all. My love
of good is damned to barrenness; it may, and let it be! But I have
still my hatred of evil; and from that, to your galling disappointment,
you shall see that I can draw both energy and courage.”

The features of the visitor began to undergo a wonderful and lovely
change: they brightened and softened with a tender triumph, and, even
as they brightened, faded and dislimned. But Markheim did not pause to
watch or understand the transformation. He opened the door and went
downstairs very slowly, thinking to himself. His past went soberly
before him; he beheld it as it was, ugly and strenuous like a dream,
random as chance-medley—a scene of defeat. Life, as he thus reviewed
it, tempted him no longer; but on the further side he perceived a quiet
haven for his bark. He paused in the passage, and looked into the shop,
where the candle still burned by the dead body. It was strangely
silent. Thoughts of the dealer swarmed into his mind, as he stood
gazing. And then the bell once more broke out into impatient clamour.

He confronted the maid upon the threshold with something like a smile.

“You had better go for the police,” said he: “I have killed your
master.”




THRAWN JANET


The Reverend Murdoch Soulis was long minister of the moorland parish of
Balweary, in the vale of Dule. A severe, bleak-faced old man, dreadful
to his hearers, he dwelt in the last years of his life, without
relative or servant or any human company, in the small and lonely manse
under the Hanging Shaw. In spite of the iron composure of his features,
his eye was wild, scared, and uncertain; and when he dwelt, in private
admonitions, on the future of the impenitent, it seemed as if his eye
pierced through the storms of time to the terrors of eternity. Many
young persons, coming to prepare themselves against the season of the
Holy Communion, were dreadfully affected by his talk. He had a sermon
on lst Peter, v. and 8th, “The devil as a roaring lion,” on the Sunday
after every seventeenth of August, and he was accustomed to surpass
himself upon that text both by the appalling nature of the matter and
the terror of his bearing in the pulpit. The children were frightened
into fits, and the old looked more than usually oracular, and were, all
that day, full of those hints that Hamlet deprecated. The manse itself,
where it stood by the water of Dule among some thick trees, with the
Shaw overhanging it on the one side, and on the other many cold,
moorish hilltops rising towards the sky, had begun, at a very early
period of Mr. Soulis’s ministry, to be avoided in the dusk hours by all
who valued themselves upon their prudence; and guidmen sitting at the
clachan alehouse shook their heads together at the thought of passing
late by that uncanny neighbourhood. There was one spot, to be more
particular, which was regarded with especial awe. The manse stood
between the high road and the water of Dule, with a gable to each; its
back was towards the kirk-town of Balweary, nearly half a mile away; in
front of it, a bare garden, hedged with thorn, occupied the land
between the river and the road. The house was two stories high, with
two large rooms on each. It opened not directly on the garden, but on a
causewayed path, or passage, giving on the road on the one hand, and
closed on the other by the tall willows and elders that bordered on the
stream. And it was this strip of causeway that enjoyed among the young
parishioners of Balweary so infamous a reputation. The minister walked
there often after dark, sometimes groaning aloud in the instancy of his
unspoken prayers; and when he was from home, and the manse door was
locked, the more daring schoolboys ventured, with beating hearts, to
“follow my leader” across that legendary spot.

This atmosphere of terror, surrounding, as it did, a man of God of
spotless character and orthodoxy, was a common cause of wonder and
subject of inquiry among the few strangers who were led by chance or
business into that unknown, outlying country. But many even of the
people of the parish were ignorant of the strange events which had
marked the first year of Mr. Soulis’s ministrations; and among those
who were better informed, some were naturally reticent, and others shy
of that particular topic. Now and again, only, one of the older folk
would warm into courage over his third tumbler, and recount the cause
of the minister’s strange looks and solitary life.


Fifty years syne, when Mr. Soulis cam first into Ba’weary, he was still
a young man—a callant, the folk said—fu’ o’ book learnin’ and grand at
the exposition, but, as was natural in sae young a man, wi’ nae leevin’
experience in religion. The younger sort were greatly taken wi’ his
gifts and his gab; but auld, concerned, serious men and women were
moved even to prayer for the young man, whom they took to be a
self-deceiver, and the parish that was like to be sae ill-supplied. It
was before the days o’ the moderates—weary fa’ them; but ill things are
like guid—they baith come bit by bit, a pickle at a time; and there
were folk even then that said the Lord had left the college professors
to their ain devices, an’ the lads that went to study wi’ them wad hae
done mair and better sittin’ in a peat-bog, like their forbears of the
persecution, wi’ a Bible under their oxter and a speerit o’ prayer in
their heart. There was nae doubt, onyway, but that Mr. Soulis had been
ower lang at the college. He was careful and troubled for mony things
besides the ae thing needful. He had a feck o’ books wi’ him—mair than
had ever been seen before in a’ that presbytery; and a sair wark the
carrier had wi’ them, for they were a’ like to have smoored in the
Deil’s Hag between this and Kilmackerlie. They were books o’ divinity,
to be sure, or so they ca’d them; but the serious were o’ opinion there
was little service for sae mony, when the hail o’ God’s Word would gang
in the neuk of a plaid. Then he wad sit half the day and half the nicht
forbye, which was scant decent—writin’, nae less; and first, they were
feared he wad read his sermons; and syne it proved he was writin’ a
book himsel’, which was surely no fittin’ for ane of his years an’ sma’
experience.

Onyway it behoved him to get an auld, decent wife to keep the manse for
him an’ see to his bit denners; and he was recommended to an auld
limmer—Janet M’Clour, they ca’d her—and sae far left to himsel’ as to
be ower persuaded. There was mony advised him to the contrar, for Janet
was mair than suspeckit by the best folk in Ba’weary. Lang or that, she
had had a wean to a dragoon; she hadnae come forrit[140] for maybe
thretty year; and bairns had seen her mumblin’ to hersel’ up on Key’s
Loan in the gloamin’, whilk was an unco time an’ place for a
God-fearin’ woman. Howsoever, it was the laird himsel’ that had first
tauld the minister o’ Janet; and in thae days he wad have gane a far
gate to pleesure the laird. When folk tauld him that Janet was sib to
the deil, it was a’ superstition by his way of it; an’ when they cast
up the Bible to him an’ the witch of Endor, he wad threep it doun their
thrapples that thir days were a’ gane by, and the deil was mercifully
restrained.

Weel, when it got about the clachan that Janet M’Clour was to be
servant at the manse, the folk were fair mad wi’ her an’ him thegether;
and some o’ the guidwives had nae better to dae than get round her door
cheeks and chairge her wi’ a’ that was ken’t again her, frae the
sodger’s bairn to John Tamson’s twa kye. She was nae great speaker;
folk usually let her gang her ain gate, an’ she let them gang theirs,
wi’, neither Fair-guid-een nor Fair-guid-day; but when she buckled to,
she had a tongue to deave the miller. Up she got, an’ there wasnae an
auld story in Ba’weary but she gart somebody lowp for it that day; they
couldnae say ae thing but she could say twa to it; till, at the hinder
end, the guidwives up and claught haud of her, and clawed the coats aff
her back, and pu’d her doun the clachan to the water o’ Dule, to see if
she were a witch or no, soum or droun. The carline skirled till ye
could hear her at the Hangin’ Shaw, and she focht like ten; there was
mony a guidwife bure the mark of her neist day an’ mony a lang day
after; and just in the hettest o’ the collieshangie, wha suld come up
(for his sins) but the new minister.

“Women,” said he (and he had a grand voice), “I charge you in the
Lord’s name to let her go.”

Janet ran to him—she was fair wud wi’ terror—an’ clang to him, an’
prayed him, for Christ’s sake, save her frae the cummers; an’ they, for
their pairt, tauld him a’ that was ken’t, and maybe mair.

“Woman,” says he to Janet, “is this true?”

“As the Lord sees me,” says she, “as the Lord made me, no a word o’t.
Forbye the bairn,” says she, “I’ve been a decent woman a’ my days.”

“Will you,” says Mr. Soulis, “in the name of God, and before me, His
unworthy minister, renounce the devil and his works?”

Weel, it wad appear that when he askit that, she gave a girn that
fairly frichtit them that saw her, an’ they could hear her teeth play
dirl thegether in her chafts; but there was naething for it but the ae
way or the ither; an’ Janet lifted up her hand and renounced the deil
before them a’.

“And now,” says Mr. Soulis to the guidwives, “home with ye, one and
all, and pray to God for His forgiveness.”

And he gied Janet his arm, though she had little on her but a sark, and
took her up the clachan to her ain door like a leddy of the land; an’
her scrieghin’ and laughin’ as was a scandal to be heard.

There were mony grave folk lang ower their prayers that nicht; but when
the morn cam’ there was sic a fear fell upon a’ Ba’weary that the
bairns hid theirsels, and even the men folk stood and keekit frae their
doors. For there was Janet comin’ doun the clachan—her or her likeness,
nane could tell—wi’ her neck thrawn, and her heid on ae side, like a
body that has been hangit, and a girn on her face like an unstreakit
corp. By an’ by they got used wi’ it, and even speered at her to ken
what was wrang; but frae that day forth she couldnae speak like a
Christian woman, but slavered and played click wi’ her teeth like a
pair o’ shears; and frae that day forth the name o’ God cam never on
her lips. Whiles she wad try to say it, but it michtnae be. Them that
kenned best said least; but they never gied that Thing the name o’
Janet M’Clour; for the auld Janet, by their way o’t, was in muckle hell
that day. But the minister was neither to haud nor to bind; he preached
about naething but the folk’s cruelty that had gi’en her a stroke of
the palsy; he skelpt the bairns that meddled her; and he had her up to
the manse that same nicht, and dwalled there a’ his lane wi’ her under
the Hangin’ Shaw.

Weel, time gaed by: and the idler sort commenced to think mair lichtly
o’ that black business. The minister was weel thocht o’; he was aye
late at the writing, folk wad see his can’le doon by the Dule water
after twal’ at e’en; and he seemed pleased wi’ himsel’ and upsitten as
at first, though a’ body could see that he was dwining. As for Janet
she cam an’ she gaed; if she didnae speak muckle afore, it was reason
she should speak less then; she meddled naebody; but she was an
eldritch thing to see, an’ nane wad hae mistrysted wi’ her for Ba’weary
glebe.

About the end o’ July there cam’ a spell o’ weather, the like o’t never
was in that country side; it was lown an’ het an’ heartless; the herds
couldnae win up the Black Hill, the bairns were ower weariet to play;
an’ yet it was gousty too, wi’ claps o’ het wund that rumm’led in the
glens, and bits o’ shouers that slockened naething. We aye thocht it
but to thun’er on the morn; but the morn cam, an’ the morn’s morning,
and it was aye the same uncanny weather, sair on folks and bestial. Of
a’ that were the waur, nane suffered like Mr. Soulis; he could neither
sleep nor eat, he tauld his elders; an’ when he wasnae writin’ at his
weary book, he wad be stravaguin’ ower a’ the countryside like a man
possessed, when a’ body else was blythe to keep caller ben the house.

Abune Hangin’ Shaw, in the bield o’ the Black Hill, there’s a bit
enclosed grund wi’ an iron yett; and it seems, in the auld days, that
was the kirkyaird o’ Ba’weary, and consecrated by the Papists before
the blessed licht shone upon the kingdom. It was a great howff o’ Mr.
Soulis’s, onyway; there he would sit an’ consider his sermons; and
indeed it’s a bieldy bit. Weel, as he cam ower the wast end o’ the
Black Hill, ae day, he saw first twa, an syne fower, an’ syne seeven
corbie craws fleein’ round an’ round abune the auld kirkyaird. They
flew laigh and heavy, an’ squawked to ither as they gaed; and it was
clear to Mr. Soulis that something had put them frae their ordinar. He
wasnae easy fleyed, an’ gaed straucht up to the wa’s; an’ what suld he
find there but a man, or the appearance of a man, sittin’ in the inside
upon a grave. He was of a great stature, an’ black as hell, and his
e’en were singular to see.[144] Mr. Soulis had heard tell o’ black men,
mony’s the time; but there was something unco about this black man that
daunted him. Het as he was, he took a kind o’ cauld grue in the marrow
o’ his banes; but up he spak for a’ that; an’ says he: “My friend, are
you a stranger in this place?” The black man answered never a word; he
got upon his feet, an’ begude to hirsle to the wa’ on the far side; but
he aye lookit at the minister; an’ the minister stood an’ lookit back;
till a’ in a meenute the black man was ower the wa’ an’ rinnin’ for the
bield o’ the trees. Mr. Soulis, he hardly kenned why, ran after him;
but he was sair forjaskit wi’ his walk an’ the het, unhalesome weather;
and rin as he likit, he got nae mair than a glisk o’ the black man
amang the birks, till he won doun to the foot o’ the hill-side, an’
there he saw him ance mair, gaun, hap, step, an’ lowp, ower Dule water
to the manse.

Mr. Soulis wasnae weel pleased that this fearsome gangrel suld mak’ sae
free wi’ Ba’weary manse; an’ he ran the harder, an’, wet shoon, ower
the burn, an’ up the walk; but the deil a black man was there to see.
He stepped out upon the road, but there was naebody there; he gaed a’
ower the gairden, but na, nae black man. At the hinder end, and a bit
feared as was but natural, he lifted the hasp and into the manse; and
there was Janet M’Clour before his een, wi’ her thrawn craig, and nane
sae pleased to see him. And he aye minded sinsyne, when first he set
his een upon her, he had the same cauld and deidly grue.

“Janet,” says he, “have you seen a black man?”

“A black man?” quo’ she. “Save us a’! Ye’re no wise, minister. There’s
nae black man in a Ba’weary.”

But she didnae speak plain, ye maun understand; but yam-yammered, like
a powney wi’ the bit in its moo.

“Weel,” says he, “Janet, if there was nae black man, I have spoken with
the Accuser of the Brethren.”

And he sat down like ane wi’ a fever, an’ his teeth chittered in his
heid.

“Hoots,” says she, “think shame to yoursel’, minister;” an’ gied him a
drap brandy that she keept aye by her.

Syne Mr. Soulis gaed into his study amang a’ his books. It’s a lang,
laigh, mirk chalmer, perishin’ cauld in winter, an’ no very dry even in
the tap o’ the simmer, for the manse stands near the burn. Sae doun he
sat, and thocht of a’ that had come an’ gane since he was in Ba’weary,
an’ his hame, an’ the days when he was a bairn an’ ran daffin’ on the
braes; and that black man aye ran in his heid like the ower-come of a
sang. Aye the mair he thocht, the mair he thocht o’ the black man. He
tried the prayer, an’ the words wouldnae come to him; an’ he tried,
they say, to write at his book, but he could nae mak’ nae mair o’ that.
There was whiles he thocht the black man was at his oxter, an’ the swat
stood upon him cauld as well-water; and there was other whiles, when he
cam to himsel’ like a christened bairn and minded naething.

The upshot was that he gaed to the window an’ stood glowrin’ at Dule
water. The trees are unco thick, an’ the water lies deep an’ black
under the manse; an’ there was Janct washin’ the cla’es wi’ her coats
kilted. She had her back to the minister, an’ he, for his pairt, hardly
kenned what he was lookin’ at. Syne she turned round, an’ shawed her
face; Mr. Soulis had the same cauld grue as twice that day afore, an’
it was borne in upon him what folk said, that Janet was deid lang syne,
an’ this was a bogle in her clay-cauld flesh. He drew back a pickle and
he scanned her narrowly. She was tramp-trampin’ in the cla’es, croonin’
to hersel’; and eh! Gude guide us, but it was a fearsome face. Whiles
she sang louder, but there was nae man born o’ woman that could tell
the words o’ her sang; an’ whiles she lookit side-lang doun, but there
was naething there for her to look at. There gaed a scunner through the
flesh upon his banes; and that was Heeven’s advertisement. But Mr.
Soulis just blamed himsel’, he said, to think sae ill of a puir, auld
afflicted wife that hadnae a freend forbye himsel’; an’ he put up a bit
prayer for him and her, an’ drank a little caller water—for his heart
rose again the meat—an’ gaed up to his naked bed in the gloaming.

That was a nicht that has never been forgotten in Ba’weary, the nicht
o’ the seeventeenth of August, seventeen hun’er’ an twal’. It had been
het afore, as I hae said, but that nicht it was hetter than ever. The
sun gaed doun amang unco-lookin’ clouds; it fell as mirk as the pit; no
a star, no a breath o’ wund; ye couldnae see your han’ afore your face,
and even the auld folk cuist the covers frae their beds and lay pechin’
for their breath. Wi’ a’ that he had upon his mind, it was gey and
unlikely Mr. Soulis wad get muckle sleep. He lay an’ he tummled; the
gude, caller bed that he got into brunt his very banes; whiles he
slept, and whiles he waukened; whiles he heard the time o’ nicht, and
whiles a tyke yowlin’ up the muir, as if somebody was deid; whiles he
thocht he heard bogles claverin’ in his lug, an’ whiles he saw spunkies
in the room. He behoved, he judged, to be sick; an’ sick he was—little
he jaloosed the sickness.

At the hinder end, he got a clearness in his mind, sat up in his sark
on the bed-side, and fell thinkin’ ance mair o’ the black man an’
Janet. He couldnae weel tell how—maybe it was the cauld to his feet—but
it cam’ in upon him wi’ a spate that there was some connection between
thir twa, an’ that either or baith o’ them were bogles. And just at
that moment, in Janet’s room, which was neist to his, there cam’ a
stramp o’ feet as if men were wars’lin’, an’ then a loud bang; an’ then
a wund gaed reishling round the fower quarters of the house; an’ then
a’ was aince mair as seelent as the grave.

Mr. Soulis was feared for neither man nor deevil. He got his
tinder-box, an’ lit a can’le, an’ made three steps o’t ower to Janet’s
door. It was on the hasp, an’ he pushed it open, an’ keeked bauldly in.
It was a big room, as big as the minister’s ain, an’ plenished wi’
grand, auld, solid gear, for he had naething else. There was a
fower-posted bed wi’ auld tapestry; and a braw cabinet of aik, that was
fu’ o’ the minister’s divinity books, an’ put there to be out o’ the
gate; an’ a wheen duds o’ Janet’s lying here and there about the floor.
But nae Janet could Mr. Soulis see; nor ony sign of a contention. In he
gaed (an’ there’s few that wad ha’e followed him) an’ lookit a’ round,
an’ listened. But there was naethin’ to be heard, neither inside the
manse nor in a’ Ba’weary parish, an’ naethin’ to be seen but the muckle
shadows turnin’ round the can’le. An’ then a’ at aince, the minister’s
heart played dunt an’ stood stock-still; an’ a cauld wund blew amang
the hairs o’ his heid. Whaten a weary sicht was that for the puir man’s
een! For there was Janat hangin’ frae a nail beside the auld aik
cabinet: her heid aye lay on her shoother, her een were steeked, the
tongue projekit frae her mouth, and her heels were twa feet clear abune
the floor.

“God forgive us all!” thocht Mr. Soulis; “poor Janet’s dead.”

He cam’ a step nearer to the corp; an’ then his heart fair whammled in
his inside. For by what cantrip it wad ill-beseem a man to judge, she
was hingin’ frae a single nail an’ by a single wursted thread for
darnin’ hose.

It’s an awfu’ thing to be your lane at nicht wi’ siccan prodigies o’
darkness; but Mr. Soulis was strong in the Lord. He turned an’ gaed his
ways oot o’ that room, and lockit the door ahint him; and step by step,
doon the stairs, as heavy as leed; and set doon the can’le on the table
at the stairfoot. He couldnae pray, he couldnae think, he was dreepin’
wi’ caul’ swat, an’ naething could he hear but the dunt-dunt-duntin’ o’
his ain heart. He micht maybe have stood there an hour, or maybe twa,
he minded sae little; when a’ o’ a sudden, he heard a laigh, uncanny
steer upstairs; a foot gaed to an’ fro in the cha’mer whaur the corp
was hingin’; syne the door was opened, though he minded weel that he
had lockit it; an’ syne there was a step upon the landin’, an’ it
seemed to him as if the corp was lookin’ ower the rail and doun upon
him whaur he stood.

He took up the can’le again (for he couldnae want the licht), and as
saftly as ever he could, gaed straucht out o’ the manse an’ to the far
end o’ the causeway. It was aye pit-mirk; the flame o’ the can’le, when
he set it on the grund, brunt steedy and clear as in a room; naething
moved, but the Dule water seepin’ and sabbin’ doon the glen, an’ yon
unhaly footstep that cam’ ploddin doun the stairs inside the manse. He
kenned the foot over weel, for it was Janet’s; and at ilka step that
cam’ a wee thing nearer, the cauld got deeper in his vitals. He
commanded his soul to Him that made an’ keepit him; “and O Lord,” said
he, “give me strength this night to war against the powers of evil.”

By this time the foot was comin’ through the passage for the door; he
could hear a hand skirt alang the wa’, as if the fearsome thing was
feelin’ for its way. The saughs tossed an’ maned thegether, a lang sigh
cam’ ower the hills, the flame o’ the can’le was blawn aboot; an’ there
stood the corp of Thrawn Janet, wi’ her grogram goun an’ her black
mutch, wi’ the heid aye upon the shouther, an’ the girn still upon the
face o’t—leevin’, ye wad hae said—deid, as Mr. Soulis weel kenned—upon
the threshold o’ the manse.

It’s a strange thing that the saul of man should be that thirled into
his perishable body; but the minister saw that, an’ his heart didnae
break.

She didnae stand there lang; she began to move again an’ cam’ slowly
towards Mr. Soulis whaur he stood under the saughs. A’ the life o’ his
body, a’ the strength o’ his speerit, were glowerin’ frae his een. It
seemed she was gaun to speak, but wanted words, an’ made a sign wi’ the
left hand. There cam’ a clap o’ wund, like a cat’s fuff; oot gaed the
can’le, the saughs skrieghed like folk; an’ Mr. Soulis kenned that,
live or die, this was the end o’t.

“Witch, beldame, devil!” he cried, “I charge you, by the power of God,
begone—if you be dead, to the grave—if you be damned, to hell.”

An’ at that moment the Lord’s ain hand out o’ the Heevens struck the
Horror whaur it stood; the auld, deid, desecrated corp o’ the
witch-wife, sae lang keepit frae the grave and hirsled round by deils,
lowed up like a brunstane spunk and fell in ashes to the grund; the
thunder followed, peal on dirling peal, the rairing rain upon the back
o’ that; and Mr. Soulis lowped through the garden hedge, and ran, wi’
skelloch upon skelloch, for the clachan.

That same mornin’, John Christie saw the Black Man pass the Muckle
Cairn as it was chappin’ six; before eicht, he gaed by the change-house
at Knockdow; an’ no lang after, Sandy M’Lellan saw him gaun linkin’
doun the braes frae Kilmackerlie. There’s little doubt but it was him
that dwalled sae lang in Janet’s body; but he was awa’ at last; and
sinsyne the deil has never fashed us in Ba’weary.

But it was a sair dispensation for the minister; lang, lang he lay
ravin’ in his bed; and frae that hour to this, he was the man ye ken
the day.




OLALLA


“Now,” said the doctor, “my part is done, and, I may say, with some
vanity, well done. It remains only to get you out of this cold and
poisonous city, and to give you two months of a pure air and an easy
conscience. The last is your affair. To the first I think I can help
you. It falls indeed rather oddly; it was but the other day the Padre
came in from the country; and as he and I are old friends, although of
contrary professions, he applied to me in a matter of distress among
some of his parishioners. This was a family—but you are ignorant of
Spain, and even the names of our grandees are hardly known to you;
suffice it, then, that they were once great people, and are now fallen
to the brink of destitution. Nothing now belongs to them but the
residencia, and certain leagues of desert mountain, in the greater part
of which not even a goat could support life. But the house is a fine
old place, and stands at a great height among the hills, and most
salubriously; and I had no sooner heard my friend’s tale, than I
remembered you. I told him I had a wounded officer, wounded in the good
cause, who was now able to make a change; and I proposed that his
friends should take you for a lodger. Instantly the Padre’s face grew
dark, as I had maliciously foreseen it would. It was out of the
question, he said. Then let them starve, said I, for I have no sympathy
with tatterdemalion pride. There-upon we separated, not very content
with one another; but yesterday, to my wonder, the Padre returned and
made a submission: the difficulty, he said, he had found upon enquiry
to be less than he had feared; or, in other words, these proud people
had put their pride in their pocket. I closed with the offer; and,
subject to your approval, I have taken rooms for you in the residencia.
The air of these mountains will renew your blood; and the quiet in
which you will there live is worth all the medicines in the world.”

“Doctor,” said I, “you have been throughout my good angel, and your
advice is a command. But tell me, if you please, something of the
family with which I am to reside.”

“I am coming to that,” replied my friend; “and, indeed, there is a
difficulty in the way. These beggars are, as I have said, of very high
descent and swollen with the most baseless vanity; they have lived for
some generations in a growing isolation, drawing away, on either hand,
from the rich who had now become too high for them, and from the poor,
whom they still regarded as too low; and even to-day, when poverty
forces them to unfasten their door to a guest, they cannot do so
without a most ungracious stipulation. You are to remain, they say, a
stranger; they will give you attendance, but they refuse from the first
the idea of the smallest intimacy.”

I will not deny that I was piqued, and perhaps the feeling strengthened
my desire to go, for I was confident that I could break down that
barrier if I desired. “There is nothing offensive in such a
stipulation,” said I; “and I even sympathise with the feeling that
inspired it.”

“It is true they have never seen you,” returned the doctor politely;
“and if they knew you were the handsomest and the most pleasant man
that ever came from England (where I am told that handsome men are
common, but pleasant ones not so much so), they would doubtless make
you welcome with a better grace. But since you take the thing so well,
it matters not. To me, indeed, it seems discourteous. But you will find
yourself the gainer. The family will not much tempt you. A mother, a
son, and a daughter; an old woman said to be halfwitted, a country
lout, and a country girl, who stands very high with her confessor, and
is, therefore,” chuckled the physician, “most likely plain; there is
not much in that to attract the fancy of a dashing officer.”

“And yet you say they are high-born,” I objected.

“Well, as to that, I should distinguish,” returned the doctor. “The
mother is; not so the children. The mother was the last representative
of a princely stock, degenerate both in parts and fortune. Her father
was not only poor, he was mad: and the girl ran wild about the
residencia till his death. Then, much of the fortune having died with
him, and the family being quite extinct, the girl ran wilder than ever,
until at last she married, Heaven knows whom, a muleteer some say,
others a smuggler; while there are some who uphold there was no
marriage at all, and that Felipe and Olalla are bastards. The union,
such as it was, was tragically dissolved some years ago; but they live
in such seclusion, and the country at that time was in so much
disorder, that the precise manner of the man’s end is known only to the
priest—if even to him.”

“I begin to think I shall have strange experiences,” said I.

“I would not romance, if I were you,” replied the doctor; “you will
find, I fear, a very grovelling and commonplace reality. Felipe, for
instance, I have seen. And what am I to say? He is very rustic, very
cunning, very loutish, and, I should say, an innocent; the others are
probably to match. No, no, senor commandante, you must seek congenial
society among the great sights of our mountains; and in these at least,
if you are at all a lover of the works of nature, I promise you will
not be disappointed.”

The next day Felipe came for me in a rough country cart, drawn by a
mule; and a little before the stroke of noon, after I had said farewell
to the doctor, the innkeeper, and different good souls who had
befriended me during my sickness, we set forth out of the city by the
Eastern gate, and began to ascend into the Sierra. I had been so long a
prisoner, since I was left behind for dying after the loss of the
convoy, that the mere smell of the earth set me smiling. The country
through which we went was wild and rocky, partially covered with rough
woods, now of the cork-tree, and now of the great Spanish chestnut, and
frequently intersected by the beds of mountain torrents. The sun shone,
the wind rustled joyously; and we had advanced some miles, and the city
had already shrunk into an inconsiderable knoll upon the plain behind
us, before my attention began to be diverted to the companion of my
drive. To the eye, he seemed but a diminutive, loutish, well-made
country lad, such as the doctor had described, mighty quick and active,
but devoid of any culture; and this first impression was with most
observers final. What began to strike me was his familiar, chattering
talk; so strangely inconsistent with the terms on which I was to be
received; and partly from his imperfect enunciation, partly from the
sprightly incoherence of the matter, so very difficult to follow
clearly without an effort of the mind. It is true I had before talked
with persons of a similar mental constitution; persons who seemed to
live (as he did) by the senses, taken and possessed by the visual
object of the moment and unable to discharge their minds of that
impression. His seemed to me (as I sat, distantly giving ear) a kind of
conversation proper to drivers, who pass much of their time in a great
vacancy of the intellect and threading the sights of a familiar
country. But this was not the case of Felipe; by his own account, he
was a home-keeper; “I wish I was there now,” he said; and then, spying
a tree by the wayside, he broke off to tell me that he had once seen a
crow among its branches.

“A crow?” I repeated, struck by the ineptitude of the remark, and
thinking I had heard imperfectly.

But by this time he was already filled with a new idea; hearkening with
a rapt intentness, his head on one side, his face puckered; and he
struck me rudely, to make me hold my peace. Then he smiled and shook
his head.

“What did you hear?” I asked.

“O, it is all right,” he said; and began encouraging his mule with
cries that echoed unhumanly up the mountain walls.

I looked at him more closely. He was superlatively well-built, light,
and lithe and strong; he was well-featured; his yellow eyes were very
large, though, perhaps, not very expressive; take him altogether, he
was a pleasant-looking lad, and I had no fault to find with him, beyond
that he was of a dusky hue, and inclined to hairyness; two
characteristics that I disliked. It was his mind that puzzled, and yet
attracted me. The doctor’s phrase—an innocent—came back to me; and I
was wondering if that were, after all, the true description, when the
road began to go down into the narrow and naked chasm of a torrent. The
waters thundered tumultuously in the bottom; and the ravine was filled
full of the sound, the thin spray, and the claps of wind, that
accompanied their descent. The scene was certainly impressive; but the
road was in that part very securely walled in; the mule went steadily
forward; and I was astonished to perceive the paleness of terror in the
face of my companion. The voice of that wild river was inconstant, now
sinking lower as if in weariness, now doubling its hoarse tones;
momentary freshets seemed to swell its volume, sweeping down the gorge,
raving and booming against the barrier walls; and I observed it was at
each of these accessions to the clamour, that my driver more
particularly winced and blanched. Some thoughts of Scottish
superstition and the river Kelpie, passed across my mind; I wondered if
perchance the like were prevalent in that part of Spain; and turning to
Felipe, sought to draw him out.

“What is the matter?” I asked.

“O, I am afraid,” he replied.

“Of what are you afraid?” I returned. “This seems one of the safest
places on this very dangerous road.”

“It makes a noise,” he said, with a simplicity of awe that set my
doubts at rest.

The lad was but a child in intellect; his mind was like his body,
active and swift, but stunted in development; and I began from that
time forth to regard him with a measure of pity, and to listen at first
with indulgence, and at last even with pleasure, to his disjointed
babble.

By about four in the afternoon we had crossed the summit of the
mountain line, said farewell to the western sunshine, and began to go
down upon the other side, skirting the edge of many ravines and moving
through the shadow of dusky woods. There rose upon all sides the voice
of falling water, not condensed and formidable as in the gorge of the
river, but scattered and sounding gaily and musically from glen to
glen. Here, too, the spirits of my driver mended, and he began to sing
aloud in a falsetto voice, and with a singular bluntness of musical
perception, never true either to melody or key, but wandering at will,
and yet somehow with an effect that was natural and pleasing, like that
of the of birds. As the dusk increased, I fell more and more under the
spell of this artless warbling, listening and waiting for some
articulate air, and still disappointed; and when at last I asked him
what it was he sang—“O,” cried he, “I am just singing!” Above all, I
was taken with a trick he had of unweariedly repeating the same note at
little intervals; it was not so monotonous as you would think, or, at
least, not disagreeable; and it seemed to breathe a wonderful
contentment with what is, such as we love to fancy in the attitude of
trees, or the quiescence of a pool.

Night had fallen dark before we came out upon a plateau, and drew up a
little after, before a certain lump of superior blackness which I could
only conjecture to be the residencia. Here, my guide, getting down from
the cart, hooted and whistled for a long time in vain; until at last an
old peasant man came towards us from somewhere in the surrounding dark,
carrying a candle in his hand. By the light of this I was able to
perceive a great arched doorway of a Moorish character: it was closed
by iron-studded gates, in one of the leaves of which Felipe opened a
wicket. The peasant carried off the cart to some out-building; but my
guide and I passed through the wicket, which was closed again behind
us; and by the glimmer of the candle, passed through a court, up a
stone stair, along a section of an open gallery, and up more stairs
again, until we came at last to the door of a great and somewhat bare
apartment. This room, which I understood was to be mine, was pierced by
three windows, lined with some lustrous wood disposed in panels, and
carpeted with the skins of many savage animals. A bright fire burned in
the chimney, and shed abroad a changeful flicker; close up to the blaze
there was drawn a table, laid for supper; and in the far end a bed
stood ready. I was pleased by these preparations, and said so to
Felipe; and he, with the same simplicity of disposition that I held
already remarked in him, warmly re-echoed my praises. “A fine room,” he
said; “a very fine room. And fire, too; fire is good; it melts out the
pleasure in your bones. And the bed,” he continued, carrying over the
candle in that direction—“see what fine sheets—how soft, how smooth,
smooth;” and he passed his hand again and again over their texture, and
then laid down his head and rubbed his cheeks among them with a
grossness of content that somehow offended me. I took the candle from
his hand (for I feared he would set the bed on fire) and walked back to
the supper-table, where, perceiving a measure of wine, I poured out a
cup and called to him to come and drink of it. He started to his feet
at once and ran to me with a strong expression of hope; but when he saw
the wine, he visibly shuddered.

“Oh, no,” he said, “not that; that is for you. I hate it.”

“Very well, Senor,” said I; “then I will drink to your good health, and
to the prosperity of your house and family. Speaking of which,” I
added, after I had drunk, “shall I not have the pleasure of laying my
salutations in person at the feet of the Senora, your mother?”

But at these words all the childishness passed out of his face, and was
succeeded by a look of indescribable cunning and secrecy. He backed
away from me at the same time, as though I were an animal about to leap
or some dangerous fellow with a weapon, and when he had got near the
door, glowered at me sullenly with contracted pupils. “No,” he said at
last, and the next moment was gone noiselessly out of the room; and I
heard his footing die away downstairs as light as rainfall, and silence
closed over the house.

After I had supped I drew up the table nearer to the bed and began to
prepare for rest; but in the new position of the light, I was struck by
a picture on the wall. It represented a woman, still young. To judge by
her costume and the mellow unity which reigned over the canvas, she had
long been dead; to judge by the vivacity of the attitude, the eyes and
the features, I might have been beholding in a mirror the image of
life. Her figure was very slim and strong, and of a just proportion;
red tresses lay like a crown over her brow; her eyes, of a very golden
brown, held mine with a look; and her face, which was perfectly shaped,
was yet marred by a cruel, sullen, and sensual expression. Something in
both face and figure, something exquisitely intangible, like the echo
of an echo, suggested the features and bearing of my guide; and I stood
awhile, unpleasantly attracted and wondering at the oddity of the
resemblance. The common, carnal stock of that race, which had been
originally designed for such high dames as the one now looking on me
from the canvas, had fallen to baser uses, wearing country clothes,
sitting on the shaft and holding the reins of a mule cart, to bring
home a lodger. Perhaps an actual link subsisted; perhaps some scruple
of the delicate flesh that was once clothed upon with the satin and
brocade of the dead lady, now winced at the rude contact of Felipe’s
frieze.

The first light of the morning shone full upon the portrait, and, as I
lay awake, my eyes continued to dwell upon it with growing complacency;
its beauty crept about my heart insidiously, silencing my scruples one
after another; and while I knew that to love such a woman were to sign
and seal one’s own sentence of degeneration, I still knew that, if she
were alive, I should love her. Day after day the double knowledge of
her wickedness and of my weakness grew clearer. She came to be the
heroine of many day-dreams, in which her eyes led on to, and
sufficiently rewarded, crimes. She cast a dark shadow on my fancy; and
when I was out in the free air of heaven, taking vigorous exercise and
healthily renewing the current of my blood, it was often a glad thought
to me that my enchantress was safe in the grave, her wand of beauty
broken, her lips closed in silence, her philtre spilt. And yet I had a
half-lingering terror that she might not be dead after all, but
re-arisen in the body of some descendant.

Felipe served my meals in my own apartment; and his resemblance to the
portrait haunted me. At times it was not; at times, upon some change of
attitude or flash of expression, it would leap out upon me like a
ghost. It was above all in his ill tempers that the likeness triumphed.
He certainly liked me; he was proud of my notice, which he sought to
engage by many simple and childlike devices; he loved to sit close
before my fire, talking his broken talk or singing his odd, endless,
wordless songs, and sometimes drawing his hand over my clothes with an
affectionate manner of caressing that never failed to cause in me an
embarrassment of which I was ashamed. But for all that, he was capable
of flashes of causeless anger and fits of sturdy sullenness. At a word
of reproof, I have seen him upset the dish of which I was about to eat,
and this not surreptitiously, but with defiance; and similarly at a
hint of inquisition. I was not unnaturally curious, being in a strange
place and surrounded by staring people; but at the shadow of a
question, he shrank back, lowering and dangerous. Then it was that, for
a fraction of a second, this rough lad might have been the brother of
the lady in the frame. But these humours were swift to pass; and the
resemblance died along with them.

In these first days I saw nothing of any one but Felipe, unless the
portrait is to be counted; and since the lad was plainly of weak mind,
and had moments of passion, it may be wondered that I bore his
dangerous neighbourhood with equanimity. As a matter of fact, it was
for some time irksome; but it happened before long that I obtained over
him so complete a mastery as set my disquietude at rest.

It fell in this way. He was by nature slothful, and much of a vagabond,
and yet he kept by the house, and not only waited upon my wants, but
laboured every day in the garden or small farm to the south of the
residencia. Here he would be joined by the peasant whom I had seen on
the night of my arrival, and who dwelt at the far end of the enclosure,
about half a mile away, in a rude out-house; but it was plain to me
that, of these two, it was Felipe who did most; and though I would
sometimes see him throw down his spade and go to sleep among the very
plants he had been digging, his constancy and energy were admirable in
themselves, and still more so since I was well assured they were
foreign to his disposition and the fruit of an ungrateful effort. But
while I admired, I wondered what had called forth in a lad so
shuttle-witted this enduring sense of duty. How was it sustained? I
asked myself, and to what length did it prevail over his instincts? The
priest was possibly his inspirer; but the priest came one day to the
residencia. I saw him both come and go after an interval of close upon
an hour, from a knoll where I was sketching, and all that time Felipe
continued to labour undisturbed in the garden.

At last, in a very unworthy spirit, I determined to debauch the lad
from his good resolutions, and, way-laying him at the gate, easily
pursuaded him to join me in a ramble. It was a fine day, and the woods
to which I led him were green and pleasant and sweet-smelling and alive
with the hum of insects. Here he discovered himself in a fresh
character, mounting up to heights of gaiety that abashed me, and
displaying an energy and grace of movement that delighted the eye. He
leaped, he ran round me in mere glee; he would stop, and look and
listen, and seem to drink in the world like a cordial; and then he
would suddenly spring into a tree with one bound, and hang and gambol
there like one at home. Little as he said to me, and that of not much
import, I have rarely enjoyed more stirring company; the sight of his
delight was a continual feast; the speed and accuracy of his movements
pleased me to the heart; and I might have been so thoughtlessly unkind
as to make a habit of these wants, had not chance prepared a very rude
conclusion to my pleasure. By some swiftness or dexterity the lad
captured a squirrel in a tree top. He was then some way ahead of me,
but I saw him drop to the ground and crouch there, crying aloud for
pleasure like a child. The sound stirred my sympathies, it was so fresh
and innocent; but as I bettered my pace to draw near, the cry of the
squirrel knocked upon my heart. I have heard and seen much of the
cruelty of lads, and above all of peasants; but what I now beheld
struck me into a passion of anger. I thrust the fellow aside, plucked
the poor brute out of his hands, and with swift mercy killed it. Then I
turned upon the torturer, spoke to him long out of the heat of my
indignation, calling him names at which he seemed to wither; and at
length, pointing toward the residencia, bade him begone and leave me,
for I chose to walk with men, not with vermin. He fell upon his knees,
and, the words coming to him with more cleanness than usual, poured out
a stream of the most touching supplications, begging me in mercy to
forgive him, to forget what he had done, to look to the future. “O, I
try so hard,” he said. “O, commandante, bear with Felipe this once; he
will never be a brute again!” Thereupon, much more affected than I
cared to show, I suffered myself to be persuaded, and at last shook
hands with him and made it up. But the squirrel, by way of penance, I
made him bury; speaking of the poor thing’s beauty, telling him what
pains it had suffered, and how base a thing was the abuse of strength.
“See, Felipe,” said I, “you are strong indeed; but in my hands you are
as helpless as that poor thing of the trees. Give me your hand in mine.
You cannot remove it. Now suppose that I were cruel like you, and took
a pleasure in pain. I only tighten my hold, and see how you suffer.” He
screamed aloud, his face stricken ashy and dotted with needle points of
sweat; and when I set him free, he fell to the earth and nursed his
hand and moaned over it like a baby. But he took the lesson in good
part; and whether from that, or from what I had said to him, or the
higher notion he now had of my bodily strength, his original affection
was changed into a dog-like, adoring fidelity.

Meanwhile I gained rapidly in health. The residencia stood on the crown
of a stony plateau; on every side the mountains hemmed it about; only
from the roof, where was a bartizan, there might be seen between two
peaks, a small segment of plain, blue with extreme distance. The air in
these altitudes moved freely and largely; great clouds congregated
there, and were broken up by the wind and left in tatters on the
hilltops; a hoarse, and yet faint rumbling of torrents rose from all
round; and one could there study all the ruder and more ancient
characters of nature in something of their pristine force. I delighted
from the first in the vigorous scenery and changeful weather; nor less
in the antique and dilapidated mansion where I dwelt. This was a large
oblong, flanked at two opposite corners by bastion-like projections,
one of which commanded the door, while both were loopholed for
musketry. The lower storey was, besides, naked of windows, so that the
building, if garrisoned, could not be carried without artillery. It
enclosed an open court planted with pomegranate trees. From this a
broad flight of marble stairs ascended to an open gallery, running all
round and resting, towards the court, on slender pillars. Thence again,
several enclosed stairs led to the upper storeys of the house, which
were thus broken up into distinct divisions. The windows, both within
and without, were closely shuttered; some of the stone-work in the
upper parts had fallen; the roof, in one place, had been wrecked in one
of the flurries of wind which were common in these mountains; and the
whole house, in the strong, beating sunlight, and standing out above a
grove of stunted cork-trees, thickly laden and discoloured with dust,
looked like the sleeping palace of the legend. The court, in
particular, seemed the very home of slumber. A hoarse cooing of doves
haunted about the eaves; the winds were excluded, but when they blew
outside, the mountain dust fell here as thick as rain, and veiled the
red bloom of the pomegranates; shuttered windows and the closed doors
of numerous cellars, and the vacant arches of the gallery, enclosed it;
and all day long the sun made broken profiles on the four sides, and
paraded the shadow of the pillars on the gallery floor. At the ground
level there was, however, a certain pillared recess, which bore the
marks of human habitation. Though it was open in front upon the court,
it was yet provided with a chimney, where a wood fire would he always
prettily blazing; and the tile floor was littered with the skins of
animals.

It was in this place that I first saw my hostess. She had drawn one of
the skins forward and sat in the sun, leaning against a pillar. It was
her dress that struck me first of all, for it was rich and brightly
coloured, and shone out in that dusty courtyard with something of the
same relief as the flowers of the pomegranates. At a second look it was
her beauty of person that took hold of me. As she sat back—watching me,
I thought, though with invisible eyes—and wearing at the same time an
expression of almost imbecile good-humour and contentment, she showed a
perfectness of feature and a quiet nobility of attitude that were
beyond a statue’s. I took off my hat to her in passing, and her face
puckered with suspicion as swiftly and lightly as a pool ruffles in the
breeze; but she paid no heed to my courtesy. I went forth on my
customary walk a trifle daunted, her idol-like impassivity haunting me;
and when I returned, although she was still in much the same posture, I
was half surprised to see that she had moved as far as the next pillar,
following the sunshine. This time, however, she addressed me with some
trivial salutation, civilly enough conceived, and uttered in the same
deep-chested, and yet indistinct and lisping tones, that had already
baffled the utmost niceness of my hearing from her son. I answered
rather at a venture; for not only did I fail to take her meaning with
precision, but the sudden disclosure of her eyes disturbed me. They
were unusually large, the iris golden like Felipe’s, but the pupil at
that moment so distended that they seemed almost black; and what
affected me was not so much their size as (what was perhaps its
consequence) the singular insignificance of their regard. A look more
blankly stupid I have never met. My eyes dropped before it even as I
spoke, and I went on my way upstairs to my own room, at once baffled
and embarrassed. Yet, when I came there and saw the face of the
portrait, I was again reminded of the miracle of family descent. My
hostess was, indeed, both older and fuller in person; her eyes were of
a different colour; her face, besides, was not only free from the
ill-significance that offended and attracted me in the painting; it was
devoid of either good or bad—a moral blank expressing literally naught.
And yet there was a likeness, not so much speaking as immanent, not so
much in any particular feature as upon the whole. It should seem, I
thought, as if when the master set his signature to that grave canvas,
he had not only caught the image of one smiling and false-eyed woman,
but stamped the essential quality of a race.

From that day forth, whether I came or went, I was sure to find the
Senora seated in the sun against a pillar, or stretched on a rug before
the fire; only at times she would shift her station to the top round of
the stone staircase, where she lay with the same nonchalance right
across my path. In all these days, I never knew her to display the
least spark of energy beyond what she expended in brushing and
re-brushing her copious copper-coloured hair, or in lisping out, in the
rich and broken hoarseness of her voice, her customary idle salutations
to myself. These, I think, were her two chief pleasures, beyond that of
mere quiescence. She seemed always proud of her remarks, as though they
had been witticisms: and, indeed, though they were empty enough, like
the conversation of many respectable persons, and turned on a very
narrow range of subjects, they were never meaningless or incoherent;
nay, they had a certain beauty of their own, breathing, as they did, of
her entire contentment. Now she would speak of the warmth, in which
(like her son) she greatly delighted; now of the flowers of the
pomegranate trees, and now of the white doves and long-winged swallows
that fanned the air of the court. The birds excited her. As they raked
the eaves in their swift flight, or skimmed sidelong past her with a
rush of wind, she would sometimes stir, and sit a little up, and seem
to awaken from her doze of satisfaction. But for the rest of her days
she lay luxuriously folded on herself and sunk in sloth and pleasure.
Her invincible content at first annoyed me, but I came gradually to
find repose in the spectacle, until at last it grew to be my habit to
sit down beside her four times in the day, both coming and going, and
to talk with her sleepily, I scarce knew of what. I had come to like
her dull, almost animal neighbourhood; her beauty and her stupidity
soothed and amused me. I began to find a kind of transcendental good
sense in her remarks, and her unfathomable good nature moved me to
admiration and envy. The liking was returned; she enjoyed my presence
half-unconsciously, as a man in deep meditation may enjoy the babbling
of a brook. I can scarce say she brightened when I came, for
satisfaction was written on her face eternally, as on some foolish
statue’s; but I was made conscious of her pleasure by some more
intimate communication than the sight. And one day, as I set within
reach of her on the marble step, she suddenly shot forth one of her
hands and patted mine. The thing was done, and she was back in her
accustomed attitude, before my mind had received intelligence of the
caress; and when I turned to look her in the face I could perceive no
answerable sentiment. It was plain she attached no moment to the act,
and I blamed myself for my own more uneasy consciousness.

The sight and (if I may so call it) the acquaintance of the mother
confirmed the view I had already taken of the son. The family blood had
been impoverished, perhaps by long inbreeding, which I knew to be a
common error among the proud and the exclusive. No decline, indeed, was
to be traced in the body, which had been handed down unimpaired in
shapeliness and strength; and the faces of to-day were struck as
sharply from the mint, as the face of two centuries ago that smiled
upon me from the portrait. But the intelligence (that more precious
heirloom) was degenerate; the treasure of ancestral memory ran low; and
it had required the potent, plebeian crossing of a muleteer or mountain
contrabandista to raise, what approached hebetude in the mother, into
the active oddity of the son. Yet of the two, it was the mother I
preferred. Of Felipe, vengeful and placable, full of starts and
shyings, inconstant as a hare, I could even conceive as a creature
possibly noxious. Of the mother I had no thoughts but those of
kindness. And indeed, as spectators are apt ignorantly to take sides, I
grew something of a partisan in the enmity which I perceived to
smoulder between them. True, it seemed mostly on the mother’s part. She
would sometimes draw in her breath as he came near, and the pupils of
her vacant eyes would contract as if with horror or fear. Her emotions,
such as they were, were much upon the surface and readily shared; and
this latent repulsion occupied my mind, and kept me wondering on what
grounds it rested, and whether the son was certainly in fault.

I had been about ten days in the residencia, when there sprang up a
high and harsh wind, carrying clouds of dust. It came out of malarious
lowlands, and over several snowy sierras. The nerves of those on whom
it blew were strung and jangled; their eyes smarted with the dust;
their legs ached under the burthen of their body; and the touch of one
hand upon another grew to be odious. The wind, besides, came down the
gullies of the hills and stormed about the house with a great, hollow
buzzing and whistling that was wearisome to the ear and dismally
depressing to the mind. It did not so much blow in gusts as with the
steady sweep of a waterfall, so that there was no remission of
discomfort while it blew. But higher upon the mountain, it was probably
of a more variable strength, with accesses of fury; for there came down
at times a far-off wailing, infinitely grievous to hear; and at times,
on one of the high shelves or terraces, there would start up, and then
disperse, a tower of dust, like the smoke of an explosion.

I no sooner awoke in bed than I was conscious of the nervous tension
and depression of the weather, and the effect grew stronger as the day
proceeded. It was in vain that I resisted; in vain that I set forth
upon my customary morning’s walk; the irrational, unchanging fury of
the storm had soon beat down my strength and wrecked my temper; and I
returned to the residencia, glowing with dry heat, and foul and gritty
with dust. The court had a forlorn appearance; now and then a glimmer
of sun fled over it; now and then the wind swooped down upon the
pomegranates, and scattered the blossoms, and set the window shutters
clapping on the wall. In the recess the Senora was pacing to and fro
with a flushed countenance and bright eyes; I thought, too, she was
speaking to herself, like one in anger. But when I addressed her with
my customary salutation, she only replied by a sharp gesture and
continued her walk. The weather had distempered even this impassive
creature; and as I went on upstairs I was the less ashamed of my own
discomposure.

All day the wind continued; and I sat in my room and made a feint of
reading, or walked up and down, and listened to the riot overhead.
Night fell, and I had not so much as a candle. I began to long for some
society, and stole down to the court. It was now plunged in the blue of
the first darkness; but the recess was redly lighted by the fire. The
wood had been piled high, and was crowned by a shock of flames, which
the draught of the chimney brandished to and fro. In this strong and
shaken brightness the Senora continued pacing from wall to wall with
disconnected gestures, clasping her hands, stretching forth her arms,
throwing back her head as in appeal to heaven. In these disordered
movements the beauty and grace of the woman showed more clearly; but
there was a light in her eye that struck on me unpleasantly; and when I
had looked on awhile in silence, and seemingly unobserved, I turned
tail as I had come, and groped my way back again to my own chamber.

By the time Felipe brought my supper and lights, my nerve was utterly
gone; and, had the lad been such as I was used to seeing him, I should
have kept him (even by force had that been necessary) to take off the
edge from my distasteful solitude. But on Felipe, also, the wind had
exercised its influence. He had been feverish all day; now that the
night had come he was fallen into a low and tremulous humour that
reacted on my own. The sight of his scared face, his starts and pallors
and sudden harkenings, unstrung me; and when he dropped and broke a
dish, I fairly leaped out of my seat.

“I think we are all mad to-day,” said I, affecting to laugh.

“It is the black wind,” he replied dolefully. “You feel as if you must
do something, and you don’t know what it is.”

I noted the aptness of the description; but, indeed, Felipe had
sometimes a strange felicity in rendering into words the sensations of
the body. “And your mother, too,” said I; “she seems to feel this
weather much. Do you not fear she may be unwell?”

He stared at me a little, and then said, “No,” almost defiantly; and
the next moment, carrying his hand to his brow, cried out lamentably on
the wind and the noise that made his head go round like a millwheel.
“Who can be well?” he cried; and, indeed, I could only echo his
question, for I was disturbed enough myself.

I went to bed early, wearied with day-long restlessness, but the
poisonous nature of the wind, and its ungodly and unintermittent
uproar, would not suffer me to sleep. I lay there and tossed, my nerves
and senses on the stretch. At times I would doze, dream horribly, and
wake again; and these snatches of oblivion confused me as to time. But
it must have been late on in the night, when I was suddenly startled by
an outbreak of pitiable and hateful cries. I leaped from my bed,
supposing I had dreamed; but the cries still continued to fill the
house, cries of pain, I thought, but certainly of rage also, and so
savage and discordant that they shocked the heart. It was no illusion;
some living thing, some lunatic or some wild animal, was being foully
tortured. The thought of Felipe and the squirrel flashed into my mind,
and I ran to the door, but it had been locked from the outside; and I
might shake it as I pleased, I was a fast prisoner. Still the cries
continued. Now they would dwindle down into a moaning that seemed to be
articulate, and at these times I made sure they must be human; and
again they would break forth and fill the house with ravings worthy of
hell. I stood at the door and gave ear to them, till at, last they died
away. Long after that, I still lingered and still continued to hear
them mingle in fancy with the storming of the wind; and when at last I
crept to my bed, it was with a deadly sickness and a blackness of
horror on my heart.

It was little wonder if I slept no more. Why had I been locked in? What
had passed? Who was the author of these indescribable and shocking
cries? A human being? It was inconceivable. A beast? The cries were
scarce quite bestial; and what animal, short of a lion or a tiger,
could thus shake the solid walls of the residencia? And while I was
thus turning over the elements of the mystery, it came into my mind
that I had not yet set eyes upon the daughter of the house. What was
more probable than that the daughter of the Senora, and the sister of
Felipe, should be herself insane? Or, what more likely than that these
ignorant and half-witted people should seek to manage an afflicted
kinswoman by violence? Here was a solution; and yet when I called to
mind the cries (which I never did without a shuddering chill) it seemed
altogether insufficient: not even cruelty could wring such cries from
madness. But of one thing I was sure: I could not live in a house where
such a thing was half conceivable, and not probe the matter home and,
if necessary, interfere.

The next day came, the wind had blown itself out, and there was nothing
to remind me of the business of the night. Felipe came to my bedside
with obvious cheerfulness; as I passed through the court, the Senora
was sunning herself with her accustomed immobility; and when I issued
from the gateway, I found the whole face of nature austerely smiling,
the heavens of a cold blue, and sown with great cloud islands, and the
mountain-sides mapped forth into provinces of light and shadow. A short
walk restored me to myself, and renewed within me the resolve to plumb
this mystery; and when, from the vantage of my knoll, I had seen Felipe
pass forth to his labours in the garden, I returned at once to the
residencia to put my design in practice. The Senora appeared plunged in
slumber; I stood awhile and marked her, but she did not stir; even if
my design were indiscreet, I had little to fear from such a guardian;
and turning away, I mounted to the gallery and began my exploration of
the house.

All morning I went from one door to another, and entered spacious and
faded chambers, some rudely shuttered, some receiving their full charge
of daylight, all empty and unhomely. It was a rich house, on which Time
had breathed his tarnish and dust had scattered disillusion. The spider
swung there; the bloated tarantula scampered on the cornices; ants had
their crowded highways on the floor of halls of audience; the big and
foul fly, that lives on carrion and is often the messenger of death,
had set up his nest in the rotten woodwork, and buzzed heavily about
the rooms. Here and there a stool or two, a couch, a bed, or a great
carved chair remained behind, like islets on the bare floors, to
testify of man’s bygone habitation; and everywhere the walls were set
with the portraits of the dead. I could judge, by these decaying
effigies, in the house of what a great and what a handsome race I was
then wandering. Many of the men wore orders on their breasts and had
the port of noble offices; the women were all richly attired; the
canvases most of them by famous hands. But it was not so much these
evidences of greatness that took hold upon my mind, even contrasted, as
they were, with the present depopulation and decay of that great house.
It was rather the parable of family life that I read in this succession
of fair faces and shapely bodies. Never before had I so realised the
miracle of the continued race, the creation and recreation, the weaving
and changing and handing down of fleshly elements. That a child should
be born of its mother, that it should grow and clothe itself (we know
not how) with humanity, and put on inherited looks, and turn its head
with the manner of one ascendant, and offer its hand with the gesture
of another, are wonders dulled for us by repetition. But in the
singular unity of look, in the common features and common bearing, of
all these painted generations on the walls of the residencia, the
miracle started out and looked me in the face. And an ancient mirror
falling opportunely in my way, I stood and read my own features a long
while, tracing out on either hand the filaments of descent and the
bonds that knit me with my family.

At last, in the course of these investigations, I opened the door of a
chamber that bore the marks of habitation. It was of large proportions
and faced to the north, where the mountains were most wildly figured.
The embers of a fire smouldered and smoked upon the hearth, to which a
chair had been drawn close. And yet the aspect of the chamber was
ascetic to the degree of sternness; the chair was uncushioned; the
floor and walls were naked; and beyond the books which lay here and
there in some confusion, there was no instrument of either work or
pleasure. The sight of books in the house of such a family exceedingly
amazed me; and I began with a great hurry, and in momentary fear of
interruption, to go from one to another and hastily inspect their
character. They were of all sorts, devotional, historical, and
scientific, but mostly of a great age and in the Latin tongue. Some I
could see to bear the marks of constant study; others had been torn
across and tossed aside as if in petulance or disapproval. Lastly, as I
cruised about that empty chamber, I espied some papers written upon
with pencil on a table near the window. An unthinking curiosity led me
to take one up. It bore a copy of verses, very roughly metred in the
original Spanish, and which I may render somewhat thus—

Pleasure approached with pain and shame,
Grief with a wreath of lilies came.
Pleasure showed the lovely sun;
Jesu dear, how sweet it shone!
Grief with her worn hand pointed on,
          Jesu dear, to thee!


Shame and confusion at once fell on me; and, laying down the paper, I
beat an immediate retreat from the apartment. Neither Felipe nor his
mother could have read the books nor written these rough but feeling
verses. It was plain I had stumbled with sacrilegious feet into the
room of the daughter of the house. God knows, my own heart most sharply
punished me for my indiscretion. The thought that I had thus secretly
pushed my way into the confidence of a girl so strangely situated, and
the fear that she might somehow come to hear of it, oppressed me like
guilt. I blamed myself besides for my suspicions of the night before;
wondered that I should ever have attributed those shocking cries to one
of whom I now conceived as of a saint, spectral of mien, wasted with
maceration, bound up in the practices of a mechanical devotion, and
dwelling in a great isolation of soul with her incongruous relatives;
and as I leaned on the balustrade of the gallery and looked down into
the bright close of pomegranates and at the gaily dressed and somnolent
woman, who just then stretched herself and delicately licked her lips
as in the very sensuality of sloth, my mind swiftly compared the scene
with the cold chamber looking northward on the mountains, where the
daughter dwelt.

That same afternoon, as I sat upon my knoll, I saw the Padre enter the
gates of the residencia. The revelation of the daughter’s character had
struck home to my fancy, and almost blotted out the horrors of the
night before; but at sight of this worthy man the memory revived. I
descended, then, from the knoll, and making a circuit among the woods,
posted myself by the wayside to await his passage. As soon as he
appeared I stepped forth and introduced myself as the lodger of the
residencia. He had a very strong, honest countenance, on which it was
easy to read the mingled emotions with which he regarded me, as a
foreigner, a heretic, and yet one who had been wounded for the good
cause. Of the family at the residencia he spoke with reserve, and yet
with respect. I mentioned that I had not yet seen the daughter,
whereupon he remarked that that was as it should be, and looked at me a
little askance. Lastly, I plucked up courage to refer to the cries that
had disturbed me in the night. He heard me out in silence, and then
stopped and partly turned about, as though to mark beyond doubt that he
was dismissing me.

“Do you take tobacco powder?” said he, offering his snuff-box; and
then, when I had refused, “I am an old man,” he added, “and I may be
allowed to remind you that you are a guest.”

“I have, then, your authority,” I returned, firmly enough, although I
flushed at the implied reproof, “to let things take their course, and
not to interfere?”

He said “yes,” and with a somewhat uneasy salute turned and left me
where I was. But he had done two things: he had set my conscience at
rest, and he had awakened my delicacy. I made a great effort, once more
dismissed the recollections of the night, and fell once more to
brooding on my saintly poetess. At the same time, I could not quite
forget that I had been locked in, and that night when Felipe brought me
my supper I attacked him warily on both points of interest.

“I never see your sister,” said I casually.

“Oh, no,” said he; “she is a good, good girl,” and his mind instantly
veered to something else.

“Your sister is pious, I suppose?” I asked in the next pause.

“Oh!” he cried, joining his hands with extreme fervour, “a saint; it is
she that keeps me up.”

“You are very fortunate,” said I, “for the most of us, I am afraid, and
myself among the number, are better at going down.”

“Senor,” said Felipe earnestly, “I would not say that. You should not
tempt your angel. If one goes down, where is he to stop?”

“Why, Felipe,” said I, “I had no guess you were a preacher, and I may
say a good one; but I suppose that is your sister’s doing?”

He nodded at me with round eyes.

“Well, then,” I continued, “she has doubtless reproved you for your sin
of cruelty?”

“Twelve times!” he cried; for this was the phrase by which the odd
creature expressed the sense of frequency. “And I told her you had done
so—I remembered that,” he added proudly—“and she was pleased.”

“Then, Felipe,” said I, “what were those cries that I heard last night?
for surely they were cries of some creature in suffering.”

“The wind,” returned Felipe, looking in the fire.

I took his hand in mine, at which, thinking it to be a caress, he
smiled with a brightness of pleasure that came near disarming my
resolve. But I trod the weakness down. “The wind,” I repeated; “and yet
I think it was this hand,” holding it up, “that had first locked me
in.” The lad shook visibly, but answered never a word. “Well,” said I,
“I am a stranger and a guest. It is not my part either to meddle or to
judge in your affairs; in these you shall take your sister’s counsel,
which I cannot doubt to be excellent. But in so far as concerns my own
I will be no man’s prisoner, and I demand that key.” Half an hour later
my door was suddenly thrown open, and the key tossed ringing on the
floor.

A day or two after I came in from a walk a little before the point of
noon. The Senora was lying lapped in slumber on the threshold of the
recess; the pigeons dozed below the eaves like snowdrifts; the house
was under a deep spell of noontide quiet; and only a wandering and
gentle wind from the mountain stole round the galleries, rustled among
the pomegranates, and pleasantly stirred the shadows. Something in the
stillness moved me to imitation, and I went very lightly across the
court and up the marble staircase. My foot was on the topmost round,
when a door opened, and I found myself face to face with Olalla.
Surprise transfixed me; her loveliness struck to my heart; she glowed
in the deep shadow of the gallery, a gem of colour; her eyes took hold
upon mine and clung there, and bound us together like the joining of
hands; and the moments we thus stood face to face, drinking each other
in, were sacramental and the wedding of souls. I know not how long it
was before I awoke out of a deep trance, and, hastily bowing, passed on
into the upper stair. She did not move, but followed me with her great,
thirsting eyes; and as I passed out of sight it seemed to me as if she
paled and faded.

In my own room, I opened the window and looked out, and could not think
what change had come upon that austere field of mountains that it
should thus sing and shine under the lofty heaven. I had seen
her—Olalla! And the stone crags answered, Olalla! and the dumb,
unfathomable azure answered, Olalla! The pale saint of my dreams had
vanished for ever; and in her place I beheld this maiden on whom God
had lavished the richest colours and the most exuberant energies of
life, whom he had made active as a deer, slender as a reed, and in
whose great eyes he had lighted the torches of the soul. The thrill of
her young life, strung like a wild animal’s, had entered into me; the
force of soul that had looked out from her eyes and conquered mine,
mantled about my heart and sprang to my lips in singing. She passed
through my veins: she was one with me.

I will not say that this enthusiasm declined; rather my soul held out
in its ecstasy as in a strong castle, and was there besieged by cold
and sorrowful considerations. I could not doubt but that I loved her at
first sight, and already with a quivering ardour that was strange to my
experience. What then was to follow? She was the child of an afflicted
house, the Senora’s daughter, the sister of Felipe; she bore it even in
her beauty. She had the lightness and swiftness of the one, swift as an
arrow, light as dew; like the other, she shone on the pale background
of the world with the brilliancy of flowers. I could not call by the
name of brother that half-witted lad, nor by the name of mother that
immovable and lovely thing of flesh, whose silly eyes and perpetual
simper now recurred to my mind like something hateful. And if I could
not marry, what then? She was helplessly unprotected; her eyes, in that
single and long glance which had been all our intercourse, had
confessed a weakness equal to my own; but in my heart I knew her for
the student of the cold northern chamber, and the writer of the
sorrowful lines; and this was a knowledge to disarm a brute. To flee
was more than I could find courage for; but I registered a vow of
unsleeping circumspection.

As I turned from the window, my eyes alighted on the portrait. It had
fallen dead, like a candle after sunrise; it followed me with eyes of
paint. I knew it to be like, and marvelled at the tenacity of type in
that declining race; but the likeness was swallowed up in difference. I
remembered how it had seemed to me a thing unapproachable in the life,
a creature rather of the painter’s craft than of the modesty of nature,
and I marvelled at the thought, and exulted in the image of Olalla.
Beauty I had seen before, and not been charmed, and I had been often
drawn to women, who were not beautiful except to me; but in Olalla all
that I desired and had not dared to imagine was united.

I did not see her the next day, and my heart ached and my eyes longed
for her, as men long for morning. But the day after, when I returned,
about my usual hour, she was once more on the gallery, and our looks
once more met and embraced. I would have spoken, I would have drawn
near to her; but strongly as she plucked at my heart, drawing me like a
magnet, something yet more imperious withheld me; and I could only bow
and pass by; and she, leaving my salutation unanswered, only followed
me with her noble eyes.

I had now her image by rote, and as I conned the traits in memory it
seemed as if I read her very heart. She was dressed with something of
her mother’s coquetry, and love of positive colour. Her robe, which I
know she must have made with her own hands, clung about her with a
cunning grace. After the fashion of that country, besides, her bodice
stood open in the middle, in a long slit, and here, in spite of the
poverty of the house, a gold coin, hanging by a ribbon, lay on her
brown bosom. These were proofs, had any been needed, of her inborn
delight in life and her own loveliness. On the other hand, in her eyes
that hung upon mine, I could read depth beyond depth of passion and
sadness, lights of poetry and hope, blacknesses of despair, and
thoughts that were above the earth. It was a lovely body, but the
inmate, the soul, was more than worthy of that lodging. Should I leave
this incomparable flower to wither unseen on these rough mountains?
Should I despise the great gift offered me in the eloquent silence of
her eyes? Here was a soul immured; should I not burst its prison? All
side considerations fell off from me; were she the child of Herod I
swore I should make her mine; and that very evening I set myself, with
a mingled sense of treachery and disgrace, to captivate the brother.
Perhaps I read him with more favourable eyes, perhaps the thought of
his sister always summoned up the better qualities of that imperfect
soul; but he had never seemed to me so amiable, and his very likeness
to Olalla, while it annoyed, yet softened me.

A third day passed in vain—an empty desert of hours. I would not lose a
chance, and loitered all afternoon in the court where (to give myself a
countenance) I spoke more than usual with the Senora. God knows it was
with a most tender and sincere interest that I now studied her; and
even as for Felipe, so now for the mother, I was conscious of a growing
warmth of toleration. And yet I wondered. Even while I spoke with her,
she would doze off into a little sleep, and presently awake again
without embarrassment; and this composure staggered me. And again, as I
marked her make infinitesimal changes in her posture, savouring and
lingering on the bodily pleasure of the movement, I was driven to
wonder at this depth of passive sensuality. She lived in her body; and
her consciousness was all sunk into and disseminated through her
members, where it luxuriously dwelt. Lastly, I could not grow
accustomed to her eyes. Each time she turned on me these great
beautiful and meaningless orbs, wide open to the day, but closed
against human inquiry—each time I had occasion to observe the lively
changes of her pupils which expanded and contracted in a breath—I know
not what it was came over me, I can find no name for the mingled
feeling of disappointment, annoyance, and distaste that jarred along my
nerves. I tried her on a variety of subjects, equally in vain; and at
last led the talk to her daughter. But even there she proved
indifferent; said she was pretty, which (as with children) was her
highest word of commendation, but was plainly incapable of any higher
thought; and when I remarked that Olalla seemed silent, merely yawned
in my face and replied that speech was of no great use when you had
nothing to say. “People speak much, very much,” she added, looking at
me with expanded pupils; and then again yawned and again showed me a
mouth that was as dainty as a toy. This time I took the hint, and,
leaving her to her repose, went up into my own chamber to sit by the
open window, looking on the hills and not beholding them, sunk in
lustrous and deep dreams, and hearkening in fancy to the note of a
voice that I had never heard.

I awoke on the fifth morning with a brightness of anticipation that
seemed to challenge fate. I was sure of myself, light of heart and
foot, and resolved to put my love incontinently to the touch of
knowledge. It should lie no longer under the bonds of silence, a dumb
thing, living by the eye only, like the love of beasts; but should now
put on the spirit, and enter upon the joys of the complete human
intimacy. I thought of it with wild hopes, like a voyager to El Dorado;
into that unknown and lovely country of her soul, I no longer trembled
to adventure. Yet when I did indeed encounter her, the same force of
passion descended on me and at once submerged my mind; speech seemed to
drop away from me like a childish habit; and I but drew near to her as
the giddy man draws near to the margin of a gulf. She drew back from me
a little as I came; but her eyes did not waver from mine, and these
lured me forward. At last, when I was already within reach of her, I
stopped. Words were denied me; if I advanced I could but clasp her to
my heart in silence; and all that was sane in me, all that was still
unconquered, revolted against the thought of such an accost. So we
stood for a second, all our life in our eyes, exchanging salvos of
attraction and yet each resisting; and then, with a great effort of the
will, and conscious at the same time of a sudden bitterness of
disappointment, I turned and went away in the same silence.

What power lay upon me that I could not speak? And she, why was she
also silent? Why did she draw away before me dumbly, with fascinated
eyes? Was this love? or was it a mere brute attraction, mindless and
inevitable, like that of the magnet for the steel? We had never spoken,
we were wholly strangers: and yet an influence, strong as the grasp of
a giant, swept us silently together. On my side, it filled me with
impatience; and yet I was sure that she was worthy; I had seen her
books, read her verses, and thus, in a sense, divined the soul of my
mistress. But on her side, it struck me almost cold. Of me, she knew
nothing but my bodily favour; she was drawn to me as stones fall to the
earth; the laws that rule the earth conducted her, unconsenting, to my
arms; and I drew back at the thought of such a bridal, and began to be
jealous for myself. It was not thus that I desired to be loved. And
then I began to fall into a great pity for the girl herself. I thought
how sharp must be her mortification, that she, the student, the
recluse, Felipe’s saintly monitress, should have thus confessed an
overweening weakness for a man with whom she had never exchanged a
word. And at the coming of pity, all other thoughts were swallowed up;
and I longed only to find and console and reassure her; to tell her how
wholly her love was returned on my side, and how her choice, even if
blindly made, was not unworthy.

The next day it was glorious weather; depth upon depth of blue
over-canopied the mountains; the sun shone wide; and the wind in the
trees and the many falling torrents in the mountains filled the air
with delicate and haunting music. Yet I was prostrated with sadness. My
heart wept for the sight of Olalla, as a child weeps for its mother. I
sat down on a boulder on the verge of the low cliffs that bound the
plateau to the north. Thence I looked down into the wooded valley of a
stream, where no foot came. In the mood I was in, it was even touching
to behold the place untenanted; it lacked Olalla; and I thought of the
delight and glory of a life passed wholly with her in that strong air,
and among these rugged and lovely surroundings, at first with a
whimpering sentiment, and then again with such a fiery joy that I
seemed to grow in strength and stature, like a Samson.

And then suddenly I was aware of Olalla drawing near. She appeared out
of a grove of cork-trees, and came straight towards me; and I stood up
and waited. She seemed in her walking a creature of such life and fire
and lightness as amazed me; yet she came quietly and slowly. Her energy
was in the slowness; but for inimitable strength, I felt she would have
run, she would have flown to me. Still, as she approached, she kept her
eyes lowered to the ground; and when she had drawn quite near, it was
without one glance that she addressed me. At the first note of her
voice I started. It was for this I had been waiting; this was the last
test of my love. And lo, her enunciation was precise and clear, not
lisping and incomplete like that of her family; and the voice, though
deeper than usual with women, was still both youthful and womanly. She
spoke in a rich chord; golden contralto strains mingled with
hoarseness, as the red threads were mingled with the brown among her
tresses. It was not only a voice that spoke to my heart directly; but
it spoke to me of her. And yet her words immediately plunged me back
upon despair.

“You will go away,” she said, “to-day.”

Her example broke the bonds of my speech; I felt as lightened of a
weight, or as if a spell had been dissolved. I know not in what words I
answered; but, standing before her on the cliffs, I poured out the
whole ardour of my love, telling her that I lived upon the thought of
her, slept only to dream of her loveliness, and would gladly forswear
my country, my language, and my friends, to live for ever by her side.
And then, strongly commanding myself, I changed the note; I reassured,
I comforted her; I told her I had divined in her a pious and heroic
spirit, with which I was worthy to sympathise, and which I longed to
share and lighten. “Nature,” I told her, “was the voice of God, which
men disobey at peril; and if we were thus humbly drawn together, ay,
even as by a miracle of love, it must imply a divine fitness in our
souls; we must be made,” I said—“made for one another. We should be mad
rebels,” I cried out—“mad rebels against God, not to obey this
instinct.”

She shook her head. “You will go to-day,” she repeated, and then with a
gesture, and in a sudden, sharp note—“no, not to-day,” she cried,
“to-morrow!”

But at this sign of relenting, power came in upon me in a tide. I
stretched out my arms and called upon her name; and she leaped to me
and clung to me. The hills rocked about us, the earth quailed; a shock
as of a blow went through me and left me blind and dizzy. And the next
moment she had thrust me back, broken rudely from my arms, and fled
with the speed of a deer among the cork-trees.

I stood and shouted to the mountains; I turned and went back towards
the residencia, waltzing upon air. She sent me away, and yet I had but
to call upon her name and she came to me. These were but the weaknesses
of girls, from which even she, the strangest of her sex, was not
exempted. Go? Not I, Olalla—O, not I, Olalla, my Olalla! A bird sang
near by; and in that season, birds were rare. It bade me be of good
cheer. And once more the whole countenance of nature, from the
ponderous and stable mountains down to the lightest leaf and the
smallest darting fly in the shadow of the groves, began to stir before
me and to put on the lineaments of life and wear a face of awful joy.
The sunshine struck upon the hills, strong as a hammer on the anvil,
and the hills shook; the earth, under that vigorous insulation, yielded
up heady scents; the woods smouldered in the blaze. I felt the thrill
of travail and delight run through the earth. Something elemental,
something rude, violent, and savage, in the love that sang in my heart,
was like a key to nature’s secrets; and the very stones that rattled
under my feet appeared alive and friendly. Olalla! Her touch had
quickened, and renewed, and strung me up to the old pitch of concert
with the rugged earth, to a swelling of the soul that men learn to
forget in their polite assemblies. Love burned in me like rage;
tenderness waxed fierce; I hated, I adored, I pitied, I revered her
with ecstasy. She seemed the link that bound me in with dead things on
the one hand, and with our pure and pitying God upon the other: a thing
brutal and divine, and akin at once to the innocence and to the
unbridled forces of the earth.

My head thus reeling, I came into the courtyard of the residencia, and
the sight of the mother struck me like a revelation. She sat there, all
sloth and contentment, blinking under the strong sunshine, branded with
a passive enjoyment, a creature set quite apart, before whom my ardour
fell away like a thing ashamed. I stopped a moment, and, commanding
such shaken tones as I was able, said a word or two. She looked at me
with her unfathomable kindness; her voice in reply sounded vaguely out
of the realm of peace in which she slumbered, and there fell on my
mind, for the first time, a sense of respect for one so uniformly
innocent and happy, and I passed on in a kind of wonder at myself, that
I should be so much disquieted.

On my table there lay a piece of the same yellow paper I had seen in
the north room; it was written on with pencil in the same hand,
Olalla’s hand, and I picked it up with a sudden sinking of alarm, and
read, “If you have any kindness for Olalla, if you have any chivalry
for a creature sorely wrought, go from here to-day; in pity, in honour,
for the sake of Him who died, I supplicate that you shall go.” I looked
at this awhile in mere stupidity, then I began to awaken to a weariness
and horror of life; the sunshine darkened outside on the bare hills,
and I began to shake like a man in terror. The vacancy thus suddenly
opened in my life unmanned me like a physical void. It was not my
heart, it was not my happiness, it was life itself that was involved. I
could not lose her. I said so, and stood repeating it. And then, like
one in a dream, I moved to the window, put forth my hand to open the
casement, and thrust it through the pane. The blood spurted from my
wrist; and with an instantaneous quietude and command of myself, I
pressed my thumb on the little leaping fountain, and reflected what to
do. In that empty room there was nothing to my purpose; I felt,
besides, that I required assistance. There shot into my mind a hope
that Olalla herself might be my helper, and I turned and went down
stairs, still keeping my thumb upon the wound.

There was no sign of either Olalla or Felipe, and I addressed myself to
the recess, whither the Senora had now drawn quite back and sat dozing
close before the fire, for no degree of heat appeared too much for her.

“Pardon me,” said I, “if I disturb you, but I must apply to you for
help.”

She looked up sleepily and asked me what it was, and with the very
words I thought she drew in her breath with a widening of the nostrils
and seemed to come suddenly and fully alive.

“I have cut myself,” I said, “and rather badly. See!” And I held out my
two hands from which the blood was oozing and dripping.

Her great eyes opened wide, the pupils shrank into points; a veil
seemed to fall from her face, and leave it sharply expressive and yet
inscrutable. And as I still stood, marvelling a little at her
disturbance, she came swiftly up to me, and stooped and caught me by
the hand; and the next moment my hand was at her mouth, and she had
bitten me to the bone. The pang of the bite, the sudden spurting of
blood, and the monstrous horror of the act, flashed through me all in
one, and I beat her back; and she sprang at me again and again, with
bestial cries, cries that I recognised, such cries as had awakened me
on the night of the high wind. Her strength was like that of madness;
mine was rapidly ebbing with the loss of blood; my mind besides was
whirling with the abhorrent strangeness of the onslaught, and I was
already forced against the wall, when Olalla ran betwixt us, and
Felipe, following at a bound, pinned down his mother on the floor.

A trance-like weakness fell upon me; I saw, heard, and felt, but I was
incapable of movement. I heard the struggle roll to and fro upon the
floor, the yells of that catamount ringing up to Heaven as she strove
to reach me. I felt Olalla clasp me in her arms, her hair falling on my
face, and, with the strength of a man, raise and half drag, half carry
me upstairs into my own room, where she cast me down upon the bed. Then
I saw her hasten to the door and lock it, and stand an instant
listening to the savage cries that shook the residencia. And then,
swift and light as a thought, she was again beside me, binding up my
hand, laying it in her bosom, moaning and mourning over it with
dove-like sounds. They were not words that came to her, they were
sounds more beautiful than speech, infinitely touching, infinitely
tender; and yet as I lay there, a thought stung to my heart, a thought
wounded me like a sword, a thought, like a worm in a flower, profaned
the holiness of my love. Yes, they were beautiful sounds, and they were
inspired by human tenderness; but was their beauty human?

All day I lay there. For a long time the cries of that nameless female
thing, as she struggled with her half-witted whelp, resounded through
the house, and pierced me with despairing sorrow and disgust. They were
the death-cry of my love; my love was murdered; was not only dead, but
an offence to me; and yet, think as I pleased, feel as I must, it still
swelled within me like a storm of sweetness, and my heart melted at her
looks and touch. This horror that had sprung out, this doubt upon
Olalla, this savage and bestial strain that ran not only through the
whole behaviour of her family, but found a place in the very
foundations and story of our love—though it appalled, though it shocked
and sickened me, was yet not of power to break the knot of my
infatuation.

When the cries had ceased, there came a scraping at the door, by which
I knew Felipe was without; and Olalla went and spoke to him—I know not
what. With that exception, she stayed close beside me, now kneeling by
my bed and fervently praying, now sitting with her eyes upon mine. So
then, for these six hours I drank in her beauty, and silently perused
the story in her face. I saw the golden coin hover on her breaths; I
saw her eyes darken and brighter, and still speak no language but that
of an unfathomable kindness; I saw the faultless face, and, through the
robe, the lines of the faultless body. Night came at last, and in the
growing darkness of the chamber, the sight of her slowly melted; but
even then the touch of her smooth hand lingered in mine and talked with
me. To lie thus in deadly weakness and drink in the traits of the
beloved, is to reawake to love from whatever shock of disillusion. I
reasoned with myself; and I shut my eyes on horrors, and again I was
very bold to accept the worst. What mattered it, if that imperious
sentiment survived; if her eyes still beckoned and attached me; if now,
even as before, every fibre of my dull body yearned and turned to her?
Late on in the night some strength revived in me, and I spoke:—

“Olalla,” I said, “nothing matters; I ask nothing; I am content; I love
you.”

She knelt down awhile and prayed, and I devoutly respected her
devotions. The moon had begun to shine in upon one side of each of the
three windows, and make a misty clearness in the room, by which I saw
her indistinctly. When she rearose she made the sign of the cross.

“It is for me to speak,” she said, “and for you to listen. I know; you
can but guess. I prayed, how I prayed for you to leave this place. I
begged it of you, and I know you would have granted me even this; or if
not, O let me think so!”

“I love you,” I said.

“And yet you have lived in the world,” she said; after a pause, “you
are a man and wise; and I am but a child. Forgive me, if I seem to
teach, who am as ignorant as the trees of the mountain; but those who
learn much do but skim the face of knowledge; they seize the laws, they
conceive the dignity of the design—the horror of the living fact fades
from their memory. It is we who sit at home with evil who remember, I
think, and are warned and pity. Go, rather, go now, and keep me in
mind. So I shall have a life in the cherished places of your memory: a
life as much my own, as that which I lead in this body.”

“I love you,” I said once more; and reaching out my weak hand, took
hers, and carried it to my lips, and kissed it. Nor did she resist, but
winced a little; and I could see her look upon me with a frown that was
not unkindly, only sad and baffled. And then it seemed she made a call
upon her resolution; plucked my hand towards her, herself at the same
time leaning somewhat forward, and laid it on the beating of her heart.
“There,” she cried, “you feel the very footfall of my life. It only
moves for you; it is yours. But is it even mine? It is mine indeed to
offer you, as I might take the coin from my neck, as I might break a
live branch from a tree, and give it you. And yet not mine! I dwell, or
I think I dwell (if I exist at all), somewhere apart, an impotent
prisoner, and carried about and deafened by a mob that I disown. This
capsule, such as throbs against the sides of animals, knows you at a
touch for its master; ay, it loves you! But my soul, does my soul? I
think not; I know not, fearing to ask. Yet when you spoke to me your
words were of the soul; it is of the soul that you ask—it is only from
the soul that you would take me.”

“Olalla,” I said, “the soul and the body are one, and mostly so in
love. What the body chooses, the soul loves; where the body clings, the
soul cleaves; body for body, soul to soul, they come together at God’s
signal; and the lower part (if we can call aught low) is only the
footstool and foundation of the highest.”

“Have you,” she said, “seen the portraits in the house of my fathers?
Have you looked at my mother or at Felipe? Have your eyes never rested
on that picture that hangs by your bed? She who sat for it died ages
ago; and she did evil in her life. But, look again: there is my hand to
the least line, there are my eyes and my hair. What is mine, then, and
what am I? If not a curve in this poor body of mine (which you love,
and for the sake of which you dotingly dream that you love me) not a
gesture that I can frame, not a tone of my voice, not any look from my
eyes, no, not even now when I speak to him I love, but has belonged to
others? Others, ages dead, have wooed other men with my eyes; other men
have heard the pleading of the same voice that now sounds in your ears.
The hands of the dead are in my bosom; they move me, they pluck me,
they guide me; I am a puppet at their command; and I but reinform
features and attributes that have long been laid aside from evil in the
quiet of the grave. Is it me you love, friend? or the race that made
me? The girl who does not know and cannot answer for the least portion
of herself? or the stream of which she is a transitory eddy, the tree
of which she is the passing fruit? The race exists; it is old, it is
ever young, it carries its eternal destiny in its bosom; upon it, like
waves upon the sea, individual succeeds to individual, mocked with a
semblance of self-control, but they are nothing. We speak of the soul,
but the soul is in the race.”

“You fret against the common law,” I said. “You rebel against the voice
of God, which he has made so winning to convince, so imperious to
command. Hear it, and how it speaks between us! Your hand clings to
mine, your heart leaps at my touch, the unknown elements of which we
are compounded awake and run together at a look; the clay of the earth
remembers its independent life and yearns to join us; we are drawn
together as the stars are turned about in space, or as the tides ebb
and flow, by things older and greater than we ourselves.”

“Alas!” she said, “what can I say to you? My fathers, eight hundred
years ago, ruled all this province: they were wise, great, cunning, and
cruel; they were a picked race of the Spanish; their flags led in war;
the king called them his cousin; the people, when the rope was slung
for them or when they returned and found their hovels smoking,
blasphemed their name. Presently a change began. Man has risen; if he
has sprung from the brutes, he can descend again to the same level. The
breath of weariness blew on their humanity and the cords relaxed; they
began to go down; their minds fell on sleep, their passions awoke in
gusts, heady and senseless like the wind in the gutters of the
mountains; beauty was still handed down, but no longer the guiding wit
nor the human heart; the seed passed on, it was wrapped in flesh, the
flesh covered the bones, but they were the bones and the flesh of
brutes, and their mind was as the mind of flies. I speak to you as I
dare; but you have seen for yourself how the wheel has gone backward
with my doomed race. I stand, as it were, upon a little rising ground
in this desperate descent, and see both before and behind, both what we
have lost and to what we are condemned to go farther downward. And
shall I—I that dwell apart in the house of the dead, my body, loathing
its ways—shall I repeat the spell? Shall I bind another spirit,
reluctant as my own, into this bewitched and tempest-broken tenement
that I now suffer in? Shall I hand down this cursed vessel of humanity,
charge it with fresh life as with fresh poison, and dash it, like a
fire, in the faces of posterity? But my vow has been given; the race
shall cease from off the earth. At this hour my brother is making
ready; his foot will soon be on the stair; and you will go with him and
pass out of my sight for ever. Think of me sometimes as one to whom the
lesson of life was very harshly told, but who heard it with courage; as
one who loved you indeed, but who hated herself so deeply that her love
was hateful to her; as one who sent you away and yet would have longed
to keep you for ever; who had no dearer hope than to forget you, and no
greater fear than to be forgotten.”

She had drawn towards the door as she spoke, her rich voice sounding
softer and farther away; and with the last word she was gone, and I lay
alone in the moonlit chamber. What I might have done had not I lain
bound by my extreme weakness, I know not; but as it was there fell upon
me a great and blank despair. It was not long before there shone in at
the door the ruddy glimmer of a lantern, and Felipe coming, charged me
without a word upon his shoulders, and carried me down to the great
gate, where the cart was waiting. In the moonlight the hills stood out
sharply, as if they were of cardboard; on the glimmering surface of the
plateau, and from among the low trees which swung together and sparkled
in the wind, the great black cube of the residencia stood out bulkily,
its mass only broken by three dimly lighted windows in the northern
front above the gate. They were Olalla’s windows, and as the cart
jolted onwards I kept my eyes fixed upon them till, where the road
dipped into a valley, they were lost to my view forever. Felipe walked
in silence beside the shafts, but from time to time he would cheek the
mule and seem to look back upon me; and at length drew quite near and
laid his hand upon my head. There was such kindness in the touch, and
such a simplicity, as of the brutes, that tears broke from me like the
bursting of an artery.

“Felipe,” I said, “take me where they will ask no questions.”

He said never a word, but he turned his mule about, end for end,
retraced some part of the way we had gone, and, striking into another
path, led me to the mountain village, which was, as we say in Scotland,
the kirkton of that thinly peopled district. Some broken memories dwell
in my mind of the day breaking over the plain, of the cart stopping, of
arms that helped me down, of a bare room into which I was carried, and
of a swoon that fell upon me like sleep.

The next day and the days following the old priest was often at my side
with his snuff-box and prayer book, and after a while, when I began to
pick up strength, he told me that I was now on a fair way to recovery,
and must as soon as possible hurry my departure; whereupon, without
naming any reason, he took snuff and looked at me sideways. I did not
affect ignorance; I knew he must have seen Olalla. “Sir,” said I, “you
know that I do not ask in wantonness. What of that family?”

He said they were very unfortunate; that it seemed a declining race,
and that they were very poor and had been much neglected.

“But she has not,” I said. “Thanks, doubtless, to yourself, she is
instructed and wise beyond the use of women.”

“Yes,” he said; “the Senorita is well-informed. But the family has been
neglected.”

“The mother?” I queried.

“Yes, the mother too,” said the Padre, taking snuff. “But Felipe is a
well-intentioned lad.”

“The mother is odd?” I asked.

“Very odd,” replied the priest.

“I think, sir, we beat about the bush,” said I. “You must know more of
my affairs than you allow. You must know my curiosity to be justified
on many grounds. Will you not be frank with me?”

“My son,” said the old gentleman, “I will be very frank with you on
matters within my competence; on those of which I know nothing it does
not require much discretion to be silent. I will not fence with you, I
take your meaning perfectly; and what can I say, but that we are all in
God’s hands, and that His ways are not as our ways? I have even advised
with my superiors in the church, but they, too, were dumb. It is a
great mystery.”

“Is she mad?” I asked.

“I will answer you according to my belief. She is not,” returned the
Padre, “or she was not. When she was young—God help me, I fear I
neglected that wild lamb—she was surely sane; and yet, although it did
not run to such heights, the same strain was already notable; it had
been so before her in her father, ay, and before him, and this inclined
me, perhaps, to think too lightly of it. But these things go on
growing, not only in the individual but in the race.”

“When she was young,” I began, and my voice failed me for a moment, and
it was only with a great effort that I was able to add, “was she like
Olalla?”

“Now God forbid!” exclaimed the Padre. “God forbid that any man should
think so slightingly of my favourite penitent. No, no; the Senorita
(but for her beauty, which I wish most honestly she had less of) has
not a hair’s resemblance to what her mother was at the same age. I
could not bear to have you think so; though, Heaven knows, it were,
perhaps, better that you should.”

At this, I raised myself in bed, and opened my heart to the old man;
telling him of our love and of her decision, owning my own horrors, my
own passing fancies, but telling him that these were at an end; and
with something more than a purely formal submission, appealing to his
judgment.

He heard me very patiently and without surprise; and when I had done,
he sat for some time silent. Then he began: “The church,” and instantly
broke off again to apologise. “I had forgotten, my child, that you were
not a Christian,” said he. “And indeed, upon a point so highly unusual,
even the church can scarce be said to have decided. But would you have
my opinion? The Senorita is, in a matter of this kind, the best judge;
I would accept her judgment.”

On the back of that he went away, nor was he thenceforward so assiduous
in his visits; indeed, even when I began to get about again, he plainly
feared and deprecated my society, not as in distaste but much as a man
might be disposed to flee from the riddling sphynx. The villagers, too,
avoided me; they were unwilling to be my guides upon the mountain. I
thought they looked at me askance, and I made sure that the more
superstitious crossed themselves on my approach. At first I set this
down to my heretical opinions; but it began at length to dawn upon me
that if I was thus redoubted it was because I had stayed at the
residencia. All men despise the savage notions of such peasantry; and
yet I was conscious of a chill shadow that seemed to fall and dwell
upon my love. It did not conquer, but I may not deny that it restrained
my ardour.

Some miles westward of the village there was a gap in the sierra, from
which the eye plunged direct upon the residencia; and thither it became
my daily habit to repair. A wood crowned the summit; and just where the
pathway issued from its fringes, it was overhung by a considerable
shelf of rock, and that, in its turn, was surmounted by a crucifix of
the size of life and more than usually painful in design. This was my
perch; thence, day after day, I looked down upon the plateau, and the
great old house, and could see Felipe, no bigger than a fly, going to
and fro about the garden. Sometimes mists would draw across the view,
and be broken up again by mountain winds; sometimes the plain slumbered
below me in unbroken sunshine; it would sometimes be all blotted out by
rain. This distant post, these interrupted sights of the place where my
life had been so strangely changed, suited the indecision of my humour.
I passed whole days there, debating with myself the various elements of
our position; now leaning to the suggestions of love, now giving an ear
to prudence, and in the end halting irresolute between the two.

One day, as I was sitting on my rock, there came by that way a somewhat
gaunt peasant wrapped in a mantle. He was a stranger, and plainly did
not know me even by repute; for, instead of keeping the other side, he
drew near and sat down beside me, and we had soon fallen in talk. Among
other things he told me he had been a muleteer, and in former years had
much frequented these mountains; later on, he had followed the army
with his mules, had realised a competence, and was now living retired
with his family.

“Do you know that house?” I inquired, at last, pointing to the
residencia, for I readily wearied of any talk that kept me from the
thought of Olalla.

He looked at me darkly and crossed himself.

“Too well,” he said, “it was there that one of my comrades sold himself
to Satan; the Virgin shield us from temptations! He has paid the price;
he is now burning in the reddest place in Hell!”

A fear came upon me; I could answer nothing; and presently the man
resumed, as if to himself: “Yes,” he said, “O yes, I know it. I have
passed its doors. There was snow upon the pass, the wind was driving
it; sure enough there was death that night upon the mountains, but
there was worse beside the hearth. I took him by the arm, Senor, and
dragged him to the gate; I conjured him, by all he loved and respected,
to go forth with me; I went on my knees before him in the snow; and I
could see he was moved by my entreaty. And just then she came out on
the gallery, and called him by his name; and he turned, and there was
she standing with a lamp in her hand and smiling on him to come back. I
cried out aloud to God, and threw my arms about him, but he put me by,
and left me alone. He had made his choice; God help us. I would pray
for him, but to what end? there are sins that not even the Pope can
loose.”

“And your friend,” I asked, “what became of him?”

“Nay, God knows,” said the muleteer. “If all be true that we hear, his
end was like his sin, a thing to raise the hair.”

“Do you mean that he was killed?” I asked.

“Sure enough, he was killed,” returned the man. “But how? Ay, how? But
these are things that it is sin to speak of.”

“The people of that house . . . ” I began.

But he interrupted me with a savage outburst. “The people?” he cried.
“What people? There are neither men nor women in that house of Satan’s!
What? have you lived here so long, and never heard?” And here he put
his mouth to my ear and whispered, as if even the fowls of the mountain
might have over-heard and been stricken with horror.

What he told me was not true, nor was it even original; being, indeed,
but a new edition, vamped up again by village ignorance and
superstition, of stories nearly as ancient as the race of man. It was
rather the application that appalled me. In the old days, he said, the
church would have burned out that nest of basilisks; but the arm of the
church was now shortened; his friend Miguel had been unpunished by the
hands of men, and left to the more awful judgment of an offended God.
This was wrong; but it should be so no more. The Padre was sunk in age;
he was even bewitched himself; but the eyes of his flock were now awake
to their own danger; and some day—ay, and before long—the smoke of that
house should go up to heaven.

He left me filled with horror and fear. Which way to turn I knew not;
whether first to warn the Padre, or to carry my ill-news direct to the
threatened inhabitants of the residencia. Fate was to decide for me;
for, while I was still hesitating, I beheld the veiled figure of a
woman drawing near to me up the pathway. No veil could deceive my
penetration; by every line and every movement I recognised Olalla; and
keeping hidden behind a corner of the rock, I suffered her to gain the
summit. Then I came forward. She knew me and paused, but did not speak;
I, too, remained silent; and we continued for some time to gaze upon
each other with a passionate sadness.

“I thought you had gone,” she said at length. “It is all that you can
do for me—to go. It is all I ever asked of you. And you still stay. But
do you know, that every day heaps up the peril of death, not only on
your head, but on ours? A report has gone about the mountain; it is
thought you love me, and the people will not suffer it.”

I saw she was already informed of her danger, and I rejoiced at it.
“Olalla,” I said, “I am ready to go this day, this very hour, but not
alone.”

She stepped aside and knelt down before the crucifix to pray, and I
stood by and looked now at her and now at the object of her adoration,
now at the living figure of the penitent, and now at the ghastly,
daubed countenance, the painted wounds, and the projected ribs of the
image. The silence was only broken by the wailing of some large birds
that circled sidelong, as if in surprise or alarm, about the summit of
the hills. Presently Olalla rose again, turned towards me, raised her
veil, and, still leaning with one hand on the shaft of the crucifix,
looked upon me with a pale and sorrowful countenance.

“I have laid my hand upon the cross,” she said. “The Padre says you are
no Christian; but look up for a moment with my eyes, and behold the
face of the Man of Sorrows. We are all such as He was—the inheritors of
sin; we must all bear and expiate a past which was not ours; there is
in all of us—ay, even in me—a sparkle of the divine. Like Him, we must
endure for a little while, until morning returns bringing peace. Suffer
me to pass on upon my way alone; it is thus that I shall be least
lonely, counting for my friend Him who is the friend of all the
distressed; it is thus that I shall be the most happy, having taken my
farewell of earthly happiness, and willingly accepted sorrow for my
portion.”

I looked at the face of the crucifix, and, though I was no friend to
images, and despised that imitative and grimacing art of which it was a
rude example, some sense of what the thing implied was carried home to
my intelligence. The face looked down upon me with a painful and deadly
contraction; but the rays of a glory encircled it, and reminded me that
the sacrifice was voluntary. It stood there, crowning the rock, as it
still stands on so many highway sides, vainly preaching to passers-by,
an emblem of sad and noble truths; that pleasure is not an end, but an
accident; that pain is the choice of the magnanimous; that it is best
to suffer all things and do well. I turned and went down the mountain
in silence; and when I looked back for the last time before the wood
closed about my path, I saw Olalla still leaning on the crucifix.




THE TREASURE OF FRANCHARD.




