IV

THE ESSENTIAL TRUTH OF CHRISTIANITY

There are few questions more difficult to answer than the question, What
is Christianity? Every attempt to answer it reveals the peculiar focus of
interest in the mind of the writer, but it leaves the main question still
asking for a new answer.

“Always it asketh, asketh,” and each answer, to say the least, is
inadequate. Harnack, Loisy, and Tolstoy have given three characteristic
answers to the great question. Their books are touched with genius and
will long continue to be read, but, like the other books, they, too,
reveal the writers rather than solve the central problem.

One of the greatest difficulties about the whole matter is the difficulty
of deciding where to look for the essential traits of Christianity.
Are they to be found in the teaching of Jesus? Are they revealed in
the message of St. Paul? Are they embodied in the Messianic hope? Are
they exhibited in the primitive apostolic Church? Are they set forth
in the great creeds of orthodoxy? Are they expressed in the imperial
authoritative Church? Are they to be discovered in the Protestantism
of the modern world? This catalogue of preliminary questions shows how
complicated the subject really is. To start in on any one of these lines
would be of necessity to arrive at a partial and one-sided answer.

Nowhere can we find pure and unalloyed Christianity; always we have
it mixed and combined with something else, more or less foreign to
it. The creeds contain a larger element of Greek philosophy than of
the pure original gospel. The Messianic hope is far more Jewish than
it is “Christian.” The imperial authoritative Church is Christianity
interpreted through the Roman genius for organization and merged
and fused with the age-long faiths and customs of pagan peoples.
Protestantism is an amazingly complex blend of ideas and ideals and
everywhere interwoven with the long processes of history. Even this did
not drop from the sky ready-made! Nor did St. Paul’s message flash in
upon him with the Damascus vision, as a pure heaven-presented truth. It
proves to be a very difficult task to find one’s way back to the pure,
unalloyed teaching of Jesus, and, strangely enough, the moment one
endeavors to constitute this by itself “Christianity,” and undertakes to
turn it into a set of commands and to make it a “new law,” he ends with a
dry legalism and not a vital, universal Christianity.

What, then, is Christianity? In answering this question we can not
confine ourselves to the teaching and the work of Jesus. Important as it
is to go “back to Jesus” that is not enough. We can not fully comprehend
the meaning of Christianity until we take into account the fact that
the invisible, resurrected Christ is the continuation through the ages
of the same revelation begun in the life and teaching of Jesus. Galilee
and Judea mark only one stage of the gospel, which is, in its fullness,
an eternal gospel. The Christian revelation which came to light first
in one Life—its master interpretation and incarnation—has since been
going forward in a continuous and unbroken manifestation of Christ
through many lives and through many groups and through the spiritual
achievements of all those who have lived by him. Christianity is, thus,
the revelation of God through personal life—God humanly revealed. St.
Paul and the writer of the Fourth Gospel were the first to reach this
profound insight into its fuller meaning, though it is plainly suggested
in some of the sayings of Jesus and in the pentecostal experiences of the
first Christians. It is the very heart of the Pauline and the Johannine
Christianity. Important as is the backward look to Jesus in both these
writers, the central emphasis is unmistakably upon the inward experience
of the invisible, spiritual Christ. This is the expectation in the Fourth
Gospel: Greater things than these shall ye do when the Spirit comes upon
you. This is the mystery, the secret of the gospel, St. Paul says, Christ
in you.

If this is the right clew, Christianity is not a new law, nor an
institution, nor a creed, nor a body of doctrine, nor a millennial
hope. It is a type of life, it is a way of living. The most essential
thing about it is the fact of the incursion of God into human life,
the revelation of the eternal in the midst of time, the new discovery
which it brought of God’s nature and character. We nowhere else come so
close to the essential truth of Christianity as we do in the life and
experience of Jesus. The life at every point floods over and transcends
the teaching. He is the most complete and adequate exhibition of what I
have called the incursion of God into human life, but even so he is the
beginning, not the end, of the revelation of God through humanity—the
Christ-revelation of God—and this Christ-revelation of God _is_ God, so
far as he is at all adequately known.

Some persons talk as though God were a kind of composite Being, got by
adding up the God of the natural order, the God of the Old Testament,
and the God as Father about whom Jesus taught. He is, according to this
scheme, in some way a compound aggregate of infinite power, irresistible
justice, and eternal love. Sometimes one “attribute” is predominant,
and sometimes another, while in some mysterious way all the dissonant
attributes get “reconciled.” This is surely boggy ground to build upon.

Christianity is essentially, I should say, a unique revelation of God.
Here for the first time the race discovers that God identifies himself
with humanity, is in the stream of it, is suffering with us, is in
moral conflict with sin and evil, is conquering through the travail
and tragedy of finite persons, and is eternally, in mind and heart and
will, a God of triumphing Love. No texts adequately “prove” this mighty
truth. We cannot tie it down to “sayings,” though there are “sayings”
which declare it. The life of Jesus, the supreme decisions through which
he expresses his purpose, the spirit which dominates him and guides his
decisive actions, make the truth plain that God meant _that_ to him and
that his way of life revealed that kind of God.

Through all the fusions and confusions of history and through all the
vagaries of man’s tortuous course since the Church began to be built,
Christ as eternal Spirit has gone on revealing this truth about God and
demonstrating the victorious power of this way of life. The making of
a kingdom of God in the world, the spread of the brother-spirit, the
expansion of the love-method, the increase of coöperation, sympathy,
and service, the continued incursion of the divine into the life of the
human, these are the things now and always which indicate the vitality
and progress of Christianity, and the uninterrupted revelation of God.

Always, in every period of history, the essential truth of Christianity
must be revealed and expressed in and through a medium not altogether
adapted to it. It is always living and working in a world more or less
alien to it. It has at any stage only partially realized its ideal, and
only achieved in a fragmentary way the goal toward which it is moving.
It means endless conquest and ever fresh winning of unwon victories. It
must be for us all a vision and a venture, it must be a thing of faith
and forecast. At the same time it is, in a very real sense, experience
and achievement. God _has_ entered into humanity. Love has revealed its
redeeming power. Grace is as much a reality as mountains are. The kingdom
of God though not all in sight yet is, I believe, as sure as gravitation.
The invisible, eternal Christ, living in the soul of man, revealing
his will in moral and spiritual victories in personal lives, is, I am
convinced, as genuine a fact as electricity is. But we shall see _all_
that Christianity means only when the living totality of the revelation
of God through humanity is complete.




