II

CONQUERING BY AN INNER FORCE

There are few texts that have been more dynamic in the history of
spiritual religion than the one which forms the keynote of the message of
the little book of Habakkuk: “The righteous man lives by faith” (2:4). It
became the central feature of St. Paul’s message. It was the epoch-making
discovery in Luther’s experience, and it has always been the guiding
principle of Protestant Christianity.

The profound significance of the words is often missed because the text
is so easily turned into a phrase that is supposed just of itself to work
a kind of magic spell, and secondly because the meaning of “faith” is so
frequently misinterpreted. When we go back to the original experience out
of which the famous text was born we can get fresh light upon the heart
of its meaning. The little book begins with a searching analysis of the
conditions of the time. With an almost unparalleled boldness the prophet
challenges God to explain why the times are so badly out of joint, why
the social order is so topsy-turvy, and why injustice is allowed to run a
long course unchecked. God seems unconcerned with affairs—the moral pilot
appears not to be steering things.

Then comes a moment of mental relief. The prophet hits upon the
conclusion, arrived at by other prophets also, that God is about to use
the Chaldeans as a divine instrument to chastise the wicked element in
the nation, to right the wrongs of the disordered world, and to execute
judgment. But as he begins to reflect he becomes more perplexed than
ever. How can God, who is good, use such a terrible instrument for moral
purposes? This people, which is assumed to be an instrument of moral
judgment in a disordered world, is itself unspeakably perverse. It is
fierce and wolfish. Its only god is might. It cares only for success. It
catches men, like fish, in its great dragnet, and “then he sacrificeth
unto his net and burneth incense unto his drag.” How can such a pitiless
and insolent people, dominated by pride and love of conquest, be used to
work out the ends of righteousness and to act for God who is too pure
even to look upon that which is evil and wrong? Here the prophet finds
himself suddenly up against the ancient problem of the moral government
of the universe and the deep mystery of evil in it. He cannot untangle
the snarled threads of his skein. No solution of the mystery lies at
hand. He decides to climb up into his “watch-tower” and wait for an
answer from God. If it does not come at once, he proposes to stay until
it does come—“if it tarry, wait for it; it will surely come.” At length
the vision comes, so clear that a man running can read it. It is just
this famous discovery of the great text that a man cannot hope to get the
world-difficulties all straightened out to suit him, he cannot in some
easy superficial way justify the ways of God in the course of history;
but, at least, he can live unswervingly and victoriously by his own
soul’s insight, the insight of faith that God can be trusted to do the
right thing for the universe which he is steering. It is beautifully
expressed in a well-known stanza of Whittier’s:

    “I know not where His islands lift
    Their fronded palms in air;
    I only know I cannot drift
    Beyond His love and care.”

Many things remain unexplained. The mysteries are not all dissipated.
But I see enough light to enable me to hold a steady course onward, and
I have an inner confidence in God which nothing in the outward world can
shatter. This is the message from Habakkuk’s watch-tower: There is a
faith which goes so far into the heart of things that a man can live by
it and stand all the water-spouts which break upon him.

Josiah Royce once defined faith as an insight of the soul by which one
can stand everything that can happen to him, and that is what this text
means. You arrive at such a personal assurance of God’s character that
you can face any event and not be swept off your feet. If this is so,
it means that the most important achievement in a man’s career is the
attainment of just this inner vision, the acquisition of an interior
spiritual confidence which itself is the victory.

William James used often to close his lecture courses at Harvard with
what he called a “Faith-ladder.” Round after round it went up from a mere
possibility of hope to an inner conviction strong enough to dominate
action. He would begin with some human faith which outstrips evidence and
he would say of it: It is at least not absurd, not self-contradictory,
and, therefore, it might be true under certain conditions, in some kind
of a world which we can conceive. It may be true even in this world and
under existing conditions. It is fit to be true; it ought to be true. The
soul in its moment of clearest insight feels that it must be true. It
shall be true, then, at least for me, for I propose to act upon it, to
live by it, to stake my existence on it.

This watch-tower of Habakkuk is a similar faith-ladder. He sees no way
to explain why the good suffer, or to account for the catastrophes of
history, but at least he has found a faith in God which holds him like
adamant: “Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold and there shall
be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy
in the God of my salvation.... He will make me to walk upon mine high
places.” Faith like that is always contagious. The unshaken soul kindles
another soul who believes in his belief, and the torch goes from this man
on his watch-tower to St. Paul, and from him on to the great reformer,
and then to an unnamed multitude, who through their soul’s insight can
stand everything that may happen!


III

LIVING IN THE PRESENCE OF THE ETERNAL

Some time ago I received a letter from a young minister who was about to
settle for religious work in a large manufacturing town. He and I were
strangers to each other in the flesh but friends through correspondence,
and because we were kindred spirits he wrote to me to say: “I have before
me the great work of living in the eternal God and in a humanity toiling
in factories and shops. Oh, if I could only make the presence of the
Eternal real to myself and to my people!” Another minister, laboring in
a large suburb of New York City, also a stranger to me except through
correspondence, wrote to say that he was glad for every voice which
holds up before men the reality of the invisible Church and the idea of
the universal priesthood of believers. These letters coming within a
week—and they are samples of many similar ones—are signs of the times,
and show clearly that thoughtful men all about us are done with the husk
of religion and are devoting themselves to the heart of the matter. There
is a deep movement under way which touches all denominations and is
steadily preparing in our busy, hurrying, materialistic America a true
seed of the vital, spiritual religion that will later bear rich blossoms
and ripe harvest.

I want for the moment to return to the central desire of the young
minister, in the hope that it may inspire some of us, especially some of
our young ministers who are facing their new spiritual tasks: “I have
before me the great work of living in the eternal God and in a humanity
toiling in factories and shops. Oh, if I could only make the presence of
the Eternal real to myself and to them!”

It is perhaps a new idea to some that living in the eternal God is
“work.” We are so accustomed to the idea that all that is required of us
is a passive mind and a waiting spirit that we have never quite realized
this truth: No person can live in the eternal God unless he is ready for
the most intense activity and for the most strenuous life. Gladstone,
in his old age, surprised his readers with his impressive phrase, “the
work of worship.” The fact is, no man ever yet found his way into the
permanent enjoyment of God along paths of least resistance or by any lazy
methods. How many of us have been humiliated to discover, in the silence
or in the service, that nothing spiritual was happening within us. Our
mind, unbent and passive enough, was like a stagnant pool, or, if not
stagnant, was darting its feelers out and following in lazy fashion any
line of suggestion which pulled it. Instead of finding ourselves “living
in the eternal God” and in the high enjoyment of him, we catch ourselves
wondering what the next strike will be, or thinking about the mean and
shabby way some one spoke to us an hour ago! There is no use blaming a
mind because it wanders—everybody’s mind wanders—but the real achievement
is to make it wander in a region which ministers to our spiritual life;
and that can be done only by getting supremely interested in the things
of the Spirit. That is where the “work” lies; that is where the effort
comes in. Attention is always determined by the fundamental interest.
What we love supremely we attend to. It gets us, it holds us. One of the
colloquial phrases for being in love with a person is “paying attention
to” the person. It is a true phrase and goes straight to reality.
If we are to discover and enjoy the eternal Presence we must become
passionately earnest in spirit and glowing with love for the Highest.

My friend brings two important things together: He proposes to undertake
the work of living in the eternal God and in toiling humanity. The two
things go together and cannot be safely separated. It is in the actual
sharing of life through love and sympathy and sacrifice, in going out of
self to feel the problems and difficulties and sufferings of others, that
we find and form a life rich in higher interests and centered on matters
of eternal value. A man who has traveled through the deeps of life with
a fellow man comes to his hour of worship with a mind focused on the
Eternal and with a spirit girded for the inward wrestling, without which
blessings of the greater sort do not come. And every time such a man
finds himself truly at home in the eternal God and fed from within, he
can go out, with the strength of ten, to the tasks of toiling humanity.
This is one of those spiritual circles which work both ways: He that
dwells in God loves, and he that loves finds God, St. John tells us.

It is fine to see a strong man, trained in all his faculties, going to
his work with the quiet prayer: “Oh, that I may make the presence of the
Eternal real to myself and to my people.” It is a good prayer for all of
us.




