III

THE DEMOCRACY WE AIM AT

Democracy was in an earlier period only a political aim; it has now
become a deep religious issue. It must be discussed not only in caucuses
and conventions, but in churches as well. For a century and a quarter
“democracy” has been a great human battle word, and battle words never
have very exact definitions. It has all the time been charged with
explosive forces, and it has produced a kind of magic spell on men’s
minds during this long transitional period. But the word democracy has,
throughout this time, remained fluid and ill-defined—sometimes expressing
the loftiest aspirations and sometimes serving the coarse demagogue in
his pursuit of selfish ends.

The goal or aim of the early struggle after democracy was the overthrow
of human inequalities. Men were thought of in terms of individual
units, and the units were declared to be intrinsically equal. The
contention was made that they all had, or ought to have, the same rights
and privileges. This equality-note has, too, dominated the social and
economic struggles of the last seventy-five years. The focus has been
centered upon rights and privileges. Men have been thought of, all along,
as individual units, and the goal has been conceived in political and
economic terms. Democracy is still supposed, in many quarters, to be an
organization of society in which the units have equal political rights.
Much of the talk concerning democracy is still in terms of privileges.
It is a striving to secure opportunities and chances. The aim is the
attainment of a social order in which guarantee is given to every
individual that he shall have his full economic and political rights.

I would not, in the least, belittle the importance of these claims,
or underestimate the human gains which have been made thus far in the
direction of greater equality and larger freedom. But these achievements,
however valuable, are not enough. They can only form the base from which
to start the drive for a more genuine and adequate type of democracy. At
its best this scheme of “equality” is abstract and superficial. Nobody
will ever be satisfied with an achievement of flat equality. Persons can
never be reduced to homogeneous units. There are individual differences
woven into the very fiber of human life, and no type of democracy can
ever satisfy men like us until it gets beyond this artificial scheme and
learns to deal with the problem in more adequate fashion.

A genuinely Christian democracy such as the religious soul is after can
not be conceived in economic terms, nor can it be content with social
units of equality or sameness. We want a democracy that is vitally and
spiritually conceived, which recognizes and safeguards the irreducible
uniqueness of every member of the social whole. This means that we can
not deal with personal life in terms of external behavior. We can not
think of society as an aggregation of units possessing individual rights
and privileges. We shall no longer be satisfied to regard persons as
beings possessing utilitarian value or made for economic uses. We shall
forever transcend the instrumental idea. We shall begin rather with
the inalienable fact of spiritual worth as the central feature of the
personal life. This would mean that every person, however humble or
limited in scope or range, has divine possibilities to be realized; is
not a “thing” to be used and exploited, but a spiritual creation to be
expanded until its true nature is revealed. The democracy I want will
treat every human person as a unique, sacred, and indispensable member
of a spiritual whole, a whole which remains imperfect if even one of
its “little ones” is missing; and its fundamental axiom will be the
liberation and realization of the inner life which is potential in every
member of the human race.

On the economic and equality level we never reach the true conception
of personal life. Men are thought of as units having desires, needs,
and wants to be satisfied. We are, on this basis, aiming to achieve a
condition in which the desires, wants, and needs are well met, in which
each individual contributes his share of supplies to the common stock of
economic values, and receives in turn his equitable amount. I am dealing,
on the other hand, with a way of life which begins and ends, not with a
material value-concept at all, but rather with a central faith in the
intrinsic worth and infinite spiritual possibilities of every person in
the social organism—a democracy of spiritual agents.

It is true, no doubt, as Shylock said, that we all have “eyes, hands,
organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions,” are “subject to
diseases,” and “warmed and cooled by summer and winter.” “If you prick
us we bleed, if you tickle us we laugh, if you poison us we die,” and so
on. We do surely have wants and needs. We must consider values. We must
have food and clothes and houses. We must have some fair share of the
earth and its privileges. But that is only the basement and foundation
of real living, and we want a democracy that is supremely concerned with
the development of personality and with the spiritual organization of
society. We shall not make our estimates of persons on a basis of their
uses, or on the ground of their behavior as animal beings; we shall
live and work, if we are Christ’s disciples, in the faith that man is
essentially a spiritual being, in a world which is essentially spiritual,
and that we are committed to the task of awakening a like faith in others
and of helping realize an organic solidarity of persons who practice
this faith. Our rule of life would be something like the following: to
act everywhere and always as though we knew that we are members of a
spiritual community, each one possessed of infinite worth, of irreducible
uniqueness, and indispensable to the spiritual unity of the whole—a
community that is being continually enlarged by the faith and action of
those who now compose it, and so in some measure being formed by our
human effort to achieve a divine ideal.

The most important service we can render our fellow men is to awaken
in them a real faith in their own spiritual nature and in their own
potential energies, and to set them to the task of building the ideal
democracy in which personality is treated as sacred and held safe from
violation, infringement, or exploitation, and, more than that, in which
we altogether respect the worth and the divine hopes inherent in our
being as men.


