III

“WE HAVE SEEN HIS STAR”

Every time the Christmas anniversary returns, the heart renews its
youthful joy in the thrilling stories of the nativity. We cannot be too
thankful for the inspiration and poetry and imagination which touch and
glorify every aspect of our religious faith. Some dull and leaden-minded
pedants appear to think that the “real” Christ is the person we get when
we take, for the construction of our figure, only those facts about him
which can be rationalistically, historically, and critically verified. We
are thus reduced to a few religious ideas, a little group of “sayings,”
a tiny body of events, which explain none of the immense results that
followed. The real Christ, on the contrary, is this rich, wonderful,
mysterious, baffling person whose life was vastly greater even than his
deeds or his words, who aroused the wonder and imagination of all who
came in contact with him, who touched everything with emotion, and fused
religion forever with poetry and feeling. He, in a very true sense,

    “ ... touches all things common,
    Till they rise to touch the spheres.”

Not only over the manger, but over the entire story of his life, hovers
the glory of the star. It is a life that will not stay down on the dull
earth of mere fact; it always rises into the region of idealism and
beauty. It always transcends the things of sight and touch. We have a
religion which cannot be confined in a system of doctrine or a code of
ethics; it partakes too intimately of life for that. It is, like its
Founder, a full rounded reality, rich in inspiration and emotion and
wonder, as well as in intellectual ideas and truth. When the star wanes
and imagination falls away, and we hold in our thin hands only the husks
of a dead system, the power of religion is over.

The same thing is true of the cross. Its power lies in the fullness and
richness of the reality. We do not want to reduce it, but to raise it
to its full meaning and glory as a way of complete life. The direction
of present-day Christianity is certainly not away from Calvary, but
quite the opposite. The men who are in these days trying to deliver our
religion from formalism and tradition find not less meaning in the cross
than a former generation did, but vastly more. The atonement remains at
the center, as it has always done, in vital Christianity. All attempts to
reduce Christianity to a dry and bloodless system of philosophy, with
the appeal of the heart left out, fail now as they have always failed.
It is a Savior that men, tangled in their sins and their sorrows, still
want—not merely a great thinker or a great teacher.

The Church has, no doubt, far too much neglected the idea of the kingdom
of God as Christ expounded it in sermon and parable, and hosts of
prominent Christians do not at all understand what this great, central
teaching of the Master meant then and means now. His transforming
revelation of the nature of God has, too, been missed by multitudes, who
still hold Jewish rather than Christian conceptions of God. But patient
study of the gospel is slowly forcing these ideas into the thought of
men everywhere, and books abound now which make his teaching clear and
luminous.

What is needed above everything else now is that we shall not lose any
of our vision of Christ as Savior, and that we shall live our lives
in his presence. It is through the cross that we touch closest to the
Savior-heart, and it is here that we feel our lives most powerfully moved
by the certainty of his divine nature. Arguments may fail, but one who
looks steadily at this voluntary Sufferer, giving himself for us, will
cry out, with one of old, “My Lord and my God.”

Nothing short of that will do, I believe, if Christianity is to remain
a saving religion. Good men have died in all ages; great teachers have
again and again gone to their deaths in behalf of their truth or out
of love for their disciples. It touches us as we read of their bravery
and their loyalty, but we do not and we cannot build a world-saving
religion upon them. Christ is different! We feel that in him the veil is
lifted and we are face to face with God. When we hear with our hearts
the words, “In the world ye shall have tribulation; but fear not, for I
have overcome the world,” we feel that we are hearing the triumph of God
in the midst of suffering—we are hearing of an eternal triumph. Christ
can not be for us less than God manifested here in a world of time and
space and finiteness, doing in time what God does in eternity—suffering
over sin, entering vicariously into the tragedy of evil, and triumphing
while he treads the winepress. No one has fathomed the awfulness of sin,
until, in some sense, he feels that his sin makes God suffer, that it
crucifies him afresh. If Christ is God revealed in time—made visible and
vocal to men—then, through the cross, we shall discover that we are not
to think of God henceforth as Sovereign—not a Being yonder, enjoying his
royal splendor. We must think of him all the time in terms of Christ. He
is an eternal Lover of our hearts. We pierce him with our sins; we wound
him with our wickedness. He suffers, as mothers who love suffer, and he
enters vicariously into all the tragic deeps of our lives, striving to
bring us home to him. Jan Ruysbroeck says:

    “You must love the Love which loves you everlastingly, and if
    you hold fast by his love, he remakes you by his Spirit, and
    then joy is yours. The Spirit of God breathes into you, and you
    breathe it out in rest and joy and love. This is eternal life,
    just as in our mortal life we breathe out the air that is in us
    and breathe in fresh air.”




CHAPTER VIII

THE LIGHT-FRINGED MYSTERY


