CHAPTER II

THE GREAT ENERGIES THAT WORK


I

TRYING THE BETTER WAY

A very fresh and unusual type of book has recently appeared under
the title, “_By An Unknown Disciple_.” It tells in a simple, direct,
impressive way, after the manner of the Gospels, the story of Christ’s
life and works and message. It professes to be written by one who was an
intimate disciple, and who was therefore an eye-witness of everything
told in the book. It is a vivid narrative and leaves the reader deeply
moved, because it brings him closer than most interpretations do into
actual presence of and companionship with the great Galilean. The first
chapter is a re-interpretation of the scene on the eastern shore of
Gennesaret, where Jesus casts the demons out of the maniac of Geresa. A
man on the shore of the lake told Jesus, when he landed there with his
disciples in the early morning, that it was not safe for any one to go
up the rugged hillside, because there were madmen hidden there among the
tombs: “people possessed by demons, who tear their flesh, and who can be
heard screaming day and night.”

“How do you know they are possessed by demons?” asked Jesus.

“What else could it be?” said the man. “There are none that can master
them. They are too fierce to be tamed.”

“Has any man tried to tame them?” asked Jesus.

“Yes, Rabbi, they have been bound with chains and fetters. There was one
that I saw. He plucked the fetters from him as a child might break a
chain of field flowers. Then he ran foaming into the wilderness, and no
man dare pass by that way now....”

“Have men tried only this way to tame him?” Jesus asked.

“What other way is there, Rabbi?” asked the man.

“There is God’s way,” said Jesus. “Come, let us try it.”

As Jesus spoke, “His gaze went from man to man,” the writer continues,
“and then his eyes fell upon me. It was as if a power passed from him to
me, and immediately something inside me answered, ‘Lead, and I follow.’”
The narrative proceeds to describe the encounter with the demoniac man
whose name was “Legion.” “He ran toward us, shrieking and bounding in the
air. He had two sharp stones in his hand, and as he leaped he cut his
flesh with them and the blood ran down his naked limbs. The men behind us
scattered and fled down the hillside; but Jesus stood still and waited.”
The effect of the calm, undisturbed, unfrightened presence of Jesus was
astonishing. It was as though a new force suddenly came into operation.
The jagged stones were thrown from his hands, for he recognized at once
in Jesus a friendly presence and a helper with an understanding heart.
His fear and terror left the demoniac man and he became quiet, composed
and like a normal person. Meantime some of the men who ran away in fear,
when the madman appeared, frightened a herd of swine feeding near by, and
in their uncontrolled terror they rushed wildly toward the headland of
the lake and pitched over the top into the water where they were drowned.
“Fear is a foul spirit,” said Jesus, and it seemed plain and obvious
that the ungoverned fear which played such havoc with the man had taken
possession also of the misguided swine. It was the same “demon,” fear. A
little later in the day when the companions of Jesus found him they saw
the man who had called himself “Legion” sitting at Jesus’ feet, clothed
and in his right mind—a quieted and restored person.

We now know that this disease, called “possession,” which appears so
often in the New Testament accounts, is a very common present-day
trouble. The name and description given to it in the Bible make it often
seem remote and unfamiliar to us, but it is, in fact, as prevalent in the
world to-day as it was in the first century. It is an extreme form of
hysteria, a disorganization of normal functions, often causing delusions,
loss of memory, the performance of automatic actions, and sometimes
resulting in double, or multiple, personality, a condition in which a
foreign self seems to usurp the control of the body and make it do many
strange and unwilled things. This disease is known in very many cases to
be produced by frights, fear, or terror, sometimes fears long hidden away
and more or less suppressed.

The famous cases of Doris Fischer and Miss Beauchamp were both of this
type. They were only extreme instances of a fairly common form of
mental trouble, generally due to fears, and capable of being cured by
wise, skillful understanding and loving care, applied by one who shows
confidence and human interest and who knows how to use the powerful
influence of _suggestion_. Dr. Morton Prince, who has reported these
two cases, has achieved cures and restorations that read like miracles,
and his narratives tell of minds, “jangling, harsh, and out of tune,”
broken into dissociated selves, which have been unified, organized,
harmonized and restored to normal life. Few restorations are more
wonderful than that effected upon a Philadelphia girl under the direction
of Dr. Lightner Witmer. The girl was hopelessly incorrigible, stubborn,
sullen, suspicious, and stupid. She screamed, kicked, and bit when she
was opposed, and she utterly refused to obey anybody. So unnatural and
dehumanized was she that she was generally called “Diabolical Mary.” She
was examined by Dr. Witmer, underwent some simple surgical operations to
remove her obvious physical handicaps, and then was put under the loving,
tender care of a wise, attractive, and understanding woman. The girl
responded to the treatment at once and soon became profoundly changed,
and the process went on until the girl became a wholly transformed and
re-made person.

The so-called shell-shock cases which have bulked so large in the story
of the wastage of men in all armies during the World War, turn out to be
cases of mental disorganization, occasioned for the most part by immense
emotional upheaval, especially through suppressed fear. The man affected
with the trouble has seemed to master his emotion. He has not winced or
shown the slightest fear in the face of danger; but the pent-up emotion,
the suppressed fear and terror, insidiously throw the entire nervous
mechanism out of gear. The successful treatment of such cases is, again,
like that for hysteria, one that brings confidence, calm, liberation
of all strain and anxiety. The poor victim needs a patient, wise,
skillful, psychologically trained physician, who has an understanding
mind, a friendly, interested, intimate way, a spirit of love, and who
can arouse expectation of recovery and can suggest thoughts of health
and the right emotional reactions. This method of cure has often been
tried with striking effect upon the so-called criminal classes. Prisoners
almost always respond constructively to the personal manifestation of
confidence, sympathy, and love. Elizabeth Fry proved this principle in an
astonishing way with the almost brutalized prisoners in Newgate. Thomas
Shillitoe’s visit to the German prisoners at Spandau, who were believed
to be beyond all human appeals, though not so well known and famous, is
no less impressive and no less convincing.

There was perhaps never a time in the history of the world when an
application of this principle and method—God’s way—was so needed in
the social sphere of life. Whole countries have the symptoms which
appear in these nervous diseases. It is not merely an individual case
here and there; it takes on a corporate, a mass, form. The nerves are
overstrained, the emotional stress has been more than could be borne,
suppressed fears have produced disorganization. There are signs of
social “dissociation.” The remedy in such cases is not an application of
compelling force, not a resort to chains and fetters, not a screwing on
of the “lid,” not a method of starving out the victims. It is rather an
application of the principle which has always worked in individual cases
of “dissociation” or “possession” or “suppressed fear”—the principle
of sympathy, love and suggestion—what Jesus, in the book mentioned
above, calls “God’s way.” The “dissociation” of labor and employers in
the social group, with its hysterical signs of strikes and lockouts,
upheaval and threats, needs just now a very wise physician. Force,
restraint, compulsion, fastening down the “lid,” imprisonment of leaders,
drastic laws against propaganda, will not cure the disease, any more
than chains cured the poor sufferer on the shores of Gennesaret. The
situation must first of all be _understood_. The inner attitude behind
the acts and deeds must be taken into account. The social mental state
must be diagnosed. The remedy, to be a remedy, must remove the causes
which produce the dissociation. It can be accomplished only by one who
has an understanding heart, a good will, an unselfish purpose, and a
comprehending, i.e., a unifying, _suggestion_ of coöperation.

This _way_ is no less urgent for the solution of the most acute
international situations. It has been assumed too long and too often that
these situations can be best handled by unlimited methods of restraint,
coercion, and reduction to helplessness. Some of the countries of Europe
have been plainly suffering from neurasthenia, dissociation, and the
kindred forms of emotional, fear-caused diseases. Starvation always makes
for types of hysteria. It will not do now to apply, with cold, precise
logic, the old vindictive principle that when the sinner has been made
to suffer enough to “cover” the enormity of his sin he can then be
restored to respectable society. It is not vindication of justice which
most concerns the world now; it is a return of health, a restoration of
normal functions, a reconstruction of the social body. That task calls
for the application of the deeper, truer principles of life. It calls for
a knowing heart, an understanding method, a healing plan, a sympathetic
guide who can obliterate the fear-attitude and _suggest_ confidence and
unity and trustful human relationships. Those great words, used in the
Epistle of London Yearly Meeting of Friends in 1917, need to be revived
and put to an experimental venture: “_Love knows no frontiers._” There is
no limit to its healing force, there are no conditions it does not meet,
there is no terminus to its constructive operations.


