II

THE NEW BORN OUT OF THE OLD

Walking across the fields in the spring I found the empty shell of a
bird’s egg. The tiny bird that once was in it was lying still and happy
under its mother’s wings, or was chirping its new-born song from the limb
of a nearby tree, or was trying its new-found wings on the buoyant air.
The empty shell was utterly worthless, a mere plaything for the wind.
The miracle of life that had stirred within it and had used it for its
shelter had gone on and left it deserted. There is a fine proverb which
says, “God empties the nest by hatching out the eggs,” and the world
is full of this gentle, silent, divine method of abolishing the old by
setting free to higher ends all that was true and living in it.

    “To-day I saw the dragon-fly
    Come from the wells where he did lie.
    An inner impulse rent the veil
    Of his old husk: from head to tail
    Came out clear plates of sapphire mail.
    He dried his wings: like gauze they grew;
    Through crofts and pastures wet with dew
    A living flash of light he flew.”

In the water below, the “old husk” lay empty and useless, while the
bright-colored living thing found its freedom in the invisible air. I
never go to a funeral without thinking of this miracle of transformation
which brings the bird out of the egg, the flower out of the seed, the
dragon-fly out of its water-larva. In his own mysterious way God has
emptied the nest by the hatching method, and all that was excellent,
lovable, and permanent in the one we loved has found itself in the realm
for which it was fitted. The body is only the empty shell, the shattered
seed, the old husk, which the silent forces of nature will slowly turn
back again into its original elements, to use over again for its myriad
processes of building:

    “And from his ashes may be made
    The violet of his native land.”

Those who treasure up the outworn dust and ashes, who make their thoughts
center about the empty shell, are failing to read aright the deeper
fact, which life everywhere is trying to utter, that that which belongs
in the higher sphere cannot be pent up in the lower.

This divine hatching method may be seen, too, in the progress of truth,
as it unfolds from stage to stage. Nothing is more common than to see a
person holding on to a shell in which truth has dwelt, without realizing
that the precious thing he wants has gone on and reëmbodied itself in
new and living ways which he fails to follow and comprehend. While he is
saying in melancholy tones, “They have taken away my Lord and I know not
where they have laid him,” the living Lord is saying, “Have I been so
long time with thee and yet dost thou not know me?”

Truth can no more keep a fixed and permanent form than life can. It lives
only by hatching out into higher and ever more adequate expressions of
itself, and the old forms in which it lived, the old words through which
it uttered itself, become empty and hollow because the warm breath of God
has raised the inner life, the spiritual reality, to a higher form of
expression.

The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews was very much impressed with
this crumbling of old forms and expressions to give place to the new.
God spoke, he says, to our fathers in sundered portions and in a variety
of manners, but he is speaking to us now by his Son. The things that can
be shaken, he writes, are being removed that the things which cannot be
shaken may remain. Luther must have felt this shaking process in his day;
and when he saw the old forms of religion crumbling, he wrote that great
hymn of the Reformation, “A Mighty Fortress is Our God.” He had found
something that could not be shaken. He could stand his ground and face
the seen and unseen world in faith, because he knew that the hatching was
going on, and the new was being born in higher, truer, and more adequate
forms as the old was vanishing.

Let us hope that this ancient divine method may still operate in this
momentous hour of human history. Never, perhaps, since the fall of Rome,
has there been such a world-shaking process affecting every country and
all peoples. Immense changes are under way. Nothing will ever be quite
the same again. The old is vanishing before our eyes and the new is
being born. So much was wrong and outworn, and unjust and inhuman, that
the changes must go very far, and they will necessarily involve some
breakage. But even now, in this most dynamic period of modern history,
that which is to mark permanent progress will come forth, not by a
smashing process, but by the hatching of the eggs, by the emergence of
the underlying forces of life and the realization of those human hopes
and aspirations that have long been held in and suppressed.

There is always the gravest danger from blind rage and sullen wrath. The
passionate resentment for the suffering of immemorial wrongs, when once
it breaks through the dams of restraint, is an almost irresistible force;
but sooner or later the sound, serious sense of the intelligent human
race comes into play and brings the world back to order and system. The
real gains in these crises are made not by the smashings and the blind
iconoclastic blows, but by the wise, clear-sighted fulfillment of the
slowly formed ideals which have been the inspiration of many lives before
the crisis came. May it be so now! It must not be, it cannot be, that
these millions of men shall have unavailingly faced death and mutilation.
It was not wreckage and chaos they sought in their brave adventure with
death. They went out to build a new world and to destroy, only that a new
re-creation might begin. This is the time of incubation and birth, for
ripening into reality those mighty hopes that make us men.

It means at once that we must deepen down our lives into the life of God,
that we must suppress our petty individual passions and feel the sweep of
God’s purposes for the new age. In a multitude of ways the world moves
on, and as it moves the Spirit of God ends old forms and methods and
brings fresh and living ways to light. May we have eyes to see what is of
his divine hatching and what is empty shell!




