III

SOME NEW REASONS FOR “LOVING ENEMIES”

Nobody ever amounts to anything who lives without conflict with
obstacles. It seems to be a law of the universe that nothing really good
can be got or held by soft, easy means.

The Persians were so impressed with this stern condition of life that
they interpreted the universe as the scene of endless warfare between
hostile powers of the invisible world. Ormuzd, the god of light, and
Ahriman, the god of darkness, were believed to be engaged in a continual
Armageddon. There could be no truce in the strife until one or the other
should win the victory by the annihilation of his opponent. This Persian
dualism has touched all systems of thought and has left its influence
upon all the religions of the world. The reasons why it has appealed so
powerfully to men of all generations are, of course, that there is so
much conflict involved in life and that no achievement of goodness is
ever made without a hard battle for it against opposing forces. But if
all this opposition and struggle is due to an “enemy,” we certainly ought
to love this “enemy,” because it turns out to be the greatest possible
blessing to us that we are forced to struggle with difficulties and to
wrestle for what we get.

“Count it all joy,” said the Apostle James in substance, writing to his
friends of the Dispersion, “when you fall into manifold testings, or
trials, knowing that the proving of your faith worketh steadfastness,
and let steadfastness have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, lacking in nothing.” St. Paul thought once that his “thorn in the
flesh” was conferred upon him by Satan and was the malicious messenger
of an enemy; but in the slow process of experience he came to see that
the painful “thorn” exercised a real ministry in his life, that through
his suffering and hardship he got a higher meaning of God’s grace; and he
discovered that divine power was thus made perfect through his weakness,
so that he learned to love the “enemy” that buffeted him.

The Psalmist who wrote our best loved psalm, the twenty-third, thought at
first that God was his Shepherd because he led him in green pastures and
beside still waters where there was no struggle and no enemy to fear. But
he learned at length that in the dark valleys of the shadow and on the
rough jagged hillsides God was no less a good Shepherd than on the level
plains and in the lush grass; and he found at last that even “in the
presence of enemies” he could be fed with good things and have his table
spread. The overflowing cup and the anointed head were not discovered
on the lower levels of ease and comfort; they came out of the harder
experiences when “enemies” of his peace were busy supplying obstacles
and perplexities for him to overcome.

It is no accident that the book of Revelation puts so much stress upon
“overcoming.” The world seemed to the prophet on the volcanic island
of Patmos essentially a place of strife and conflict—an Armageddon of
opposing forces. There are no beatitudes in this book promised to any
except “overcomers.”

    “Not to one church alone, but seven
    The voice prophetic spake from heaven;
    And unto each the promise came,
    Diversified, but still the same;
    For him that overcometh are
    The new name written on the stone,
    The raiment white, the crown, the throne,
    And I will give him the Morning Star!”

But the conflict that ends in such results can not be called misfortune,
any more than Hercules’ labors through which the legendary hero won his
immortality can be pronounced a misfortune for him. Once more, then, the
saint who has overcome discovers, at least in retrospect, that there is
good ground for loving his “enemies”!

The farmer, in his unceasing struggle with weeds, with parasites, with
pests visible and invisible, with blight and rot and uncongenial
weather, sometimes feels tempted to blaspheme against the hard conditions
under which he labors and to assume that an “enemy” has cursed the ground
which he tills and loaded the dice of nature against him. The best cure
for his “mood” is to visit the land of the bread-fruit tree, where nature
does everything and man does nothing but eat what is gratuitously given
him, and to see there the kind of men you get under those kindly skies.
The virile fiber of muscle, the strong manly frame, the keen active mind
that meets each new “pest” with a successful invention, the spirit of
conquest and courage that are revealed in the farmer at his best are no
accident. They are the by-product of his battle with conditions, which if
they seem to come from an “enemy,” must come from one that ought to be
loved for what he accomplishes.

These critics of ours who harshly review the books we write, the
addresses we give, the schemes of reform for which we work so
strenuously—do they do nothing for us? On the contrary, they force
us to go deeper, to write with more care, to reconsider our hasty
generalizations, to recast our pet schemes, to revise our crude
endeavors. They may speak as “enemies,” and they may show a stern and
hostile face; but we do well to love them, for they enable us to find
our better self and our deeper powers. The hand may be the horny hand of
Esau, but the voice is the kindly voice of Jacob.

All sorts of things “work” for us, then, as St. Paul declared. Not only
does love “work,” and faith and grace; but tribulation “works,” and
affliction, and the seemingly hostile forces which block and buffet and
hamper us. Everything that drives us deeper, that draws us closer to the
great resources of life, that puts vigor into our frame and character
into our souls, is in the last resort a blessing to us, even though it
seems on superficial examination to be the work of an “enemy,” and we
shall be wise if we learn to love the “enemies” that give us the chance
to overcome and to attain our true destiny. Perhaps the dualism of the
universe is not quite as sharp as the old Persians thought. Perhaps, too,
the love of God reaches further under than we sometimes suppose. Perhaps
in fact all things “work together for good,” and even the enemy forces
are helping to achieve the ultimate good that shall be revealed “when God
hath made the pile complete.”




