I

THE CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD

We have all been asking, “What is the matter with the Church? Why is it
so weak and ineffective? Why does it exercise such a feeble influence
in the world to-day? Why do men care so little for its message and its
mission?” There are no doubt many answers to these questions, but one
answer concerns us here. It is this: We who compose the Church do not
sufficiently realize that God is a living God and that the Church is
intended to be the living body through which he works in the world and
through which he reveals himself. We think of him as far away in space
and remote in time, a God who created once and who worked wonders in
ancient times long past, but we do not, as we should, vividly think of
him as a living reality, as near to us as the air is to the flying bird
or the water to the swimming fish. We suppose that the Church is made
up of just people, and is a human convenience for getting things done in
the world. We do not see as we should that it is meant to be both divine
and human and that it never is properly a Church unless God lives in it,
reveals himself by means of it and works his spiritual work in the world
through it.

This truth of the real Presence breaks through many of Christ’s great
sayings and was one of the most evident features of the experience of the
early Church. “Wherever in all the world two or three shall gather in my
name there am I in the midst of them.” “Lo, I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world.” “Wherever there is one alone,” according to
the newly found “saying” of Jesus, “I am with him. Raise the stone and
there thou shalt find me; cleave the wood and there am I.”

Not once alone was the early Church invaded by a life and power from
beyond itself as at Pentecost. The consciousness which characterized this
“upper room” experience was repeated in some degree wherever a Church
of the living God came into existence, as “a tiny island in a sea of
surrounding paganism.” To belong to the Church meant to St. Paul to be
“joined to the Lord in one spirit,” while the Church itself in his great
phrase is the body of Christ and each individual a member in particular
of that body.

What a difference it would make if we could rise to the height of St.
Paul’s expectation and be actually “builded together for an habitation
of God through the Spirit!” We try plenty of other expedients. We
popularize our message; we take up fads; we adjust as far as we can to
the tendencies of the time; but only one thing really works after all and
that is having the Church become the organ of the living God, and having
it “charged” with what Paul so often calls the power of God—“the power
that worketh in us.”

I saw a car wheel recently that had been running many miles with the
brake clamped tight against it. It was white hot and it glowed with
heat and light until it seemed almost transparent in its extraordinary
luminosity. Those Christians in the upper room at Pentecost were baptized
with fire so that the whole personality of each of them was glowing with
heat and light, for the fire had gone all through them. They suddenly
became conscious that their divine Leader who was no longer visible
with them had become an invisible presence and a living power working
through them. It is no wonder that all Jerusalem and its multitudinous
sojourners were at once awakened to the fact that something novel had
happened.

Our controversies which have divided us have been controversies about
things out at the periphery, not about realities at the heart and center.
We disagree about baptism, and we are at variance over problems of
organization, ministry, and ordination, but the thing that really matters
is the depth of conviction, consciousness of God, certainty of communion
and fellowship with the Spirit. These experiences unite and never divide.

There is after all, in spite of all our gaps and chasms, only one Church.
It is the Church of the living God. We are named with many names. We bear
the sign of a particular denomination, but if we belong truly to the
Church, then we belong to the great Church of the living God. It is built
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief cornerstone, in whom the building, fitly framed together,
grows into an holy temple in the Lord. This is “the blessed community,”
the living, expanding fellowship of vital faith, and it has the promise
of the future, whether conferences on “faith and order” succeed or not,
because it is the Church of the living God.


II

THE NURSERY OF SPIRITUAL LIFE

We are coming more and more to realize that religion attaches to the
simple, elemental aspects of our human life. We shall not look for it in
a few rare, exalted, and so-called “sacred” aspects of life, separated
off from the rest of life and raised to a place apart. Religion to be
real and vital must be rooted in life itself and it must express itself
through the whole life. It should begin, where all effective education
must begin, in the home, which should be the nursery of spiritual life.

The Christian home is the highest product of civilization; in fact there
is nothing that can be called civilization where the home is absent. The
savage is on his way out of savagery as soon as he can create a home and
make family life at all sacred. The real horror of the “slums” in our
great cities is that there are no homes there, but human beings crowded
indiscriminately into one room. It is the real trouble with the “poor
whites” whether in the South or in the North that they have failed to
preserve the home as a sacred center of life.

One of the first services of the foreign missionary is to help to
establish homes among the people whom he hopes to Christianize. In short,
the home is the true unit of society. It determines what the individual
shall be; it shapes the social life; it makes the Church possible; it is
the basis of the state and nation. A society of mere individual units is
inconceivable. Men and women, each for self, and with no holy center for
family life, could never compose either a Church or a State.

Christianity has created the home as we know it, and that is its highest
service to the world, for the kingdom of heaven would be realized if
the Christian home were universal. The mother’s knee is still the
holiest place in the world; and the home life determines more than all
influences combined what the destiny of the boy or girl shall be. The
formation of disposition and early habits of thought and manner as well
as the fundamental emotions and sentiments do more to shape and fix the
permanent character than do any other forces in the world.

We may well rejoice in the power of the Sunday school, the Christian
ministry, the secular school, the college, the university; but all
together they do not measure up to the power of the homes which are
silently, gradually determining the future lives of those who will
compose the Sunday school, the Church, the school, and the college.

The woman who is successful in making a true home, where peace and love
dwell, in which the children whom God gives her feel the sacredness and
holy meaning of life, where her husband renews his strength for the
struggles and activities of his life, and in which all unite to promote
the happiness and highest welfare of each other—that woman has won the
best crown there is in this life, and she has served the world in a
very high degree. The union of man and woman for the creation of a home
breathing an atmosphere of love is Christ’s best parable of the highest
possible spiritual union where the soul is the bride and he is the
Eternal Bridegroom, and they are one.

It seems strange that these vital matters are so little emphasized or
regarded. Few things in fact are more ominous than the signs of the
disintegration of the home as a nursery of spiritual life. We can,
perhaps, weather catastrophes which may break down many of our ancient
customs and even obliterate some of the institutions which now seem
essential to civilization; but the home is a fundamental necessity for
true spiritual nurture and culture, and if it does not perform its
function the world will drift on toward unspeakable moral disasters.


