CHAPTER III

THE POWER THAT WORKETH IN US


I

WHERE THE BEYOND BREAKS THROUGH

If we sprinkle iron filings over a sheet of paper and move a magnet
beneath the paper, the filings become active and combine and recombine
in a great variety of groupings and regroupings. A beholder who knows
nothing of the magnet underneath gazes upon the whole affair with a sense
of awe and mystery, though he feels all the time that there must be some
explanation of the action and that some hidden power behind is operating
as the cause of the groupings and regroupings of the iron particles.
Something certainly that we do not see is revealing its presence and its
power.

Our everyday experience is full of another series of activities even
more mysterious than these movements of the iron. Whenever we open our
eyes we see objects and colors confronting us and located in spaces far
and near. What brings the object to us? What operates to produce the
contact? How does the far-away thing hit our organ of vision? This was to
the ancient philosopher a most difficult problem, a real mystery. He made
many guesses at a solution, but no guess which he could make satisfied
his judgment. Our answer is that an invisible and intangible substance
which we call ether—luminiferous ether—fills all space, even the space
occupied by visible objects, and that this ether which is capable of
amazing vibrations, billions of them a second, is set vibrating at
different velocities by different objects. These vibrations bombard the
minute rods and cones of the retina at the back of the eye and, presto,
we see now one color and now another, now one object and now another.
This ether would forever have remained unknown to us had not this
marvelous structure of the retina given it a chance to break through and
reveal itself. In many other ways, too, this ether breaks through into
revelation. It is responsible apparently for all the immensely varied
phenomena of electricity, probably, too, of cohesion and gravitation.
Here, again, the revelations remained inadequate and without clear
interpretation until we succeeded in constructing proper instruments and
devices for it to break through into active operation. The dynamo and
the other electrical mechanisms which we have invented do not make or
create electricity. They merely let it come through, showing itself now
as light, now as heat, now again as motive power. But always it was there
before, unnoted, merely potential, and yet a vast surrounding ocean of
energy there behind, ready to break into active operation when the medium
was at hand for it.

Life is another one of those strange mysteries that cannot be explained
until we realize that something more than we see is breaking through
matter and revealing itself. The living thing is letting through some
greater power than itself, something beyond and behind, which is needed
to account for what we see moving and acting with invention and purpose.
Matter of itself is no explanation of life. The same elemental stuff is
very different until it becomes the instrument of something not itself
which organizes it, pushes it upward and onward, and reveals itself
through it. Something has at length come into view which is more than
force and mechanism. Here is intelligent purpose and forward-looking
activity and something capable of variation, novelty, and surprise.
And when living substance has reached a certain stage of organization,
something higher still begins to break through—consciousness appears,
and on its higher levels consciousness begins to reveal truth and moral
goodness. It is useless to try to explain consciousness—especially
truth-bearing consciousness—as a function of the brain, for it cannot be
done. That way of explanation no more explains mind than the Ptolemaic
theory explains the movements of the heavenly bodies. Once more,
something breaks through and reveals itself, as surely as light breaks
through a prism and reveals itself in the band of spectral colors. This
consciousness of ours, as I have said, is not merely awareness, not only
intelligent response; it lays hold of and apprehends, i.e., reveals,
truth and goodness. What I think, when I really think, is not just
my private “opinion,” or “guess,” or “seeming”; it turns out to have
something universal and absolute about it. My multiplication-table is
everybody’s multiplication-table. It is true for me and for beyond me.
And what is true of my mathematics is also true of other features of my
thinking. When I properly organize my experience through rightly formed
concepts, I express aspects that are real and true for everybody—I attain
to something which can be called truth. The same way in the field of
conduct: I can discover not only what is subjectively right, but I can
go farther and embody principles which are right not only for me but for
every good man. Something more than a petty, tiny, private consciousness
is expressing itself through my personality. I am the organ of something
more than myself.

Perhaps more wonderful still is the way in which beauty breaks through.
It breaks through not only at a few highly organized points, it breaks
through almost everywhere. Even the minutest things reveal it as well
as do the sublimest things, like the stars. Whatever one sees through
the microscope, a bit of mould for example, is charged with beauty.
Everything from a dewdrop to Mount Shasta is the bearer of beauty. And
yet beauty has no function, no utility. Its value is intrinsic, not
extrinsic. It is its own excuse for being. It greases no wheels, it bakes
no puddings. It is a gift of sheer grace, a gratuitous largess. It must
imply behind things a Spirit that enjoys beauty for its own sake and
that floods the world everywhere with it. Wherever it can break through
it does break through, and our joy in it shows that we are in some sense
kindred to the giver and revealer of it.

Something higher and greater still breaks through and reveals a
deeper Reality than any that we see and touch. Love comes through—not
everywhere like beauty, but only where rare organization has prepared an
organ for it. Some aspects of love appear very widely, are, at least,
as universal as truth and moral goodness. But love in its full glory,
love in its height of unselfishness and with its passion of self-giving
is a rare manifestation. One person—the Galilean—has been a perfect
revealing organ of it. In his life it broke through with the same perfect
naturalness as the beam of light breaks through the prism of waterdrops
and reveals the rainbow. Love that understands, sympathizes, endures,
inspires, recreates, and transforms, broke through and revealed itself so
impressively that those who see it and feel it are convinced that here at
last the real nature of God has come through to us and stands revealed.
And St. Paul, who was absolutely convinced of this, went still further.
He held, with a faith buttressed in experience, that this same Christ,
who had made this demonstration of love, became after his resurrection
an invisible presence, a life-giving Spirit who could work and act as a
resident power within receptive, responsive, human spirits, and could
transform them into a likeness to himself and continue his revelation
of love wherever he should find such organs of revelation. If that, or
something like it, is true it is a very great truth. It was this that
good old William Dell meant when he said: “The believer is the only book
in which God himself writes his New Testament.”


