III

THE GREATEST RIVALRIES OF LIFE

“After experience had taught me that all things which are encountered in
human life are vain and futile.... I at length determined to inquire if
there was anything which was a true good.” Those are the words of a great
philosopher who says that he found himself “led by the hand up to the
highest blessedness.”

Not everybody finds the choice of ends so easy as Spinoza did; not all of
us are carried along into sustained and unmistakable blessedness. Life
is full of rivalries which tend to divide our interest and to dissipate
our attention. We wake up, perhaps, with surprise to discover that we
are being carried, by the hand or by the hair, straight away from “the
highest blessedness.” Not seldom the sternest tragedies of human life are
occasioned by success. Failure overtaking one in his aim will often shake
him awake and make him see that he was pursuing an end in sharp rivalry
with his highest good. But success often dulls the vision for other
issues and gives one the specious confidence that he is on the right
track and “all’s well.”

Christ has a vivid parable which touches upon the rivalries of life. It
is the story of a great feast to which many guests are invited. When
the critical moment for the dinner comes the other rivalries begin to
operate. One man, attracted by his possessions, “begs off,” to use the
graphic phrase of the original. Another, occupied with the complex
interests of business and busy with the affairs of trade, prays to be
excused. A third is immersed in the joys and responsibilities of married
life and he abruptly dispatches his “regrets.” It was not that they were
unconcerned about the sumptuous feast, but that they were carried along
by rival interests.

The feast in this parable plainly stands for the “true good,” the
“highest blessedness” of life. It symbolizes the goal and crown of life,
the full realization of our best human possibilities, the attainment of
that for which we were made aspiring beings. The invitation is a mark
of amazing grace and the recipient of it has the clearest evidence that
the feast would satisfy him. But there are the other things with their
rival attractions! Possessions and business and domestic life pull us in
a contrary direction. We send our cards of regret and beg off from the
great feast.

The real mistake lies in treating these things as rivals. If we only
knew it, an affirmative response to the great invitation of life would
prepare us for all the other things and would heighten the value of all
we own, of all we do, and of all we love. Salvation is not some remote
and ghostly thing that has to do with another world. It is the infusion
of new life and power into all the concerns and affairs of this present
world where we are. It means, as Christ said, receiving “a hundredfold
now in this time, houses and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal
life.”

Nothing could be a more mistaken way than to regard human love as a
rival to the highest of all relations, the love of the soul for God.
One of the medieval saints said: “God brooks no rival”; but that phrase
shows that the saint was caught napping, and in any case did not quite
understand what love is. The way up to the highest love is not to be
found by turning away from those experiences which give us training
and preparation for the highest; but rather it is found in and through
the experience of loving some person who, however imperfectly, is a
revelation of the beauty and divineness of love. Not by some sheer leap
from the earth does the soul arrive at its height of blessedness, but by
steps and stages, by processes which bring illumination and richness of
life. The man who has married a wife will do well to say when he answers
the great invitation: “I have just married a wife and therefore I am
peculiarly glad to come to thy feast, since fellowship with thee will
make my love more real and true as that in turn will enable me to rise to
a more genuine appreciation of thy love.”

The same is true of houses and lands, of business and trade. There is no
necessary rivalry here. Religion does not rob us of earthly interests,
it does not strip us of the good things of this world. It only corrects
our perspective and enables us to see the true scale of values. The
trivial and fragmentary things of the world no longer absorb us. We
refuse now to allow them to own us and drive us, or drag us. We see
things steadily and we see them whole. We discover through our higher
contacts and inspirations how to flood light back upon our occupations
and upon the things we own, and how to make these subordinate things
minister to the higher functions and attitudes of life. We get not some
other world, but this world here and now transmuted and raised a little
nearer to the ideal and perfect world of our hopes and dreams. We get it
back item for item increased a hundredfold, raised to a higher spiritual
level. The wise owner of property and the intelligent man of affairs will
not beg off when the great invitation comes to him. He will say: “I have
just come into possession of a piece of land, I have bought five yoke
of oxen, and therefore I want to come to thy divine feast so that I may
learn how to turn all I possess into the channels of real service and to
make these things which thou hast given me help me find the way to the
highest joy and blessedness of life.”




CHAPTER VI

AGENCIES OF CONSTRUCTION


