III

A LONG DISTANCE CALL

Just when life seems peculiarly crowded with items of complexity and
importance, the telephone rings a determined, significant kind of ring.
This is evidently no ordinary passing-the-time-of-day affair. I interrupt
my weighty concerns and take up the receiver with expectation. I say
“Hello!” but there is no answer, no human recognition. The wire hums and
buzzes, instruments click far away, plugs are pulled out and pushed in.
Little tiny scraps of remote, inane, unintelligible conversation between
unknown mortals furnish the only evidence I get that there is any human
purpose going forward in this strange world inside the telephone system
where I can see nothing happening.

Suddenly a voice which is evidently hunting for me breaks in: “Is this
Mr. ——?” “Yes.” “Hold the wire, please.” I am led on with increasing
interest and confidence. Somebody somewhere miles away in this invisible
world of electrical connections is seeking for me. I forget the
multitudinous problems that were besieging me when the telephone first
rang, and I listen with suppressed breath and strained muscles. All I
get, however, is an immense confusion. There is no coherence or order to
anything that reaches me. Faint and far away in some still remoter center
than at first I hear clicks and buzzes, vague unmeaning noises, and the
dull thud of shifting plugs that connect the lines. Once more a kindly
voice breaks in on the confusion, a voice seeking after me from some
distant city: “Is this Mr. ——?” “Yes.” “Wait a minute.”

I do wait a minute as patiently as I can. I dimly feel that we are
plunging out into yet remoter space, and that I am being connected up
with the person who all the time has been seeking me. A low hum of
the far-away wire is all I get to repay me for the long wait. I grow
impatient. I shout “Hello!” “Is anybody there?” “Do you want me?” Not a
word comes back, only endless, empty murmurs of people who have found one
another and are talking so far off that the sense is lost in the mere
broth of sounds. This dull world inside the telephone seems to be a mad
world of noise and confusion but no substance, no real correspondence. I
am on the verge of giving the whole business up and of returning to my
interrupted tasks, which at least were rational.

Suddenly a voice breaks in, this time a voice I know and recognize. The
person who had been seeking me all the time, across these spaces and
over this network of interlaced wires, calls me by name, speaks words of
insight and intelligence, and gives me a message which moves me deeply
and raises the whole tone of my spirit. When finally I “hang up” and
return to the things in hand, I have renewed my strength and can work
with clearer head and faster pace. The pause has been like a pause in
a piece of music. It has been full of significance, and it has helped
toward a higher level.

Something like this telephone experience happens in another and very
different sphere—a sphere where there are no wires. In the hush and
silence, when the conditions are right for it, it often seems as
though some one were trying to communicate with us, seeking for actual
correspondence with us. We turn from the din and turmoil of busy efforts
and listen for the voice. We listen intently and we hear—our own heart
beating. We feel the strain of our muscles across the chest. We push back
a little deeper and try again. We feel the tension of the skin over the
forehead and we note that we are pulling the eyeballs up and inward for
more concentrated meditation. All the muscles of the scalp are drawn
and we notice them perhaps for the first time. Strange little bits of
thought flit across the threshold of the mind. We catch glimpses of dim
ideas knocking at the windows for admission to the inner domain where
we live. Then, all of a sudden, we succeed in pushing further back. We
forget our strained muscles and are unconscious of the corporeal bulk of
ourselves. We get in past the flitting thoughts and the procession of
ideas contending for entrance. The track seems open for the Someone who
is seeking us no less certainly than we are seeking him. If we do not
hear our name called, and do not hear distinctly a message in well-known
words, we do at least feel that we have found a real Presence and have
received fresh vital energy from the creative center of life itself, so
that we come back to action, after our pause, restored, refreshed, and
“charged” with new force to live by.

Some time ago a long distance call came to my telephone and I went
through all the stages of waiting and of confusion and finally heard the
clear voice calling me, but I could not get any answer back. I heard
perfectly across the five hundred intervening miles, but my correspondent
never got a single clear word from me. We found that something was wrong
with our transmitter. The connection was good, the line was pervious, the
seeking voice was at the other end, but I did not succeed in transmitting
what ought to have been said. Here is where most of us fail in this other
sphere—this inner wireless sphere—we are poor transmitters. We make the
connection, we receive the gift of grace, we are flooded with the incomes
of life and power and we freely take, but we do not give. We absorb and
accumulate what we can, but we transmit little of all that comes to us.
Our radius of out-giving influence is far too small. We need, on the one
hand, to listen deeper, to get further in beyond the tensions and the
noises, but on the other hand we need to be more radio-active, better
transmitters of the grace of God.




CHAPTER V

THE WAY OF PERSONALITY


I

ANOTHER KIND OF HERO

A generation ago almost everybody read, at least once, Carlyle’s great
book on heroes. He gave us the hero as prophet, as priest, as poet,
as king, and he made us realize that these heroes have been the real
makers of human society. I should like to add a chapter on another kind
of hero, who has, perhaps, not done much to build cities and states and
church systems, but who has, almost more than anybody else, shown us the
spiritual value of endurance—I mean the hero as invalid.

It is the hardest kind of heroism there is to achieve. Most of us know
some man—too often it is oneself—who is a very fair Christian when he is
in normal health and absorbed in interesting work, who carries a smooth
forehead and easily drops into a good-natured smile, but who becomes
“blue” and irritable and a storm center in the family weather as soon
as the bodily apparatus is thrown out of gear. Most of us have had a
taste of humiliation as we have witnessed our own defeat in the presence
of some thorn in the flesh, which stubbornly pricked us, even though we
prayed to have it removed and urged the doctor to hurry up and remove it.

What a hero, then, must he be, who, with a weak and broken body, a
prey to pain and doomed to die daily, learns how to live in calm faith
that God is good and makes his life a center of cheer and sunshine!
The heroism of the battlefield and the man-of-war looks cheap and thin
compared with this. We could all rally to meet some glorious moment
when a trusted leader shouted to us, “Your country expects you to do
your duty!” But to drag on through days and nights, through weeks and
months, through recurring birthdays, with vital energy low, with sluggish
appetite, with none of that ground-swell of superfluous vigor which makes
healthy life so good, and still to prove that life is good and to radiate
joy and triumph—that is the very flower and perfume of heroism. If we
are making up a bead-roll of heroes, let us put at the top the names of
those quiet friends of ours who have played the man or revealed the woman
through hard periods of invalidism and have exhibited to us the fine
glory of a courageous spirit.

One of the hardest and most difficult features to bear is the inability
to work at one’s former pace and with the old-time constructive power.
The prayer of the Psalmist that his work, the contribution of his life,
might be preserved is very touching: “Establish thou the work of our
hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.” What can be
more tragic than the cry of Othello: “My occupation is gone!” So long as
the hand keeps its cunning and the mind remains clear and creative, one
can stand physical handicap and pain, but when the working power of mind
or body is threatened, then the test of faith and heroism indeed arrives.

A man whose life meant much to me and whose intimacy was very precious
to me made me see many years ago how wonderfully this test could be
met. He was a great teacher, the head of a distinguished boys’ school.
He was experiencing the full measure of success, and his influence over
his boys was extraordinary. He realized, as his work went on, that his
hearing was becoming dull and was steadily failing. He went to New York
and consulted a famous specialist. After making a careful examination the
specialist said, with perfect frankness: “Your case is hopeless. Nothing
can be done to check the disaster. You are hard of hearing already, but
in a very short time you will have no hearing at all.” Without a quaver
the teacher said: “Don’t you think, doctor, that I shall hear Gabriel’s
trumpet when it blows!” He went back to his school, learned to read lips,
reorganized his life, accepted without a murmur his loss of a major
sense, and finished his splendid career of work in an undefeated spirit
and with a grace and joy which were envied by many persons in possession
of all their powers.

All my readers will think of some “star player” in this hard game of
patience and endurance, and will have watched with awe and reverence the
glorious fight of some of those unrecorded heroes who won but got no
valor medal. The only person who ranks higher in the scale of heroism
than the hero as invalid is possibly the person who patiently, lovingly
nurses and cares for some invalid through years of decline and suffering.
Generally, though not always, it is a woman. Not seldom she is called
upon to consecrate her life to the task, and often she gives what is much
more precious than life itself. We build no monuments to daughters who
unmurmuringly forego the joy of married life, who refuse the suit of
love in order to be free to ease the closing years of father or mother,
grown helpless; but where is there higher consecration or finer heroism?
Men sometimes complain that the days of chivalry and heroism are past. On
the contrary, they are more truly dawning. As Christianity ripens love
grows richer and deeper, and where love appears heroism is always close
at hand. Our best heroes are mothers and wives and daughters, fathers and
husbands and sons.


