II

HE CAME TO HIMSELF

Was there ever such a short-story character sketch as this one of the
prodigal son! No realism of details, no elaboration of his sins, and
yet the immortal picture is burned forever into our imagination. The
_débâcle_ of his life is as clear and vivid as words can portray the
ruin. Yet the phrase which arrests us most as we read the compact
narrative of his undoing is not the one which tells about “riotous
living,” or the reckless squandering of his patrimony, or his hunger for
swine husks, or his unshod feet and the loss of his tunic; it is rather
the one which says that when he was at the bottom of his fortune “he came
to himself.”

He had not been himself then, before. He was not finding himself in the
life of riotous indulgence. That did not turn out after all to be the
life for which he was meant. He missed himself more than he missed his
lost shoes and tunic. That raises a nice question which is worth an
answer: When is a person his real self? When can he properly say, “At
last I have found myself; I am what I want to be?” Robert Louis Stevenson
has given us in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde a fine parable of the actual
double self in us all, a higher and a lower self under our one hat. But
I ask, which is the real me? Is it Jekyll or is it Hyde? Is it the best
that we can be or is it this worse thing which we just now are?

Most answers to the question would be, I think, that the real self is
that ideal self of which in moments of rare visibility we sometimes
catch glimpses.

    “All I could never be,
    All, men ignored in me,
    This, I was worth to God, whose wheel the pitcher shaped.”

“Dig deep enough into any man,” St. Augustine said, “and you will find
something divine.” We supposed he believed in total depravity, and
he does in theory believe in it; but when it is a matter of actual
experience, he announces this deep fact which fits perfectly with his
other great utterance: “Thou, O God, hast made us for thyself, and we are
restless (dissatisfied) until we find ourselves in thee.”

Too long we have assumed that Adam, the failure, is the type of our
lives, that he is the normal man, that to err is human, and that one
touch, that is, blight, of nature makes all men kin. What Christ has
revealed to us is the fact that we always have higher and diviner
possibilities in us. He, the overcomer, and not Adam, is the true type,
the normal person, giving us at last the pattern of life which is life
indeed.

Which is the real self, then? Surely this higher possible self, this one
which we discover in our best moments. The Greeks always held that sin
was “missing the mark”—that is what the Greek word for sin means—failure
to arrive at, to reach, the real end toward which life aims. Sin is
defeat. It is loss of the trail. It is undoing. The sinner has not found
himself, he has not come to himself. He has missed the real me. He cannot
say, “I am.”

If that is a fact, and if the life of spiritual health and attainment is
the normal life, we surely ought to do more than is done to help young
people to realize it and to assist them to find themselves. We are much
more concerned to manufacture things than we are to make persons. We do
one very well and we do the other very badly. Kipling’s “The Ship that
Found Itself” is a fine account of the care bestowed upon every rivet and
screw, every valve and piston. He pictures the ship in the stress and
strain of a great storm and each part of the ship from keel to funnel
describes what it has to bear and to do in the emergency and how it has
been prepared in advance for just this crisis. Nansen was asked how he
felt when he found that the _Fram_ was caught in the awful jam of the
Arctic ice-floe. “I felt perfectly calm,” he said. “I knew she could
stand it. I had watched every stick of timber and every piece of steel
that went into her hull. The result was that I could go to sleep and
let the ice do its worst.” With even more care we build the airplane.
There must be no chance for capricious action. The propeller blades must
be made of perfect wood. There must be no defect in any piece of the
structure. The gasoline must be tested by all the methods of refinement.
The oil must be absolutely pure, free of every suspicion of grit.

But when we turn from ships and airplanes to the provisions for training
young persons we are in a different world. The element of chance now
bulks very large. We let the youth have pretty free opportunity to begin
his malformation before we begin seriously to construct him on right
lines. We fail to note what an enormous fact “disposition” is, and we
take little pains to form it early and to form it in the best way. We
are far too apt to assume that all the fundamentals come by the road
of heredity. We overwork this theory as much as earlier theologians
overworked their dogma of original sin from poor old Adam.

The fact is that temperament and disposition and the traits of character
which most definitely settle destiny are at least as much formed in those
early critical years of infancy as they are acquired by the strains of
heredity. Education, which is more essential to the greatness of any
country than even its manufactures, is one of the most neglected branches
of life. We take it as we find it—and lay its failures to Providence
as we do deaths from typhoid. It must not always be so. We must be as
greatly concerned to form virile character in our boys and girls and
to develop in them the capacity for moral and spiritual leadership in
this crisis as we are concerned over our coal supply or our industries.
There are ways of assisting the higher self to control and dominate the
life, ways by which the ideal person can become the real person. Why not
consider seriously how to do that?

He that overcomes, the prophet of Patmos says, receives a white stone
with a new name written on it, which no man knoweth save he that hath
it. It is a symbolism which may mean many things. It seems at least to
mean that he who subdues his lower self, holds out in the strain of life,
and lives by the highest that he knows, will as a consequence receive a
distinct individuality, a clearly defined self, instead of being blurred
in with the great level mass—a self with a name of its own. And that self
will not be the old familiar self that everybody knows by traits of past
achievement and by the old tendencies of habit. It will be the self
which only God and the person himself in his deepest and most intimate
moments knew was possible—and here at last it is found to be the real
self. The man can say, “I am.” He has come to himself.

We ask, at the end, whether it may not be that the world will soon come
to itself and discover the way back to some of its missed ideals. Here on
a large scale we have the story of a desperate hunger, squandered wealth,
lost shoes, lost tunics, and even more precious things gone—a world that
has missed its way and is floundering about without sufficient vision
or adequate leadership. If it could only come to itself, discover what
its true mission is and where its real sources of power and its line of
progress lie, it would still find that God and man together can rebuild
what man by his blunders has destroyed.


