II

THE BETTER POSSESSION

During one of the intense persecutions by which an early Roman emperor
harried the Christians of the first century, some unknown writer (Harnack
thinks It was a woman) wrote an extraordinary little book to hearten
those who were undergoing the trial of their faith. I mean, of course,
the Epistle to the Hebrews. It is marked by rare genius and by undoubted
inspiration. It is full of vital messages and it contains passages of
great power. Just before the most loved section of the little book—the
account of the faith-heroes—the author, in a passage open to a variety
of translations, refers to the fact that those to whom he is writing
have suffered, and have suffered joyfully, the spoiling of their
possessions, “knowing,” he says, “that you have your own selves for a
better possession”—you yourselves are a better possession than any of
those goods which you have lost for your faith.

I wonder if the readers fully realized the truth, or if we should to-day
realize it had we suffered a similar stripping. We are very slow to take
account of that type of stock. We are very keen about our own assets,
but we often fail to prize this supreme ownership, the possession of
ourselves. There is a story, both sad and amusing, of an insane man who
was seen wildly rushing about the house, from room to room, looking in
cupboards and clothes-presses, crawling under beds, obviously searching
for something. When questioned as to what he was so frantically looking
for, he replied, “I am trying to find my self!” It is not as mad as it
seems. I am not sure but that we who are not trying to find ourselves are
after all more crazy still.

Old Burton, who wrote _The Anatomy of Melancholy_, well said:

    “Men look to their tools; a painter will wash his pencils; a
    smith will look to his hammer, anvil, and forge; a husbandman
    will mend his plow-irons and grind his hatchet, if it be dull;
    a musician will string and unstring his lute; only scholars
    neglect that instrument, their brains and spirits I mean, which
    they daily use.”

Not scholars only, but all classes and conditions of men are guilty
of this strange insanity. If the Duke of Westminster should offer to
transfer to us his estates, we would rush with all conceivable speed to
acquire our new potential possessions. We would go as with wings of an
aeroplane to get the transaction accomplished before anything could occur
to keep us from entering into our fortune. But here we are already within
reach of a vastly better possession, of which we are strangely negligent.
If it came to a choice between himself and his outward possessions, this
duke who owns so much would not hesitate a minute which to prefer. If in
a crisis of illness he could save himself by surrender of his goods, they
would instantly go. “Give me health and a day,” Emerson said, “and I will
make the pomp of emperors ridiculous.”

What we would do in a crisis we often fail to do when no crisis confronts
us, and it is a fact that too often we miss and even squander that
better possession, ourselves. The best way to win it and enjoy it is
to cultivate those inner experiences and endowments which make us
independent of external fortune. All Christ’s beatitudes attach to some
inherent quality of life itself. The meek, the merciful, the pure, are
“happy,” not because the external world conforms to their wishes, but
because they have resources of life within themselves and have entered
upon a way of life which continually opens out into more life and richer
life. They have found a kind of Canaan that “comes” in continuous
instalments.

One of the simplest ways to heighten the total value of life is to form
a habit of appreciating the world we have here and now. It presents
occasional inconveniences, no doubt, but think of the amazing donations
which come to us: the tilting of the earth’s axis twenty-three and a
half degrees to the ecliptic by which contrivance we have our seasons;
the fact that the proportion of earth and water is just right to give
us a fine balance of rain and sunshine; the extraordinary way in which
the entire universe submits to our mathematics so that every movement of
matter and every vibration of ether conforms to laws which we formulate;
the accumulation and storage of fuel and motor power, with the prospect
of even greater resources of energy to be had from the unoccupied space
surrounding the earth. Then, again, it cannot be a matter of unconcern
that there is such a wealth of beauty lavished upon us everywhere,
waiting for us to enjoy it. There is here a strange fit between the outer
and the inner. The more one draws upon the beauty of the world and enjoys
it, so much the more does he increase his capacity to discover and enjoy
beauty. Coal and oil may become exhausted, but beauty is inexhaustible.
The only trouble is that we are so limited in our range of appreciation
of it. We turn to cheaper values and miss so much of this free gift of
loveliness.

Greater still should be our resources of love and friendship. Nothing
could be stranger or more wonderful than that in a world where struggle
for existence is the law this other trait should have emerged. It is
easy to explain selfishness; love is the mystery. Love forgets itself;
it scorns double-entry bookkeeping; it gives, it bestows, it shares, it
sacrifices without asking whether anything is coming back. And it turns
out to be a fact that nothing else so enhances and increases the value of
this “better possession which is ourselves.”

Even more wonderful, if that is possible, is the way we are formed
and contrived to have intercourse with the Eternal. With all our
material furnishings we strangely open out into the infinite and
partake of a spiritual nature. God has set eternity in our hearts. We
cannot win this better possession nor hold it permanently unless we
exercise these spiritual capacities, which expand our being and add the
richest qualities of life. “Thou hast made us for thyself,” Augustine
acknowledged in his great prayer at the opening of the _Confessions_ and
“we are restless until we find thee as our true rest.” It is as true now
as in the fourth century. Barns and houses, lands and stocks, mortgages
and bonds, do not constitute life unless one learns how to win and
possess his soul and to keep that best of all possessions—himself.


