II

THE SEARCH FOR A REFUGE

Few things are more impressive than the persistent search which men have
made in all ages for a refuge against the dangers and the ills that
beset life. The cave-men, the cliff-dwellers, the primitive builders of
shelters in inaccessible tree tops, are early examples of the search for
human defenses against fear. Civilization slowly perfected methods of
refuge and defense of elaborate types, which, in turn, had to compete
with ever-increasing ingenuity of attack and assault. But I am not
concerned here with these material strongholds of refuge and defense. I
am thinking rather of the human search for shelter against other weapons
than those which kill the body. We are all trying, in one way or another,
to discover how to escape from “the heavy and weary weight of all this
unintelligible world,” how to bear the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune. We are sensitively constructed, with nerves exposed to easy
attack. We are all shelterless at some point to the storms of the world.
Even the most perfectly equipped and impervious heroes prove to be
vulnerable at some one uncovered spot. Sooner or later our protections
fail, and the pitiless enemies of our happiness get through the defenses
and reach the quick and sensitive soul within us. How to rebuild our
refuge, how to find real shelter, is our problem. What fortress is there
in which the soul is safe from fear and trouble?

The most common expedient is one which will drug the sensitive nerves
and produce an easy relief from strain and worry. There is a magic in
alcohol and kindred distillations, which, like Aladdin’s genie, builds a
palace of joy and, for the moment, banishes the enemy of all peace. The
refuge seems complete. All fear is gone, worry is a thing of the past.
The jargon of life is over, the pitiless problem of good and evil drops
out of consciousness. The shelterless soul seems covered and housed.
Intoxication is only one of the many quick expedients. It is always
possible to retreat from the edge of strenuous battle into some one of
the many natural instincts as a way of refuge. The great instinctive
emotions are absorbing, and tend to obliterate everything else. They
occupy the entire stage of the inner drama, and push all other actors
away from the footlights of consciousness, so that here, too, the enemies
of peace and joy seem vanquished, and the refuge appears to be found.

That multitudes accept these easy ways of defense against the ills of
life is only too obvious. The medieval barons who could build themselves
castles of safety were few in number. Visible refuges in any case are
rare and scarce, but the escape from the burdens and defeats of the
world in drink and drug and thrilling instinctive emotion is, without
much difficulty, open to every man and within easy reach for rich and
poor alike, and many there be that seize upon this method. The trouble
with it is that it is a very temporary refuge. It works, if at all, only
for a brief span. It plays havoc in the future with those who resort
to it. It rolls up new liabilities to the ills one would escape. It
involves far too great a price for the tiny respite gained. And, most
of all, it discounts or fails to reckon with the inherent greatness of
the human soul. We are fashioned for stupendous issues. Our very sense
of failure and defeat comes from a touch of the infinite in our being.
We look before and after, and sigh for that which is not, just because
we can not be contented with finite fragments of time and space. We are
meant for greater things than these trivial ones which so often get our
attention and absorb us; but the moment the soul comes to itself, its
reach goes beyond the grasp, and it feels an indescribable discontent
and longing for that for which it was made. To seek refuge, therefore,
in some narcotic joy, to still the onward yearning of the soul by
drowning consciousness, to banish the pain of pursuit by a barbaric surge
of emotions, is to strike against the noblest trait of our spiritual
structure; it means committing suicide of the soul. It cannot be a real
man’s way of relief.

In fact, nothing short of finding the goal and object for which the soul,
the spiritual nature in us, is fitted will ever do for beings like us.
St. Augustine, in words of immortal beauty, has said that God has made
us for himself, and our hearts are restless until we rest in him. It
is not a theory of poet or theologian. It is a simple fact of life, as
veritable as the human necessity for food. There is no other shelter for
the soul, no other refuge or fortress will ever do for us but God. “We
tremble and we burn. We tremble, knowing that we are unlike him. We burn,
feeling that we are like him.”

In hours of loss and sorrow, when the spurious props fail us, we are
more apt to find our way back to the real refuge. We are suddenly made
aware of our shelterless condition, alone, and in our own strength. Our
stoic armor and our brave defenses of pride become utterly inadequate.
We are thrown back on reality. We have then our moments of sincerity and
insight. We feel that we cannot live without resources from beyond our
own domain. We must have God. It is then, when one knows that nothing
else whatever will do, that the great discovery is made. Again and again
the psalms announce this. When the world has caved in; when the last
extremity has been reached; when the billows and water-spouts of fortune
have done their worst, you hear the calm, heroic voice of the lonely man
saying: “God is our refuge and fortress, therefore will not we fear
though the earth be removed, though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea.” That is great experience, but it is not reserved for
psalmists and rare patriarchs like Job. It is a privilege for common
mortals like us who struggle and agonize and feel the thorn in the flesh,
and the bitter tragedy of life unhealed. Whether we make the discovery
or not, God is there with us in the furnace. Only it makes all the
difference if we do find him as the one high tower where refuge is not
for the passing moment only, but is an eternal attainment.


III

WHAT WE WANT MOST

There are many things which we want—things for which we struggle hard and
toil painfully. Like the little child with his printed list for Santa
Claus, we have our list, longer or shorter, of precious things which
we hope to see brought within our reach before we are gathered to our
fathers. The difference is that the child is satisfied if he gets one
thing which is on his list. We want everything on ours. The world is
full of hurry and rush, push and scramble, each man bent on winning some
one of his many goals. But, in spite of this excessive effort to secure
the tangible goods of the earth, it is nevertheless true that deep down
in the heart most men want the peace of God. If you have an opportunity
to work your way into that secret place where a man really lives, you
will find that he knows perfectly well that he is missing something.
This feeling of unrest and disquiet gets smothered for long periods in
the mass of other aims, and some men hardly know that they have such a
thing as an immortal soul hidden away within. But, even so, it will not
remain quiet. It cries out like the lost child who misses his home. When
the hard games of life prove losing ones, when the stupidity of striving
so fiercely for such bubbles comes over him, when a hand from the dark
catches away the best earthly comfort he had, when the genuine realities
of life assert themselves over sense, he wakes up to find himself hungry
and thirsty for something which no one of his earthly pursuits has
supplied or can supply. He wants God. He wants peace. He wants to feel
his life founded on an absolute reality. He wants to have the same sort
of peace and quiet steal over him which used to come when as a child he
ran to his mother and had all the ills of life banished from thought in
the warm love of her embrace.

But it is not only the driving, pushing man, ambitious for wealth and
position, who misses the best thing there is to get—the peace of God.
Many persons who are directly seeking it miss it. Here is a man who hopes
to find it by solving all his difficult intellectual problems. When
he can answer the hard questions which life puts to him, and read the
riddles which the ages have left unread, he thinks his soul will feel the
peace of God. Not so, because each problem opens into a dozen more. It is
a noble undertaking to help read the riddles of the universe, but let no
one expect to enter into the peace of God by such a path. Here is another
person who devotes herself to nothing but to seeking the peace of God.
Will she not find it? Not that way. It is not found when it is sought for
its own sake. He or she who is living to get the joy of divine peace,
who would “have no joy but calm,” will probably never have the peace
which passeth understanding. Like all the great blessings, it comes as a
by-product when one is seeking something else. Christ’s peace came to him
not because he sought it, but because he accepted the divine will which
led to Gethsemane and Calvary. Paul’s peace did not flow over him while
he was in Arabia seeking it, but while he was in Nero’s prison, whither
the path of his labors for helping men had led him. He who forgets
himself in loving devotion, he who turns aside from his self-seeking aims
to carry joy into any life, he who sets about doing any task for the love
of God, has found the only possible road to the permanent peace of God.

There are no doubt a great many persons working for the good of others
and for the betterment of the world who yet do not succeed in securing
the peace of God. They are in a frequent state of nerves; they are busy
here and there, rushing about perplexed and weary, fussy and irritable.
With all their efforts to promote good causes, they do not quite attain
the poise and calm of interior peace. They are like the tumultuous
surface of the ocean with its combers and its spray, and they seldom know
the deep quiet like that of the underlying, submerged waters far below
the surface. The trouble with them is that they are carrying themselves
all the time. They do not forget themselves in their aims of service.
They are like the ill person who is so eager to get well that he keeps
watching his tongue, feeling his pulse, and getting his weight. Peace
does not come to one who is watching continually for the results of his
work, or who is wondering what people are saying about it, or who is
envious and jealous of other persons working in the same field, or who is
touchy about “honor” or recognition. Those are just the attitudes which
frustrate peace and make it stay away from one’s inner self.

There is a higher level of work and service and ministry, which, thank
God, men like us can reach. It is attained when one swings out into a
way of life which is motived and controlled by genuine sincere love
and devotion, when consecration obliterates self-seeking, when in some
measure, like Christ, the worker can say without reservations, “Not my
will but thine be done.”




