letter is yours, or it is not. If it be, we can converse securely upon
the subject at once. If it be not, of course I have no more to say.’

‘Stay, stay,’ said Trott, ‘it _is_ mine; I _did_ write it. What could I
do, sir? I had no friend here.’

‘To be sure, to be sure,’ said the mayor, encouragingly, ‘you could not
have managed it better. Well, sir; it will be necessary for you to
leave here to-night in a post-chaise and four. And the harder the boys
drive, the better. You are not safe from pursuit.’

‘Bless me!’ exclaimed Trott, in an agony of apprehension, ‘can such
things happen in a country like this? Such unrelenting and cold-blooded
hostility!’ He wiped off the concentrated essence of cowardice that was
oozing fast down his forehead, and looked aghast at Joseph Overton.

‘It certainly is a very hard case,’ replied the mayor with a smile,
‘that, in a free country, people can’t marry whom they like, without
being hunted down as if they were criminals. However, in the present
instance the lady is willing, you know, and that’s the main point,
after all.’

‘Lady willing,’ repeated Trott, mechanically. ‘How do you know the
lady’s willing?’

‘Come, that’s a good one,’ said the mayor, benevolently tapping Mr.
Trott on the arm with his broad-brimmed hat; ‘I have known her, well,
for a long time; and if anybody could entertain the remotest doubt on
the subject, I assure you I have none, nor need you have.’

‘Dear me!’ said Mr. Trott, ruminating. ‘This is _very_ extraordinary!’

‘Well, Lord Peter,’ said the mayor, rising.

‘Lord Peter?’ repeated Mr. Trott.

‘Oh—ah, I forgot. Mr. Trott, then—Trott—very good, ha! ha!—Well, sir,
the chaise shall be ready at half-past twelve.’

‘And what is to become of me until then?’ inquired Mr. Trott,
anxiously. ‘Wouldn’t it save appearances, if I were placed under some
restraint?’

‘Ah!’ replied Overton, ‘very good thought—capital idea indeed. I’ll
send somebody up directly. And if you make a little resistance when we
put you in the chaise it wouldn’t be amiss—look as if you didn’t want
to be taken away, you know.’

‘To be sure,’ said Trott—‘to be sure.’

‘Well, my lord,’ said Overton, in a low tone, ‘until then, I wish your
lordship a good evening.’

‘Lord—lordship?’ ejaculated Trott again, falling back a step or two,
and gazing, in unutterable wonder, on the countenance of the mayor.

‘Ha-ha! I see, my lord—practising the madman?—very good indeed—very
vacant look—capital, my lord, capital—good evening, Mr.—Trott—ha! ha!
ha!’

‘That mayor’s decidedly drunk,’ soliloquised Mr. Trott, throwing
himself back in his chair, in an attitude of reflection.

‘He is a much cleverer fellow than I thought him, that young
nobleman—he carries it off uncommonly well,’ thought Overton, as he
went his way to the bar, there to complete his arrangements. This was
soon done. Every word of the story was implicitly believed, and the
one-eyed boots was immediately instructed to repair to number nineteen,
to act as custodian of the person of the supposed lunatic until
half-past twelve o’clock. In pursuance of this direction, that somewhat
eccentric gentleman armed himself with a walking-stick of gigantic
dimensions, and repaired, with his usual equanimity of manner, to Mr.
Trott’s apartment, which he entered without any ceremony, and mounted
guard in, by quietly depositing himself on a chair near the door, where
he proceeded to beguile the time by whistling a popular air with great
apparent satisfaction.

‘What do you want here, you scoundrel?’ exclaimed Mr. Alexander Trott,
with a proper appearance of indignation at his detention.

The boots beat time with his head, as he looked gently round at Mr.
Trott with a smile of pity, and whistled an _adagio_ movement.

‘Do you attend in this room by Mr. Overton’s desire?’ inquired Trott,
rather astonished at the man’s demeanour.

‘Keep yourself to yourself, young feller,’ calmly responded the boots,
‘and don’t say nothing to nobody.’ And he whistled again.

‘Now mind!’ ejaculated Mr. Trott, anxious to keep up the farce of
wishing with great earnestness to fight a duel if they’d let him. ‘I
protest against being kept here. I deny that I have any intention of
fighting with anybody. But as it’s useless contending with superior
numbers, I shall sit quietly down.’

‘You’d better,’ observed the placid boots, shaking the large stick
expressively.

‘Under protest, however,’ added Alexander Trott, seating himself with
indignation in his face, but great content in his heart. ‘Under
protest.’

‘Oh, certainly!’ responded the boots; ‘anything you please. If you’re
happy, I’m transported; only don’t talk too much—it’ll make you worse.’

‘Make me worse?’ exclaimed Trott, in unfeigned astonishment: ‘the man’s
drunk!’

‘You’d better be quiet, young feller,’ remarked the boots, going
through a threatening piece of pantomime with the stick.

‘Or mad!’ said Mr. Trott, rather alarmed. ‘Leave the room, sir, and
tell them to send somebody else.’

‘Won’t do!’ replied the boots.

‘Leave the room!’ shouted Trott, ringing the bell violently: for he
began to be alarmed on a new score.

‘Leave that ’ere bell alone, you wretched loo-nattic!’ said the boots,
suddenly forcing the unfortunate Trott back into his chair, and
brandishing the stick aloft. ‘Be quiet, you miserable object, and don’t
let everybody know there’s a madman in the house.’

‘He _is_ a madman! He _is_ a madman!’ exclaimed the terrified Mr.
Trott, gazing on the one eye of the red-headed boots with a look of
abject horror.

‘Madman!’ replied the boots, ‘dam’me, I think he _is_ a madman with a
vengeance! Listen to me, you unfortunate. Ah! would you?’ [a slight tap
on the head with the large stick, as Mr. Trott made another move
towards the bell-handle] ‘I caught you there! did I?’

‘Spare my life!’ exclaimed Trott, raising his hands imploringly.

‘I don’t want your life,’ replied the boots, disdainfully, ‘though I
think it ’ud be a charity if somebody took it.’

‘No, no, it wouldn’t,’ interrupted poor Mr. Trott, hurriedly, ‘no, no,
it wouldn’t! I—I-’d rather keep it!’

‘O werry well,’ said the boots: ‘that’s a mere matter of taste—ev’ry
one to his liking. Hows’ever, all I’ve got to say is this here: You sit
quietly down in that chair, and I’ll sit hoppersite you here, and if
you keep quiet and don’t stir, I won’t damage you; but, if you move
hand or foot till half-past twelve o’clock, I shall alter the
expression of your countenance so completely, that the next time you
look in the glass you’ll ask vether you’re gone out of town, and ven
you’re likely to come back again. So sit down.’

‘I will—I will,’ responded the victim of mistakes; and down sat Mr.
Trott and down sat the boots too, exactly opposite him, with the stick
ready for immediate action in case of emergency.

Long and dreary were the hours that followed. The bell of Great
Winglebury church had just struck ten, and two hours and a half would
probably elapse before succour arrived.

For half an hour, the noise occasioned by shutting up the shops in the
street beneath, betokened something like life in the town, and rendered
Mr. Trott’s situation a little less insupportable; but, when even these
ceased, and nothing was heard beyond the occasional rattling of a
post-chaise as it drove up the yard to change horses, and then drove
away again, or the clattering of horses’ hoofs in the stables behind,
it became almost unbearable. The boots occasionally moved an inch or
two, to knock superfluous bits of wax off the candles, which were
burning low, but instantaneously resumed his former position; and as he
remembered to have heard, somewhere or other, that the human eye had an
unfailing effect in controlling mad people, he kept his solitary organ
of vision constantly fixed on Mr. Alexander Trott. That unfortunate
individual stared at his companion in his turn, until his features grew
more and more indistinct—his hair gradually less red—and the room more
misty and obscure. Mr. Alexander Trott fell into a sound sleep, from
which he was awakened by a rumbling in the street, and a cry of
‘Chaise-and-four for number twenty-five!’ A bustle on the stairs
succeeded; the room door was hastily thrown open; and Mr. Joseph
Overton entered, followed by four stout waiters, and Mrs. Williamson,
the stout landlady of the Winglebury Arms.

‘Mr. Overton!’ exclaimed Mr. Alexander Trott, jumping up in a frenzy.
‘Look at this man, sir; consider the situation in which I have been
placed for three hours past—the person you sent to guard me, sir, was a
madman—a madman—a raging, ravaging, furious madman.’

‘Bravo!’ whispered Mr. Overton.

‘Poor dear!’ said the compassionate Mrs. Williamson, ‘mad people always
thinks other people’s mad.’

‘Poor dear!’ ejaculated Mr. Alexander Trott. ‘What the devil do you
mean by poor dear! Are you the landlady of this house?’

‘Yes, yes,’ replied the stout old lady, ‘don’t exert yourself, there’s
a dear! Consider your health, now; do.’

‘Exert myself!’ shouted Mr. Alexander Trott; ‘it’s a mercy, ma’am, that
I have any breath to exert myself with! I might have been assassinated
three hours ago by that one-eyed monster with the oakum head. How dare
you have a madman, ma’am—how dare you have a madman, to assault and
terrify the visitors to your house?’

‘I’ll never have another,’ said Mrs. Williamson, casting a look of
reproach at the mayor.

‘Capital, capital,’ whispered Overton again, as he enveloped Mr.
Alexander Trott in a thick travelling-cloak.

‘Capital, sir!’ exclaimed Trott, aloud; ‘it’s horrible. The very
recollection makes me shudder. I’d rather fight four duels in three
hours, if I survived the first three, than I’d sit for that time face
to face with a madman.’

‘Keep it up, my lord, as you go down-stairs,’ whispered Overton, ‘your
bill is paid, and your portmanteau in the chaise.’ And then he added
aloud, ‘Now, waiters, the gentleman’s ready.’

At this signal, the waiters crowded round Mr. Alexander Trott. One took
one arm; another, the other; a third, walked before with a candle; the
fourth, behind with another candle; the boots and Mrs. Williamson
brought up the rear; and down-stairs they went: Mr. Alexander Trott
expressing alternately at the very top of his voice either his feigned
reluctance to go, or his unfeigned indignation at being shut up with a
madman.

Mr. Overton was waiting at the chaise-door, the boys were ready
mounted, and a few ostlers and stable nondescripts were standing round
to witness the departure of ‘the mad gentleman.’ Mr. Alexander Trott’s
foot was on the step, when he observed (which the dim light had
prevented his doing before) a figure seated in the chaise, closely
muffled up in a cloak like his own.

‘Who’s that?’ he inquired of Overton, in a whisper.

‘Hush, hush,’ replied the mayor: ‘the other party of course.’

‘The other party!’ exclaimed Trott, with an effort to retreat.

‘Yes, yes; you’ll soon find that out, before you go far, I should
think—but make a noise, you’ll excite suspicion if you whisper to me so
much.’

‘I won’t go in this chaise!’ shouted Mr. Alexander Trott, all his
original fears recurring with tenfold violence. ‘I shall be
assassinated—I shall be—’

‘Bravo, bravo,’ whispered Overton. ‘I’ll push you in.’

‘But I won’t go,’ exclaimed Mr. Trott. ‘Help here, help! They’re
carrying me away against my will. This is a plot to murder me.’

‘Poor dear!’ said Mrs. Williamson again.

‘Now, boys, put ’em along,’ cried the mayor, pushing Trott in and
slamming the door. ‘Off with you, as quick as you can, and stop for
nothing till you come to the next stage—all right!’

‘Horses are paid, Tom,’ screamed Mrs. Williamson; and away went the
chaise, at the rate of fourteen miles an hour, with Mr. Alexander Trott
and Miss Julia Manners carefully shut up in the inside.

Mr. Alexander Trott remained coiled up in one corner of the chaise, and
his mysterious companion in the other, for the first two or three
miles; Mr. Trott edging more and more into his corner, as he felt his
companion gradually edging more and more from hers; and vainly
endeavouring in the darkness to catch a glimpse of the furious face of
the supposed Horace Hunter.

‘We may speak now,’ said his fellow-traveller, at length; ‘the
post-boys can neither see nor hear us.’

‘That’s not Hunter’s voice!’—thought Alexander, astonished.

‘Dear Lord Peter!’ said Miss Julia, most winningly: putting her arm on
Mr. Trott’s shoulder. ‘Dear Lord Peter. Not a word?’

‘Why, it’s a woman!’ exclaimed Mr. Trott, in a low tone of excessive
wonder.

‘Ah! Whose voice is that?’ said Julia; ‘’tis not Lord Peter’s.’

‘No,—it’s mine,’ replied Mr. Trott.

‘Yours!’ ejaculated Miss Julia Manners; ‘a strange man! Gracious
heaven! How came you here!’

‘Whoever you are, you might have known that I came against my will,
ma’am,’ replied Alexander, ‘for I made noise enough when I got in.’

‘Do you come from Lord Peter?’ inquired Miss Manners.

‘Confound Lord Peter,’ replied Trott pettishly. ‘I don’t know any Lord
Peter. I never heard of him before to-night, when I’ve been Lord
Peter’d by one and Lord Peter’d by another, till I verily believe I’m
mad, or dreaming—’

‘Whither are we going?’ inquired the lady tragically.

‘How should _I_ know, ma’am?’ replied Trott with singular coolness; for
the events of the evening had completely hardened him.

‘Stop stop!’ cried the lady, letting down the front glasses of the
chaise.

‘Stay, my dear ma’am!’ said Mr. Trott, pulling the glasses up again
with one hand, and gently squeezing Miss Julia’s waist with the other.
‘There is some mistake here; give me till the end of this stage to
explain my share of it. We must go so far; you cannot be set down here
alone, at this hour of the night.’

The lady consented; the mistake was mutually explained. Mr. Trott was a
young man, had highly promising whiskers, an undeniable tailor, and an
insinuating address—he wanted nothing but valour, and who wants that
with three thousand a-year? The lady had this, and more; she wanted a
young husband, and the only course open to Mr. Trott to retrieve his
disgrace was a rich wife. So, they came to the conclusion that it would
be a pity to have all this trouble and expense for nothing; and that as
they were so far on the road already, they had better go to Gretna
Green, and marry each other; and they did so. And the very next
preceding entry in the Blacksmith’s book, was an entry of the marriage
of Emily Brown with Horace Hunter. Mr. Hunter took his wife home, and
begged pardon, and _was_ pardoned; and Mr. Trott took _his_ wife home,
begged pardon too, and was pardoned also. And Lord Peter, who had been
detained beyond his time by drinking champagne and riding a
steeple-chase, went back to the Honourable Augustus Flair’s, and drank
more champagne, and rode another steeple-chase, and was thrown and
killed. And Horace Hunter took great credit to himself for practising
on the cowardice of Alexander Trott; and all these circumstances were
discovered in time, and carefully noted down; and if you ever stop a
week at the Winglebury Arms, they will give you just this account of
The Great Winglebury Duel.




