CHAPTER XII—THE DRUNKARD’S DEATH


We will be bold to say, that there is scarcely a man in the constant
habit of walking, day after day, through any of the crowded
thoroughfares of London, who cannot recollect among the people whom he
‘knows by sight,’ to use a familiar phrase, some being of abject and
wretched appearance whom he remembers to have seen in a very different
condition, whom he has observed sinking lower and lower, by almost
imperceptible degrees, and the shabbiness and utter destitution of
whose appearance, at last, strike forcibly and painfully upon him, as
he passes by. Is there any man who has mixed much with society, or
whose avocations have caused him to mingle, at one time or other, with
a great number of people, who cannot call to mind the time when some
shabby, miserable wretch, in rags and filth, who shuffles past him now
in all the squalor of disease and poverty, with a respectable
tradesman, or clerk, or a man following some thriving pursuit, with
good prospects, and decent means?—or cannot any of our readers call to
mind from among the list of their _quondam_ acquaintance, some fallen
and degraded man, who lingers about the pavement in hungry misery—from
whom every one turns coldly away, and who preserves himself from sheer
starvation, nobody knows how? Alas! such cases are of too frequent
occurrence to be rare items in any man’s experience; and but too often
arise from one cause—drunkenness—that fierce rage for the slow, sure
poison, that oversteps every other consideration; that casts aside
wife, children, friends, happiness, and station; and hurries its
victims madly on to degradation and death.

Some of these men have been impelled, by misfortune and misery, to the
vice that has degraded them. The ruin of worldly expectations, the
death of those they loved, the sorrow that slowly consumes, but will
not break the heart, has driven them wild; and they present the hideous
spectacle of madmen, slowly dying by their own hands. But by far the
greater part have wilfully, and with open eyes, plunged into the gulf
from which the man who once enters it never rises more, but into which
he sinks deeper and deeper down, until recovery is hopeless.

Such a man as this once stood by the bedside of his dying wife, while
his children knelt around, and mingled loud bursts of grief with their
innocent prayers. The room was scantily and meanly furnished; and it
needed but a glance at the pale form from which the light of life was
fast passing away, to know that grief, and want, and anxious care, had
been busy at the heart for many a weary year. An elderly woman, with
her face bathed in tears, was supporting the head of the dying
woman—her daughter—on her arm. But it was not towards her that the was
face turned; it was not her hand that the cold and trembling fingers
clasped; they pressed the husband’s arm; the eyes so soon to be closed
in death rested on his face, and the man shook beneath their gaze. His
dress was slovenly and disordered, his face inflamed, his eyes
bloodshot and heavy. He had been summoned from some wild debauch to the
bed of sorrow and death.

A shaded lamp by the bed-side cast a dim light on the figures around,
and left the remainder of the room in thick, deep shadow. The silence
of night prevailed without the house, and the stillness of death was in
the chamber. A watch hung over the mantel-shelf; its low ticking was
the only sound that broke the profound quiet, but it was a solemn one,
for well they knew, who heard it, that before it had recorded the
passing of another hour, it would beat the knell of a departed spirit.

It is a dreadful thing to wait and watch for the approach of death; to
know that hope is gone, and recovery impossible; and to sit and count
the dreary hours through long, long nights—such nights as only watchers
by the bed of sickness know. It chills the blood to hear the dearest
secrets of the heart—the pent-up, hidden secrets of many years—poured
forth by the unconscious, helpless being before you; and to think how
little the reserve and cunning of a whole life will avail, when fever
and delirium tear off the mask at last. Strange tales have been told in
the wanderings of dying men; tales so full of guilt and crime, that
those who stood by the sick person’s couch have fled in horror and
affright, lest they should be scared to madness by what they heard and
saw; and many a wretch has died alone, raving of deeds the very name of
which has driven the boldest man away.

But no such ravings were to be heard at the bed-side by which the
children knelt. Their half-stifled sobs and moaning alone broke the
silence of the lonely chamber. And when at last the mother’s grasp
relaxed, and, turning one look from the children to the father, she
vainly strove to speak, and fell backward on the pillow, all was so
calm and tranquil that she seemed to sink to sleep. They leant over
her; they called upon her name, softly at first, and then in the loud
and piercing tones of desperation. But there was no reply. They
listened for her breath, but no sound came. They felt for the
palpitation of the heart, but no faint throb responded to the touch.
That heart was broken, and she was dead!

The husband sunk into a chair by the bed-side, and clasped his hands
upon his burning forehead. He gazed from child to child, but when a
weeping eye met his, he quailed beneath its look. No word of comfort
was whispered in his ear, no look of kindness lighted on his face. All
shrunk from and avoided him; and when at last he staggered from the
room, no one sought to follow or console the widower.

The time had been when many a friend would have crowded round him in
his affliction, and many a heartfelt condolence would have met him in
his grief. Where were they now? One by one, friends, relations, the
commonest acquaintance even, had fallen off from and deserted the
drunkard. His wife alone had clung to him in good and evil, in sickness
and poverty, and how had he rewarded her? He had reeled from the tavern
to her bed-side in time to see her die.

He rushed from the house, and walked swiftly through the streets.
Remorse, fear, shame, all crowded on his mind. Stupefied with drink,
and bewildered with the scene he had just witnessed, he re-entered the
tavern he had quitted shortly before. Glass succeeded glass. His blood
mounted, and his brain whirled round. Death! Every one must die, and
why not _she_? She was too good for him; her relations had often told
him so. Curses on them! Had they not deserted her, and left her to
whine away the time at home? Well—she was dead, and happy perhaps. It
was better as it was. Another glass—one more! Hurrah! It was a merry
life while it lasted; and he would make the most of it.

Time went on; the three children who were left to him, grew up, and
were children no longer. The father remained the same—poorer, shabbier,
and more dissolute-looking, but the same confirmed and irreclaimable
drunkard. The boys had, long ago, run wild in the streets, and left
him; the girl alone remained, but she worked hard, and words or blows
could always procure him something for the tavern. So he went on in the
old course, and a merry life he led.

One night, as early as ten o’clock—for the girl had been sick for many
days, and there was, consequently, little to spend at the
public-house—he bent his steps homeward, bethinking himself that if he
would have her able to earn money, it would be as well to apply to the
parish surgeon, or, at all events, to take the trouble of inquiring
what ailed her, which he had not yet thought it worth while to do. It
was a wet December night; the wind blew piercing cold, and the rain
poured heavily down. He begged a few halfpence from a passer-by, and
having bought a small loaf (for it was his interest to keep the girl
alive, if he could), he shuffled onwards as fast as the wind and rain
would let him.

At the back of Fleet-street, and lying between it and the water-side,
are several mean and narrow courts, which form a portion of
Whitefriars: it was to one of these that he directed his steps.

The alley into which he turned, might, for filth and misery, have
competed with the darkest corner of this ancient sanctuary in its
dirtiest and most lawless time. The houses, varying from two stories in
height to four, were stained with every indescribable hue that long
exposure to the weather, damp, and rottenness can impart to tenements
composed originally of the roughest and coarsest materials. The windows
were patched with paper, and stuffed with the foulest rags; the doors
were falling from their hinges; poles with lines on which to dry
clothes, projected from every casement, and sounds of quarrelling or
drunkenness issued from every room.

The solitary oil lamp in the centre of the court had been blown out,
either by the violence of the wind or the act of some inhabitant who
had excellent reasons for objecting to his residence being rendered too
conspicuous; and the only light which fell upon the broken and uneven
pavement, was derived from the miserable candles that here and there
twinkled in the rooms of such of the more fortunate residents as could
afford to indulge in so expensive a luxury. A gutter ran down the
centre of the alley—all the sluggish odours of which had been called
forth by the rain; and as the wind whistled through the old houses, the
doors and shutters creaked upon their hinges, and the windows shook in
their frames, with a violence which every moment seemed to threaten the
destruction of the whole place.

The man whom we have followed into this den, walked on in the darkness,
sometimes stumbling into the main gutter, and at others into some
branch repositories of garbage which had been formed by the rain, until
he reached the last house in the court. The door, or rather what was
left of it, stood ajar, for the convenience of the numerous lodgers;
and he proceeded to grope his way up the old and broken stair, to the
attic story.

He was within a step or two of his room door, when it opened, and a
girl, whose miserable and emaciated appearance was only to be equalled
by that of the candle which she shaded with her hand, peeped anxiously
out.

‘Is that you, father?’ said the girl.

‘Who else should it be?’ replied the man gruffly. ‘What are you
trembling at? It’s little enough that I’ve had to drink to-day, for
there’s no drink without money, and no money without work. What the
devil’s the matter with the girl?’

‘I am not well, father—not at all well,’ said the girl, bursting into
tears.

‘Ah!’ replied the man, in the tone of a person who is compelled to
admit a very unpleasant fact, to which he would rather remain blind, if
he could. ‘You must get better somehow, for we must have money. You
must go to the parish doctor, and make him give you some medicine.
They’re paid for it, damn ’em. What are you standing before the door
for? Let me come in, can’t you?’

‘Father,’ whispered the girl, shutting the door behind her, and placing
herself before it, ‘William has come back.’

‘Who!’ said the man with a start.

‘Hush,’ replied the girl, ‘William; brother William.’

‘And what does he want?’ said the man, with an effort at
composure—‘money? meat? drink? He’s come to the wrong shop for that, if
he does. Give me the candle—give me the candle, fool—I ain’t going to
hurt him.’ He snatched the candle from her hand, and walked into the
room.

Sitting on an old box, with his head resting on his hand, and his eyes
fixed on a wretched cinder fire that was smouldering on the hearth, was
a young man of about two-and-twenty, miserably clad in an old coarse
jacket and trousers. He started up when his father entered.

‘Fasten the door, Mary,’ said the young man hastily—‘Fasten the door.
You look as if you didn’t know me, father. It’s long enough, since you
drove me from home; you may well forget me.’

‘And what do you want here, now?’ said the father, seating himself on a
stool, on the other side of the fireplace. ‘What do you want here,
now?’

‘Shelter,’ replied the son. ‘I’m in trouble: that’s enough. If I’m
caught I shall swing; that’s certain. Caught I shall be, unless I stop
here; that’s _as_ certain. And there’s an end of it.’

‘You mean to say, you’ve been robbing, or murdering, then?’ said the
father.

‘Yes, I do,’ replied the son. ‘Does it surprise you, father?’ He looked
steadily in the man’s face, but he withdrew his eyes, and bent them on
the ground.

‘Where’s your brothers?’ he said, after a long pause.

‘Where they’ll never trouble you,’ replied his son: ‘John’s gone to
America, and Henry’s dead.’

‘Dead!’ said the father, with a shudder, which even he could not
express.

‘Dead,’ replied the young man. ‘He died in my arms—shot like a dog, by
a gamekeeper. He staggered back, I caught him, and his blood trickled
down my hands. It poured out from his side like water. He was weak, and
it blinded him, but he threw himself down on his knees, on the grass,
and prayed to God, that if his mother was in heaven, He would hear her
prayers for pardon for her youngest son. “I was her favourite boy,
Will,” he said, “and I am glad to think, now, that when she was dying,
though I was a very young child then, and my little heart was almost
bursting, I knelt down at the foot of the bed, and thanked God for
having made me so fond of her as to have never once done anything to
bring the tears into her eyes. O Will, why was she taken away, and
father left?” There’s his dying words, father,’ said the young man;
‘make the best you can of ’em. You struck him across the face, in a
drunken fit, the morning we ran away; and here’s the end of it.’

The girl wept aloud; and the father, sinking his head upon his knees,
rocked himself to and fro.

‘If I am taken,’ said the young man, ‘I shall be carried back into the
country, and hung for that man’s murder. They cannot trace me here,
without your assistance, father. For aught I know, you may give me up
to justice; but unless you do, here I stop, until I can venture to
escape abroad.’

For two whole days, all three remained in the wretched room, without
stirring out. On the third evening, however, the girl was worse than
she had been yet, and the few scraps of food they had were gone. It was
indispensably necessary that somebody should go out; and as the girl
was too weak and ill, the father went, just at nightfall.

He got some medicine for the girl, and a trifle in the way of pecuniary
assistance. On his way back, he earned sixpence by holding a horse; and
he turned homewards with enough money to supply their most pressing
wants for two or three days to come. He had to pass the public-house.
He lingered for an instant, walked past it, turned back again, lingered
once more, and finally slunk in. Two men whom he had not observed, were
on the watch. They were on the point of giving up their search in
despair, when his loitering attracted their attention; and when he
entered the public-house, they followed him.

‘You’ll drink with me, master,’ said one of them, proffering him a
glass of liquor.

‘And me too,’ said the other, replenishing the glass as soon as it was
drained of its contents.

The man thought of his hungry children, and his son’s danger. But they
were nothing to the drunkard. He _did_ drink; and his reason left him.

‘A wet night, Warden,’ whispered one of the men in his ear, as he at
length turned to go away, after spending in liquor one-half of the
money on which, perhaps, his daughter’s life depended.

‘The right sort of night for our friends in hiding, Master Warden,’
whispered the other.

‘Sit down here,’ said the one who had spoken first, drawing him into a
corner. ‘We have been looking arter the young un. We came to tell him,
it’s all right now, but we couldn’t find him ’cause we hadn’t got the
precise direction. But that ain’t strange, for I don’t think he know’d
it himself, when he come to London, did he?’

‘No, he didn’t,’ replied the father.

The two men exchanged glances.

‘There’s a vessel down at the docks, to sail at midnight, when it’s
high water,’ resumed the first speaker, ‘and we’ll put him on board.
His passage is taken in another name, and what’s better than that, it’s
paid for. It’s lucky we met you.’

‘Very,’ said the second.

‘Capital luck,’ said the first, with a wink to his companion.

‘Great,’ replied the second, with a slight nod of intelligence.

‘Another glass here; quick’—said the first speaker. And in five minutes
more, the father had unconsciously yielded up his own son into the
hangman’s hands.

Slowly and heavily the time dragged along, as the brother and sister,
in their miserable hiding-place, listened in anxious suspense to the
slightest sound. At length, a heavy footstep was heard upon the stair;
it approached nearer; it reached the landing; and the father staggered
into the room.

The girl saw that he was intoxicated, and advanced with the candle in
her hand to meet him; she stopped short, gave a loud scream, and fell
senseless on the ground. She had caught sight of the shadow of a man
reflected on the floor. They both rushed in, and in another instant the
young man was a prisoner, and handcuffed.

‘Very quietly done,’ said one of the men to his companion, ‘thanks to
the old man. Lift up the girl, Tom—come, come, it’s no use crying,
young woman. It’s all over now, and can’t be helped.’

The young man stooped for an instant over the girl, and then turned
fiercely round upon his father, who had reeled against the wall, and
was gazing on the group with drunken stupidity.

‘Listen to me, father,’ he said, in a tone that made the drunkard’s
flesh creep. ‘My brother’s blood, and mine, is on your head: I never
had kind look, or word, or care, from you, and alive or dead, I never
will forgive you. Die when you will, or how, I will be with you. I
speak as a dead man now, and I warn you, father, that as surely as you
must one day stand before your Maker, so surely shall your children be
there, hand in hand, to cry for judgment against you.’ He raised his
manacled hands in a threatening attitude, fixed his eyes on his
shrinking parent, and slowly left the room; and neither father nor
sister ever beheld him more, on this side of the grave.

When the dim and misty light of a winter’s morning penetrated into the
narrow court, and struggled through the begrimed window of the wretched
room, Warden awoke from his heavy sleep, and found himself alone. He
rose, and looked round him; the old flock mattress on the floor was
undisturbed; everything was just as he remembered to have seen it last:
and there were no signs of any one, save himself, having occupied the
room during the night. He inquired of the other lodgers, and of the
neighbours; but his daughter had not been seen or heard of. He rambled
through the streets, and scrutinised each wretched face among the
crowds that thronged them, with anxious eyes. But his search was
fruitless, and he returned to his garret when night came on, desolate
and weary.

For many days he occupied himself in the same manner, but no trace of
his daughter did he meet with, and no word of her reached his ears. At
length he gave up the pursuit as hopeless. He had long thought of the
probability of her leaving him, and endeavouring to gain her bread in
quiet, elsewhere. She had left him at last to starve alone. He ground
his teeth, and cursed her!

He begged his bread from door to door. Every halfpenny he could wring
from the pity or credulity of those to whom he addressed himself, was
spent in the old way. A year passed over his head; the roof of a jail
was the only one that had sheltered him for many months. He slept under
archways, and in brickfields—anywhere, where there was some warmth or
shelter from the cold and rain. But in the last stage of poverty,
disease, and houseless want, he was a drunkard still.

At last, one bitter night, he sunk down on a door-step faint and ill.
The premature decay of vice and profligacy had worn him to the bone.
His cheeks were hollow and livid; his eyes were sunken, and their sight
was dim. His legs trembled beneath his weight, and a cold shiver ran
through every limb.

And now the long-forgotten scenes of a misspent life crowded thick and
fast upon him. He thought of the time when he had a home—a happy,
cheerful home—and of those who peopled it, and flocked about him then,
until the forms of his elder children seemed to rise from the grave,
and stand about him—so plain, so clear, and so distinct they were that
he could touch and feel them. Looks that he had long forgotten were
fixed upon him once more; voices long since hushed in death sounded in
his ears like the music of village bells. But it was only for an
instant. The rain beat heavily upon him; and cold and hunger were
gnawing at his heart again.

He rose, and dragged his feeble limbs a few paces further. The street
was silent and empty; the few passengers who passed by, at that late
hour, hurried quickly on, and his tremulous voice was lost in the
violence of the storm. Again that heavy chill struck through his frame,
and his blood seemed to stagnate beneath it. He coiled himself up in a
projecting doorway, and tried to sleep.

But sleep had fled from his dull and glazed eyes. His mind wandered
strangely, but he was awake, and conscious. The well-known shout of
drunken mirth sounded in his ear, the glass was at his lips, the board
was covered with choice rich food—they were before him: he could see
them all, he had but to reach out his hand, and take them—and, though
the illusion was reality itself, he knew that he was sitting alone in
the deserted street, watching the rain-drops as they pattered on the
stones; that death was coming upon him by inches—and that there were
none to care for or help him.

Suddenly he started up, in the extremity of terror. He had heard his
own voice shouting in the night air, he knew not what, or why. Hark! A
groan!—another! His senses were leaving him: half-formed and incoherent
words burst from his lips; and his hands sought to tear and lacerate
his flesh. He was going mad, and he shrieked for help till his voice
failed him.

He raised his head, and looked up the long dismal street. He
recollected that outcasts like himself, condemned to wander day and
night in those dreadful streets, had sometimes gone distracted with
their own loneliness. He remembered to have heard many years before
that a homeless wretch had once been found in a solitary corner,
sharpening a rusty knife to plunge into his own heart, preferring death
to that endless, weary, wandering to and fro. In an instant his resolve
was taken, his limbs received new life; he ran quickly from the spot,
and paused not for breath until he reached the river-side.

He crept softly down the steep stone stairs that lead from the
commencement of Waterloo Bridge, down to the water’s level. He crouched
into a corner, and held his breath, as the patrol passed. Never did
prisoner’s heart throb with the hope of liberty and life half so
eagerly as did that of the wretched man at the prospect of death. The
watch passed close to him, but he remained unobserved; and after
waiting till the sound of footsteps had died away in the distance, he
cautiously descended, and stood beneath the gloomy arch that forms the
landing-place from the river.

The tide was in, and the water flowed at his feet. The rain had ceased,
the wind was lulled, and all was, for the moment, still and quiet—so
quiet, that the slightest sound on the opposite bank, even the rippling
of the water against the barges that were moored there, was distinctly
audible to his ear. The stream stole languidly and sluggishly on.
Strange and fantastic forms rose to the surface, and beckoned him to
approach; dark gleaming eyes peered from the water, and seemed to mock
his hesitation, while hollow murmurs from behind, urged him onwards. He
retreated a few paces, took a short run, desperate leap, and plunged
into the river.

Not five seconds had passed when he rose to the water’s surface—but
what a change had taken place in that short time, in all his thoughts
and feelings! Life—life in any form, poverty, misery,
starvation—anything but death. He fought and struggled with the water
that closed over his head, and screamed in agonies of terror. The curse
of his own son rang in his ears. The shore—but one foot of dry
ground—he could almost touch the step. One hand’s breadth nearer, and
he was saved—but the tide bore him onward, under the dark arches of the
bridge, and he sank to the bottom.

Again he rose, and struggled for life. For one instant—for one brief
instant—the buildings on the river’s banks, the lights on the bridge
through which the current had borne him, the black water, and the
fast-flying clouds, were distinctly visible—once more he sunk, and once
again he rose. Bright flames of fire shot up from earth to heaven, and
reeled before his eyes, while the water thundered in his ears, and
stunned him with its furious roar.

A week afterwards the body was washed ashore, some miles down the
river, a swollen and disfigured mass. Unrecognised and unpitied, it was
borne to the grave; and there it has long since mouldered away!




SKETCHES OF YOUNG GENTLEMEN


TO THE YOUNG LADIES
of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland;
also
THE YOUNG LADIES
of
the principality of wales,
and likewise
THE YOUNG LADIES
resident in the isles of
guernsey, jersey, alderney, and sark,
the humble dedication of their devoted admirer,


Sheweth,—

That your Dedicator has perused, with feelings of virtuous indignation,
a work purporting to be ‘Sketches of Young Ladies;’ written by Quiz,
illustrated by Phiz, and published in one volume, square twelvemo.

That after an attentive and vigilant perusal of the said work, your
Dedicator is humbly of opinion that so many libels, upon your
Honourable sex, were never contained in any previously published work,
in twelvemo or any other mo.

That in the title page and preface to the said work, your Honourable
sex are described and classified as animals; and although your
Dedicator is not at present prepared to deny that you _are_ animals,
still he humbly submits that it is not polite to call you so.

That in the aforesaid preface, your Honourable sex are also described
as Troglodites, which, being a hard word, may, for aught your
Honourable sex or your Dedicator can say to the contrary, be an
injurious and disrespectful appellation.

That the author of the said work applied himself to his task in malice
prepense and with wickedness aforethought; a fact which, your Dedicator
contends, is sufficiently demonstrated, by his assuming the name of
Quiz, which, your Dedicator submits, denotes a foregone conclusion, and
implies an intention of quizzing.

That in the execution of his evil design, the said Quiz, or author of
the said work, must have betrayed some trust or confidence reposed in
him by some members of your Honourable sex, otherwise he never could
have acquired so much information relative to the manners and customs
of your Honourable sex in general.

That actuated by these considerations, and further moved by various
slanders and insinuations respecting your Honourable sex contained in
the said work, square twelvemo, entitled ‘Sketches of Young Ladies,’
your Dedicator ventures to produce another work, square twelvemo,
entitled ‘Sketches of Young Gentlemen,’ of which he now solicits your
acceptance and approval.

That as the Young Ladies are the best companions of the Young
Gentlemen, so the Young Gentlemen should be the best companions of the
Young Ladies; and extending the comparison from animals (to quote the
disrespectful language of the said Quiz) to inanimate objects, your
Dedicator humbly suggests, that such of your Honourable sex as
purchased the bane should possess themselves of the antidote, and that
those of your Honourable sex who were not rash enough to take the
first, should lose no time in swallowing the last,—prevention being in
all cases better than cure, as we are informed upon the authority, not
only of general acknowledgment, but also of traditionary wisdom.

That with reference to the said bane and antidote, your Dedicator has
no further remarks to make, than are comprised in the printed
directions issued with Doctor Morison’s pills; namely, that whenever
your Honourable sex take twenty-five of Number, 1, you will be pleased
to take fifty of Number 2, without delay.

And your Dedicator shall ever pray, &c.




THE BASHFUL YOUNG GENTLEMAN


We found ourself seated at a small dinner party the other day, opposite
a stranger of such singular appearance and manner, that he irresistibly
attracted our attention.

This was a fresh-coloured young gentleman, with as good a promise of
light whisker as one might wish to see, and possessed of a very
velvet-like, soft-looking countenance. We do not use the latter term
invidiously, but merely to denote a pair of smooth, plump,
highly-coloured cheeks of capacious dimensions, and a mouth rather
remarkable for the fresh hue of the lips than for any marked or
striking expression it presented. His whole face was suffused with a
crimson blush, and bore that downcast, timid, retiring look, which
betokens a man ill at ease with himself.

There was nothing in these symptoms to attract more than a passing
remark, but our attention had been originally drawn to the bashful
young gentleman, on his first appearance in the drawing-room
above-stairs, into which he was no sooner introduced, than making his
way towards us who were standing in a window, and wholly neglecting
several persons who warmly accosted him, he seized our hand with
visible emotion, and pressed it with a convulsive grasp for a good
couple of minutes, after which he dived in a nervous manner across the
room, oversetting in his way a fine little girl of six years and a
quarter old—and shrouding himself behind some hangings, was seen no
more, until the eagle eye of the hostess detecting him in his
concealment, on the announcement of dinner, he was requested to pair
off with a lively single lady, of two or three and thirty.

This most flattering salutation from a perfect stranger, would have
gratified us not a little as a token of his having held us in high
respect, and for that reason been desirous of our acquaintance, if we
had not suspected from the first, that the young gentleman, in making a
desperate effort to get through the ceremony of introduction, had, in
the bewilderment of his ideas, shaken hands with us at random. This
impression was fully confirmed by the subsequent behaviour of the
bashful young gentleman in question, which we noted particularly, with
the view of ascertaining whether we were right in our conjecture.

The young gentleman seated himself at table with evident misgivings,
and turning sharp round to pay attention to some observation of his
loquacious neighbour, overset his bread. There was nothing very bad in
this, and if he had had the presence of mind to let it go, and say
nothing about it, nobody but the man who had laid the cloth would have
been a bit the wiser; but the young gentleman in various
semi-successful attempts to prevent its fall, played with it a little,
as gentlemen in the streets may be seen to do with their hats on a
windy day, and then giving the roll a smart rap in his anxiety to catch
it, knocked it with great adroitness into a tureen of white soup at
some distance, to the unspeakable terror and disturbance of a very
amiable bald gentleman, who was dispensing the contents. We thought the
bashful young gentleman would have gone off in an apoplectic fit,
consequent upon the violent rush of blood to his face at the occurrence
of this catastrophe.

From this moment we perceived, in the phraseology of the fancy, that it
was ‘all up’ with the bashful young gentleman, and so indeed it was.
Several benevolent persons endeavoured to relieve his embarrassment by
taking wine with him, but finding that it only augmented his
sufferings, and that after mingling sherry, champagne, hock, and
moselle together, he applied the greater part of the mixture
externally, instead of internally, they gradually dropped off, and left
him to the exclusive care of the talkative lady, who, not noting the
wildness of his eye, firmly believed she had secured a listener. He
broke a glass or two in the course of the meal, and disappeared shortly
afterwards; it is inferred that he went away in some confusion,
inasmuch as he left the house in another gentleman’s coat, and the
footman’s hat.

This little incident led us to reflect upon the most prominent
characteristics of bashful young gentlemen in the abstract; and as this
portable volume will be the great text-book of young ladies in all
future generations, we record them here for their guidance and behoof.

If the bashful young gentleman, in turning a street corner, chance to
stumble suddenly upon two or three young ladies of his acquaintance,
nothing can exceed his confusion and agitation. His first impulse is to
make a great variety of bows, and dart past them, which he does until,
observing that they wish to stop, but are uncertain whether to do so or
not, he makes several feints of returning, which causes them to do the
same; and at length, after a great quantity of unnecessary dodging and
falling up against the other passengers, he returns and shakes hands
most affectionately with all of them, in doing which he knocks out of
their grasp sundry little parcels, which he hastily picks up, and
returns very muddy and disordered. The chances are that the bashful
young gentleman then observes it is very fine weather, and being
reminded that it has only just left off raining for the first time
these three days, he blushes very much, and smiles as if he had said a
very good thing. The young lady who was most anxious to speak, here
inquires, with an air of great commiseration, how his dear sister
Harriet is to-day; to which the young gentleman, without the slightest
consideration, replies with many thanks, that she is remarkably well.
‘Well, Mr. Hopkins!’ cries the young lady, ‘why, we heard she was bled
yesterday evening, and have been perfectly miserable about her.’ ‘Oh,
ah,’ says the young gentleman, ‘so she was. Oh, she’s very ill, very
ill indeed.’ The young gentleman then shakes his head, and looks very
desponding (he has been smiling perpetually up to this time), and after
a short pause, gives his glove a great wrench at the wrist, and says,
with a strong emphasis on the adjective, ‘_Good_ morning, _good_
morning.’ And making a great number of bows in acknowledgment of
several little messages to his sister, walks backward a few paces, and
comes with great violence against a lamp-post, knocking his hat off in
the contact, which in his mental confusion and bodily pain he is going
to walk away without, until a great roar from a carter attracts his
attention, when he picks it up, and tries to smile cheerfully to the
young ladies, who are looking back, and who, he has the satisfaction of
seeing, are all laughing heartily.

At a quadrille party, the bashful young gentleman always remains as
near the entrance of the room as possible, from which position he
smiles at the people he knows as they come in, and sometimes steps
forward to shake hands with more intimate friends: a process which on
each repetition seems to turn him a deeper scarlet than before. He
declines dancing the first set or two, observing, in a faint voice,
that he would rather wait a little; but at length is absolutely
compelled to allow himself to be introduced to a partner, when he is
led, in a great heat and blushing furiously, across the room to a spot
where half-a-dozen unknown ladies are congregated together.

‘Miss Lambert, let me introduce Mr. Hopkins for the next quadrille.’
Miss Lambert inclines her head graciously. Mr. Hopkins bows, and his
fair conductress disappears, leaving Mr. Hopkins, as he too well knows,
to make himself agreeable. The young lady more than half expects that
the bashful young gentleman will say something, and the bashful young
gentleman feeling this, seriously thinks whether he has got anything to
say, which, upon mature reflection, he is rather disposed to conclude
he has not, since nothing occurs to him. Meanwhile, the young lady,
after several inspections of her _bouquet_, all made in the expectation
that the bashful young gentleman is going to talk, whispers her mamma,
who is sitting next her, which whisper the bashful young gentleman
immediately suspects (and possibly with very good reason) must be about
_him_. In this comfortable condition he remains until it is time to
‘stand up,’ when murmuring a ‘Will you allow me?’ he gives the young
lady his arm, and after inquiring where she will stand, and receiving a
reply that she has no choice, conducts her to the remotest corner of
the quadrille, and making one attempt at conversation, which turns out
a desperate failure, preserves a profound silence until it is all over,
when he walks her twice round the room, deposits her in her old seat,
and retires in confusion.

A married bashful gentleman—for these bashful gentlemen do get married
sometimes; how it is ever brought about, is a mystery to us—a married
bashful gentleman either causes his wife to appear bold by contrast, or
merges her proper importance in his own insignificance. Bashful young
gentlemen should be cured, or avoided. They are never hopeless, and
never will be, while female beauty and attractions retain their
influence, as any young lady will find, who may think it worth while on
this confident assurance to take a patient in hand.




THE OUT-AND-OUT YOUNG GENTLEMAN


Out-and-out young gentlemen may be divided into two classes—those who
have something to do, and those who have nothing. I shall commence with
the former, because that species come more frequently under the notice
of young ladies, whom it is our province to warn and to instruct.

The out-and-out young gentleman is usually no great dresser, his
instructions to his tailor being all comprehended in the one general
direction to ‘make that what’s-a-name a regular bang-up sort of thing.’
For some years past, the favourite costume of the out-and-out young
gentleman has been a rough pilot coat, with two gilt hooks and eyes to
the velvet collar; buttons somewhat larger than crown-pieces; a black
or fancy neckerchief, loosely tied; a wide-brimmed hat, with a low
crown; tightish inexpressibles, and iron-shod boots. Out of doors he
sometimes carries a large ash stick, but only on special occasions, for
he prefers keeping his hands in his coat pockets. He smokes at all
hours, of course, and swears considerably.

The out-and-out young gentleman is employed in a city counting-house or
solicitor’s office, in which he does as little as he possibly can: his
chief places of resort are, the streets, the taverns, and the theatres.
In the streets at evening time, out-and-out young gentlemen have a
pleasant custom of walking six or eight abreast, thus driving females
and other inoffensive persons into the road, which never fails to
afford them the highest satisfaction, especially if there be any
immediate danger of their being run over, which enhances the fun of the
thing materially. In all places of public resort, the out-and-outers
are careful to select each a seat to himself, upon which he lies at
full length, and (if the weather be very dirty, but not in any other
case) he lies with his knees up, and the soles of his boots planted
firmly on the cushion, so that if any low fellow should ask him to make
room for a lady, he takes ample revenge upon her dress, without going
at all out of his way to do it. He always sits with his hat on, and
flourishes his stick in the air while the play is proceeding, with a
dignified contempt of the performance; if it be possible for one or two
out-and-out young gentlemen to get up a little crowding in the
passages, they are quite in their element, squeezing, pushing,
whooping, and shouting in the most humorous manner possible. If they
can only succeed in irritating the gentleman who has a family of
daughters under his charge, they are like to die with laughing, and
boast of it among their companions for a week afterwards, adding, that
one or two of them were ‘devilish fine girls,’ and that they really
thought the youngest would have fainted, which was the only thing
wanted to render the joke complete.

If the out-and-out young gentleman have a mother and sisters, of course
he treats them with becoming contempt, inasmuch as they (poor things!)
having no notion of life or gaiety, are far too weak-spirited and
moping for him. Sometimes, however, on a birth-day or at
Christmas-time, he cannot very well help accompanying them to a party
at some old friend’s, with which view he comes home when they have been
dressed an hour or two, smelling very strongly of tobacco and spirits,
and after exchanging his rough coat for some more suitable attire (in
which however he loses nothing of the out-and-outer), gets into the
coach and grumbles all the way at his own good nature: his bitter
reflections aggravated by the recollection, that Tom Smith has taken
the chair at a little impromptu dinner at a fighting man’s, and that a
set-to was to take place on a dining-table, between the fighting man
and his brother-in-law, which is probably ‘coming off’ at that very
instant.

As the out-and-out young gentleman is by no means at his ease in
ladies’ society, he shrinks into a corner of the drawing-room when they
reach the friend’s, and unless one of his sisters is kind enough to
talk to him, remains there without being much troubled by the
attentions of other people, until he espies, lingering outside the
door, another gentleman, whom he at once knows, by his air and manner
(for there is a kind of free-masonry in the craft), to be a brother
out-and-outer, and towards whom he accordingly makes his way.
Conversation being soon opened by some casual remark, the second
out-and-outer confidentially informs the first, that he is one of the
rough sort and hates that kind of thing, only he couldn’t very well be
off coming; to which the other replies, that that’s just his case—‘and
I’ll tell you what,’ continues the out-and-outer in a whisper, ‘I
should like a glass of warm brandy and water just now,’—‘Or a pint of
stout and a pipe,’ suggests the other out-and-outer.

The discovery is at once made that they are sympathetic souls; each of
them says at the same moment, that he sees the other understands what’s
what: and they become fast friends at once, more especially when it
appears, that the second out-and-outer is no other than a gentleman,
long favourably known to his familiars as ‘Mr. Warmint Blake,’ who upon
divers occasions has distinguished himself in a manner that would not
have disgraced the fighting man, and who—having been a pretty long time
about town—had the honour of once shaking hands with the celebrated Mr.
Thurtell himself.

At supper, these gentlemen greatly distinguish themselves, brightening
up very much when the ladies leave the table, and proclaiming aloud
their intention of beginning to spend the evening—a process which is
generally understood to be satisfactorily performed, when a great deal
of wine is drunk and a great deal of noise made, both of which feats
the out-and-out young gentlemen execute to perfection. Having
protracted their sitting until long after the host and the other guests
have adjourned to the drawing-room, and finding that they have drained
the decanters empty, they follow them thither with complexions rather
heightened, and faces rather bloated with wine; and the agitated lady
of the house whispers her friends as they waltz together, to the great
terror of the whole room, that ‘both Mr. Blake and Mr. Dummins are very
nice sort of young men in their way, only they are eccentric persons,
and unfortunately _rather too wild_!’

The remaining class of out-and-out young gentlemen is composed of
persons, who, having no money of their own and a soul above earning
any, enjoy similar pleasures, nobody knows how. These respectable
gentlemen, without aiming quite so much at the out-and-out in external
appearance, are distinguished by all the same amiable and attractive
characteristics, in an equal or perhaps greater degree, and now and
then find their way into society, through the medium of the other class
of out-and-out young gentlemen, who will sometimes carry them home, and
who usually pay their tavern bills. As they are equally gentlemanly,
clever, witty, intelligent, wise, and well-bred, we need scarcely have
recommended them to the peculiar consideration of the young ladies, if
it were not that some of the gentle creatures whom we hold in such high
respect, are perhaps a little too apt to confound a great many heavier
terms with the light word eccentricity, which we beg them henceforth to
take in a strictly Johnsonian sense, without any liberality or latitude
of construction.




THE VERY FRIENDLY YOUNG GENTLEMAN


We know—and all people know—so many specimens of this class, that in
selecting the few heads our limits enable us to take from a great
number, we have been induced to give the very friendly young gentleman
the preference over many others, to whose claims upon a more cursory
view of the question we had felt disposed to assign the priority.

The very friendly young gentleman is very friendly to everybody, but he
attaches himself particularly to two, or at most to three families:
regulating his choice by their dinners, their circle of acquaintance,
or some other criterion in which he has an immediate interest. He is of
any age between twenty and forty, unmarried of course, must be fond of
children, and is expected to make himself generally useful if possible.
Let us illustrate our meaning by an example, which is the shortest mode
and the clearest.

We encountered one day, by chance, an old friend of whom we had lost
sight for some years, and who—expressing a strong anxiety to renew our
former intimacy—urged us to dine with him on an early day, that we
might talk over old times. We readily assented, adding, that we hoped
we should be alone. ‘Oh, certainly, certainly,’ said our friend, ‘not a
soul with us but Mincin.’ ‘And who is Mincin?’ was our natural inquiry.
‘O don’t mind him,’ replied our friend, ‘he’s a most particular friend
of mine, and a very friendly fellow you will find him;’ and so he left
us.

‘We thought no more about Mincin until we duly presented ourselves at
the house next day, when, after a hearty welcome, our friend motioned
towards a gentleman who had been previously showing his teeth by the
fireplace, and gave us to understand that it was Mr. Mincin, of whom he
had spoken. It required no great penetration on our part to discover at
once that Mr. Mincin was in every respect a very friendly young
gentleman.

‘I am delighted,’ said Mincin, hastily advancing, and pressing our hand
warmly between both of his, ‘I am delighted, I am sure, to make your
acquaintance—(here he smiled)—very much delighted indeed—(here he
exhibited a little emotion)—I assure you that I have looked forward to
it anxiously for a very long time:’ here he released our hands, and
rubbing his own, observed, that the day was severe, but that he was
delighted to perceive from our appearance that it agreed with us
wonderfully; and then went on to observe, that, notwithstanding the
coldness of the weather, he had that morning seen in the paper an
exceedingly curious paragraph, to the effect, that there was now in the
garden of Mr. Wilkins of Chichester, a pumpkin, measuring four feet in
height, and eleven feet seven inches in circumference, which he looked
upon as a very extraordinary piece of intelligence. We ventured to
remark, that we had a dim recollection of having once or twice before
observed a similar paragraph in the public prints, upon which Mr.
Mincin took us confidentially by the button, and said, Exactly,
exactly, to be sure, we were very right, and he wondered what the
editors meant by putting in such things. Who the deuce, he should like
to know, did they suppose cared about them? that struck him as being
the best of it.

The lady of the house appeared shortly afterwards, and Mr. Mincin’s
friendliness, as will readily be supposed, suffered no diminution in
consequence; he exerted much strength and skill in wheeling a large
easy-chair up to the fire, and the lady being seated in it, carefully
closed the door, stirred the fire, and looked to the windows to see
that they admitted no air; having satisfied himself upon all these
points, he expressed himself quite easy in his mind, and begged to know
how she found herself to-day. Upon the lady’s replying very well, Mr.
Mincin (who it appeared was a medical gentleman) offered some general
remarks upon the nature and treatment of colds in the head, which
occupied us agreeably until dinner-time. During the meal, he devoted
himself to complimenting everybody, not forgetting himself, so that we
were an uncommonly agreeable quartette.

‘I’ll tell you what, Capper,’ said Mr. Mincin to our host, as he closed
the room door after the lady had retired, ‘you have very great reason
to be fond of your wife. Sweet woman, Mrs. Capper, sir!’ ‘Nay, Mincin—I
beg,’ interposed the host, as we were about to reply that Mrs. Capper
unquestionably was particularly sweet. ‘Pray, Mincin, don’t.’ ‘Why
not?’ exclaimed Mr. Mincin, ‘why not? Why should you feel any delicacy
before your old friend—_our_ old friend, if I may be allowed to call
you so, sir; why should you, I ask?’ We of course wished to know why he
should also, upon which our friend admitted that Mrs. Capper _was_ a
very sweet woman, at which admission Mr. Mincin cried ‘Bravo!’ and
begged to propose Mrs. Capper with heartfelt enthusiasm, whereupon our
host said, ‘Thank you, Mincin,’ with deep feeling; and gave us, in a
low voice, to understand, that Mincin had saved Mrs. Capper’s cousin’s
life no less than fourteen times in a year and a half, which he
considered no common circumstance—an opinion to which we most cordially
subscribed.

Now that we three were left to entertain ourselves with conversation,
Mr. Mincin’s extreme friendliness became every moment more apparent; he
was so amazingly friendly, indeed, that it was impossible to talk about
anything in which he had not the chief concern. We happened to allude
to some affairs in which our friend and we had been mutually engaged
nearly fourteen years before, when Mr. Mincin was all at once reminded
of a joke which our friend had made on that day four years, which he
positively must insist upon telling—and which he did tell accordingly,
with many pleasant recollections of what he said, and what Mrs. Capper
said, and how he well remembered that they had been to the play with
orders on the very night previous, and had seen Romeo and Juliet, and
the pantomime, and how Mrs. Capper being faint had been led into the
lobby, where she smiled, said it was nothing after all, and went back
again, with many other interesting and absorbing particulars: after
which the friendly young gentleman went on to assure us, that our
friend had experienced a marvellously prophetic opinion of that same
pantomime, which was of such an admirable kind, that two morning papers
took the same view next day: to this our friend replied, with a little
triumph, that in that instance he had some reason to think he had been
correct, which gave the friendly young gentleman occasion to believe
that our friend was always correct; and so we went on, until our
friend, filling a bumper, said he must drink one glass to his dear
friend Mincin, than whom he would say no man saved the lives of his
acquaintances more, or had a more friendly heart. Finally, our friend
having emptied his glass, said, ‘God bless you, Mincin,’—and Mr. Mincin
and he shook hands across the table with much affection and
earnestness.

But great as the friendly young gentleman is, in a limited scene like
this, he plays the same part on a larger scale with increased _éclat_.
Mr. Mincin is invited to an evening party with his dear friends the
Martins, where he meets his dear friends the Cappers, and his dear
friends the Watsons, and a hundred other dear friends too numerous to
mention. He is as much at home with the Martins as with the Cappers;
but how exquisitely he balances his attentions, and divides them among
his dear friends! If he flirts with one of the Miss Watsons, he has one
little Martin on the sofa pulling his hair, and the other little Martin
on the carpet riding on his foot. He carries Mrs. Watson down to supper
on one arm, and Miss Martin on the other, and takes wine so
judiciously, and in such exact order, that it is impossible for the
most punctilious old lady to consider herself neglected. If any young
lady, being prevailed upon to sing, become nervous afterwards, Mr.
Mincin leads her tenderly into the next room, and restores her with
port wine, which she must take medicinally. If any gentleman be
standing by the piano during the progress of the ballad, Mr. Mincin
seizes him by the arm at one point of the melody, and softly beating
time the while with his head, expresses in dumb show his intense
perception of the delicacy of the passage. If anybody’s self-love is to
be flattered, Mr. Mincin is at hand. If anybody’s overweening vanity is
to be pampered, Mr. Mincin will surfeit it. What wonder that people of
all stations and ages recognise Mr. Mincin’s friendliness; that he is
universally allowed to be handsome as amiable; that mothers think him
an oracle, daughters a dear, brothers a beau, and fathers a wonder! And
who would not have the reputation of the very friendly young gentleman?




THE MILITARY YOUNG GENTLEMAN


We are rather at a loss to imagine how it has come to pass that
military young gentlemen have obtained so much favour in the eyes of
the young ladies of this kingdom. We cannot think so lightly of them as
to suppose that the mere circumstance of a man’s wearing a red coat
ensures him a ready passport to their regard; and even if this were the
case, it would be no satisfactory explanation of the circumstance,
because, although the analogy may in some degree hold good in the case
of mail coachmen and guards, still general postmen wear red coats, and
_they_ are not to our knowledge better received than other men; nor are
firemen either, who wear (or used to wear) not only red coats, but very
resplendent and massive badges besides—much larger than epaulettes.
Neither do the twopenny post-office boys, if the result of our
inquiries be correct, find any peculiar favour in woman’s eyes,
although they wear very bright red jackets, and have the additional
advantage of constantly appearing in public on horseback, which last
circumstance may be naturally supposed to be greatly in their favour.

We have sometimes thought that this phenomenon may take its rise in the
conventional behaviour of captains and colonels and other gentlemen in
red coats on the stage, where they are invariably represented as fine
swaggering fellows, talking of nothing but charming girls, their king
and country, their honour, and their debts, and crowing over the
inferior classes of the community, whom they occasionally treat with a
little gentlemanly swindling, no less to the improvement and pleasure
of the audience, than to the satisfaction and approval of the choice
spirits who consort with them. But we will not devote these pages to
our speculations upon the subject, inasmuch as our business at the
present moment is not so much with the young ladies who are bewitched
by her Majesty’s livery as with the young gentlemen whose heads are
turned by it. For ‘heads’ we had written ‘brains;’ but upon
consideration, we think the former the more appropriate word of the
two.

These young gentlemen may be divided into two classes—young gentlemen
who are actually in the army, and young gentlemen who, having an
intense and enthusiastic admiration for all things appertaining to a
military life, are compelled by adverse fortune or adverse relations to
wear out their existence in some ignoble counting-house. We will take
this latter description of military young gentlemen first.

The whole heart and soul of the military young gentleman are
concentrated in his favourite topic. There is nothing that he is so
learned upon as uniforms; he will tell you, without faltering for an
instant, what the habiliments of any one regiment are turned up with,
what regiment wear stripes down the outside and inside of the leg, and
how many buttons the Tenth had on their coats; he knows to a fraction
how many yards and odd inches of gold lace it takes to make an ensign
in the Guards; is deeply read in the comparative merits of different
bands, and the apparelling of trumpeters; and is very luminous indeed
in descanting upon ‘crack regiments,’ and the ‘crack’ gentlemen who
compose them, of whose mightiness and grandeur he is never tired of
telling.

We were suggesting to a military young gentleman only the other day,
after he had related to us several dazzling instances of the profusion
of half-a-dozen honourable ensign somebodies or nobodies in the
articles of kid gloves and polished boots, that possibly ‘cracked’
regiments would be an improvement upon ‘crack,’ as being a more
expressive and appropriate designation, when he suddenly interrupted us
by pulling out his watch, and observing that he must hurry off to the
Park in a cab, or he would be too late to hear the band play. Not
wishing to interfere with so important an engagement, and being in fact
already slightly overwhelmed by the anecdotes of the honourable ensigns
afore-mentioned, we made no attempt to detain the military young
gentleman, but parted company with ready good-will.

Some three or four hours afterwards, we chanced to be walking down
Whitehall, on the Admiralty side of the way, when, as we drew near to
one of the little stone places in which a couple of horse soldiers
mount guard in the daytime, we were attracted by the motionless
appearance and eager gaze of a young gentleman, who was devouring both
man and horse with his eyes, so eagerly, that he seemed deaf and blind
to all that was passing around him. We were not much surprised at the
discovery that it was our friend, the military young gentleman, but we
_were_ a little astonished when we returned from a walk to South
Lambeth to find him still there, looking on with the same intensity as
before. As it was a very windy day, we felt bound to awaken the young
gentleman from his reverie, when he inquired of us with great
enthusiasm, whether ‘that was not a glorious spectacle,’ and proceeded
to give us a detailed account of the weight of every article of the
spectacle’s trappings, from the man’s gloves to the horse’s shoes.

We have made it a practice since, to take the Horse Guards in our daily
walk, and we find it is the custom of military young gentlemen to plant
themselves opposite the sentries, and contemplate them at leisure, in
periods varying from fifteen minutes to fifty, and averaging
twenty-five. We were much struck a day or two since, by the behaviour
of a very promising young butcher who (evincing an interest in the
service, which cannot be too strongly commanded or encouraged), after a
prolonged inspection of the sentry, proceeded to handle his boots with
great curiosity, and as much composure and indifference as if the man
were wax-work.

But the really military young gentleman is waiting all this time, and
at the very moment that an apology rises to our lips, he emerges from
the barrack gate (he is quartered in a garrison town), and takes the
way towards the high street. He wears his undress uniform, which
somewhat mars the glory of his outward man; but still how great, how
grand, he is! What a happy mixture of ease and ferocity in his gait and
carriage, and how lightly he carries that dreadful sword under his arm,
making no more ado about it than if it were a silk umbrella! The lion
is sleeping: only think if an enemy were in sight, how soon he’d whip
it out of the scabbard, and what a terrible fellow he would be!

But he walks on, thinking of nothing less than blood and slaughter; and
now he comes in sight of three other military young gentlemen,
arm-in-arm, who are bearing down towards him, clanking their iron heels
on the pavement, and clashing their swords with a noise, which should
cause all peaceful men to quail at heart. They stop to talk. See how
the flaxen-haired young gentleman with the weak legs—he who has his
pocket-handkerchief thrust into the breast of his coat-glares upon the
fainthearted civilians who linger to look upon his glory; how the next
young gentleman elevates his head in the air, and majestically places
his arms a-kimbo, while the third stands with his legs very wide apart,
and clasps his hands behind him. Well may we inquire—not in familiar
jest, but in respectful earnest—if you call that nothing. Oh! if some
encroaching foreign power—the Emperor of Russia, for instance, or any
of those deep fellows, could only see those military young gentlemen as
they move on together towards the billiard-room over the way, wouldn’t
he tremble a little!

And then, at the Theatre at night, when the performances are by command
of Colonel Fitz-Sordust and the officers of the garrison—what a
splendid sight it is! How sternly the defenders of their country look
round the house as if in mute assurance to the audience, that they may
make themselves comfortable regarding any foreign invasion, for they
(the military young gentlemen) are keeping a sharp look-out, and are
ready for anything. And what a contrast between them, and that
stage-box full of grey-headed officers with tokens of many battles
about them, who have nothing at all in common with the military young
gentlemen, and who—but for an old-fashioned kind of manly dignity in
their looks and bearing—might be common hard-working soldiers for
anything they take the pains to announce to the contrary!

Ah! here is a family just come in who recognise the flaxen-headed young
gentleman; and the flaxen-headed young gentleman recognises them too,
only he doesn’t care to show it just now. Very well done indeed! He
talks louder to the little group of military young gentlemen who are
standing by him, and coughs to induce some ladies in the next box but
one to look round, in order that their faces may undergo the same
ordeal of criticism to which they have subjected, in not a wholly
inaudible tone, the majority of the female portion of the audience. Oh!
a gentleman in the same box looks round as if he were disposed to
resent this as an impertinence; and the flaxen-headed young gentleman
sees his friends at once, and hurries away to them with the most
charming cordiality.

Three young ladies, one young man, and the mamma of the party, receive
the military young gentleman with great warmth and politeness, and in
five minutes afterwards the military young gentleman, stimulated by the
mamma, introduces the two other military young gentlemen with whom he
was walking in the morning, who take their seats behind the young
ladies and commence conversation; whereat the mamma bestows a
triumphant bow upon a rival mamma, who has not succeeded in decoying
any military young gentlemen, and prepares to consider her visitors
from that moment three of the most elegant and superior young gentlemen
in the whole world.




THE POLITICAL YOUNG GENTLEMAN


Once upon a time—_not_ in the days when pigs drank wine, but in a more
recent period of our history—it was customary to banish politics when
ladies were present. If this usage still prevailed, we should have had
no chapter for political young gentlemen, for ladies would have neither
known nor cared what kind of monster a political young gentleman was.
But as this good custom in common with many others has ‘gone out,’ and
left no word when it is likely to be home again; as political young
ladies are by no means rare, and political young gentlemen the very
reverse of scarce, we are bound in the strict discharge of our most
responsible duty not to neglect this natural division of our subject.

If the political young gentleman be resident in a country town (and
there _are_ political young gentlemen in country towns sometimes), he
is wholly absorbed in his politics; as a pair of purple spectacles
communicate the same uniform tint to all objects near and remote, so
the political glasses, with which the young gentleman assists his
mental vision, give to everything the hue and tinge of party feeling.
The political young gentleman would as soon think of being struck with
the beauty of a young lady in the opposite interest, as he would dream
of marrying his sister to the opposite member.

If the political young gentleman be a Conservative, he has usually some
vague ideas about Ireland and the Pope which he cannot very clearly
explain, but which he knows are the right sort of thing, and not to be
very easily got over by the other side. He has also some choice
sentences regarding church and state, culled from the banners in use at
the last election, with which he intersperses his conversation at
intervals with surprising effect. But his great topic is the
constitution, upon which he will declaim, by the hour together, with
much heat and fury; not that he has any particular information on the
subject, but because he knows that the constitution is somehow church
and state, and church and state somehow the constitution, and that the
fellows on the other side say it isn’t, which is quite a sufficient
reason for him to say it is, and to stick to it.

Perhaps his greatest topic of all, though, is the people. If a fight
takes place in a populous town, in which many noses are broken, and a
few windows, the young gentleman throws down the newspaper with a
triumphant air, and exclaims, ‘Here’s your precious people!’ If
half-a-dozen boys run across the course at race time, when it ought to
be kept clear, the young gentleman looks indignantly round, and begs
you to observe the conduct of the people; if the gallery demand a
hornpipe between the play and the afterpiece, the same young gentleman
cries ‘No’ and ‘Shame’ till he is hoarse, and then inquires with a
sneer what you think of popular moderation _now_; in short, the people
form a never-failing theme for him; and when the attorney, on the side
of his candidate, dwells upon it with great power of eloquence at
election time, as he never fails to do, the young gentleman and his
friends, and the body they head, cheer with great violence against _the
other people_, with whom, of course, they have no possible connexion.
In much the same manner the audience at a theatre never fail to be
highly amused with any jokes at the expense of the public—always
laughing heartily at some other public, and never at themselves.

If the political young gentleman be a Radical, he is usually a very
profound person indeed, having great store of theoretical questions to
put to you, with an infinite variety of possible cases and logical
deductions therefrom. If he be of the utilitarian school, too, which is
more than probable, he is particularly pleasant company, having many
ingenious remarks to offer upon the voluntary principle and various
cheerful disquisitions connected with the population of the country,
the position of Great Britain in the scale of nations, and the balance
of power. Then he is exceedingly well versed in all doctrines of
political economy as laid down in the newspapers, and knows a great
many parliamentary speeches by heart; nay, he has a small stock of
aphorisms, none of them exceeding a couple of lines in length, which
will settle the toughest question and leave you nothing to say. He
gives all the young ladies to understand, that Miss Martineau is the
greatest woman that ever lived; and when they praise the good looks of
Mr. Hawkins the new member, says he’s very well for a representative,
all things considered, but he wants a little calling to account, and he
is more than half afraid it will be necessary to bring him down on his
knees for that vote on the miscellaneous estimates. At this, the young
ladies express much wonderment, and say surely a Member of Parliament
is not to be brought upon his knees so easily; in reply to which the
political young gentleman smiles sternly, and throws out dark hints
regarding the speedy arrival of that day, when Members of Parliament
will be paid salaries, and required to render weekly accounts of their
proceedings, at which the young ladies utter many expressions of
astonishment and incredulity, while their lady-mothers regard the
prophecy as little else than blasphemous.

It is extremely improving and interesting to hear two political young
gentlemen, of diverse opinions, discuss some great question across a
dinner-table; such as, whether, if the public were admitted to
Westminster Abbey for nothing, they would or would not convey small
chisels and hammers in their pockets, and immediately set about
chipping all the noses off the statues; or whether, if they once got
into the Tower for a shilling, they would not insist upon trying the
crown on their own heads, and loading and firing off all the small arms
in the armoury, to the great discomposure of Whitechapel and the
Minories. Upon these, and many other momentous questions which agitate
the public mind in these desperate days, they will discourse with great
vehemence and irritation for a considerable time together, both leaving
off precisely where they began, and each thoroughly persuaded that he
has got the better of the other.

In society, at assemblies, balls, and playhouses, these political young
gentlemen are perpetually on the watch for a political allusion, or
anything which can be tortured or construed into being one; when,
thrusting themselves into the very smallest openings for their
favourite discourse, they fall upon the unhappy company tooth and nail.
They have recently had many favourable opportunities of opening in
churches, but as there the clergyman has it all his own way, and must
not be contradicted, whatever politics he preaches, they are fain to
hold their tongues until they reach the outer door, though at the
imminent risk of bursting in the effort.

As such discussions can please nobody but the talkative parties
concerned, we hope they will henceforth take the hint and discontinue
them, otherwise we now give them warning, that the ladies have our
advice to discountenance such talkers altogether.




THE DOMESTIC YOUNG GENTLEMAN


Let us make a slight sketch of our amiable friend, Mr. Felix Nixon. We
are strongly disposed to think, that if we put him in this place, he
will answer our purpose without another word of comment.

Felix, then, is a young gentleman who lives at home with his mother,
just within the twopenny-post office circle of three miles from St.
Martin-le-Grand. He wears Indiarubber goloshes when the weather is at
all damp, and always has a silk handkerchief neatly folded up in the
right-hand pocket of his great-coat, to tie over his mouth when he goes
home at night; moreover, being rather near-sighted, he carries
spectacles for particular occasions, and has a weakish tremulous voice,
of which he makes great use, for he talks as much as any old lady
breathing.

The two chief subjects of Felix’s discourse, are himself and his
mother, both of whom would appear to be very wonderful and interesting
persons. As Felix and his mother are seldom apart in body, so Felix and
his mother are scarcely ever separate in spirit. If you ask Felix how
he finds himself to-day, he prefaces his reply with a long and minute
bulletin of his mother’s state of health; and the good lady in her
turn, edifies her acquaintance with a circumstantial and alarming
account, how he sneezed four times and coughed once after being out in
the rain the other night, but having his feet promptly put into hot
water, and his head into a flannel-something, which we will not
describe more particularly than by this delicate allusion, was happily
brought round by the next morning, and enabled to go to business as
usual.

Our friend is not a very adventurous or hot-headed person, but he has
passed through many dangers, as his mother can testify: there is one
great story in particular, concerning a hackney coachman who wanted to
overcharge him one night for bringing them home from the play, upon
which Felix gave the aforesaid coachman a look which his mother thought
would have crushed him to the earth, but which did not crush him quite,
for he continued to demand another sixpence, notwithstanding that Felix
took out his pocket-book, and, with the aid of a flat candle, pointed
out the fare in print, which the coachman obstinately disregarding, he
shut the street-door with a slam which his mother shudders to think of;
and then, roused to the most appalling pitch of passion by the coachman
knocking a double knock to show that he was by no means convinced, he
broke with uncontrollable force from his parent and the servant girl,
and running into the street without his hat, actually shook his fist at
the coachman, and came back again with a face as white, Mrs. Nixon
says, looking about her for a simile, as white as that ceiling. She
never will forget his fury that night, Never!

To this account Felix listens with a solemn face, occasionally looking
at you to see how it affects you, and when his mother has made an end
of it, adds that he looked at every coachman he met for three weeks
afterwards, in hopes that he might see the scoundrel; whereupon Mrs.
Nixon, with an exclamation of terror, requests to know what he would
have done to him if he _had_ seen him, at which Felix smiling darkly
and clenching his right fist, she exclaims, ‘Goodness gracious!’ with a
distracted air, and insists upon extorting a promise that he never will
on any account do anything so rash, which her dutiful son—it being
something more than three years since the offence was
committed—reluctantly concedes, and his mother, shaking her head
prophetically, fears with a sigh that his spirit will lead him into
something violent yet. The discourse then, by an easy transition, turns
upon the spirit which glows within the bosom of Felix, upon which point
Felix himself becomes eloquent, and relates a thrilling anecdote of the
time when he used to sit up till two o’clock in the morning reading
French, and how his mother used to say, ‘Felix, you will make yourself
ill, I know you will;’ and how _he_ used to say, ‘Mother, I don’t
care—I will do it;’ and how at last his mother privately procured a
doctor to come and see him, who declared, the moment he felt his pulse,
that if he had gone on reading one night more—only one night more—he
must have put a blister on each temple, and another between his
shoulders; and who, as it was, sat down upon the instant, and writing a
prescription for a blue pill, said it must be taken immediately, or he
wouldn’t answer for the consequences. The recital of these and many
other moving perils of the like nature, constantly harrows up the
feelings of Mr. Nixon’s friends.

Mrs. Nixon has a tolerably extensive circle of female acquaintance,
being a good-humoured, talkative, bustling little body, and to the
unmarried girls among them she is constantly vaunting the virtues of
her son, hinting that she will be a very happy person who wins him, but
that they must mind their P’s and Q’s, for he is very particular, and
terribly severe upon young ladies. At this last caution the young
ladies resident in the same row, who happen to be spending the evening
there, put their pocket-handkerchiefs before their mouths, and are
troubled with a short cough; just then Felix knocks at the door, and
his mother drawing the tea-table nearer the fire, calls out to him as
he takes off his boots in the back parlour that he needn’t mind coming
in in his slippers, for there are only the two Miss Greys and Miss
Thompson, and she is quite sure they will excuse _him_, and nodding to
the two Miss Greys, she adds, in a whisper, that Julia Thompson is a
great favourite with Felix, at which intelligence the short cough comes
again, and Miss Thompson in particular is greatly troubled with it,
till Felix coming in, very faint for want of his tea, changes the
subject of discourse, and enables her to laugh out boldly and tell
Amelia Grey not to be so foolish. Here they all three laugh, and Mrs.
Nixon says they are giddy girls; in which stage of the proceedings,
Felix, who has by this time refreshened himself with the grateful herb
that ‘cheers but not inebriates,’ removes his cup from his countenance
and says with a knowing smile, that all girls are; whereat his admiring
mamma pats him on the back and tells him not to be sly, which calls
forth a general laugh from the young ladies, and another smile from
Felix, who, thinking he looks very sly indeed, is perfectly satisfied.

Tea being over, the young ladies resume their work, and Felix insists
upon holding a skein of silk while Miss Thompson winds it on a card.
This process having been performed to the satisfaction of all parties,
he brings down his flute in compliance with a request from the youngest
Miss Grey, and plays divers tunes out of a very small music-book till
supper-time, when he is very facetious and talkative indeed. Finally,
after half a tumblerful of warm sherry and water, he gallantly puts on
his goloshes over his slippers, and telling Miss Thompson’s servant to
run on first and get the door open, escorts that young lady to her
house, five doors off: the Miss Greys who live in the next house but
one stopping to peep with merry faces from their own door till he comes
back again, when they call out ‘Very well, Mr. Felix,’ and trip into
the passage with a laugh more musical than any flute that was ever
played.

Felix is rather prim in his appearance, and perhaps a little priggish
about his books and flute, and so forth, which have all their peculiar
corners of peculiar shelves in his bedroom; indeed all his female
acquaintance (and they are good judges) have long ago set him down as a
thorough old bachelor. He is a favourite with them however, in a
certain way, as an honest, inoffensive, kind-hearted creature; and as
his peculiarities harm nobody, not even himself, we are induced to hope
that many who are not personally acquainted with him will take our good
word in his behalf, and be content to leave him to a long continuance
of his harmless existence.




THE CENSORIOUS YOUNG GENTLEMAN


There is an amiable kind of young gentleman going about in society,
upon whom, after much experience of him, and considerable turning over
of the subject in our mind, we feel it our duty to affix the above
appellation. Young ladies mildly call him a ‘sarcastic’ young
gentleman, or a ‘severe’ young gentleman. We, who know better, beg to
acquaint them with the fact, that he is merely a censorious young
gentleman, and nothing else.

The censorious young gentleman has the reputation among his familiars
of a remarkably clever person, which he maintains by receiving all
intelligence and expressing all opinions with a dubious sneer,
accompanied with a half smile, expressive of anything you please but
good-humour. This sets people about thinking what on earth the
censorious young gentleman means, and they speedily arrive at the
conclusion that he means something very deep indeed; for they reason in
this way—‘This young gentleman looks so very knowing that he must mean
something, and as I am by no means a dull individual, what a very deep
meaning he must have if I can’t find it out!’ It is extraordinary how
soon a censorious young gentleman may make a reputation in his own
small circle if he bear this in his mind, and regulate his proceedings
accordingly.

As young ladies are generally—not curious, but laudably desirous to
acquire information, the censorious young gentleman is much talked
about among them, and many surmises are hazarded regarding him. ‘I
wonder,’ exclaims the eldest Miss Greenwood, laying down her work to
turn up the lamp, ‘I wonder whether Mr. Fairfax will ever be married.’
‘Bless me, dear,’ cries Miss Marshall, ‘what ever made you think of
him?’ ‘Really I hardly know,’ replies Miss Greenwood; ‘he is such a
very mysterious person, that I often wonder about him.’ ‘Well, to tell
you the truth,’ replies Miss Marshall, ‘and so do I.’ Here two other
young ladies profess that they are constantly doing the like, and all
present appear in the same condition except one young lady, who, not
scrupling to state that she considers Mr. Fairfax ‘a horror,’ draws
down all the opposition of the others, which having been expressed in a
great many ejaculatory passages, such as ‘Well, did I ever!’—and ‘Lor,
Emily, dear!’ ma takes up the subject, and gravely states, that she
must say she does not think Mr. Fairfax by any means a horror, but
rather takes him to be a young man of very great ability; ‘and I am
quite sure,’ adds the worthy lady, ‘he always means a great deal more
than he says.’

The door opens at this point of the disclosure, and who of all people
alive walks into the room, but the very Mr. Fairfax, who has been the
subject of conversation! ‘Well, it really is curious,’ cries ma, ‘we
were at that very moment talking about you.’ ‘You did me great honour,’
replies Mr. Fairfax; ‘may I venture to ask what you were saying?’ ‘Why,
if you must know,’ returns the eldest girl, ‘we were remarking what a
very mysterious man you are.’ ‘Ay, ay!’ observes Mr. Fairfax, ‘Indeed!’
Now Mr. Fairfax says this ay, ay, and indeed, which are slight words
enough in themselves, with so very unfathomable an air, and accompanies
them with such a very equivocal smile, that ma and the young ladies are
more than ever convinced that he means an immensity, and so tell him he
is a very dangerous man, and seems to be always thinking ill of
somebody, which is precisely the sort of character the censorious young
gentleman is most desirous to establish; wherefore he says, ‘Oh, dear,
no,’ in a tone, obviously intended to mean, ‘You have me there,’ and
which gives them to understand that they have hit the right nail on the
very centre of its head.

When the conversation ranges from the mystery overhanging the
censorious young gentleman’s behaviour, to the general topics of the
day, he sustains his character to admiration. He considers the new
tragedy well enough for a new tragedy, but Lord bless us—well, no
matter; he could say a great deal on that point, but he would rather
not, lest he should be thought ill-natured, as he knows he would be.
‘But is not Mr. So-and-so’s performance truly charming?’ inquires a
young lady. ‘Charming!’ replies the censorious young gentleman. ‘Oh,
dear, yes, certainly; very charming—oh, very charming indeed.’ After
this, he stirs the fire, smiling contemptuously all the while: and a
modest young gentleman, who has been a silent listener, thinks what a
great thing it must be, to have such a critical judgment. Of music,
pictures, books, and poetry, the censorious young gentleman has an
equally fine conception. As to men and women, he can tell all about
them at a glance. ‘Now let us hear your opinion of young Mrs. Barker,’
says some great believer in the powers of Mr. Fairfax, ‘but don’t be
too severe.’ ‘I never am severe,’ replies the censorious young
gentleman. ‘Well, never mind that now. She is very lady-like, is she
not?’ ‘Lady-like!’ repeats the censorious young gentleman (for he
always repeats when he is at a loss for anything to say). ‘Did you
observe her manner? Bless my heart and soul, Mrs. Thompson, did you
observe her manner?—that’s all I ask.’ ‘I thought I had done so,’
rejoins the poor lady, much perplexed; ‘I did not observe it very
closely perhaps.’ ‘Oh, not very closely,’ rejoins the censorious young
gentleman, triumphantly. ‘Very good; then _I_ did. Let us talk no more
about her.’ The censorious young gentleman purses up his lips, and nods
his head sagely, as he says this; and it is forthwith whispered about,
that Mr. Fairfax (who, though he is a little prejudiced, must be
admitted to be a very excellent judge) has observed something
exceedingly odd in Mrs. Barker’s manner.




THE FUNNY YOUNG GENTLEMAN


As one funny young gentleman will serve as a sample of all funny young
Gentlemen we purpose merely to note down the conduct and behaviour of
an individual specimen of this class, whom we happened to meet at an
annual family Christmas party in the course of this very last Christmas
that ever came.

We were all seated round a blazing fire which crackled pleasantly as
the guests talked merrily and the urn steamed cheerily—for, being an
old-fashioned party, there _was_ an urn, and a teapot besides—when
there came a postman’s knock at the door, so violent and sudden, that
it startled the whole circle, and actually caused two or three very
interesting and most unaffected young ladies to scream aloud and to
exhibit many afflicting symptoms of terror and distress, until they had
been several times assured by their respective adorers, that they were
in no danger. We were about to remark that it was surely beyond
post-time, and must have been a runaway knock, when our host, who had
hitherto been paralysed with wonder, sank into a chair in a perfect
ecstasy of laughter, and offered to lay twenty pounds that it was that
droll dog Griggins. He had no sooner said this, than the majority of
the company and all the children of the house burst into a roar of
laughter too, as if some inimitable joke flashed upon them
simultaneously, and gave vent to various exclamations of—To be sure it
must be Griggins, and How like him that was, and What spirits he was
always in! with many other commendatory remarks of the like nature.

Not having the happiness to know Griggins, we became extremely desirous
to see so pleasant a fellow, the more especially as a stout gentleman
with a powdered head, who was sitting with his breeches buckles almost
touching the hob, whispered us he was a wit of the first water, when
the door opened, and Mr. Griggins being announced, presented himself,
amidst another shout of laughter and a loud clapping of hands from the
younger branches. This welcome he acknowledged by sundry contortions of
countenance, imitative of the clown in one of the new pantomimes, which
were so extremely successful, that one stout gentleman rolled upon an
ottoman in a paroxysm of delight, protesting, with many gasps, that if
somebody didn’t make that fellow Griggins leave off, he would be the
death of him, he knew. At this the company only laughed more
boisterously than before, and as we always like to accommodate our tone
and spirit if possible to the humour of any society in which we find
ourself, we laughed with the rest, and exclaimed, ‘Oh! capital,
capital!’ as loud as any of them.

When he had quite exhausted all beholders, Mr. Griggins received the
welcomes and congratulations of the circle, and went through the
needful introductions with much ease and many puns. This ceremony over,
he avowed his intention of sitting in somebody’s lap unless the young
ladies made room for him on the sofa, which being done, after a great
deal of tittering and pleasantry, he squeezed himself among them, and
likened his condition to that of love among the roses. At this novel
jest we all roared once more. ‘You should consider yourself highly
honoured, sir,’ said we. ‘Sir,’ replied Mr. Griggins, ‘you do me
proud.’ Here everybody laughed again; and the stout gentleman by the
fire whispered in our ear that Griggins was making a dead set at us.

The tea-things having been removed, we all sat down to a round game,
and here Mr. Griggins shone forth with peculiar brilliancy, abstracting
other people’s fish, and looking over their hands in the most comical
manner. He made one most excellent joke in snuffing a candle, which was
neither more nor less than setting fire to the hair of a pale young
gentleman who sat next him, and afterwards begging his pardon with
considerable humour. As the young gentleman could not see the joke
however, possibly in consequence of its being on the top of his own
head, it did not go off quite as well as it might have done; indeed,
the young gentleman was heard to murmur some general references to
‘impertinence,’ and a ‘rascal,’ and to state the number of his lodgings
in an angry tone—a turn of the conversation which might have been
productive of slaughterous consequences, if a young lady, betrothed to
the young gentleman, had not used her immediate influence to bring
about a reconciliation: emphatically declaring in an agitated whisper,
intended for his peculiar edification but audible to the whole table,
that if he went on in that way, she never would think of him otherwise
than as a friend, though as that she must always regard him. At this
terrible threat the young gentleman became calm, and the young lady,
overcome by the revulsion of feeling, instantaneously fainted.

Mr. Griggins’s spirits were slightly depressed for a short period by
this unlooked-for result of such a harmless pleasantry, but being
promptly elevated by the attentions of the host and several glasses of
wine, he soon recovered, and became even more vivacious than before,
insomuch that the stout gentleman previously referred to, assured us
that although he had known him since he was _that_ high (something
smaller than a nutmeg-grater), he had never beheld him in such
excellent cue.

When the round game and several games at blind man’s buff which
followed it were all over, and we were going down to supper, the
inexhaustible Mr. Griggins produced a small sprig of mistletoe from his
waistcoat pocket, and commenced a general kissing of the assembled
females, which occasioned great commotion and much excitement. We
observed that several young gentlemen—including the young gentleman
with the pale countenance—were greatly scandalised at this indecorous
proceeding, and talked very big among themselves in corners; and we
observed too, that several young ladies when remonstrated with by the
aforesaid young gentlemen, called each other to witness how they had
struggled, and protested vehemently that it was very rude, and that
they were surprised at Mrs. Brown’s allowing it, and that they couldn’t
bear it, and had no patience with such impertinence. But such is the
gentle and forgiving nature of woman, that although we looked very
narrowly for it, we could not detect the slightest harshness in the
subsequent treatment of Mr. Griggins. Indeed, upon the whole, it struck
us that among the ladies he seemed rather more popular than before!

To recount all the drollery of Mr. Griggins at supper, would fill such
a tiny volume as this, [429] to the very bottom of the outside cover.
How he drank out of other people’s glasses, and ate of other people’s
bread, how he frightened into screaming convulsions a little boy who
was sitting up to supper in a high chair, by sinking below the table
and suddenly reappearing with a mask on; how the hostess was really
surprised that anybody could find a pleasure in tormenting children,
and how the host frowned at the hostess, and felt convinced that Mr.
Griggins had done it with the very best intentions; how Mr. Griggins
explained, and how everybody’s good-humour was restored but the
child’s;—to tell these and a hundred other things ever so briefly,
would occupy more of our room and our readers’ patience, than either
they or we can conveniently spare. Therefore we change the subject,
merely observing that we have offered no description of the funny young
gentleman’s personal appearance, believing that almost every society
has a Griggins of its own, and leaving all readers to supply the
deficiency, according to the particular circumstances of their
particular case.




THE THEATRICAL YOUNG GENTLEMAN


All gentlemen who love the drama—and there are few gentlemen who are
not attached to the most intellectual and rational of all our
amusements—do not come within this definition. As we have no mean
relish for theatrical entertainments ourself, we are disinterestedly
anxious that this should be perfectly understood.

The theatrical young gentleman has early and important information on
all theatrical topics. ‘Well,’ says he, abruptly, when you meet him in
the street, ‘here’s a pretty to-do. Flimkins has thrown up his part in
the melodrama at the Surrey.’—‘And what’s to be done?’ you inquire with
as much gravity as you can counterfeit. ‘Ah, that’s the point,’ replies
the theatrical young gentleman, looking very serious; ‘Boozle declines
it; positively declines it. From all I am told, I should say it was
decidedly in Boozle’s line, and that he would be very likely to make a
great hit in it; but he objects on the ground of Flimkins having been
put up in the part first, and says no earthly power shall induce him to
take the character. It’s a fine part, too—excellent business, I’m told.
He has to kill six people in the course of the piece, and to fight over
a bridge in red fire, which is as safe a card, you know, as can be.
Don’t mention it; but I hear that the last scene, when he is first
poisoned, and then stabbed, by Mrs. Flimkins as Vengedora, will be the
greatest thing that has been done these many years.’ With this piece of
news, and laying his finger on his lips as a caution for you not to
excite the town with it, the theatrical young gentleman hurries away.

The theatrical young gentleman, from often frequenting the different
theatrical establishments, has pet and familiar names for them all.
Thus Covent-Garden is the garden, Drury-Lane the lane, the Victoria the
vic, and the Olympic the pic. Actresses, too, are always designated by
their surnames only, as Taylor, Nisbett, Faucit, Honey; that talented
and lady-like girl Sheriff, that clever little creature Horton, and so
on. In the same manner he prefixes Christian names when he mentions
actors, as Charley Young, Jemmy Buckstone, Fred. Yates, Paul Bedford.
When he is at a loss for a Christian name, the word ‘old’ applied
indiscriminately answers quite as well: as old Charley Matthews at
Vestris’s, old Harley, and old Braham. He has a great knowledge of the
private proceedings of actresses, especially of their getting married,
and can tell you in a breath half-a-dozen who have changed their names
without avowing it. Whenever an alteration of this kind is made in the
playbills, he will remind you that he let you into the secret six
months ago.

The theatrical young gentleman has a great reverence for all that is
connected with the stage department of the different theatres. He
would, at any time, prefer going a street or two out of his way, to
omitting to pass a stage-entrance, into which he always looks with a
curious and searching eye. If he can only identify a popular actor in
the street, he is in a perfect transport of delight; and no sooner
meets him, than he hurries back, and walks a few paces in front of him,
so that he can turn round from time to time, and have a good stare at
his features. He looks upon a theatrical-fund dinner as one of the most
enchanting festivities ever known; and thinks that to be a member of
the Garrick Club, and see so many actors in their plain clothes, must
be one of the highest gratifications the world can bestow.

The theatrical young gentleman is a constant half-price visitor at one
or other of the theatres, and has an infinite relish for all pieces
which display the fullest resources of the establishment. He likes to
place implicit reliance upon the play-bills when he goes to see a
show-piece, and works himself up to such a pitch of enthusiasm, as not
only to believe (if the bills say so) that there are three hundred and
seventy-five people on the stage at one time in the last scene, but is
highly indignant with you, unless you believe it also. He considers
that if the stage be opened from the foot-lights to the back wall, in
any new play, the piece is a triumph of dramatic writing, and applauds
accordingly. He has a great notion of trap-doors too; and thinks any
character going down or coming up a trap (no matter whether he be an
angel or a demon—they both do it occasionally) one of the most
interesting feats in the whole range of scenic illusion.

Besides these acquirements, he has several veracious accounts to
communicate of the private manners and customs of different actors,
which, during the pauses of a quadrille, he usually communicates to his
partner, or imparts to his neighbour at a supper table. Thus he is
advised, that Mr. Liston always had a footman in gorgeous livery
waiting at the side-scene with a brandy bottle and tumbler, to
administer half a pint or so of spirit to him every time he came off,
without which assistance he must infallibly have fainted. He knows for
a fact, that, after an arduous part, Mr. George Bennett is put between
two feather beds, to absorb the perspiration; and is credibly informed,
that Mr. Baker has, for many years, submitted to a course of lukewarm
toast-and-water, to qualify him to sustain his favourite characters. He
looks upon Mr. Fitz Ball as the principal dramatic genius and poet of
the day; but holds that there are great writers extant besides him,—in
proof whereof he refers you to various dramas and melodramas recently
produced, of which he takes in all the sixpenny and three-penny
editions as fast as they appear.

The theatrical young gentleman is a great advocate for violence of
emotion and redundancy of action. If a father has to curse a child upon
the stage, he likes to see it done in the thorough-going style, with no
mistake about it: to which end it is essential that the child should
follow the father on her knees, and be knocked violently over on her
face by the old gentleman as he goes into a small cottage, and shuts
the door behind him. He likes to see a blessing invoked upon the young
lady, when the old gentleman repents, with equal earnestness, and
accompanied by the usual conventional forms, which consist of the old
gentleman looking anxiously up into the clouds, as if to see whether it
rains, and then spreading an imaginary tablecloth in the air over the
young lady’s head—soft music playing all the while. Upon these, and
other points of a similar kind, the theatrical young gentleman is a
great critic indeed. He is likewise very acute in judging of natural
expressions of the passions, and knows precisely the frown, wink, nod,
or leer, which stands for any one of them, or the means by which it may
be converted into any other: as jealousy, with a good stamp of the
right foot, becomes anger; or wildness, with the hands clasped before
the throat, instead of tearing the wig, is passionate love. If you
venture to express a doubt of the accuracy of any of these
portraitures, the theatrical young gentleman assures you, with a
haughty smile, that it always has been done in that way, and he
supposes they are not going to change it at this time of day to please
you; to which, of course, you meekly reply that you suppose not.

There are innumerable disquisitions of this nature, in which the
theatrical young gentleman is very profound, especially to ladies whom
he is most in the habit of entertaining with them; but as we have no
space to recapitulate them at greater length, we must rest content with
calling the attention of the young ladies in general to the theatrical
young gentlemen of their own acquaintance.




THE POETICAL YOUNG GENTLEMAN


Time was, and not very long ago either, when a singular epidemic raged
among the young gentlemen, vast numbers of whom, under the influence of
the malady, tore off their neckerchiefs, turned down their shirt
collars, and exhibited themselves in the open streets with bare throats
and dejected countenances, before the eyes of an astonished public.
These were poetical young gentlemen. The custom was gradually found to
be inconvenient, as involving the necessity of too much clean linen and
too large washing bills, and these outward symptoms have consequently
passed away; but we are disposed to think, notwithstanding, that the
number of poetical young gentlemen is considerably on the increase.

We know a poetical young gentleman—a very poetical young gentleman. We
do not mean to say that he is troubled with the gift of poesy in any
remarkable degree, but his countenance is of a plaintive and melancholy
cast, his manner is abstracted and bespeaks affliction of soul: he
seldom has his hair cut, and often talks about being an outcast and
wanting a kindred spirit; from which, as well as from many general
observations in which he is wont to indulge, concerning mysterious
impulses, and yearnings of the heart, and the supremacy of intellect
gilding all earthly things with the glowing magic of immortal verse, it
is clear to all his friends that he has been stricken poetical.

The favourite attitude of the poetical young gentleman is lounging on a
sofa with his eyes fixed upon the ceiling, or sitting bolt upright in a
high-backed chair, staring with very round eyes at the opposite wall.
When he is in one of these positions, his mother, who is a worthy,
affectionate old soul, will give you a nudge to bespeak your attention
without disturbing the abstracted one, and whisper with a shake of the
head, that John’s imagination is at some extraordinary work or other,
you may take her word for it. Hereupon John looks more fiercely intent
upon vacancy than before, and suddenly snatching a pencil from his
pocket, puts down three words, and a cross on the back of a card, sighs
deeply, paces once or twice across the room, inflicts a most unmerciful
slap upon his head, and walks moodily up to his dormitory.

The poetical young gentleman is apt to acquire peculiar notions of
things too, which plain ordinary people, unblessed with a poetical
obliquity of vision, would suppose to be rather distorted. For
instance, when the sickening murder and mangling of a wretched woman
was affording delicious food wherewithal to gorge the insatiable
curiosity of the public, our friend the poetical young gentleman was in
ecstasies—not of disgust, but admiration. ‘Heavens!’ cried the poetical
young gentleman, ‘how grand; how great!’ We ventured deferentially to
inquire upon whom these epithets were bestowed: our humble thoughts
oscillating between the police officer who found the criminal, and the
lock-keeper who found the head. ‘Upon whom!’ exclaimed the poetical
young gentleman in a frenzy of poetry, ‘Upon whom should they be
bestowed but upon the murderer!’—and thereupon it came out, in a fine
torrent of eloquence, that the murderer was a great spirit, a bold
creature full of daring and nerve, a man of dauntless heart and
determined courage, and withal a great casuist and able reasoner, as
was fully demonstrated in his philosophical colloquies with the great
and noble of the land. We held our peace, and meekly signified our
indisposition to controvert these opinions—firstly, because we were no
match at quotation for the poetical young gentleman; and secondly,
because we felt it would be of little use our entering into any
disputation, if we were: being perfectly convinced that the respectable
and immoral hero in question is not the first and will not be the last
hanged gentleman upon whom false sympathy or diseased curiosity will be
plentifully expended.

This was a stern mystic flight of the poetical young gentleman. In his
milder and softer moments he occasionally lays down his neckcloth, and
pens stanzas, which sometimes find their way into a Lady’s Magazine, or
the ‘Poets’ Corner’ of some country newspaper; or which, in default of
either vent for his genius, adorn the rainbow leaves of a lady’s album.
These are generally written upon some such occasions as contemplating
the Bank of England by midnight, or beholding Saint Paul’s in a
snow-storm; and when these gloomy objects fail to afford him
inspiration, he pours forth his soul in a touching address to a violet,
or a plaintive lament that he is no longer a child, but has gradually
grown up.

The poetical young gentleman is fond of quoting passages from his
favourite authors, who are all of the gloomy and desponding school. He
has a great deal to say too about the world, and is much given to
opining, especially if he has taken anything strong to drink, that
there is nothing in it worth living for. He gives you to understand,
however, that for the sake of society, he means to bear his part in the
tiresome play, manfully resisting the gratification of his own strong
desire to make a premature exit; and consoles himself with the
reflection, that immortality has some chosen nook for himself and the
other great spirits whom earth has chafed and wearied.

When the poetical young gentleman makes use of adjectives, they are all
superlatives. Everything is of the grandest, greatest, noblest,
mightiest, loftiest; or the lowest, meanest, obscurest, vilest, and
most pitiful. He knows no medium: for enthusiasm is the soul of poetry;
and who so enthusiastic as a poetical young gentleman? ‘Mr. Milkwash,’
says a young lady as she unlocks her album to receive the young
gentleman’s original impromptu contribution, ‘how very silent you are!
I think you must be in love.’ ‘Love!’ cries the poetical young
gentleman, starting from his seat by the fire and terrifying the cat
who scampers off at full speed, ‘Love! that burning, consuming passion;
that ardour of the soul, that fierce glowing of the heart. Love! The
withering, blighting influence of hope misplaced and affection
slighted. Love did you say! Ha! ha! ha!’

With this, the poetical young gentleman laughs a laugh belonging only
to poets and Mr. O. Smith of the Adelphi Theatre, and sits down, pen in
hand, to throw off a page or two of verse in the biting,
semi-atheistical demoniac style, which, like the poetical young
gentleman himself, is full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.




THE ‘THROWING-OFF’ YOUNG GENTLEMAN


There is a certain kind of impostor—a bragging, vaunting, puffing young
gentleman—against whom we are desirous to warn that fairer part of the
creation, to whom we more peculiarly devote these our labours. And we
are particularly induced to lay especial stress upon this division of
our subject, by a little dialogue we held some short time ago, with an
esteemed young lady of our acquaintance, touching a most gross specimen
of this class of men. We had been urging all the absurdities of his
conduct and conversation, and dwelling upon the impossibilities he
constantly recounted—to which indeed we had not scrupled to prefix a
certain hard little word of one syllable and three letters—when our
fair friend, unable to maintain the contest any longer, reluctantly
cried, ‘Well; he certainly has a habit of throwing-off, but then—’ What
then? Throw him off yourself, said we. And so she did, but not at our
instance, for other reasons appeared, and it might have been better if
she had done so at first.

The throwing-off young gentleman has so often a father possessed of
vast property in some remote district of Ireland, that we look with
some suspicion upon all young gentlemen who volunteer this description
of themselves. The deceased grandfather of the throwing-off young
gentleman was a man of immense possessions, and untold wealth; the
throwing-off young gentleman remembers, as well as if it were only
yesterday, the deceased baronet’s library, with its long rows of scarce
and valuable books in superbly embossed bindings, arranged in cases,
reaching from the lofty ceiling to the oaken floor; and the fine
antique chairs and tables, and the noble old castle of
Ballykillbabaloo, with its splendid prospect of hill and dale, and
wood, and rich wild scenery, and the fine hunting stables and the
spacious court-yards, ‘and—and—everything upon the same magnificent
scale,’ says the throwing-off young gentleman, ‘princely; quite
princely. Ah!’ And he sighs as if mourning over the fallen fortunes of
his noble house.

The throwing-off young gentleman is a universal genius; at walking,
running, rowing, swimming, and skating, he is unrivalled; at all games
of chance or skill, at hunting, shooting, fishing, riding, driving, or
amateur theatricals, no one can touch him—that is _could_ not, because
he gives you carefully to understand, lest there should be any
opportunity of testing his skill, that he is quite out of practice just
now, and has been for some years. If you mention any beautiful girl of
your common acquaintance in his hearing, the throwing-off young
gentleman starts, smiles, and begs you not to mind him, for it was
quite involuntary: people do say indeed that they were once engaged,
but no—although she is a very fine girl, he was so situated at that
time that he couldn’t possibly encourage the—‘but it’s of no use
talking about it!’ he adds, interrupting himself. ‘She has got over it
now, and I firmly hope and trust is happy.’ With this benevolent
aspiration he nods his head in a mysterious manner, and whistling the
first part of some popular air, thinks perhaps it will be better to
change the subject.

There is another great characteristic of the throwing-off young
gentleman, which is, that he ‘happens to be acquainted’ with a most
extraordinary variety of people in all parts of the world. Thus in all
disputed questions, when the throwing-off young gentleman has no
argument to bring forward, he invariably happens to be acquainted with
some distant person, intimately connected with the subject, whose
testimony decides the point against you, to the great—may we say it—to
the great admiration of three young ladies out of every four, who
consider the throwing-off young gentleman a very highly-connected young
man, and a most charming person.

Sometimes the throwing-off young gentleman happens to look in upon a
little family circle of young ladies who are quietly spending the
evening together, and then indeed is he at the very height and summit
of his glory; for it is to be observed that he by no means shines to
equal advantage in the presence of men as in the society of
over-credulous young ladies, which is his proper element. It is
delightful to hear the number of pretty things the throwing-off young
gentleman gives utterance to, during tea, and still more so to observe
the ease with which, from long practice and study, he delicately blends
one compliment to a lady with two for himself. ‘Did you ever see a more
lovely blue than this flower, Mr. Caveton?’ asks a young lady who,
truth to tell, is rather smitten with the throwing-off young gentleman.
‘Never,’ he replies, bending over the object of admiration, ‘never but
in your eyes.’ ‘Oh, Mr. Caveton,’ cries the young lady, blushing of
course. ‘Indeed I speak the truth,’ replies the throwing-off young
gentleman, ‘I never saw any approach to them. I used to think my
cousin’s blue eyes lovely, but they grow dim and colourless beside
yours.’ ‘Oh! a beautiful cousin, Mr. Caveton!’ replies the young lady,
with that perfect artlessness which is the distinguishing
characteristic of all young ladies; ‘an affair, of course.’ ‘No;
indeed, indeed you wrong me,’ rejoins the throwing-off young gentleman
with great energy. ‘I fervently hope that her attachment towards me may
be nothing but the natural result of our close intimacy in childhood,
and that in change of scene and among new faces she may soon overcome
it. _I_ love her! Think not so meanly of me, Miss Lowfield, I beseech,
as to suppose that title, lands, riches, and beauty, can influence _my_
choice. The heart, the heart, Miss Lowfield.’ Here the throwing-off
young gentleman sinks his voice to a still lower whisper; and the young
lady duly proclaims to all the other young ladies when they go
up-stairs, to put their bonnets on, that Mr. Caveton’s relations are
all immensely rich, and that he is hopelessly beloved by title, lands,
riches, and beauty.

We have seen a throwing-off young gentleman who, to our certain
knowledge, was innocent of a note of music, and scarcely able to
recognise a tune by ear, volunteer a Spanish air upon the guitar when
he had previously satisfied himself that there was not such an
instrument within a mile of the house.

We have heard another throwing-off young gentleman, after striking a
note or two upon the piano, and accompanying it correctly (by dint of
laborious practice) with his voice, assure a circle of wondering
listeners that so acute was his ear that he was wholly unable to sing
out of tune, let him try as he would. We have lived to witness the
unmasking of another throwing-off young gentleman, who went out a
visiting in a military cap with a gold band and tassel, and who, after
passing successfully for a captain and being lauded to the skies for
his red whiskers, his bravery, his soldierly bearing and his pride,
turned out to be the dishonest son of an honest linen-draper in a small
country town, and whom, if it were not for this fortunate exposure, we
should not yet despair of encountering as the fortunate husband of some
rich heiress. Ladies, ladies, the throwing-off young gentlemen are
often swindlers, and always fools. So pray you avoid them.




THE YOUNG LADIES’ YOUNG GENTLEMAN


This young gentleman has several titles. Some young ladies consider him
‘a nice young man,’ others ‘a fine young man,’ others ‘quite a lady’s
man,’ others ‘a handsome man,’ others ‘a remarkably good-looking young
man.’ With some young ladies he is ‘a perfect angel,’ and with others
‘quite a love.’ He is likewise a charming creature, a duck, and a dear.

The young ladies’ young gentleman has usually a fresh colour and very
white teeth, which latter articles, of course, he displays on every
possible opportunity. He has brown or black hair, and whiskers of the
same, if possible; but a slight tinge of red, or the hue which is
vulgarly known as _sandy_, is not considered an objection. If his head
and face be large, his nose prominent, and his figure square, he is an
uncommonly fine young man, and worshipped accordingly. Should his
whiskers meet beneath his chin, so much the better, though this is not
absolutely insisted on; but he must wear an under-waistcoat, and smile
constantly.

There was a great party got up by some party-loving friends of ours
last summer, to go and dine in Epping Forest. As we hold that such wild
expeditions should never be indulged in, save by people of the smallest
means, who have no dinner at home, we should indubitably have excused
ourself from attending, if we had not recollected that the projectors
of the excursion were always accompanied on such occasions by a choice
sample of the young ladies’ young gentleman, whom we were very anxious
to have an opportunity of meeting. This determined us, and we went.

We were to make for Chigwell in four glass coaches, each with a
trifling company of six or eight inside, and a little boy belonging to
the projectors on the box—and to start from the residence of the
projectors, Woburn-place, Russell-square, at half-past ten precisely.
We arrived at the place of rendezvous at the appointed time, and found
the glass coaches and the little boys quite ready, and divers young
ladies and young gentlemen looking anxiously over the breakfast-parlour
blinds, who appeared by no means so much gratified by our approach as
we might have expected, but evidently wished we had been somebody else.
Observing that our arrival in lieu of the unknown occasioned some
disappointment, we ventured to inquire who was yet to come, when we
found from the hasty reply of a dozen voices, that it was no other than
the young ladies’ young gentleman.

‘I cannot imagine,’ said the mamma, ‘what has become of Mr.
Balim—always so punctual, always so pleasant and agreeable. I am sure I
can-_not_ think.’ As these last words were uttered in that measured,
emphatic manner which painfully announces that the speaker has not
quite made up his or her mind what to say, but is determined to talk on
nevertheless, the eldest daughter took up the subject, and hoped no
accident had happened to Mr. Balim, upon which there was a general
chorus of ‘Dear Mr. Balim!’ and one young lady, more adventurous than
the rest, proposed that an express should be straightway sent to dear
Mr. Balim’s lodgings. This, however, the papa resolutely opposed,
observing, in what a short young lady behind us termed ‘quite a bearish
way,’ that if Mr. Balim didn’t choose to come, he might stop at home.
At this all the daughters raised a murmur of ‘Oh pa!’ except one
sprightly little girl of eight or ten years old, who, taking advantage
of a pause in the discourse, remarked, that perhaps Mr. Balim might
have been married that morning—for which impertinent suggestion she was
summarily ejected from the room by her eldest sister.

We were all in a state of great mortification and uneasiness, when one
of the little boys, running into the room as airily as little boys
usually run who have an unlimited allowance of animal food in the
holidays, and keep their hands constantly forced down to the bottoms of
very deep trouser-pockets when they take exercise, joyfully announced
that Mr. Balim was at that moment coming up the street in a
hackney-cab; and the intelligence was confirmed beyond all doubt a
minute afterwards by the entry of Mr. Balim himself, who was received
with repeated cries of ‘Where have you been, you naughty creature?’
whereunto the naughty creature replied, that he had been in bed, in
consequence of a late party the night before, and had only just risen.
The acknowledgment awakened a variety of agonizing fears that he had
taken no breakfast; which appearing after a slight cross-examination to
be the real state of the case, breakfast for one was immediately
ordered, notwithstanding Mr. Balim’s repeated protestations that he
couldn’t think of it. He did think of it though, and thought better of
it too, for he made a remarkably good meal when it came, and was
assiduously served by a select knot of young ladies. It was quite
delightful to see how he ate and drank, while one pair of fair hands
poured out his coffee, and another put in the sugar, and another the
milk; the rest of the company ever and anon casting angry glances at
their watches, and the glass coaches,—and the little boys looking on in
an agony of apprehension lest it should begin to rain before we set
out; it might have rained all day, after we were once too far to turn
back again, and welcome, for aught they cared.

However, the cavalcade moved at length, every coachman being
accommodated with a hamper between his legs something larger than a
wheelbarrow; and the company being packed as closely as they possibly
could in the carriages, ‘according,’ as one married lady observed, ‘to
the immemorial custom, which was half the diversion of gipsy parties.’
Thinking it very likely it might be (we have never been able to
discover the other half), we submitted to be stowed away with a
cheerful aspect, and were fortunate enough to occupy one corner of a
coach in which were one old lady, four young ladies, and the renowned
Mr. Balim the young ladies’ young gentleman.

We were no sooner fairly off, than the young ladies’ young gentleman
hummed a fragment of an air, which induced a young lady to inquire
whether he had danced to that the night before. ‘By Heaven, then, I
did,’ replied the young gentleman, ‘and with a lovely heiress; a superb
creature, with twenty thousand pounds.’ ‘You seem rather struck,’
observed another young lady. ‘’Gad she was a sweet creature,’ returned
the young gentleman, arranging his hair. ‘Of course _she_ was struck
too?’ inquired the first young lady. ‘How can you ask, love?’
interposed the second; ‘could she fail to be?’ ‘Well, honestly I think
she was,’ observed the young gentleman. At this point of the dialogue,
the young lady who had spoken first, and who sat on the young
gentleman’s right, struck him a severe blow on the arm with a rosebud,
and said he was a vain man—whereupon the young gentleman insisted on
having the rosebud, and the young lady appealing for help to the other
young ladies, a charming struggle ensued, terminating in the victory of
the young gentleman, and the capture of the rosebud. This little
skirmish over, the married lady, who was the mother of the rosebud,
smiled sweetly upon the young gentleman, and accused him of being a
flirt; the young gentleman pleading not guilty, a most interesting
discussion took place upon the important point whether the young
gentleman was a flirt or not, which being an agreeable conversation of
a light kind, lasted a considerable time. At length, a short silence
occurring, the young ladies on either side of the young gentleman fell
suddenly fast asleep; and the young gentleman, winking upon us to
preserve silence, won a pair of gloves from each, thereby causing them
to wake with equal suddenness and to scream very loud. The lively
conversation to which this pleasantry gave rise, lasted for the
remainder of the ride, and would have eked out a much longer one.

We dined rather more comfortably than people usually do under such
circumstances, nothing having been left behind but the cork-screw and
the bread. The married gentlemen were unusually thirsty, which they
attributed to the heat of the weather; the little boys ate to
inconvenience; mammas were very jovial, and their daughters very
fascinating; and the attendants being well-behaved men, got exceedingly
drunk at a respectful distance.

We had our eye on Mr. Balim at dinner-time, and perceived that he
flourished wonderfully, being still surrounded by a little group of
young ladies, who listened to him as an oracle, while he ate from their
plates and drank from their glasses in a manner truly captivating from
its excessive playfulness. His conversation, too, was exceedingly
brilliant. In fact, one elderly lady assured us, that in the course of
a little lively _badinage_ on the subject of ladies’ dresses, he had
evinced as much knowledge as if he had been born and bred a milliner.

As such of the fat people who did not happen to fall asleep after
dinner entered upon a most vigorous game at ball, we slipped away alone
into a thicker part of the wood, hoping to fall in with Mr. Balim, the
greater part of the young people having dropped off in twos and threes
and the young ladies’ young gentleman among them. Nor were we
disappointed, for we had not walked far, when, peeping through the
trees, we discovered him before us, and truly it was a pleasant thing
to contemplate his greatness.

The young ladies’ young gentleman was seated upon the ground, at the
feet of a few young ladies who were reclining on a bank; he was so
profusely decked with scarfs, ribands, flowers, and other pretty
spoils, that he looked like a lamb—or perhaps a calf would be a better
simile—adorned for the sacrifice. One young lady supported a parasol
over his interesting head, another held his hat, and a third his
neck-cloth, which in romantic fashion he had thrown off; the young
gentleman himself, with his hand upon his breast, and his face moulded
into an expression of the most honeyed sweetness, was warbling forth
some choice specimens of vocal music in praise of female loveliness, in
a style so exquisitely perfect, that we burst into an involuntary shout
of laughter, and made a hasty retreat.

What charming fellows these young ladies’ young gentlemen are! Ducks,
dears, loves, angels, are all terms inadequate to express their merit.
They are such amazingly, uncommonly, wonderfully, nice men.




CONCLUSION


As we have placed before the young ladies so many specimens of young
gentlemen, and have also in the dedication of this volume given them to
understand how much we reverence and admire their numerous virtues and
perfections; as we have given them such strong reasons to treat us with
confidence, and to banish, in our case, all that reserve and distrust
of the male sex which, as a point of general behaviour, they cannot do
better than preserve and maintain—we say, as we have done all this, we
feel that now, when we have arrived at the close of our task, they may
naturally press upon us the inquiry, what particular description of
young gentlemen we can conscientiously recommend.

Here we are at a loss. We look over our list, and can neither recommend
the bashful young gentleman, nor the out-and-out young gentleman, nor
the very friendly young gentleman, nor the military young gentleman,
nor the political young gentleman, nor the domestic young gentleman,
nor the censorious young gentleman, nor the funny young gentleman, nor
the theatrical young gentleman, nor the poetical young gentleman, nor
the throwing-off young gentleman, nor the young ladies’ young
gentleman.

As there are some good points about many of them, which still are not
sufficiently numerous to render any one among them eligible, as a
whole, our respectful advice to the young ladies is, to seek for a
young gentleman who unites in himself the best qualities of all, and
the worst weaknesses of none, and to lead him forthwith to the hymeneal
altar, whether he will or no. And to the young lady who secures him, we
beg to tender one short fragment of matrimonial advice, selected from
many sound passages of a similar tendency, to be found in a letter
written by Dean Swift to a young lady on her marriage.

‘The grand affair of your life will be, to gain and preserve the esteem
of your husband. Neither good-nature nor virtue will suffer him to
_esteem_ you against his judgment; and although he is not capable of
using you ill, yet you will in time grow a thing indifferent and
perhaps contemptible; unless you can supply the loss of youth and
beauty with more durable qualities. You have but a very few years to be
young and handsome in the eyes of the world; and as few months to be so
in the eyes of a husband who is not a fool; for I hope you do not still
dream of charms and raptures, which marriage ever did, and ever will,
put a sudden end to.’

From the anxiety we express for the proper behaviour of the fortunate
lady after marriage, it may possibly be inferred that the young
gentleman to whom we have so delicately alluded, is no other than
ourself. Without in any way committing ourself upon this point, we have
merely to observe, that we are ready to receive sealed offers
containing a full specification of age, temper, appearance, and
condition; but we beg it to be distinctly understood that we do not
pledge ourself to accept the highest bidder.

These offers may be forwarded to the Publishers, Messrs. Chapman and
Hall, London; to whom all pieces of plate and other testimonials of
approbation from the young ladies generally, are respectfully requested
to be addressed.




SKETCHES OF YOUNG COUPLES


AN URGENT REMONSTRANCE, &c.

TO THE GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND,
(being bachelors or widowers,)
THE REMONSTRANCE OF THEIR FAITHFUL FELLOW-SUBJECT,


Sheweth,—

That Her Most Gracious Majesty, Victoria, by the Grace of God of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen, Defender of the
Faith, did, on the 23rd day of November last past, declare and
pronounce to Her Most Honourable Privy Council, Her Majesty’s Most
Gracious intention of entering into the bonds of wedlock.

That Her Most Gracious Majesty, in so making known Her Most Gracious
intention to Her Most Honourable Privy Council as aforesaid, did use
and employ the words—‘It is my intention to ally myself in marriage
with Prince Albert of Saxe Coburg and Gotha.’

That the present is Bissextile, or Leap Year, in which it is held and
considered lawful for any lady to offer and submit proposals of
marriage to any gentleman, and to enforce and insist upon acceptance of
the same, under pain of a certain fine or penalty; to wit, one silk or
satin dress of the first quality, to be chosen by the lady and paid (or
owed) for, by the gentleman.

That these and other the horrors and dangers with which the said
Bissextile, or Leap Year, threatens the gentlemen of England on every
occasion of its periodical return, have been greatly aggravated and
augmented by the terms of Her Majesty’s said Most Gracious
communication, which have filled the heads of divers young ladies in
this Realm with certain new ideas destructive to the peace of mankind,
that never entered their imagination before.

That a case has occurred in Camberwell, in which a young lady informed
her Papa that ‘she intended to ally herself in marriage’ with Mr. Smith
of Stepney; and that another, and a very distressing case, has occurred
at Tottenham, in which a young lady not only stated her intention of
allying herself in marriage with her cousin John, but, taking violent
possession of her said cousin, actually married him.

That similar outrages are of constant occurrence, not only in the
capital and its neighbourhood, but throughout the kingdom, and that
unless the excited female populace be speedily checked and restrained
in their lawless proceedings, most deplorable results must ensue
therefrom; among which may be anticipated a most alarming increase in
the population of the country, with which no efforts of the
agricultural or manufacturing interest can possibly keep pace.

That there is strong reason to suspect the existence of a most
extensive plot, conspiracy, or design, secretly contrived by vast
numbers of single ladies in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, and now extending its ramifications in every quarter of the
land; the object and intent of which plainly appears to be the holding
and solemnising of an enormous and unprecedented number of marriages,
on the day on which the nuptials of Her said Most Gracious Majesty are
performed.

That such plot, conspiracy, or design, strongly savours of Popery, as
tending to the discomfiture of the Clergy of the Established Church, by
entailing upon them great mental and physical exhaustion; and that such
Popish plots are fomented and encouraged by Her Majesty’s Ministers,
which clearly appears—not only from Her Majesty’s principal Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs traitorously getting married while holding
office under the Crown; but from Mr. O’Connell having been heard to
declare and avow that, if he had a daughter to marry, she should be
married on the same day as Her said Most Gracious Majesty.

That such arch plots, conspiracies, and designs, besides being fraught
with danger to the Established Church, and (consequently) to the State,
cannot fail to bring ruin and bankruptcy upon a large class of Her
Majesty’s subjects; as a great and sudden increase in the number of
married men occasioning the comparative desertion (for a time) of
Taverns, Hotels, Billiard-rooms, and Gaming-Houses, will deprive the
Proprietors of their accustomed profits and returns. And in further
proof of the depth and baseness of such designs, it may be here
observed, that all proprietors of Taverns, Hotels, Billiard-rooms, and
Gaming-Houses, are (especially the last) solemnly devoted to the
Protestant religion.

For all these reasons, and many others of no less gravity and import,
an urgent appeal is made to the gentlemen of England (being bachelors
or widowers) to take immediate steps for convening a Public meeting; To
consider of the best and surest means of averting the dangers with
which they are threatened by the recurrence of Bissextile, or Leap
Year, and the additional sensation created among single ladies by the
terms of Her Majesty’s Most Gracious Declaration; To take measures,
without delay, for resisting the said single Ladies, and counteracting
their evil designs; And to pray Her Majesty to dismiss her present
Ministers, and to summon to her Councils those distinguished Gentlemen
in various Honourable Professions who, by insulting on all occasions
the only Lady in England who can be insulted with safety, have given a
sufficient guarantee to Her Majesty’s Loving Subjects that they, at
least, are qualified to make war with women, and are already expert in
the use of those weapons which are common to the lowest and most
abandoned of the sex.




THE YOUNG COUPLE


There is to be a wedding this morning at the corner house in the
terrace. The pastry-cook’s people have been there half-a-dozen times
already; all day yesterday there was a great stir and bustle, and they
were up this morning as soon as it was light. Miss Emma Fielding is
going to be married to young Mr. Harvey.

Heaven alone can tell in what bright colours this marriage is painted
upon the mind of the little housemaid at number six, who has hardly
slept a wink all night with thinking of it, and now stands on the
unswept door-steps leaning upon her broom, and looking wistfully
towards the enchanted house. Nothing short of omniscience can divine
what visions of the baker, or the green-grocer, or the smart and most
insinuating butterman, are flitting across her mind—what thoughts of
how she would dress on such an occasion, if she were a lady—of how she
would dress, if she were only a bride—of how cook would dress, being
bridesmaid, conjointly with her sister ‘in place’ at Fulham, and how
the clergyman, deeming them so many ladies, would be quite humbled and
respectful. What day-dreams of hope and happiness—of life being one
perpetual holiday, with no master and no mistress to grant or withhold
it—of every Sunday being a Sunday out—of pure freedom as to curls and
ringlets, and no obligation to hide fine heads of hair in caps—what
pictures of happiness, vast and immense to her, but utterly ridiculous
to us, bewilder the brain of the little housemaid at number six, all
called into existence by the wedding at the corner!

We smile at such things, and so we should, though perhaps for a better
reason than commonly presents itself. It should be pleasant to us to
know that there are notions of happiness so moderate and limited, since
upon those who entertain them, happiness and lightness of heart are
very easily bestowed.

But the little housemaid is awakened from her reverie, for forth from
the door of the magical corner house there runs towards her, all
fluttering in smart new dress and streaming ribands, her friend Jane
Adams, who comes all out of breath to redeem a solemn promise of taking
her in, under cover of the confusion, to see the breakfast table spread
forth in state, and—sight of sights!—her young mistress ready dressed
for church.

And there, in good truth, when they have stolen up-stairs on tip-toe
and edged themselves in at the chamber-door—there is Miss Emma ‘looking
like the sweetest picter,’ in a white chip bonnet and orange flowers,
and all other elegancies becoming a bride, (with the make, shape, and
quality of every article of which the girl is perfectly familiar in one
moment, and never forgets to her dying day)—and there is Miss Emma’s
mamma in tears, and Miss Emma’s papa comforting her, and saying how
that of course she has been long looking forward to this, and how happy
she ought to be—and there too is Miss Emma’s sister with her arms round
her neck, and the other bridesmaid all smiles and tears, quieting the
children, who would cry more but that they are so finely dressed, and
yet sob for fear sister Emma should be taken away—and it is all so
affecting, that the two servant-girls cry more than anybody; and Jane
Adams, sitting down upon the stairs, when they have crept away,
declares that her legs tremble so that she don’t know what to do, and
that she will say for Miss Emma, that she never had a hasty word from
her, and that she does hope and pray she may be happy.

But Jane soon comes round again, and then surely there never was
anything like the breakfast table, glittering with plate and china, and
set out with flowers and sweets, and long-necked bottles, in the most
sumptuous and dazzling manner. In the centre, too, is the mighty charm,
the cake, glistening with frosted sugar, and garnished beautifully.
They agree that there ought to be a little Cupid under one of the
barley-sugar temples, or at least two hearts and an arrow; but, with
this exception, there is nothing to wish for, and a table could not be
handsomer. As they arrive at this conclusion, who should come in but
Mr. John! to whom Jane says that its only Anne from number six; and
John says _he_ knows, for he’s often winked his eye down the area,
which causes Anne to blush and look confused. She is going away,
indeed; when Mr. John will have it that she must drink a glass of wine,
and he says never mind it’s being early in the morning, it won’t hurt
her: so they shut the door and pour out the wine; and Anne drinking
lane’s health, and adding, ‘and here’s wishing you yours, Mr. John,’
drinks it in a great many sips,—Mr. John all the time making jokes
appropriate to the occasion. At last Mr. John, who has waxed bolder by
degrees, pleads the usage at weddings, and claims the privilege of a
kiss, which he obtains after a great scuffle; and footsteps being now
heard on the stairs, they disperse suddenly.

By this time a carriage has driven up to convey the bride to church,
and Anne of number six prolonging the process of ‘cleaning her door,’
has the satisfaction of beholding the bride and bridesmaids, and the
papa and mamma, hurry into the same and drive rapidly off. Nor is this
all, for soon other carriages begin to arrive with a posse of company
all beautifully dressed, at whom she could stand and gaze for ever; but
having something else to do, is compelled to take one last long look
and shut the street-door.

And now the company have gone down to breakfast, and tears have given
place to smiles, for all the corks are out of the long-necked bottles,
and their contents are disappearing rapidly. Miss Emma’s papa is at the
top of the table; Miss Emma’s mamma at the bottom; and beside the
latter are Miss Emma herself and her husband,—admitted on all hands to
be the handsomest and most interesting young couple ever known. All
down both sides of the table, too, are various young ladies, beautiful
to see, and various young gentlemen who seem to think so; and there, in
a post of honour, is an unmarried aunt of Miss Emma’s, reported to
possess unheard-of riches, and to have expressed vast testamentary
intentions respecting her favourite niece and new nephew. This lady has
been very liberal and generous already, as the jewels worn by the bride
abundantly testify, but that is nothing to what she means to do, or
even to what she has done, for she put herself in close communication
with the dressmaker three months ago, and prepared a wardrobe (with
some articles worked by her own hands) fit for a Princess. People may
call her an old maid, and so she may be, but she is neither cross nor
ugly for all that; on the contrary, she is very cheerful and
pleasant-looking, and very kind and tender-hearted: which is no matter
of surprise except to those who yield to popular prejudices without
thinking why, and will never grow wiser and never know better.

Of all the company though, none are more pleasant to behold or better
pleased with themselves than two young children, who, in honour of the
day, have seats among the guests. Of these, one is a little fellow of
six or eight years old, brother to the bride,—and the other a girl of
the same age, or something younger, whom he calls ‘his wife.’ The real
bride and bridegroom are not more devoted than they: he all love and
attention, and she all blushes and fondness, toying with a little
bouquet which he gave her this morning, and placing the scattered
rose-leaves in her bosom with nature’s own coquettishness. They have
dreamt of each other in their quiet dreams, these children, and their
little hearts have been nearly broken when the absent one has been
dispraised in jest. When will there come in after-life a passion so
earnest, generous, and true as theirs; what, even in its gentlest
realities, can have the grace and charm that hover round such fairy
lovers!

By this time the merriment and happiness of the feast have gained their
height; certain ominous looks begin to be exchanged between the
bridesmaids, and somehow it gets whispered about that the carriage
which is to take the young couple into the country has arrived. Such
members of the party as are most disposed to prolong its enjoyments,
affect to consider this a false alarm, but it turns out too true, being
speedily confirmed, first by the retirement of the bride and a select
file of intimates who are to prepare her for the journey, and secondly
by the withdrawal of the ladies generally. To this there ensues a
particularly awkward pause, in which everybody essays to be facetious,
and nobody succeeds; at length the bridegroom makes a mysterious
disappearance in obedience to some equally mysterious signal; and the
table is deserted.

Now, for at least six weeks last past it has been solemnly devised and
settled that the young couple should go away in secret; but they no
sooner appear without the door than the drawing-room windows are
blocked up with ladies waving their handkerchiefs and kissing their
hands, and the dining-room panes with gentlemen’s faces beaming
farewell in every queer variety of its expression. The hall and steps
are crowded with servants in white favours, mixed up with particular
friends and relations who have darted out to say good-bye; and foremost
in the group are the tiny lovers arm in arm, thinking, with fluttering
hearts, what happiness it would be to dash away together in that
gallant coach, and never part again.

The bride has barely time for one hurried glance at her old home, when
the steps rattle, the door slams, the horses clatter on the pavement,
and they have left it far away.

A knot of women servants still remain clustered in the hall, whispering
among themselves, and there of course is Anne from number six, who has
made another escape on some plea or other, and been an admiring witness
of the departure. There are two points on which Anne expatiates over
and over again, without the smallest appearance of fatigue or intending
to leave off; one is, that she ‘never see in all her life such a—oh
such a angel of a gentleman as Mr. Harvey’—and the other, that she
‘can’t tell how it is, but it don’t seem a bit like a work-a-day, or a
Sunday neither—it’s all so unsettled and unregular.’




THE FORMAL COUPLE


The formal couple are the most prim, cold, immovable, and
unsatisfactory people on the face of the earth. Their faces, voices,
dress, house, furniture, walk, and manner, are all the essence of
formality, unrelieved by one redeeming touch of frankness, heartiness,
or nature.

Everything with the formal couple resolves itself into a matter of
form. They don’t call upon you on your account, but their own; not to
see how you are, but to show how they are: it is not a ceremony to do
honour to you, but to themselves,—not due to your position, but to
theirs. If one of a friend’s children die, the formal couple are as
sure and punctual in sending to the house as the undertaker; if a
friend’s family be increased, the monthly nurse is not more attentive
than they. The formal couple, in fact, joyfully seize all occasions of
testifying their good-breeding and precise observance of the little
usages of society; and for you, who are the means to this end, they
care as much as a man does for the tailor who has enabled him to cut a
figure, or a woman for the milliner who has assisted her to a conquest.

Having an extensive connexion among that kind of people who make
acquaintances and eschew friends, the formal gentleman attends from
time to time a great many funerals, to which he is formally invited,
and to which he formally goes, as returning a call for the last time.
Here his deportment is of the most faultless description; he knows the
exact pitch of voice it is proper to assume, the sombre look he ought
to wear, the melancholy tread which should be his gait for the day. He
is perfectly acquainted with all the dreary courtesies to be observed
in a mourning-coach; knows when to sigh, and when to hide his nose in
the white handkerchief; and looks into the grave and shakes his head
when the ceremony is concluded, with the sad formality of a mute.

‘What kind of funeral was it?’ says the formal lady, when he returns
home. ‘Oh!’ replies the formal gentleman, ‘there never was such a gross
and disgusting impropriety; there were no feathers.’ ‘No feathers!’
cries the lady, as if on wings of black feathers dead people fly to
Heaven, and, lacking them, they must of necessity go elsewhere. Her
husband shakes his head; and further adds, that they had seed-cake
instead of plum-cake, and that it was all white wine. ‘All white wine!’
exclaims his wife. ‘Nothing but sherry and madeira,’ says the husband.
‘What! no port?’ ‘Not a drop.’ No port, no plums, and no feathers! ‘You
will recollect, my dear,’ says the formal lady, in a voice of stately
reproof, ‘that when we first met this poor man who is now dead and
gone, and he took that very strange course of addressing me at dinner
without being previously introduced, I ventured to express my opinion
that the family were quite ignorant of etiquette, and very imperfectly
acquainted with the decencies of life. You have now had a good
opportunity of judging for yourself, and all I have to say is, that I
trust you will never go to a funeral _there_ again.’ ‘My dear,’ replies
the formal gentleman, ‘I never will.’ So the informal deceased is cut
in his grave; and the formal couple, when they tell the story of the
funeral, shake their heads, and wonder what some people’s feelings
_are_ made of, and what their notions of propriety _can_ be!

If the formal couple have a family (which they sometimes have), they
are not children, but little, pale, sour, sharp-nosed men and women;
and so exquisitely brought up, that they might be very old dwarfs for
anything that appeareth to the contrary. Indeed, they are so acquainted
with forms and conventionalities, and conduct themselves with such
strict decorum, that to see the little girl break a looking-glass in
some wild outbreak, or the little boy kick his parents, would be to any
visitor an unspeakable relief and consolation.

The formal couple are always sticklers for what is rigidly proper, and
have a great readiness in detecting hidden impropriety of speech or
thought, which by less scrupulous people would be wholly unsuspected.
Thus, if they pay a visit to the theatre, they sit all night in a
perfect agony lest anything improper or immoral should proceed from the
stage; and if anything should happen to be said which admits of a
double construction, they never fail to take it up directly, and to
express by their looks the great outrage which their feelings have
sustained. Perhaps this is their chief reason for absenting themselves
almost entirely from places of public amusement. They go sometimes to
the Exhibition of the Royal Academy;—but that is often more shocking
than the stage itself, and the formal lady thinks that it really is
high time Mr. Etty was prosecuted and made a public example of.

We made one at a christening party not long since, where there were
amongst the guests a formal couple, who suffered the acutest torture
from certain jokes, incidental to such an occasion, cut—and very likely
dried also—by one of the godfathers; a red-faced elderly gentleman,
who, being highly popular with the rest of the company, had it all his
own way, and was in great spirits. It was at supper-time that this
gentleman came out in full force. We—being of a grave and quiet
demeanour—had been chosen to escort the formal lady down-stairs, and,
sitting beside her, had a favourable opportunity of observing her
emotions.

We have a shrewd suspicion that, in the very beginning, and in the
first blush—literally the first blush—of the matter, the formal lady
had not felt quite certain whether the being present at such a
ceremony, and encouraging, as it were, the public exhibition of a baby,
was not an act involving some degree of indelicacy and impropriety; but
certain we are that when that baby’s health was drunk, and allusions
were made, by a grey-headed gentleman proposing it, to the time when he
had dandled in his arms the young Christian’s mother,—certain we are
that then the formal lady took the alarm, and recoiled from the old
gentleman as from a hoary profligate. Still she bore it; she fanned
herself with an indignant air, but still she bore it. A comic song was
sung, involving a confession from some imaginary gentleman that he had
kissed a female, and yet the formal lady bore it. But when at last, the
health of the godfather before-mentioned being drunk, the godfather
rose to return thanks, and in the course of his observations darkly
hinted at babies yet unborn, and even contemplated the possibility of
the subject of that festival having brothers and sisters, the formal
lady could endure no more, but, bowing slightly round, and sweeping
haughtily past the offender, left the room in tears, under the
protection of the formal gentleman.




THE LOVING COUPLE


There cannot be a better practical illustration of the wise saw and
ancient instance, that there may be too much of a good thing, than is
presented by a loving couple. Undoubtedly it is meet and proper that
two persons joined together in holy matrimony should be loving, and
unquestionably it is pleasant to know and see that they are so; but
there is a time for all things, and the couple who happen to be always
in a loving state before company, are well-nigh intolerable.

And in taking up this position we would have it distinctly understood
that we do not seek alone the sympathy of bachelors, in whose objection
to loving couples we recognise interested motives and personal
considerations. We grant that to that unfortunate class of society
there may be something very irritating, tantalising, and provoking, in
being compelled to witness those gentle endearments and chaste
interchanges which to loving couples are quite the ordinary business of
life. But while we recognise the natural character of the prejudice to
which these unhappy men are subject, we can neither receive their
biassed evidence, nor address ourself to their inflamed and angered
minds. Dispassionate experience is our only guide; and in these moral
essays we seek no less to reform hymeneal offenders than to hold out a
timely warning to all rising couples, and even to those who have not
yet set forth upon their pilgrimage towards the matrimonial market.

Let all couples, present or to come, therefore profit by the example of
Mr. and Mrs. Leaver, themselves a loving couple in the first degree.

Mr. and Mrs. Leaver are pronounced by Mrs. Starling, a widow lady who
lost her husband when she was young, and lost herself about the
same-time—for by her own count she has never since grown five years
older—to be a perfect model of wedded felicity. ‘You would suppose,’
says the romantic lady, ‘that they were lovers only just now engaged.
Never was such happiness! They are so tender, so affectionate, so
attached to each other, so enamoured, that positively nothing can be
more charming!’

‘Augusta, my soul,’ says Mr. Leaver. ‘Augustus, my life,’ replies Mrs.
Leaver. ‘Sing some little ballad, darling,’ quoth Mr. Leaver. ‘I
couldn’t, indeed, dearest,’ returns Mrs. Leaver. ‘Do, my dove,’ says
Mr. Leaver. ‘I couldn’t possibly, my love,’ replies Mrs. Leaver; ‘and
it’s very naughty of you to ask me.’ ‘Naughty, darling!’ cries Mr.
Leaver. ‘Yes, very naughty, and very cruel,’ returns Mrs. Leaver, ‘for
you know I have a sore throat, and that to sing would give me great
pain. You’re a monster, and I hate you. Go away!’ Mrs. Leaver has said
‘go away,’ because Mr. Leaver has tapped her under the chin: Mr. Leaver
not doing as he is bid, but on the contrary, sitting down beside her,
Mrs. Leaver slaps Mr. Leaver; and Mr. Leaver in return slaps Mrs.
Leaver, and it being now time for all persons present to look the other
way, they look the other way, and hear a still small sound as of
kissing, at which Mrs. Starling is thoroughly enraptured, and whispers
her neighbour that if all married couples were like that, what a heaven
this earth would be!

The loving couple are at home when this occurs, and maybe only three or
four friends are present, but, unaccustomed to reserve upon this
interesting point, they are pretty much the same abroad. Indeed upon
some occasions, such as a pic-nic or a water-party, their lovingness is
even more developed, as we had an opportunity last summer of observing
in person.

There was a great water-party made up to go to Twickenham and dine, and
afterwards dance in an empty villa by the river-side, hired expressly
for the purpose. Mr. and Mrs. Leaver were of the company; and it was
our fortune to have a seat in the same boat, which was an eight-oared
galley, manned by amateurs, with a blue striped awning of the same
pattern as their Guernsey shirts, and a dingy red flag of the same
shade as the whiskers of the stroke oar. A coxswain being appointed,
and all other matters adjusted, the eight gentlemen threw themselves
into strong paroxysms, and pulled up with the tide, stimulated by the
compassionate remarks of the ladies, who one and all exclaimed, that it
seemed an immense exertion—as indeed it did. At first we raced the
other boat, which came alongside in gallant style; but this being found
an unpleasant amusement, as giving rise to a great quantity of
splashing, and rendering the cold pies and other viands very moist, it
was unanimously voted down, and we were suffered to shoot a-head, while
the second boat followed ingloriously in our wake.

It was at this time that we first recognised Mr. Leaver. There were two
firemen-watermen in the boat, lying by until somebody was exhausted;
and one of them, who had taken upon himself the direction of affairs,
was heard to cry in a gruff voice, ‘Pull away, number two—give it her,
number two—take a longer reach, number two—now, number two, sir, think
you’re winning a boat.’ The greater part of the company had no doubt
begun to wonder which of the striped Guernseys it might be that stood
in need of such encouragement, when a stifled shriek from Mrs. Leaver
confirmed the doubtful and informed the ignorant; and Mr. Leaver, still
further disguised in a straw hat and no neckcloth, was observed to be
in a fearful perspiration, and failing visibly. Nor was the general
consternation diminished at this instant by the same gentleman (in the
performance of an accidental aquatic feat, termed ‘catching a crab’)
plunging suddenly backward, and displaying nothing of himself to the
company, but two violently struggling legs. Mrs. Leaver shrieked again
several times, and cried piteously—‘Is he dead? Tell me the worst. Is
he dead?’

Now, a moment’s reflection might have convinced the loving wife, that
unless her husband were endowed with some most surprising powers of
muscular action, he never could be dead while he kicked so hard; but
still Mrs. Leaver cried, ‘Is he dead? is he dead?’ and still everybody
else cried—‘No, no, no,’ until such time as Mr. Leaver was replaced in
a sitting posture, and his oar (which had been going through all kinds
of wrong-headed performances on its own account) was once more put in
his hand, by the exertions of the two firemen-watermen. Mr. Leaver then
exclaimed, ‘Augustus, my child, come to me;’ and Mr. Leaver said,
‘Augusta, my love, compose yourself, I am not injured.’ But Mrs. Leaver
cried again more piteously than before, ‘Augustus, my child, come to
me;’ and now the company generally, who seemed to be apprehensive that
if Mr. Leaver remained where he was, he might contribute more than his
proper share towards the drowning of the party, disinterestedly took
part with Mrs. Leaver, and said he really ought to go, and that he was
not strong enough for such violent exercise, and ought never to have
undertaken it. Reluctantly, Mr. Leaver went, and laid himself down at
Mrs. Leaver’s feet, and Mrs. Leaver stooping over him, said, ‘Oh
Augustus, how could you terrify me so?’ and Mr. Leaver said, ‘Augusta,
my sweet, I never meant to terrify you;’ and Mrs. Leaver said, ‘You are
faint, my dear;’ and Mr. Leaver said, ‘I am rather so, my love;’ and
they were very loving indeed under Mrs. Leaver’s veil, until at length
Mr. Leaver came forth again, and pleasantly asked if he had not heard
something said about bottled stout and sandwiches.

Mrs. Starling, who was one of the party, was perfectly delighted with
this scene, and frequently murmured half-aside, ‘What a loving couple
you are!’ or ‘How delightful it is to see man and wife so happy
together!’ To us she was quite poetical, (for we are a kind of
cousins,) observing that hearts beating in unison like that made life a
paradise of sweets; and that when kindred creatures were drawn together
by sympathies so fine and delicate, what more than mortal happiness did
not our souls partake! To all this we answered ‘Certainly,’ or ‘Very
true,’ or merely sighed, as the case might be. At every new act of the
loving couple, the widow’s admiration broke out afresh; and when Mrs.
Leaver would not permit Mr. Leaver to keep his hat off, lest the sun
should strike to his head, and give him a brain fever, Mrs. Starling
actually shed tears, and said it reminded her of Adam and Eve.

The loving couple were thus loving all the way to Twickenham, but when
we arrived there (by which time the amateur crew looked very thirsty
and vicious) they were more playful than ever, for Mrs. Leaver threw
stones at Mr. Leaver, and Mr. Leaver ran after Mrs. Leaver on the
grass, in a most innocent and enchanting manner. At dinner, too, Mr.
Leaver _would_ steal Mrs. Leaver’s tongue, and Mrs. Leaver _would_
retaliate upon Mr. Leaver’s fowl; and when Mrs. Leaver was going to
take some lobster salad, Mr. Leaver wouldn’t let her have any, saying
that it made her ill, and she was always sorry for it afterwards, which
afforded Mrs. Leaver an opportunity of pretending to be cross, and
showing many other prettinesses. But this was merely the smiling
surface of their loves, not the mighty depths of the stream, down to
which the company, to say the truth, dived rather unexpectedly, from
the following accident. It chanced that Mr. Leaver took upon himself to
propose the bachelors who had first originated the notion of that
entertainment, in doing which, he affected to regret that he was no
longer of their body himself, and pretended grievously to lament his
fallen state. This Mrs. Leaver’s feelings could not brook, even in
jest, and consequently, exclaiming aloud, ‘He loves me not, he loves me
not!’ she fell in a very pitiable state into the arms of Mrs. Starling,
and, directly becoming insensible, was conveyed by that lady and her
husband into another room. Presently Mr. Leaver came running back to
know if there was a medical gentleman in company, and as there was, (in
what company is there not?) both Mr. Leaver and the medical gentleman
hurried away together.

The medical gentleman was the first who returned, and among his
intimate friends he was observed to laugh and wink, and look as
unmedical as might be; but when Mr. Leaver came back he was very
solemn, and in answer to all inquiries, shook his head, and remarked
that Augusta was far too sensitive to be trifled with—an opinion which
the widow subsequently confirmed. Finding that she was in no imminent
peril, however, the rest of the party betook themselves to dancing on
the green, and very merry and happy they were, and a vast quantity of
flirtation there was; the last circumstance being no doubt
attributable, partly to the fineness of the weather, and partly to the
locality, which is well known to be favourable to all harmless
recreations.

In the bustle of the scene, Mr. and Mrs. Leaver stole down to the boat,
and disposed themselves under the awning, Mrs. Leaver reclining her
head upon Mr. Leaver’s shoulder, and Mr. Leaver grasping her hand with
great fervour, and looking in her face from time to time with a
melancholy and sympathetic aspect. The widow sat apart, feigning to be
occupied with a book, but stealthily observing them from behind her
fan; and the two firemen-watermen, smoking their pipes on the bank hard
by, nudged each other, and grinned in enjoyment of the joke. Very few
of the party missed the loving couple; and the few who did, heartily
congratulated each other on their disappearance.




THE CONTRADICTORY COUPLE


One would suppose that two people who are to pass their whole lives
together, and must necessarily be very often alone with each other,
could find little pleasure in mutual contradiction; and yet what is
more common than a contradictory couple?

The contradictory couple agree in nothing but contradiction. They
return home from Mrs. Bluebottle’s dinner-party, each in an opposite
corner of the coach, and do not exchange a syllable until they have
been seated for at least twenty minutes by the fireside at home, when
the gentleman, raising his eyes from the stove, all at once breaks
silence:

‘What a very extraordinary thing it is,’ says he, ‘that you _will_
contradict, Charlotte!’ ‘_I_ contradict!’ cries the lady, ‘but that’s
just like you.’ ‘What’s like me?’ says the gentleman sharply. ‘Saying
that I contradict you,’ replies the lady. ‘Do you mean to say that you
do _not_ contradict me?’ retorts the gentleman; ‘do you mean to say
that you have not been contradicting me the whole of this day?’ ‘Do you
mean to tell me now, that you have not? I mean to tell you nothing of
the kind,’ replies the lady quietly; ‘when you are wrong, of course I
shall contradict you.’

During this dialogue the gentleman has been taking his brandy-and-water
on one side of the fire, and the lady, with her dressing-case on the
table, has been curling her hair on the other. She now lets down her
back hair, and proceeds to brush it; preserving at the same time an air
of conscious rectitude and suffering virtue, which is intended to
exasperate the gentleman—and does so.

‘I do believe,’ he says, taking the spoon out of his glass, and tossing
it on the table, ‘that of all the obstinate, positive, wrong-headed
creatures that were ever born, you are the most so, Charlotte.’
‘Certainly, certainly, have it your own way, pray. You see how much _I_
contradict you,’ rejoins the lady. ‘Of course, you didn’t contradict me
at dinner-time—oh no, not you!’ says the gentleman. ‘Yes, I did,’ says
the lady. ‘Oh, you did,’ cries the gentleman ‘you admit that?’ ‘If you
call that contradiction, I do,’ the lady answers; ‘and I say again,
Edward, that when I know you are wrong, I will contradict you. I am not
your slave.’ ‘Not my slave!’ repeats the gentleman bitterly; ‘and you
still mean to say that in the Blackburns’ new house there are not more
than fourteen doors, including the door of the wine-cellar!’ ‘I mean to
say,’ retorts the lady, beating time with her hair-brush on the palm of
her hand, ‘that in that house there are fourteen doors and no more.’
‘Well then—’ cries the gentleman, rising in despair, and pacing the
room with rapid strides. ‘By G-, this is enough to destroy a man’s
intellect, and drive him mad!’

By and by the gentleman comes-to a little, and passing his hand
gloomily across his forehead, reseats himself in his former chair.
There is a long silence, and this time the lady begins. ‘I appealed to
Mr. Jenkins, who sat next to me on the sofa in the drawing-room during
tea—’ ‘Morgan, you mean,’ interrupts the gentleman. ‘I do not mean
anything of the kind,’ answers the lady. ‘Now, by all that is
aggravating and impossible to bear,’ cries the gentleman, clenching his
hands and looking upwards in agony, ‘she is going to insist upon it
that Morgan is Jenkins!’ ‘Do you take me for a perfect fool?’ exclaims
the lady; ‘do you suppose I don’t know the one from the other? Do you
suppose I don’t know that the man in the blue coat was Mr. Jenkins?’
‘Jenkins in a blue coat!’ cries the gentleman with a groan; ‘Jenkins in
a blue coat! a man who would suffer death rather than wear anything but
brown!’ ‘Do you dare to charge me with telling an untruth?’ demands the
lady, bursting into tears. ‘I charge you, ma’am,’ retorts the
gentleman, starting up, ‘with being a monster of contradiction, a
monster of aggravation, a—a—a—Jenkins in a blue coat!—what have I done
that I should be doomed to hear such statements!’

Expressing himself with great scorn and anguish, the gentleman takes up
his candle and stalks off to bed, where feigning to be fast asleep when
the lady comes up-stairs drowned in tears, murmuring lamentations over
her hard fate and indistinct intentions of consulting her brothers, he
undergoes the secret torture of hearing her exclaim between whiles, ‘I
know there are only fourteen doors in the house, I know it was Mr.
Jenkins, I know he had a blue coat on, and I would say it as positively
as I do now, if they were the last words I had to speak!’

If the contradictory couple are blessed with children, they are not the
less contradictory on that account. Master James and Miss Charlotte
present themselves after dinner, and being in perfect good humour, and
finding their parents in the same amiable state, augur from these
appearances half a glass of wine a-piece and other extraordinary
indulgences. But unfortunately Master James, growing talkative upon
such prospects, asks his mamma how tall Mrs. Parsons is, and whether
she is not six feet high; to which his mamma replies, ‘Yes, she should
think she was, for Mrs. Parsons is a very tall lady indeed; quite a
giantess.’ ‘For Heaven’s sake, Charlotte,’ cries her husband, ‘do not
tell the child such preposterous nonsense. Six feet high!’ ‘Well,’
replies the lady, ‘surely I may be permitted to have an opinion; my
opinion is, that she is six feet high—at least six feet.’ ‘Now you
know, Charlotte,’ retorts the gentleman sternly, ‘that that is _not_
your opinion—that you have no such idea—and that you only say this for
the sake of contradiction.’ ‘You are exceedingly polite,’ his wife
replies; ‘to be wrong about such a paltry question as anybody’s height,
would be no great crime; but I say again, that I believe Mrs. Parsons
to be six feet—more than six feet; nay, I believe you know her to be
full six feet, and only say she is not, because I say she is.’ This
taunt disposes the gentleman to become violent, but he cheeks himself,
and is content to mutter, in a haughty tone, ‘Six feet—ha! ha! Mrs.
Parsons six feet!’ and the lady answers, ‘Yes, six feet. I am sure I am
glad you are amused, and I’ll say it again—six feet.’ Thus the subject
gradually drops off, and the contradiction begins to be forgotten, when
Master James, with some undefined notion of making himself agreeable,
and putting things to rights again, unfortunately asks his mamma what
the moon’s made of; which gives her occasion to say that he had better
not ask her, for she is always wrong and never can be right; that he
only exposes her to contradiction by asking any question of her; and
that he had better ask his papa, who is infallible, and never can be
wrong. Papa, smarting under this attack, gives a terrible pull at the
bell, and says, that if the conversation is to proceed in this way, the
children had better be removed. Removed they are, after a few tears and
many struggles; and Pa having looked at Ma sideways for a minute or
two, with a baleful eye, draws his pocket-handkerchief over his face,
and composes himself for his after-dinner nap.

The friends of the contradictory couple often deplore their frequent
disputes, though they rather make light of them at the same time:
observing, that there is no doubt they are very much attached to each
other, and that they never quarrel except about trifles. But neither
the friends of the contradictory couple, nor the contradictory couple
themselves, reflect, that as the most stupendous objects in nature are
but vast collections of minute particles, so the slightest and least
considered trifles make up the sum of human happiness or misery.




THE COUPLE WHO DOTE UPON THEIR CHILDREN


The couple who dote upon their children have usually a great many of
them: six or eight at least. The children are either the healthiest in
all the world, or the most unfortunate in existence. In either case,
they are equally the theme of their doting parents, and equally a
source of mental anguish and irritation to their doting parents’
friends.

The couple who dote upon their children recognise no dates but those
connected with their births, accidents, illnesses, or remarkable deeds.
They keep a mental almanack with a vast number of Innocents’-days, all
in red letters. They recollect the last coronation, because on that day
little Tom fell down the kitchen stairs; the anniversary of the
Gunpowder Plot, because it was on the fifth of November that Ned asked
whether wooden legs were made in heaven and cocked hats grew in
gardens. Mrs. Whiffler will never cease to recollect the last day of
the old year as long as she lives, for it was on that day that the baby
had the four red spots on its nose which they took for measles: nor
Christmas-day, for twenty-one days after Christmas-day the twins were
born; nor Good Friday, for it was on a Good Friday that she was
frightened by the donkey-cart when she was in the family way with
Georgiana. The movable feasts have no motion for Mr. and Mrs. Whiffler,
but remain pinned down tight and fast to the shoulders of some small
child, from whom they can never be separated any more. Time was made,
according to their creed, not for slaves but for girls and boys; the
restless sands in his glass are but little children at play.

As we have already intimated, the children of this couple can know no
medium. They are either prodigies of good health or prodigies of bad
health; whatever they are, they must be prodigies. Mr. Whiffler must
have to describe at his office such excruciating agonies constantly
undergone by his eldest boy, as nobody else’s eldest boy ever
underwent; or he must be able to declare that there never was a child
endowed with such amazing health, such an indomitable constitution, and
such a cast-iron frame, as his child. His children must be, in some
respect or other, above and beyond the children of all other people. To
such an extent is this feeling pushed, that we were once slightly
acquainted with a lady and gentleman who carried their heads so high
and became so proud after their youngest child fell out of a
two-pair-of-stairs window without hurting himself much, that the
greater part of their friends were obliged to forego their
acquaintance. But perhaps this may be an extreme case, and one not
justly entitled to be considered as a precedent of general application.

If a friend happen to dine in a friendly way with one of these couples
who dote upon their children, it is nearly impossible for him to divert
the conversation from their favourite topic. Everything reminds Mr.
Whiffler of Ned, or Mrs. Whiffler of Mary Anne, or of the time before
Ned was born, or the time before Mary Anne was thought of. The
slightest remark, however harmless in itself, will awaken slumbering
recollections of the twins. It is impossible to steer clear of them.
They will come uppermost, let the poor man do what he may. Ned has been
known to be lost sight of for half an hour, Dick has been forgotten,
the name of Mary Anne has not been mentioned, but the twins will out.
Nothing can keep down the twins.

‘It’s a very extraordinary thing, Saunders,’ says Mr. Whiffler to the
visitor, ‘but—you have seen our little babies, the—the—twins?’ The
friend’s heart sinks within him as he answers, ‘Oh, yes—often.’ ‘Your
talking of the Pyramids,’ says Mr. Whiffler, quite as a matter of
course, ‘reminds me of the twins. It’s a very extraordinary thing about
those babies—what colour should you say their eyes were?’ ‘Upon my
word,’ the friend stammers, ‘I hardly know how to answer’—the fact
being, that except as the friend does not remember to have heard of any
departure from the ordinary course of nature in the instance of these
twins, they might have no eyes at all for aught he has observed to the
contrary. ‘You wouldn’t say they were red, I suppose?’ says Mr.
Whiffler. The friend hesitates, and rather thinks they are; but
inferring from the expression of Mr. Whiffler’s face that red is not
the colour, smiles with some confidence, and says, ‘No, no! very
different from that.’ ‘What should you say to blue?’ says Mr. Whiffler.
The friend glances at him, and observing a different expression in his
face, ventures to say, ‘I should say they _were_ blue—a decided blue.’
‘To be sure!’ cries Mr. Whiffler, triumphantly, ‘I knew you would! But
what should you say if I was to tell you that the boy’s eyes are blue
and the girl’s hazel, eh?’ ‘Impossible!’ exclaims the friend, not at
all knowing why it should be impossible. ‘A fact, notwithstanding,’
cries Mr. Whiffler; ‘and let me tell you, Saunders, _that’s_ not a
common thing in twins, or a circumstance that’ll happen every day.’

In this dialogue Mrs. Whiffler, as being deeply responsible for the
twins, their charms and singularities, has taken no share; but she now
relates, in broken English, a witticism of little Dick’s bearing upon
the subject just discussed, which delights Mr. Whiffler beyond measure,
and causes him to declare that he would have sworn that was Dick’s if
he had heard it anywhere. Then he requests that Mrs. Whiffler will tell
Saunders what Tom said about mad bulls; and Mrs. Whiffler relating the
anecdote, a discussion ensues upon the different character of Tom’s wit
and Dick’s wit, from which it appears that Dick’s humour is of a lively
turn, while Tom’s style is the dry and caustic. This discussion being
enlivened by various illustrations, lasts a long time, and is only
stopped by Mrs. Whiffler instructing the footman to ring the nursery
bell, as the children were promised that they should come down and
taste the pudding.

The friend turns pale when this order is given, and paler still when it
is followed up by a great pattering on the staircase, (not unlike the
sound of rain upon a skylight,) a violent bursting open of the
dining-room door, and the tumultuous appearance of six small children,
closely succeeded by a strong nursery-maid with a twin in each arm. As
the whole eight are screaming, shouting, or kicking—some influenced by
a ravenous appetite, some by a horror of the stranger, and some by a
conflict of the two feelings—a pretty long space elapses before all
their heads can be ranged round the table and anything like order
restored; in bringing about which happy state of things both the nurse
and footman are severely scratched. At length Mrs. Whiffler is heard to
say, ‘Mr. Saunders, shall I give you some pudding?’ A breathless
silence ensues, and sixteen small eyes are fixed upon the guest in
expectation of his reply. A wild shout of joy proclaims that he has
said ‘No, thank you.’ Spoons are waved in the air, legs appear above
the table-cloth in uncontrollable ecstasy, and eighty short fingers
dabble in damson syrup.

While the pudding is being disposed of, Mr. and Mrs. Whiffler look on
with beaming countenances, and Mr. Whiffler nudging his friend
Saunders, begs him to take notice of Tom’s eyes, or Dick’s chin, or
Ned’s nose, or Mary Anne’s hair, or Emily’s figure, or little Bob’s
calves, or Fanny’s mouth, or Carry’s head, as the case may be. Whatever
the attention of Mr. Saunders is called to, Mr. Saunders admires of
course; though he is rather confused about the sex of the youngest
branches and looks at the wrong children, turning to a girl when Mr.
Whiffler directs his attention to a boy, and falling into raptures with
a boy when he ought to be enchanted with a girl. Then the dessert
comes, and there is a vast deal of scrambling after fruit, and sudden
spirting forth of juice out of tight oranges into infant eyes, and much
screeching and wailing in consequence. At length it becomes time for
Mrs. Whiffler to retire, and all the children are by force of arms
compelled to kiss and love Mr. Saunders before going up-stairs, except
Tom, who, lying on his back in the hall, proclaims that Mr. Saunders
‘is a naughty beast;’ and Dick, who having drunk his father’s wine when
he was looking another way, is found to be intoxicated and is carried
out, very limp and helpless.

Mr. Whiffler and his friend are left alone together, but Mr. Whiffler’s
thoughts are still with his family, if his family are not with him.
‘Saunders,’ says he, after a short silence, ‘if you please, we’ll drink
Mrs. Whiffler and the children.’ Mr. Saunders feels this to be a
reproach against himself for not proposing the same sentiment, and
drinks it in some confusion. ‘Ah!’ Mr. Whiffler sighs, ‘these children,
Saunders, make one quite an old man.’ Mr. Saunders thinks that if they
were his, they would make him a very old man; but he says nothing. ‘And
yet,’ pursues Mr. Whiffler, ‘what can equal domestic happiness? what
can equal the engaging ways of children! Saunders, why don’t you get
married?’ Now, this is an embarrassing question, because Mr. Saunders
has been thinking that if he had at any time entertained matrimonial
designs, the revelation of that day would surely have routed them for
ever. ‘I am glad, however,’ says Mr. Whiffler, ‘that you _are_ a
bachelor,—glad on one account, Saunders; a selfish one, I admit. Will
you do Mrs. Whiffler and myself a favour?’ Mr. Saunders is
surprised—evidently surprised; but he replies, ‘with the greatest
pleasure.’ ‘Then, will you, Saunders,’ says Mr. Whiffler, in an
impressive manner, ‘will you cement and consolidate our friendship by
coming into the family (so to speak) as a godfather?’ ‘I shall be proud
and delighted,’ replies Mr. Saunders: ‘which of the children is it?
really, I thought they were all christened; or—’ ‘Saunders,’ Mr.
Whiffler interposes, ‘they _are_ all christened; you are right. The
fact is, that Mrs. Whiffler is—in short, we expect another.’ ‘Not a
ninth!’ cries the friend, all aghast at the idea. ‘Yes, Saunders,’
rejoins Mr. Whiffler, solemnly, ‘a ninth. Did we drink Mrs. Whiffler’s
health? Let us drink it again, Saunders, and wish her well over it!’

Doctor Johnson used to tell a story of a man who had but one idea,
which was a wrong one. The couple who dote upon their children are in
the same predicament: at home or abroad, at all times, and in all
places, their thoughts are bound up in this one subject, and have no
sphere beyond. They relate the clever things their offspring say or do,
and weary every company with their prolixity and absurdity. Mr.
Whiffler takes a friend by the button at a street corner on a windy day
to tell him a _bon mot_ of his youngest boy’s; and Mrs. Whiffler,
calling to see a sick acquaintance, entertains her with a cheerful
account of all her own past sufferings and present expectations. In
such cases the sins of the fathers indeed descend upon the children;
for people soon come to regard them as predestined little bores. The
couple who dote upon their children cannot be said to be actuated by a
general love for these engaging little people (which would be a great
excuse); for they are apt to underrate and entertain a jealousy of any
children but their own. If they examined their own hearts, they would,
perhaps, find at the bottom of all this, more self-love and egotism
than they think of. Self-love and egotism are bad qualities, of which
the unrestrained exhibition, though it may be sometimes amusing, never
fails to be wearisome and unpleasant. Couples who dote upon their
children, therefore, are best avoided.




THE COOL COUPLE


There is an old-fashioned weather-glass representing a house with two
doorways, in one of which is the figure of a gentleman, in the other
the figure of a lady. When the weather is to be fine the lady comes out
and the gentleman goes in; when wet, the gentleman comes out and the
lady goes in. They never seek each other’s society, are never elevated
and depressed by the same cause, and have nothing in common. They are
the model of a cool couple, except that there is something of
politeness and consideration about the behaviour of the gentleman in
the weather-glass, in which, neither of the cool couple can be said to
participate.

The cool couple are seldom alone together, and when they are, nothing
can exceed their apathy and dulness: the gentleman being for the most
part drowsy, and the lady silent. If they enter into conversation, it
is usually of an ironical or recriminatory nature. Thus, when the
gentleman has indulged in a very long yawn and settled himself more
snugly in his easy-chair, the lady will perhaps remark, ‘Well, I am
sure, Charles! I hope you’re comfortable.’ To which the gentleman
replies, ‘Oh yes, he’s quite comfortable quite.’ ‘There are not many
married men, I hope,’ returns the lady, ‘who seek comfort in such
selfish gratifications as you do.’ ‘Nor many wives who seek comfort in
such selfish gratifications as _you_ do, I hope,’ retorts the
gentleman. ‘Whose fault is that?’ demands the lady. The gentleman
becoming more sleepy, returns no answer. ‘Whose fault is that?’ the
lady repeats. The gentleman still returning no answer, she goes on to
say that she believes there never was in all this world anybody so
attached to her home, so thoroughly domestic, so unwilling to seek a
moment’s gratification or pleasure beyond her own fireside as she. God
knows that before she was married she never thought or dreamt of such a
thing; and she remembers that her poor papa used to say again and
again, almost every day of his life, ‘Oh, my dear Louisa, if you only
marry a man who understands you, and takes the trouble to consider your
happiness and accommodate himself a very little to your disposition,
what a treasure he will find in you!’ She supposes her papa knew what
her disposition was—he had known her long enough—he ought to have been
acquainted with it, but what can she do? If her home is always dull and
lonely, and her husband is always absent and finds no pleasure in her
society, she is naturally sometimes driven (seldom enough, she is sure)
to seek a little recreation elsewhere; she is not expected to pine and
mope to death, she hopes. ‘Then come, Louisa,’ says the gentleman,
waking up as suddenly as he fell asleep, ‘stop at home this evening,
and so will I.’ ‘I should be sorry to suppose, Charles, that you took a
pleasure in aggravating me,’ replies the lady; ‘but you know as well as
I do that I am particularly engaged to Mrs. Mortimer, and that it would
be an act of the grossest rudeness and ill-breeding, after accepting a
seat in her box and preventing her from inviting anybody else, not to
go.’ ‘Ah! there it is!’ says the gentleman, shrugging his shoulders, ‘I
knew that perfectly well. I knew you couldn’t devote an evening to your
own home. Now all I have to say, Louisa, is this—recollect that _I_ was
quite willing to stay at home, and that it’s no fault of _mine_ we are
not oftener together.’

With that the gentleman goes away to keep an old appointment at his
club, and the lady hurries off to dress for Mrs. Mortimer’s; and
neither thinks of the other until by some odd chance they find
themselves alone again.

But it must not be supposed that the cool couple are habitually a
quarrelsome one. Quite the contrary. These differences are only
occasions for a little self-excuse,—nothing more. In general they are
as easy and careless, and dispute as seldom, as any common
acquaintances may; for it is neither worth their while to put each
other out of the way, nor to ruffle themselves.

When they meet in society, the cool couple are the best-bred people in
existence. The lady is seated in a corner among a little knot of lady
friends, one of whom exclaims, ‘Why, I vow and declare there is your
husband, my dear!’ ‘Whose?—mine?’ she says, carelessly. ‘Ay, yours, and
coming this way too.’ ‘How very odd!’ says the lady, in a languid tone,
‘I thought he had been at Dover.’ The gentleman coming up, and speaking
to all the other ladies and nodding slightly to his wife, it turns out
that he has been at Dover, and has just now returned. ‘What a strange
creature you are!’ cries his wife; ‘and what on earth brought you here,
I wonder?’ ‘I came to look after you, _of course_,’ rejoins her
husband. This is so pleasant a jest that the lady is mightily amused,
as are all the other ladies similarly situated who are within hearing;
and while they are enjoying it to the full, the gentleman nods again,
turns upon his heel, and saunters away.

There are times, however, when his company is not so agreeable, though
equally unexpected; such as when the lady has invited one or two
particular friends to tea and scandal, and he happens to come home in
the very midst of their diversion. It is a hundred chances to one that
he remains in the house half an hour, but the lady is rather disturbed
by the intrusion, notwithstanding, and reasons within herself,—‘I am
sure I never interfere with him, and why should he interfere with me?
It can scarcely be accidental; it never happens that I have a
particular reason for not wishing him to come home, but he always
comes. It’s very provoking and tiresome; and I am sure when he leaves
me so much alone for his own pleasure, the least he could do would be
to do as much for mine.’ Observing what passes in her mind, the
gentleman, who has come home for his own accommodation, makes a merit
of it with himself; arrives at the conclusion that it is the very last
place in which he can hope to be comfortable; and determines, as he
takes up his hat and cane, never to be so virtuous again.

Thus a great many cool couples go on until they are cold couples, and
the grave has closed over their folly and indifference. Loss of name,
station, character, life itself, has ensued from causes as slight as
these, before now; and when gossips tell such tales, and aggravate
their deformities, they elevate their hands and eyebrows, and call each
other to witness what a cool couple Mr. and Mrs. So-and-so always were,
even in the best of times.




THE PLAUSIBLE COUPLE


The plausible couple have many titles. They are ‘a delightful couple,’
an ‘affectionate couple,’ ‘a most agreeable couple, ‘a good-hearted
couple,’ and ‘the best-natured couple in existence.’ The truth is, that
the plausible couple are people of the world; and either the way of
pleasing the world has grown much easier than it was in the days of the
old man and his ass, or the old man was but a bad hand at it, and knew
very little of the trade.

‘But is it really possible to please the world!’ says some doubting
reader. It is indeed. Nay, it is not only very possible, but very easy.
The ways are crooked, and sometimes foul and low. What then? A man need
but crawl upon his hands and knees, know when to close his eyes and
when his ears, when to stoop and when to stand upright; and if by the
world is meant that atom of it in which he moves himself, he shall
please it, never fear.

Now, it will be readily seen, that if a plausible man or woman have an
easy means of pleasing the world by an adaptation of self to all its
twistings and twinings, a plausible man _and_ woman, or, in other
words, a plausible couple, playing into each other’s hands, and acting
in concert, have a manifest advantage. Hence it is that plausible
couples scarcely ever fail of success on a pretty large scale; and
hence it is that if the reader, laying down this unwieldy volume at the
next full stop, will have the goodness to review his or her circle of
acquaintance, and to search particularly for some man and wife with a
large connexion and a good name, not easily referable to their
abilities or their wealth, he or she (that is, the male or female
reader) will certainly find that gentleman or lady, on a very short
reflection, to be a plausible couple.

The plausible couple are the most ecstatic people living: the most
sensitive people—to merit—on the face of the earth. Nothing clever or
virtuous escapes them. They have microscopic eyes for such endowments,
and can find them anywhere. The plausible couple never fawn—oh no! They
don’t even scruple to tell their friends of their faults. One is too
generous, another too candid; a third has a tendency to think all
people like himself, and to regard mankind as a company of angels; a
fourth is kind-hearted to a fault. ‘We never flatter, my dear Mrs.
Jackson,’ say the plausible couple; ‘we speak our minds. Neither you
nor Mr. Jackson have faults enough. It may sound strangely, but it is
true. You have not faults enough. You know our way,—we must speak out,
and always do. Quarrel with us for saying so, if you will; but we
repeat it,—you have not faults enough!’

The plausible couple are no less plausible to each other than to third
parties. They are always loving and harmonious. The plausible gentleman
calls his wife ‘darling,’ and the plausible lady addresses him as
‘dearest.’ If it be Mr. and Mrs. Bobtail Widger, Mrs. Widger is
‘Lavinia, darling,’ and Mr. Widger is ‘Bobtail, dearest.’ Speaking of
each other, they observe the same tender form. Mrs. Widger relates what
‘Bobtail’ said, and Mr. Widger recounts what ‘darling’ thought and did.

If you sit next to the plausible lady at a dinner-table, she takes the
earliest opportunity of expressing her belief that you are acquainted
with the Clickits; she is sure she has heard the Clickits speak of
you—she must not tell you in what terms, or you will take her for a
flatterer. You admit a knowledge of the Clickits; the plausible lady
immediately launches out in their praise. She quite loves the Clickits.
Were there ever such true-hearted, hospitable, excellent people—such a
gentle, interesting little woman as Mrs. Clickit, or such a frank,
unaffected creature as Mr. Clickit? were there ever two people, in
short, so little spoiled by the world as they are? ‘As who, darling?’
cries Mr. Widger, from the opposite side of the table. ‘The Clickits,
dearest,’ replies Mrs. Widger. ‘Indeed you are right, darling,’ Mr.
Widger rejoins; ‘the Clickits are a very high-minded, worthy, estimable
couple.’ Mrs. Widger remarking that Bobtail always grows quite eloquent
upon this subject, Mr. Widger admits that he feels very strongly
whenever such people as the Clickits and some other friends of his
(here he glances at the host and hostess) are mentioned; for they are
an honour to human nature, and do one good to think of. ‘_You_ know the
Clickits, Mrs. Jackson?’ he says, addressing the lady of the house.
‘No, indeed; we have not that pleasure,’ she replies. ‘You astonish
me!’ exclaims Mr. Widger: ‘not know the Clickits! why, you are the very
people of all others who ought to be their bosom friends. You are
kindred beings; you are one and the same thing:—not know the Clickits!
Now _will_ you know the Clickits? Will you make a point of knowing
them? Will you meet them in a friendly way at our house one evening,
and be acquainted with them?’ Mrs. Jackson will be quite delighted;
nothing would give her more pleasure. ‘Then, Lavinia, my darling,’ says
Mr. Widger, ‘mind you don’t lose sight of that; now, pray take care
that Mr. and Mrs. Jackson know the Clickits without loss of time. Such
people ought not to be strangers to each other.’ Mrs. Widger books both
families as the centre of attraction for her next party; and Mr.
Widger, going on to expatiate upon the virtues of the Clickits, adds to
their other moral qualities, that they keep one of the neatest phaetons
in town, and have two thousand a year.

As the plausible couple never laud the merits of any absent person,
without dexterously contriving that their praises shall reflect upon
somebody who is present, so they never depreciate anything or anybody,
without turning their depreciation to the same account. Their friend,
Mr. Slummery, say they, is unquestionably a clever painter, and would
no doubt be very popular, and sell his pictures at a very high price,
if that cruel Mr. Fithers had not forestalled him in his department of
art, and made it thoroughly and completely his own;—Fithers, it is to
be observed, being present and within hearing, and Slummery elsewhere.
Is Mrs. Tabblewick really as beautiful as people say? Why, there indeed
you ask them a very puzzling question, because there is no doubt that
she is a very charming woman, and they have long known her intimately.
She is no doubt beautiful, very beautiful; they once thought her the
most beautiful woman ever seen; still if you press them for an honest
answer, they are bound to say that this was before they had ever seen
our lovely friend on the sofa, (the sofa is hard by, and our lovely
friend can’t help hearing the whispers in which this is said;) since
that time, perhaps, they have been hardly fair judges; Mrs. Tabblewick
is no doubt extremely handsome,—very like our friend, in fact, in the
form of the features,—but in point of expression, and soul, and figure,
and air altogether—oh dear!

But while the plausible couple depreciate, they are still careful to
preserve their character for amiability and kind feeling; indeed the
depreciation itself is often made to grow out of their excessive
sympathy and good will. The plausible lady calls on a lady who dotes
upon her children, and is sitting with a little girl upon her knee,
enraptured by her artless replies, and protesting that there is nothing
she delights in so much as conversing with these fairies; when the
other lady inquires if she has seen young Mrs. Finching lately, and
whether the baby has turned out a finer one than it promised to be. ‘Oh
dear!’ cries the plausible lady, ‘you cannot think how often Bobtail
and I have talked about poor Mrs. Finching—she is such a dear soul, and
was so anxious that the baby should be a fine child—and very naturally,
because she was very much here at one time, and there is, you know, a
natural emulation among mothers—that it is impossible to tell you how
much we have felt for her.’ ‘Is it weak or plain, or what?’ inquires
the other. ‘Weak or plain, my love,’ returns the plausible lady, ‘it’s
a fright—a perfect little fright; you never saw such a miserable
creature in all your days. Positively you must not let her see one of
these beautiful dears again, or you’ll break her heart, you will
indeed.—Heaven bless this child, see how she is looking in my face! can
you conceive anything prettier than that? If poor Mrs. Finching could
only hope—but that’s impossible—and the gifts of Providence, you
know—What _did_ I do with my pocket-handkerchief!’

What prompts the mother, who dotes upon her children, to comment to her
lord that evening on the plausible lady’s engaging qualities and
feeling heart, and what is it that procures Mr. and Mrs. Bobtail Widger
an immediate invitation to dinner?




THE NICE LITTLE COUPLE


A custom once prevailed in old-fashioned circles, that when a lady or
gentleman was unable to sing a song, he or she should enliven the
company with a story. As we find ourself in the predicament of not
being able to describe (to our own satisfaction) nice little couples in
the abstract, we purpose telling in this place a little story about a
nice little couple of our acquaintance.

Mr. and Mrs. Chirrup are the nice little couple in question. Mr.
Chirrup has the smartness, and something of the brisk, quick manner of
a small bird. Mrs. Chirrup is the prettiest of all little women, and
has the prettiest little figure conceivable. She has the neatest little
foot, and the softest little voice, and the pleasantest little smile,
and the tidiest little curls, and the brightest little eyes, and the
quietest little manner, and is, in short, altogether one of the most
engaging of all little women, dead or alive. She is a condensation of
all the domestic virtues,—a pocket edition of the young man’s best
companion,—a little woman at a very high pressure, with an amazing
quantity of goodness and usefulness in an exceedingly small space.
Little as she is, Mrs. Chirrup might furnish forth matter for the moral
equipment of a score of housewives, six feet high in their
stockings—if, in the presence of ladies, we may be allowed the
expression—and of corresponding robustness.

Nobody knows all this better than Mr. Chirrup, though he rather takes
on that he don’t. Accordingly he is very proud of his better-half, and
evidently considers himself, as all other people consider him, rather
fortunate in having her to wife. We say evidently, because Mr. Chirrup
is a warm-hearted little fellow; and if you catch his eye when he has
been slyly glancing at Mrs. Chirrup in company, there is a certain
complacent twinkle in it, accompanied, perhaps, by a half-expressed
toss of the head, which as clearly indicates what has been passing in
his mind as if he had put it into words, and shouted it out through a
speaking-trumpet. Moreover, Mr. Chirrup has a particularly mild and
bird-like manner of calling Mrs. Chirrup ‘my dear;’ and—for he is of a
jocose turn—of cutting little witticisms upon her, and making her the
subject of various harmless pleasantries, which nobody enjoys more
thoroughly than Mrs. Chirrup herself. Mr. Chirrup, too, now and then
affects to deplore his bachelor-days, and to bemoan (with a
marvellously contented and smirking face) the loss of his freedom, and
the sorrow of his heart at having been taken captive by Mrs.
Chirrup—all of which circumstances combine to show the secret triumph
and satisfaction of Mr. Chirrup’s soul.

We have already had occasion to observe that Mrs. Chirrup is an
incomparable housewife. In all the arts of domestic arrangement and
management, in all the mysteries of confectionery-making, pickling, and
preserving, never was such a thorough adept as that nice little body.
She is, besides, a cunning worker in muslin and fine linen, and a
special hand at marketing to the very best advantage. But if there be
one branch of housekeeping in which she excels to an utterly
unparalleled and unprecedented extent, it is in the important one of
carving. A roast goose is universally allowed to be the great
stumbling-block in the way of young aspirants to perfection in this
department of science; many promising carvers, beginning with legs of
mutton, and preserving a good reputation through fillets of veal,
sirloins of beef, quarters of lamb, fowls, and even ducks, have sunk
before a roast goose, and lost caste and character for ever. To Mrs.
Chirrup the resolving a goose into its smallest component parts is a
pleasant pastime—a practical joke—a thing to be done in a minute or so,
without the smallest interruption to the conversation of the time. No
handing the dish over to an unfortunate man upon her right or left, no
wild sharpening of the knife, no hacking and sawing at an unruly joint,
no noise, no splash, no heat, no leaving off in despair; all is
confidence and cheerfulness. The dish is set upon the table, the cover
is removed; for an instant, and only an instant, you observe that Mrs.
Chirrup’s attention is distracted; she smiles, but heareth not. You
proceed with your story; meanwhile the glittering knife is slowly
upraised, both Mrs. Chirrup’s wrists are slightly but not ungracefully
agitated, she compresses her lips for an instant, then breaks into a
smile, and all is over. The legs of the bird slide gently down into a
pool of gravy, the wings seem to melt from the body, the breast
separates into a row of juicy slices, the smaller and more complicated
parts of his anatomy are perfectly developed, a cavern of stuffing is
revealed, and the goose is gone!

To dine with Mr. and Mrs. Chirrup is one of the pleasantest things in
the world. Mr. Chirrup has a bachelor friend, who lived with him in his
own days of single blessedness, and to whom he is mightily attached.
Contrary to the usual custom, this bachelor friend is no less a friend
of Mrs. Chirrup’s, and, consequently, whenever you dine with Mr. and
Mrs. Chirrup, you meet the bachelor friend. It would put any
reasonably-conditioned mortal into good-humour to observe the entire
unanimity which subsists between these three; but there is a quiet
welcome dimpling in Mrs. Chirrup’s face, a bustling hospitality oozing
as it were out of the waistcoat-pockets of Mr. Chirrup, and a
patronising enjoyment of their cordiality and satisfaction on the part
of the bachelor friend, which is quite delightful. On these occasions
Mr. Chirrup usually takes an opportunity of rallying the friend on
being single, and the friend retorts on Mr. Chirrup for being married,
at which moments some single young ladies present are like to die of
laughter; and we have more than once observed them bestow looks upon
the friend, which convinces us that his position is by no means a safe
one, as, indeed, we hold no bachelor’s to be who visits married friends
and cracks jokes on wedlock, for certain it is that such men walk among
traps and nets and pitfalls innumerable, and often find themselves down
upon their knees at the altar rails, taking M. or N. for their wedded
wives, before they know anything about the matter.

However, this is no business of Mr. Chirrup’s, who talks, and laughs,
and drinks his wine, and laughs again, and talks more, until it is time
to repair to the drawing-room, where, coffee served and over, Mrs.
Chirrup prepares for a round game, by sorting the nicest possible
little fish into the nicest possible little pools, and calling Mr.
Chirrup to assist her, which Mr. Chirrup does. As they stand side by
side, you find that Mr. Chirrup is the least possible shadow of a shade
taller than Mrs. Chirrup, and that they are the neatest and
best-matched little couple that can be, which the chances are ten to
one against your observing with such effect at any other time, unless
you see them in the street arm-in-arm, or meet them some rainy day
trotting along under a very small umbrella. The round game (at which
Mr. Chirrup is the merriest of the party) being done and over, in
course of time a nice little tray appears, on which is a nice little
supper; and when that is finished likewise, and you have said ‘Good
night,’ you find yourself repeating a dozen times, as you ride home,
that there never was such a nice little couple as Mr. and Mrs. Chirrup.

Whether it is that pleasant qualities, being packed more closely in
small bodies than in large, come more readily to hand than when they
are diffused over a wider space, and have to be gathered together for
use, we don’t know, but as a general rule,—strengthened like all other
rules by its exceptions,—we hold that little people are sprightly and
good-natured. The more sprightly and good-natured people we have, the
better; therefore, let us wish well to all nice little couples, and
hope that they may increase and multiply.




THE EGOTISTICAL COUPLE


Egotism in couples is of two kinds.—It is our purpose to show this by
two examples.

The egotistical couple may be young, old, middle-aged, well to do, or
ill to do; they may have a small family, a large family, or no family
at all. There is no outward sign by which an egotistical couple may be
known and avoided. They come upon you unawares; there is no guarding
against them. No man can of himself be forewarned or forearmed against
an egotistical couple.

The egotistical couple have undergone every calamity, and experienced
every pleasurable and painful sensation of which our nature is
susceptible. You cannot by possibility tell the egotistical couple
anything they don’t know, or describe to them anything they have not
felt. They have been everything but dead. Sometimes we are tempted to
wish they had been even that, but only in our uncharitable moments,
which are few and far between.

We happened the other day, in the course of a morning call, to
encounter an egotistical couple, nor were we suffered to remain long in
ignorance of the fact, for our very first inquiry of the lady of the
house brought them into active and vigorous operation. The inquiry was
of course touching the lady’s health, and the answer happened to be,
that she had not been very well. ‘Oh, my dear!’ said the egotistical
lady, ‘don’t talk of not being well. We have been in _such_ a state
since we saw you last!’—The lady of the house happening to remark that
her lord had not been well either, the egotistical gentleman struck in:
‘Never let Briggs complain of not being well—never let Briggs complain,
my dear Mrs. Briggs, after what I have undergone within these six
weeks. He doesn’t know what it is to be ill, he hasn’t the least idea
of it; not the faintest conception.’—‘My dear,’ interposed his wife
smiling, ‘you talk as if it were almost a crime in Mr. Briggs not to
have been as ill as we have been, instead of feeling thankful to
Providence that both he and our dear Mrs. Briggs are in such blissful
ignorance of real suffering.’—‘My love,’ returned the egotistical
gentleman, in a low and pious voice, ‘you mistake me;—I feel
grateful—very grateful. I trust our friends may never purchase their
experience as dearly as we have bought ours; I hope they never may!’

Having put down Mrs. Briggs upon this theme, and settled the question
thus, the egotistical gentleman turned to us, and, after a few
preliminary remarks, all tending towards and leading up to the point he
had in his mind, inquired if we happened to be acquainted with the
Dowager Lady Snorflerer. On our replying in the negative, he presumed
we had often met Lord Slang, or beyond all doubt, that we were on
intimate terms with Sir Chipkins Glogwog. Finding that we were equally
unable to lay claim to either of these distinctions, he expressed great
astonishment, and turning to his wife with a retrospective smile,
inquired who it was that had told that capital story about the mashed
potatoes. ‘Who, my dear?’ returned the egotistical lady, ‘why Sir
Chipkins, of course; how can you ask! Don’t you remember his applying
it to our cook, and saying that you and I were so like the Prince and
Princess, that he could almost have sworn we were they?’ ‘To be sure, I
remember that,’ said the egotistical gentleman, ‘but are you quite
certain that didn’t apply to the other anecdote about the Emperor of
Austria and the pump?’ ‘Upon my word then, I think it did,’ replied his
wife. ‘To be sure it did,’ said the egotistical gentleman, ‘it was
Slang’s story, I remember now, perfectly.’ However, it turned out, a
few seconds afterwards, that the egotistical gentleman’s memory was
rather treacherous, as he began to have a misgiving that the story had
been told by the Dowager Lady Snorflerer the very last time they dined
there; but there appearing, on further consideration, strong
circumstantial evidence tending to show that this couldn’t be, inasmuch
as the Dowager Lady Snorflerer had been, on the occasion in question,
wholly engrossed by the egotistical lady, the egotistical gentleman
recanted this opinion; and after laying the story at the doors of a
great many great people, happily left it at last with the Duke of
Scuttlewig:—observing that it was not extraordinary he had forgotten
his Grace hitherto, as it often happened that the names of those with
whom we were upon the most familiar footing were the very last to
present themselves to our thoughts.

It not only appeared that the egotistical couple knew everybody, but
that scarcely any event of importance or notoriety had occurred for
many years with which they had not been in some way or other connected.
Thus we learned that when the well-known attempt upon the life of
George the Third was made by Hatfield in Drury Lane theatre, the
egotistical gentleman’s grandfather sat upon his right hand and was the
first man who collared him; and that the egotistical lady’s aunt,
sitting within a few boxes of the royal party, was the only person in
the audience who heard his Majesty exclaim, ‘Charlotte, Charlotte,
don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened; they’re letting off squibs,
they’re letting off squibs.’ When the fire broke out, which ended in
the destruction of the two Houses of Parliament, the egotistical
couple, being at the time at a drawing-room window on Blackheath, then
and there simultaneously exclaimed, to the astonishment of a whole
party—‘It’s the House of Lords!’ Nor was this a solitary instance of
their peculiar discernment, for chancing to be (as by a comparison of
dates and circumstances they afterwards found) in the same omnibus with
Mr. Greenacre, when he carried his victim’s head about town in a blue
bag, they both remarked a singular twitching in the muscles of his
countenance; and walking down Fish Street Hill, a few weeks since, the
egotistical gentleman said to his lady—slightly casting up his eyes to
the top of the Monument—‘There’s a boy up there, my dear, reading a
Bible. It’s very strange. I don’t like it.—In five seconds afterwards,
Sir,’ says the egotistical gentleman, bringing his hands together with
one violent clap—‘the lad was over!’

Diversifying these topics by the introduction of many others of the
same kind, and entertaining us between whiles with a minute account of
what weather and diet agreed with them, and what weather and diet
disagreed with them, and at what time they usually got up, and at what
time went to bed, with many other particulars of their domestic economy
too numerous to mention; the egotistical couple at length took their
leave, and afforded us an opportunity of doing the same.

Mr. and Mrs. Sliverstone are an egotistical couple of another class,
for all the lady’s egotism is about her husband, and all the
gentleman’s about his wife. For example:—Mr. Sliverstone is a clerical
gentleman, and occasionally writes sermons, as clerical gentlemen do.
If you happen to obtain admission at the street-door while he is so
engaged, Mrs. Sliverstone appears on tip-toe, and speaking in a solemn
whisper, as if there were at least three or four particular friends
up-stairs, all upon the point of death, implores you to be very silent,
for Mr. Sliverstone is composing, and she need not say how very
important it is that he should not be disturbed. Unwilling to interrupt
anything so serious, you hasten to withdraw, with many apologies; but
this Mrs. Sliverstone will by no means allow, observing, that she knows
you would like to see him, as it is very natural you should, and that
she is determined to make a trial for you, as you are a great
favourite. So you are led up-stairs—still on tip-toe—to the door of a
little back room, in which, as the lady informs you in a whisper, Mr.
Sliverstone always writes. No answer being returned to a couple of soft
taps, the lady opens the door, and there, sure enough, is Mr.
Sliverstone, with dishevelled hair, powdering away with pen, ink, and
paper, at a rate which, if he has any power of sustaining it, would
settle the longest sermon in no time. At first he is too much absorbed
to be roused by this intrusion; but presently looking up, says faintly,
‘Ah!’ and pointing to his desk with a weary and languid smile, extends
his hand, and hopes you’ll forgive him. Then Mrs. Sliverstone sits down
beside him, and taking his hand in hers, tells you how that Mr.
Sliverstone has been shut up there ever since nine o’clock in the
morning, (it is by this time twelve at noon,) and how she knows it
cannot be good for his health, and is very uneasy about it. Unto this
Mr. Sliverstone replies firmly, that ‘It must be done;’ which agonizes
Mrs. Sliverstone still more, and she goes on to tell you that such were
Mr. Sliverstone’s labours last week—what with the buryings, marryings,
churchings, christenings, and all together,—that when he was going up
the pulpit stairs on Sunday evening, he was obliged to hold on by the
rails, or he would certainly have fallen over into his own pew. Mr.
Sliverstone, who has been listening and smiling meekly, says, ‘Not
quite so bad as that, not quite so bad!’ he admits though, on
cross-examination, that he _was_ very near falling upon the verger who
was following him up to bolt the door; but adds, that it was his duty
as a Christian to fall upon him, if need were, and that he, Mr.
Sliverstone, and (possibly the verger too) ought to glory in it.

This sentiment communicates new impulse to Mrs. Sliverstone, who
launches into new praises of Mr. Sliverstone’s worth and excellence, to
which he listens in the same meek silence, save when he puts in a word
of self-denial relative to some question of fact, as—‘Not seventy-two
christenings that week, my dear. Only seventy-one, only seventy-one.’
At length his lady has quite concluded, and then he says, Why should he
repine, why should he give way, why should he suffer his heart to sink
within him? Is it he alone who toils and suffers? What has she gone
through, he should like to know? What does she go through every day for
him and for society?

With such an exordium Mr. Sliverstone launches out into glowing praises
of the conduct of Mrs. Sliverstone in the production of eight young
children, and the subsequent rearing and fostering of the same; and
thus the husband magnifies the wife, and the wife the husband.

This would be well enough if Mr. and Mrs. Sliverstone kept it to
themselves, or even to themselves and a friend or two; but they do not.
The more hearers they have, the more egotistical the couple become, and
the more anxious they are to make believers in their merits. Perhaps
this is the worst kind of egotism. It has not even the poor excuse of
being spontaneous, but is the result of a deliberate system and malice
aforethought. Mere empty-headed conceit excites our pity, but
ostentatious hypocrisy awakens our disgust.




THE COUPLE WHO CODDLE THEMSELVES


Mrs. Merrywinkle’s maiden name was Chopper. She was the only child of
Mr. and Mrs. Chopper. Her father died when she was, as the play-books
express it, ‘yet an infant;’ and so old Mrs. Chopper, when her daughter
married, made the house of her son-in-law her home from that time
henceforth, and set up her staff of rest with Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle.

Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle are a couple who coddle themselves; and the
venerable Mrs. Chopper is an aider and abettor in the same.

Mr. Merrywinkle is a rather lean and long-necked gentleman, middle-aged
and middle-sized, and usually troubled with a cold in the head. Mrs.
Merrywinkle is a delicate-looking lady, with very light hair, and is
exceedingly subject to the same unpleasant disorder. The venerable Mrs.
Chopper—who is strictly entitled to the appellation, her daughter not
being very young, otherwise than by courtesy, at the time of her
marriage, which was some years ago—is a mysterious old lady who lurks
behind a pair of spectacles, and is afflicted with a chronic disease,
respecting which she has taken a vast deal of medical advice, and
referred to a vast number of medical books, without meeting any
definition of symptoms that at all suits her, or enables her to say,
‘That’s my complaint.’ Indeed, the absence of authentic information
upon the subject of this complaint would seem to be Mrs. Chopper’s
greatest ill, as in all other respects she is an uncommonly hale and
hearty gentlewoman.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Chopper wear an extraordinary quantity of flannel,
and have a habit of putting their feet in hot water to an unnatural
extent. They likewise indulge in chamomile tea and such-like compounds,
and rub themselves on the slightest provocation with camphorated
spirits and other lotions applicable to mumps, sore-throat, rheumatism,
or lumbago.

Mr. Merrywinkle’s leaving home to go to business on a damp or wet
morning is a very elaborate affair. He puts on wash-leather socks over
his stockings, and India-rubber shoes above his boots, and wears under
his waistcoat a cuirass of hare-skin. Besides these precautions, he
winds a thick shawl round his throat, and blocks up his mouth with a
large silk handkerchief. Thus accoutred, and furnished besides with a
great-coat and umbrella, he braves the dangers of the streets;
travelling in severe weather at a gentle trot, the better to preserve
the circulation, and bringing his mouth to the surface to take breath,
but very seldom, and with the utmost caution. His office-door opened,
he shoots past his clerk at the same pace, and diving into his own
private room, closes the door, examines the window-fastenings, and
gradually unrobes himself: hanging his pocket-handkerchief on the
fender to air, and determining to write to the newspapers about the
fog, which, he says, ‘has really got to that pitch that it is quite
unbearable.’

In this last opinion Mrs. Merrywinkle and her respected mother fully
concur; for though not present, their thoughts and tongues are occupied
with the same subject, which is their constant theme all day. If
anybody happens to call, Mrs. Merrywinkle opines that they must
assuredly be mad, and her first salutation is, ‘Why, what in the name
of goodness can bring you out in such weather? You know you _must_
catch your death.’ This assurance is corroborated by Mrs. Chopper, who
adds, in further confirmation, a dismal legend concerning an individual
of her acquaintance who, making a call under precisely parallel
circumstances, and being then in the best health and spirits, expired
in forty-eight hours afterwards, of a complication of inflammatory
disorders. The visitor, rendered not altogether comfortable perhaps by
this and other precedents, inquires very affectionately after Mr.
Merrywinkle, but by so doing brings about no change of the subject; for
Mr. Merrywinkle’s name is inseparably connected with his complaints,
and his complaints are inseparably connected with Mrs. Merrywinkle’s;
and when these are done with, Mrs. Chopper, who has been biding her
time, cuts in with the chronic disorder—a subject upon which the
amiable old lady never leaves off speaking until she is left alone, and
very often not then.

But Mr. Merrywinkle comes home to dinner. He is received by Mrs.
Merrywinkle and Mrs. Chopper, who, on his remarking that he thinks his
feet are damp, turn pale as ashes and drag him up-stairs, imploring him
to have them rubbed directly with a dry coarse towel. Rubbed they are,
one by Mrs. Merrywinkle and one by Mrs. Chopper, until the friction
causes Mr. Merrywinkle to make horrible faces, and look as if he had
been smelling very powerful onions; when they desist, and the patient,
provided for his better security with thick worsted stockings and list
slippers, is borne down-stairs to dinner. Now, the dinner is always a
good one, the appetites of the diners being delicate, and requiring a
little of what Mrs. Merrywinkle calls ‘tittivation;’ the secret of
which is understood to lie in good cookery and tasteful spices, and
which process is so successfully performed in the present instance,
that both Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle eat a remarkably good dinner, and
even the afflicted Mrs. Chopper wields her knife and fork with much of
the spirit and elasticity of youth. But Mr. Merrywinkle, in his desire
to gratify his appetite, is not unmindful of his health, for he has a
bottle of carbonate of soda with which to qualify his porter, and a
little pair of scales in which to weigh it out. Neither in his anxiety
to take care of his body is he unmindful of the welfare of his immortal
part, as he always prays that for what he is going to receive he may be
made truly thankful; and in order that he may be as thankful as
possible, eats and drinks to the utmost.

Either from eating and drinking so much, or from being the victim of
this constitutional infirmity, among others, Mr. Merrywinkle, after two
or three glasses of wine, falls fast asleep; and he has scarcely closed
his eyes, when Mrs. Merrywinkle and Mrs. Chopper fall asleep likewise.
It is on awakening at tea-time that their most alarming symptoms
prevail; for then Mr. Merrywinkle feels as if his temples were tightly
bound round with the chain of the street-door, and Mrs. Merrywinkle as
if she had made a hearty dinner of half-hundredweights, and Mrs.
Chopper as if cold water were running down her back, and oyster-knives
with sharp points were plunging of their own accord into her ribs.
Symptoms like these are enough to make people peevish, and no wonder
that they remain so until supper-time, doing little more than doze and
complain, unless Mr. Merrywinkle calls out very loudly to a servant ‘to
keep that draught out,’ or rushes into the passage to flourish his fist
in the countenance of the twopenny-postman, for daring to give such a
knock as he had just performed at the door of a private gentleman with
nerves.

Supper, coming after dinner, should consist of some gentle provocative;
and therefore the tittivating art is again in requisition, and
again—done honour to by Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle, still comforted and
abetted by Mrs. Chopper. After supper, it is ten to one but the
last-named old lady becomes worse, and is led off to bed with the
chronic complaint in full vigour. Mr. and Mrs. Merrywinkle, having
administered to her a warm cordial, which is something of the
strongest, then repair to their own room, where Mr. Merrywinkle, with
his legs and feet in hot water, superintends the mulling of some wine
which he is to drink at the very moment he plunges into bed, while Mrs.
Merrywinkle, in garments whose nature is unknown to and unimagined by
all but married men, takes four small pills with a spasmodic look
between each, and finally comes to something hot and fragrant out of
another little saucepan, which serves as her composing-draught for the
night.

There is another kind of couple who coddle themselves, and who do so at
a cheaper rate and on more spare diet, because they are niggardly and
parsimonious; for which reason they are kind enough to coddle their
visitors too. It is unnecessary to describe them, for our readers may
rest assured of the accuracy of these general principles:—that all
couples who coddle themselves are selfish and slothful,—that they
charge upon every wind that blows, every rain that falls, and every
vapour that hangs in the air, the evils which arise from their own
imprudence or the gloom which is engendered in their own tempers,—and
that all men and women, in couples or otherwise, who fall into
exclusive habits of self-indulgence, and forget their natural sympathy
and close connexion with everybody and everything in the world around
them, not only neglect the first duty of life, but, by a happy
retributive justice, deprive themselves of its truest and best
enjoyment.




THE OLD COUPLE


They are grandfather and grandmother to a dozen grown people and have
great-grandchildren besides; their bodies are bent, their hair is grey,
their step tottering and infirm. Is this the lightsome pair whose
wedding was so merry, and have the young couple indeed grown old so
soon!

It seems but yesterday—and yet what a host of cares and griefs are
crowded into the intervening time which, reckoned by them, lengthens
out into a century! How many new associations have wreathed themselves
about their hearts since then! The old time is gone, and a new time has
come for others—not for them. They are but the rusting link that feebly
joins the two, and is silently loosening its hold and dropping asunder.

It seems but yesterday—and yet three of their children have sunk into
the grave, and the tree that shades it has grown quite old. One was an
infant—they wept for him; the next a girl, a slight young thing too
delicate for earth—her loss was hard indeed to bear. The third, a man.
That was the worst of all, but even that grief is softened now.

It seems but yesterday—and yet how the gay and laughing faces of that
bright morning have changed and vanished from above ground! Faint
likenesses of some remain about them yet, but they are very faint and
scarcely to be traced. The rest are only seen in dreams, and even they
are unlike what they were, in eyes so old and dim.

One or two dresses from the bridal wardrobe are yet preserved. They are
of a quaint and antique fashion, and seldom seen except in pictures.
White has turned yellow, and brighter hues have faded. Do you wonder,
child? The wrinkled face was once as smooth as yours, the eyes as
bright, the shrivelled skin as fair and delicate. It is the work of
hands that have been dust these many years.

Where are the fairy lovers of that happy day whose annual return comes
upon the old man and his wife, like the echo of some village bell which
has long been silent? Let yonder peevish bachelor, racked by rheumatic
pains, and quarrelling with the world, let him answer to the question.
He recollects something of a favourite playmate; her name was Lucy—so
they tell him. He is not sure whether she was married, or went abroad,
or died. It is a long while ago, and he don’t remember.

Is nothing as it used to be; does no one feel, or think, or act, as in
days of yore? Yes. There is an aged woman who once lived servant with
the old lady’s father, and is sheltered in an alms-house not far off.
She is still attached to the family, and loves them all; she nursed the
children in her lap, and tended in their sickness those who are no
more. Her old mistress has still something of youth in her eyes; the
young ladies are like what she was but not quite so handsome, nor are
the gentlemen as stately as Mr. Harvey used to be. She has seen a great
deal of trouble; her husband and her son died long ago; but she has got
over that, and is happy now—quite happy.

If ever her attachment to her old protectors were disturbed by fresher
cares and hopes, it has long since resumed its former current. It has
filled the void in the poor creature’s heart, and replaced the love of
kindred. Death has not left her alone, and this, with a roof above her
head, and a warm hearth to sit by, makes her cheerful and contented.
Does she remember the marriage of great-grandmamma? Ay, that she does,
as well—as if it was only yesterday. You wouldn’t think it to look at
her now, and perhaps she ought not to say so of herself, but she was as
smart a young girl then as you’d wish to see. She recollects she took a
friend of hers up-stairs to see Miss Emma dressed for church; her name
was—ah! she forgets the name, but she remembers that she was a very
pretty girl, and that she married not long afterwards, and lived—it has
quite passed out of her mind where she lived, but she knows she had a
bad husband who used her ill, and that she died in Lambeth work-house.
Dear, dear, in Lambeth workhouse!

And the old couple—have they no comfort or enjoyment of existence? See
them among their grandchildren and great-grandchildren; how garrulous
they are, how they compare one with another, and insist on likenesses
which no one else can see; how gently the old lady lectures the girls
on points of breeding and decorum, and points the moral by anecdotes of
herself in her young days—how the old gentleman chuckles over boyish
feats and roguish tricks, and tells long stories of a ‘barring-out’
achieved at the school he went to: which was very wrong, he tells the
boys, and never to be imitated of course, but which he cannot help
letting them know was very pleasant too—especially when he kissed the
master’s niece. This last, however, is a point on which the old lady is
very tender, for she considers it a shocking and indelicate thing to
talk about, and always says so whenever it is mentioned, never failing
to observe that he ought to be very penitent for having been so sinful.
So the old gentleman gets no further, and what the schoolmaster’s niece
said afterwards (which he is always going to tell) is lost to
posterity.

The old gentleman is eighty years old, to-day—‘Eighty years old,
Crofts, and never had a headache,’ he tells the barber who shaves him
(the barber being a young fellow, and very subject to that complaint).
‘That’s a great age, Crofts,’ says the old gentleman. ‘I don’t think
it’s sich a wery great age, Sir,’ replied the barber. ‘Crofts,’ rejoins
the old gentleman, ‘you’re talking nonsense to me. Eighty not a great
age?’ ‘It’s a wery great age, Sir, for a gentleman to be as healthy and
active as you are,’ returns the barber; ‘but my grandfather, Sir, he
was ninety-four.’ ‘You don’t mean that, Crofts?’ says the old
gentleman. ‘I do indeed, Sir,’ retorts the barber, ‘and as wiggerous as
Julius Caesar, my grandfather was.’ The old gentleman muses a little
time, and then says, ‘What did he die of, Crofts?’ ‘He died
accidentally, Sir,’ returns the barber; ‘he didn’t mean to do it. He
always would go a running about the streets—walking never satisfied
_his_ spirit—and he run against a post and died of a hurt in his
chest.’ The old gentleman says no more until the shaving is concluded,
and then he gives Crofts half-a-crown to drink his health. He is a
little doubtful of the barber’s veracity afterwards, and telling the
anecdote to the old lady, affects to make very light of it—though to be
sure (he adds) there was old Parr, and in some parts of England,
ninety-five or so is a common age, quite a common age.

This morning the old couple are cheerful but serious, recalling old
times as well as they can remember them, and dwelling upon many
passages in their past lives which the day brings to mind. The old lady
reads aloud, in a tremulous voice, out of a great Bible, and the old
gentleman with his hand to his ear, listens with profound respect. When
the book is closed, they sit silent for a short space, and afterwards
resume their conversation, with a reference perhaps to their dead
children, as a subject not unsuited to that they have just left. By
degrees they are led to consider which of those who survive are the
most like those dearly-remembered objects, and so they fall into a less
solemn strain, and become cheerful again.

How many people in all, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and one or
two intimate friends of the family, dine together to-day at the eldest
son’s to congratulate the old couple, and wish them many happy returns,
is a calculation beyond our powers; but this we know, that the old
couple no sooner present themselves, very sprucely and carefully
attired, than there is a violent shouting and rushing forward of the
younger branches with all manner of presents, such as pocket-books,
pencil-cases, pen-wipers, watch-papers, pin-cushions, sleeve-buckles,
worked-slippers, watch-guards, and even a nutmeg-grater: the latter
article being presented by a very chubby and very little boy, who
exhibits it in great triumph as an extraordinary variety. The old
couple’s emotion at these tokens of remembrance occasions quite a
pathetic scene, of which the chief ingredients are a vast quantity of
kissing and hugging, and repeated wipings of small eyes and noses with
small square pocket-handkerchiefs, which don’t come at all easily out
of small pockets. Even the peevish bachelor is moved, and he says, as
he presents the old gentleman with a queer sort of antique ring from
his own finger, that he’ll be de’ed if he doesn’t think he looks
younger than he did ten years ago.

But the great time is after dinner, when the dessert and wine are on
the table, which is pushed back to make plenty of room, and they are
all gathered in a large circle round the fire, for it is then—the
glasses being filled, and everybody ready to drink the toast—that two
great-grandchildren rush out at a given signal, and presently return,
dragging in old Jane Adams leaning upon her crutched stick, and
trembling with age and pleasure. Who so popular as poor old Jane, nurse
and story-teller in ordinary to two generations; and who so happy as
she, striving to bend her stiff limbs into a curtsey, while tears of
pleasure steal down her withered cheeks!

The old couple sit side by side, and the old time seems like yesterday
indeed. Looking back upon the path they have travelled, its dust and
ashes disappear; the flowers that withered long ago, show brightly
again upon its borders, and they grow young once more in the youth of
those about them.




CONCLUSION


We have taken for the subjects of the foregoing moral essays, twelve
samples of married couples, carefully selected from a large stock on
hand, open to the inspection of all comers. These samples are intended
for the benefit of the rising generation of both sexes, and, for their
more easy and pleasant information, have been separately ticketed and
labelled in the manner they have seen.

We have purposely excluded from consideration the couple in which the
lady reigns paramount and supreme, holding such cases to be of a very
unnatural kind, and like hideous births and other monstrous
deformities, only to be discreetly and sparingly exhibited.

And here our self-imposed task would have ended, but that to those
young ladies and gentlemen who are yet revolving singly round the
church, awaiting the advent of that time when the mysterious laws of
attraction shall draw them towards it in couples, we are desirous of
addressing a few last words.

Before marriage and afterwards, let them learn to centre all their
hopes of real and lasting happiness in their own fireside; let them
cherish the faith that in home, and all the English virtues which the
love of home engenders, lies the only true source of domestic felicity;
let them believe that round the household gods, contentment and
tranquillity cluster in their gentlest and most graceful forms; and
that many weary hunters of happiness through the noisy world, have
learnt this truth too late, and found a cheerful spirit and a quiet
mind only at home at last.

How much may depend on the education of daughters and the conduct of
mothers; how much of the brightest part of our old national character
may be perpetuated by their wisdom or frittered away by their folly—how
much of it may have been lost already, and how much more in danger of
vanishing every day—are questions too weighty for discussion here, but
well deserving a little serious consideration from all young couples
nevertheless.

To that one young couple on whose bright destiny the thoughts of
nations are fixed, may the youth of England look, and not in vain, for
an example. From that one young couple, blessed and favoured as they
are, may they learn that even the glare and glitter of a court, the
splendour of a palace, and the pomp and glory of a throne, yield in
their power of conferring happiness, to domestic worth and virtue. From
that one young couple may they learn that the crown of a great empire,
costly and jewelled though it be, gives place in the estimation of a
Queen to the plain gold ring that links her woman’s nature to that of
tens of thousands of her humble subjects, and guards in her woman’s
heart one secret store of tenderness, whose proudest boast shall be
that it knows no Royalty save Nature’s own, and no pride of birth but
being the child of heaven!

So shall the highest young couple in the land for once hear the truth,
when men throw up their caps, and cry with loving shouts—


God bless them.




THE MUDFOG AND OTHER SKETCHES


PUBLIC LIFE OF MR. TULRUMBLE—ONCE MAYOR OF MUDFOG

Mudfog is a pleasant town—a remarkably pleasant town—situated in a
charming hollow by the side of a river, from which river, Mudfog
derives an agreeable scent of pitch, tar, coals, and rope-yarn, a
roving population in oilskin hats, a pretty steady influx of drunken
bargemen, and a great many other maritime advantages. There is a good
deal of water about Mudfog, and yet it is not exactly the sort of town
for a watering-place, either. Water is a perverse sort of element at
the best of times, and in Mudfog it is particularly so. In winter, it
comes oozing down the streets and tumbling over the fields,—nay, rushes
into the very cellars and kitchens of the houses, with a lavish
prodigality that might well be dispensed with; but in the hot summer
weather it _will_ dry up, and turn green: and, although green is a very
good colour in its way, especially in grass, still it certainly is not
becoming to water; and it cannot be denied that the beauty of Mudfog is
rather impaired, even by this trifling circumstance. Mudfog is a
healthy place—very healthy;—damp, perhaps, but none the worse for that.
It’s quite a mistake to suppose that damp is unwholesome: plants thrive
best in damp situations, and why shouldn’t men? The inhabitants of
Mudfog are unanimous in asserting that there exists not a finer race of
people on the face of the earth; here we have an indisputable and
veracious contradiction of the vulgar error at once. So, admitting
Mudfog to be damp, we distinctly state that it is salubrious.

The town of Mudfog is extremely picturesque. Limehouse and Ratcliff
Highway are both something like it, but they give you a very faint idea
of Mudfog. There are a great many more public-houses in Mudfog—more
than in Ratcliff Highway and Limehouse put together. The public
buildings, too, are very imposing. We consider the town-hall one of the
finest specimens of shed architecture, extant: it is a combination of
the pig-sty and tea-garden-box orders; and the simplicity of its design
is of surpassing beauty. The idea of placing a large window on one side
of the door, and a small one on the other, is particularly happy. There
is a fine old Doric beauty, too, about the padlock and scraper, which
is strictly in keeping with the general effect.

In this room do the mayor and corporation of Mudfog assemble together
in solemn council for the public weal. Seated on the massive wooden
benches, which, with the table in the centre, form the only furniture
of the whitewashed apartment, the sage men of Mudfog spend hour after
hour in grave deliberation. Here they settle at what hour of the night
the public-houses shall be closed, at what hour of the morning they
shall be permitted to open, how soon it shall be lawful for people to
eat their dinner on church-days, and other great political questions;
and sometimes, long after silence has fallen on the town, and the
distant lights from the shops and houses have ceased to twinkle, like
far-off stars, to the sight of the boatmen on the river, the
illumination in the two unequal-sized windows of the town-hall, warns
the inhabitants of Mudfog that its little body of legislators, like a
larger and better-known body of the same genus, a great deal more
noisy, and not a whit more profound, are patriotically dozing away in
company, far into the night, for their country’s good.

Among this knot of sage and learned men, no one was so eminently
distinguished, during many years, for the quiet modesty of his
appearance and demeanour, as Nicholas Tulrumble, the well-known
coal-dealer. However exciting the subject of discussion, however
animated the tone of the debate, or however warm the personalities
exchanged, (and even in Mudfog we get personal sometimes,) Nicholas
Tulrumble was always the same. To say truth, Nicholas, being an
industrious man, and always up betimes, was apt to fall asleep when a
debate began, and to remain asleep till it was over, when he would wake
up very much refreshed, and give his vote with the greatest
complacency. The fact was, that Nicholas Tulrumble, knowing that
everybody there had made up his mind beforehand, considered the talking
as just a long botheration about nothing at all; and to the present
hour it remains a question, whether, on this point at all events,
Nicholas Tulrumble was not pretty near right.

Time, which strews a man’s head with silver, sometimes fills his
pockets with gold. As he gradually performed one good office for
Nicholas Tulrumble, he was obliging enough, not to omit the other.
Nicholas began life in a wooden tenement of four feet square, with a
capital of two and ninepence, and a stock in trade of three bushels and
a-half of coals, exclusive of the large lump which hung, by way of
sign-board, outside. Then he enlarged the shed, and kept a truck; then
he left the shed, and the truck too, and started a donkey and a Mrs.
Tulrumble; then he moved again and set up a cart; the cart was soon
afterwards exchanged for a waggon; and so he went on like his great
predecessor Whittington—only without a cat for a partner—increasing in
wealth and fame, until at last he gave up business altogether, and
retired with Mrs. Tulrumble and family to Mudfog Hall, which he had
himself erected, on something which he attempted to delude himself into
the belief was a hill, about a quarter of a mile distant from the town
of Mudfog.

About this time, it began to be murmured in Mudfog that Nicholas
Tulrumble was growing vain and haughty; that prosperity and success had
corrupted the simplicity of his manners, and tainted the natural
goodness of his heart; in short, that he was setting up for a public
character, and a great gentleman, and affected to look down upon his
old companions with compassion and contempt. Whether these reports were
at the time well-founded, or not, certain it is that Mrs. Tulrumble
very shortly afterwards started a four-wheel chaise, driven by a tall
postilion in a yellow cap,—that Mr. Tulrumble junior took to smoking
cigars, and calling the footman a ‘feller,’—and that Mr. Tulrumble from
that time forth, was no more seen in his old seat in the chimney-corner
of the Lighterman’s Arms at night. This looked bad; but, more than
this, it began to be observed that Mr. Nicholas Tulrumble attended the
corporation meetings more frequently than heretofore; and he no longer
went to sleep as he had done for so many years, but propped his eyelids
open with his two forefingers; that he read the newspapers by himself
at home; and that he was in the habit of indulging abroad in distant
and mysterious allusions to ‘masses of people,’ and ‘the property of
the country,’ and ‘productive power,’ and ‘the monied interest:’ all of
which denoted and proved that Nicholas Tulrumble was either mad, or
worse; and it puzzled the good people of Mudfog amazingly.

At length, about the middle of the month of October, Mr. Tulrumble and
family went up to London; the middle of October being, as Mrs.
Tulrumble informed her acquaintance in Mudfog, the very height of the
fashionable season.

Somehow or other, just about this time, despite the health-preserving
air of Mudfog, the Mayor died. It was a most extraordinary
circumstance; he had lived in Mudfog for eighty-five years. The
corporation didn’t understand it at all; indeed it was with great
difficulty that one old gentleman, who was a great stickler for forms,
was dissuaded from proposing a vote of censure on such unaccountable
conduct. Strange as it was, however, die he did, without taking the
slightest notice of the corporation; and the corporation were
imperatively called upon to elect his successor. So, they met for the
purpose; and being very full of Nicholas Tulrumble just then, and
Nicholas Tulrumble being a very important man, they elected him, and
wrote off to London by the very next post to acquaint Nicholas
Tulrumble with his new elevation.

Now, it being November time, and Mr. Nicholas Tulrumble being in the
capital, it fell out that he was present at the Lord Mayor’s show and
dinner, at sight of the glory and splendour whereof, he, Mr. Tulrumble,
was greatly mortified, inasmuch as the reflection would force itself on
his mind, that, had he been born in London instead of in Mudfog, he
might have been a Lord Mayor too, and have patronized the judges, and
been affable to the Lord Chancellor, and friendly with the Premier, and
coldly condescending to the Secretary to the Treasury, and have dined
with a flag behind his back, and done a great many other acts and deeds
which unto Lord Mayors of London peculiarly appertain. The more he
thought of the Lord Mayor, the more enviable a personage he seemed. To
be a King was all very well; but what was the King to the Lord Mayor!
When the King made a speech, everybody knew it was somebody else’s
writing; whereas here was the Lord Mayor, talking away for half an
hour-all out of his own head—amidst the enthusiastic applause of the
whole company, while it was notorious that the King might talk to his
parliament till he was black in the face without getting so much as a
single cheer. As all these reflections passed through the mind of Mr.
Nicholas Tulrumble, the Lord Mayor of London appeared to him the
greatest sovereign on the face of the earth, beating the Emperor of
Russia all to nothing, and leaving the Great Mogul immeasurably behind.

Mr. Nicholas Tulrumble was pondering over these things, and inwardly
cursing the fate which had pitched his coal-shed in Mudfog, when the
letter of the corporation was put into his hand. A crimson flush
mantled over his face as he read it, for visions of brightness were
already dancing before his imagination.

‘My dear,’ said Mr. Tulrumble to his wife, ‘they have elected me, Mayor
of Mudfog.’

‘Lor-a-mussy!’ said Mrs. Tulrumble: ‘why what’s become of old Sniggs?’

‘The late Mr. Sniggs, Mrs. Tulrumble,’ said Mr. Tulrumble sharply, for
he by no means approved of the notion of unceremoniously designating a
gentleman who filled the high office of Mayor, as ‘Old Sniggs,’—‘The
late Mr. Sniggs, Mrs. Tulrumble, is dead.’

The communication was very unexpected; but Mrs. Tulrumble only
ejaculated ‘Lor-a-mussy!’ once again, as if a Mayor were a mere
ordinary Christian, at which Mr. Tulrumble frowned gloomily.

‘What a pity ’tan’t in London, ain’t it?’ said Mrs. Tulrumble, after a
short pause; ‘what a pity ’tan’t in London, where you might have had a
show.’

‘I _might_ have a show in Mudfog, if I thought proper, I apprehend,’
said Mr. Tulrumble mysteriously.

‘Lor! so you might, I declare,’ replied Mrs. Tulrumble.

‘And a good one too,’ said Mr. Tulrumble.

‘Delightful!’ exclaimed Mrs. Tulrumble.

‘One which would rather astonish the ignorant people down there,’ said
Mr. Tulrumble.

‘It would kill them with envy,’ said Mrs. Tulrumble.

So it was agreed that his Majesty’s lieges in Mudfog should be
astonished with splendour, and slaughtered with envy, and that such a
show should take place as had never been seen in that town, or in any
other town before,—no, not even in London itself.

On the very next day after the receipt of the letter, down came the
tall postilion in a post-chaise,—not upon one of the horses, but
inside—actually inside the chaise,—and, driving up to the very door of
the town-hall, where the corporation were assembled, delivered a
letter, written by the Lord knows who, and signed by Nicholas
Tulrumble, in which Nicholas said, all through four sides of
closely-written, gilt-edged, hot-pressed, Bath post letter paper, that
he responded to the call of his fellow-townsmen with feelings of
heartfelt delight; that he accepted the arduous office which their
confidence had imposed upon him; that they would never find him
shrinking from the discharge of his duty; that he would endeavour to
execute his functions with all that dignity which their magnitude and
importance demanded; and a great deal more to the same effect. But even
this was not all. The tall postilion produced from his right-hand
top-boot, a damp copy of that afternoon’s number of the county paper;
and there, in large type, running the whole length of the very first
column, was a long address from Nicholas Tulrumble to the inhabitants
of Mudfog, in which he said that he cheerfully complied with their
requisition, and, in short, as if to prevent any mistake about the
matter, told them over again what a grand fellow he meant to be, in
very much the same terms as those in which he had already told them all
about the matter in his letter.

The corporation stared at one another very hard at all this, and then
looked as if for explanation to the tall postilion, but as the tall
postilion was intently contemplating the gold tassel on the top of his
yellow cap, and could have afforded no explanation whatever, even if
his thoughts had been entirely disengaged, they contented themselves
with coughing very dubiously, and looking very grave. The tall
postilion then delivered another letter, in which Nicholas Tulrumble
informed the corporation, that he intended repairing to the town-hall,
in grand state and gorgeous procession, on the Monday afternoon next
ensuing. At this the corporation looked still more solemn; but, as the
epistle wound up with a formal invitation to the whole body to dine
with the Mayor on that day, at Mudfog Hall, Mudfog Hill, Mudfog, they
began to see the fun of the thing directly, and sent back their
compliments, and they’d be sure to come.

Now there happened to be in Mudfog, as somehow or other there does
happen to be, in almost every town in the British dominions, and
perhaps in foreign dominions too—we think it very likely, but, being no
great traveller, cannot distinctly say—there happened to be, in Mudfog,
a merry-tempered, pleasant-faced, good-for-nothing sort of vagabond,
with an invincible dislike to manual labour, and an unconquerable
attachment to strong beer and spirits, whom everybody knew, and nobody,
except his wife, took the trouble to quarrel with, who inherited from
his ancestors the appellation of Edward Twigger, and rejoiced in the
_sobriquet_ of Bottle-nosed Ned. He was drunk upon the average once a
day, and penitent upon an equally fair calculation once a month; and
when he was penitent, he was invariably in the very last stage of
maudlin intoxication. He was a ragged, roving, roaring kind of fellow,
with a burly form, a sharp wit, and a ready head, and could turn his
hand to anything when he chose to do it. He was by no means opposed to
hard labour on principle, for he would work away at a cricket-match by
the day together,—running, and catching, and batting, and bowling, and
revelling in toil which would exhaust a galley-slave. He would have
been invaluable to a fire-office; never was a man with such a natural
taste for pumping engines, running up ladders, and throwing furniture
out of two-pair-of-stairs’ windows: nor was this the only element in
which he was at home; he was a humane society in himself, a portable
drag, an animated life-preserver, and had saved more people, in his
time, from drowning, than the Plymouth life-boat, or Captain Manby’s
apparatus. With all these qualifications, notwithstanding his
dissipation, Bottle-nosed Ned was a general favourite; and the
authorities of Mudfog, remembering his numerous services to the
population, allowed him in return to get drunk in his own way, without
the fear of stocks, fine, or imprisonment. He had a general licence,
and he showed his sense of the compliment by making the most of it.

We have been thus particular in describing the character and avocations
of Bottle-nosed Ned, because it enables us to introduce a fact
politely, without hauling it into the reader’s presence with indecent
haste by the head and shoulders, and brings us very naturally to
relate, that on the very same evening on which Mr. Nicholas Tulrumble
and family returned to Mudfog, Mr. Tulrumble’s new secretary, just
imported from London, with a pale face and light whiskers, thrust his
head down to the very bottom of his neckcloth-tie, in at the tap-room
door of the Lighterman’s Arms, and inquiring whether one Ned Twigger
was luxuriating within, announced himself as the bearer of a message
from Nicholas Tulrumble, Esquire, requiring Mr. Twigger’s immediate
attendance at the hall, on private and particular business. It being by
no means Mr. Twigger’s interest to affront the Mayor, he rose from the
fireplace with a slight sigh, and followed the light-whiskered
secretary through the dirt and wet of Mudfog streets, up to Mudfog
Hall, without further ado.

Mr. Nicholas Tulrumble was seated in a small cavern with a skylight,
which he called his library, sketching out a plan of the procession on
a large sheet of paper; and into the cavern the secretary ushered Ned
Twigger.

‘Well, Twigger!’ said Nicholas Tulrumble, condescendingly.

There was a time when Twigger would have replied, ‘Well, Nick!’ but
that was in the days of the truck, and a couple of years before the
donkey; so, he only bowed.

‘I want you to go into training, Twigger,’ said Mr. Tulrumble.

‘What for, sir?’ inquired Ned, with a stare.

‘Hush, hush, Twigger!’ said the Mayor. ‘Shut the door, Mr. Jennings.
Look here, Twigger.’

As the Mayor said this, he unlocked a high closet, and disclosed a
complete suit of brass armour, of gigantic dimensions.

‘I want you to wear this next Monday, Twigger,’ said the Mayor.

‘Bless your heart and soul, sir!’ replied Ned, ‘you might as well ask
me to wear a seventy-four pounder, or a cast-iron boiler.’

‘Nonsense, Twigger, nonsense!’ said the Mayor.

‘I couldn’t stand under it, sir,’ said Twigger; ‘it would make mashed
potatoes of me, if I attempted it.’

‘Pooh, pooh, Twigger!’ returned the Mayor. ‘I tell you I have seen it
done with my own eyes, in London, and the man wasn’t half such a man as
you are, either.’

‘I should as soon have thought of a man’s wearing the case of an
eight-day clock to save his linen,’ said Twigger, casting a look of
apprehension at the brass suit.

‘It’s the easiest thing in the world,’ rejoined the Mayor.

‘It’s nothing,’ said Mr. Jennings.

‘When you’re used to it,’ added Ned.

‘You do it by degrees,’ said the Mayor. ‘You would begin with one piece
to-morrow, and two the next day, and so on, till you had got it all on.
Mr. Jennings, give Twigger a glass of rum. Just try the breast-plate,
Twigger. Stay; take another glass of rum first. Help me to lift it, Mr.
Jennings. Stand firm, Twigger! There!—it isn’t half as heavy as it
looks, is it?’

Twigger was a good strong, stout fellow; so, after a great deal of
staggering, he managed to keep himself up, under the breastplate, and
even contrived, with the aid of another glass of rum, to walk about in
it, and the gauntlets into the bargain. He made a trial of the helmet,
but was not equally successful, inasmuch as he tipped over
instantly,—an accident which Mr. Tulrumble clearly demonstrated to be
occasioned by his not having a counteracting weight of brass on his
legs.

‘Now, wear that with grace and propriety on Monday next,’ said
Tulrumble, ‘and I’ll make your fortune.’

‘I’ll try what I can do, sir,’ said Twigger.

‘It must be kept a profound secret,’ said Tulrumble.

‘Of course, sir,’ replied Twigger.

‘And you must be sober,’ said Tulrumble; ‘perfectly sober.’ Mr. Twigger
at once solemnly pledged himself to be as sober as a judge, and
Nicholas Tulrumble was satisfied, although, had we been Nicholas, we
should certainly have exacted some promise of a more specific nature;
inasmuch as, having attended the Mudfog assizes in the evening more
than once, we can solemnly testify to having seen judges with very
strong symptoms of dinner under their wigs. However, that’s neither
here nor there.

The next day, and the day following, and the day after that, Ned
Twigger was securely locked up in the small cavern with the sky-light,
hard at work at the armour. With every additional piece he could manage
to stand upright in, he had an additional glass of rum; and at last,
after many partial suffocations, he contrived to get on the whole suit,
and to stagger up and down the room in it, like an intoxicated effigy
from Westminster Abbey.

Never was man so delighted as Nicholas Tulrumble; never was woman so
charmed as Nicholas Tulrumble’s wife. Here was a sight for the common
people of Mudfog! A live man in brass armour! Why, they would go wild
with wonder!

The day—_the_ Monday—arrived.

If the morning had been made to order, it couldn’t have been better
adapted to the purpose. They never showed a better fog in London on
Lord Mayor’s day, than enwrapped the town of Mudfog on that eventful
occasion. It had risen slowly and surely from the green and stagnant
water with the first light of morning, until it reached a little above
the lamp-post tops; and there it had stopped, with a sleepy, sluggish
obstinacy, which bade defiance to the sun, who had got up very
blood-shot about the eyes, as if he had been at a drinking-party
over-night, and was doing his day’s work with the worst possible grace.
The thick damp mist hung over the town like a huge gauze curtain. All
was dim and dismal. The church steeples had bidden a temporary adieu to
the world below; and every object of lesser importance—houses, barns,
hedges, trees, and barges—had all taken the veil.

The church-clock struck one. A cracked trumpet from the front garden of
Mudfog Hall produced a feeble flourish, as if some asthmatic person had
coughed into it accidentally; the gate flew open, and out came a
gentleman, on a moist-sugar coloured charger, intended to represent a
herald, but bearing a much stronger resemblance to a court-card on
horseback. This was one of the Circus people, who always came down to
Mudfog at that time of the year, and who had been engaged by Nicholas
Tulrumble expressly for the occasion. There was the horse, whisking his
tail about, balancing himself on his hind-legs, and flourishing away
with his fore-feet, in a manner which would have gone to the hearts and
souls of any reasonable crowd. But a Mudfog crowd never was a
reasonable one, and in all probability never will be. Instead of
scattering the very fog with their shouts, as they ought most
indubitably to have done, and were fully intended to do, by Nicholas
Tulrumble, they no sooner recognized the herald, than they began to
growl forth the most unqualified disapprobation at the bare notion of
his riding like any other man. If he had come out on his head indeed,
or jumping through a hoop, or flying through a red-hot drum, or even
standing on one leg with his other foot in his mouth, they might have
had something to say to him; but for a professional gentleman to sit
astride in the saddle, with his feet in the stirrups, was rather too
good a joke. So, the herald was a decided failure, and the crowd hooted
with great energy, as he pranced ingloriously away.

On the procession came. We are afraid to say how many supernumeraries
there were, in striped shirts and black velvet caps, to imitate the
London watermen, or how many base imitations of running-footmen, or how
many banners, which, owing to the heaviness of the atmosphere, could by
no means be prevailed on to display their inscriptions: still less do
we feel disposed to relate how the men who played the wind instruments,
looking up into the sky (we mean the fog) with musical fervour, walked
through pools of water and hillocks of mud, till they covered the
powdered heads of the running-footmen aforesaid with splashes, that
looked curious, but not ornamental; or how the barrel-organ performer
put on the wrong stop, and played one tune while the band played
another; or how the horses, being used to the arena, and not to the
streets, would stand still and dance, instead of going on and
prancing;—all of which are matters which might be dilated upon to great
advantage, but which we have not the least intention of dilating upon,
notwithstanding.

Oh! it was a grand and beautiful sight to behold a corporation in glass
coaches, provided at the sole cost and charge of Nicholas Tulrumble,
coming rolling along, like a funeral out of mourning, and to watch the
attempts the corporation made to look great and solemn, when Nicholas
Tulrumble himself, in the four-wheel chaise, with the tall postilion,
rolled out after them, with Mr. Jennings on one side to look like a
chaplain, and a supernumerary on the other, with an old
life-guardsman’s sabre, to imitate the sword-bearer; and to see the
tears rolling down the faces of the mob as they screamed with
merriment. This was beautiful! and so was the appearance of Mrs.
Tulrumble and son, as they bowed with grave dignity out of their
coach-window to all the dirty faces that were laughing around them: but
it is not even with this that we have to do, but with the sudden
stopping of the procession at another blast of the trumpet, whereat,
and whereupon, a profound silence ensued, and all eyes were turned
towards Mudfog Hall, in the confident anticipation of some new wonder.

‘They won’t laugh now, Mr. Jennings,’ said Nicholas Tulrumble.

‘I think not, sir,’ said Mr. Jennings.

‘See how eager they look,’ said Nicholas Tulrumble. ‘Aha! the laugh
will be on our side now; eh, Mr. Jennings?’

‘No doubt of that, sir,’ replied Mr. Jennings; and Nicholas Tulrumble,
in a state of pleasurable excitement, stood up in the four-wheel
chaise, and telegraphed gratification to the Mayoress behind.

While all this was going forward, Ned Twigger had descended into the
kitchen of Mudfog Hall for the purpose of indulging the servants with a
private view of the curiosity that was to burst upon the town; and,
somehow or other, the footman was so companionable, and the housemaid
so kind, and the cook so friendly, that he could not resist the offer
of the first-mentioned to sit down and take something—just to drink
success to master in.

So, down Ned Twigger sat himself in his brass livery on the top of the
kitchen-table; and in a mug of something strong, paid for by the
unconscious Nicholas Tulrumble, and provided by the companionable
footman, drank success to the Mayor and his procession; and, as Ned
laid by his helmet to imbibe the something strong, the companionable
footman put it on his own head, to the immeasurable and unrecordable
delight of the cook and housemaid. The companionable footman was very
facetious to Ned, and Ned was very gallant to the cook and housemaid by
turns. They were all very cosy and comfortable; and the something
strong went briskly round.

At last Ned Twigger was loudly called for, by the procession people:
and, having had his helmet fixed on, in a very complicated manner, by
the companionable footman, and the kind housemaid, and the friendly
cook, he walked gravely forth, and appeared before the multitude.

The crowd roared—it was not with wonder, it was not with surprise; it
was most decidedly and unquestionably with laughter.

‘What!’ said Mr. Tulrumble, starting up in the four-wheel chaise.
‘Laughing? If they laugh at a man in real brass armour, they’d laugh
when their own fathers were dying. Why doesn’t he go into his place,
Mr. Jennings? What’s he rolling down towards us for? he has no business
here!’

‘I am afraid, sir—’ faltered Mr. Jennings.

‘Afraid of what, sir?’ said Nicholas Tulrumble, looking up into the
secretary’s face.

‘I am afraid he’s drunk, sir,’ replied Mr. Jennings.

Nicholas Tulrumble took one look at the extraordinary figure that was
bearing down upon them; and then, clasping his secretary by the arm,
uttered an audible groan in anguish of spirit.

It is a melancholy fact that Mr. Twigger having full licence to demand
a single glass of rum on the putting on of every piece of the armour,
got, by some means or other, rather out of his calculation in the hurry
and confusion of preparation, and drank about four glasses to a piece
instead of one, not to mention the something strong which went on the
top of it. Whether the brass armour checked the natural flow of
perspiration, and thus prevented the spirit from evaporating, we are
not scientific enough to know; but, whatever the cause was, Mr. Twigger
no sooner found himself outside the gate of Mudfog Hall, than he also
found himself in a very considerable state of intoxication; and hence
his extraordinary style of progressing. This was bad enough, but, as if
fate and fortune had conspired against Nicholas Tulrumble, Mr. Twigger,
not having been penitent for a good calendar month, took it into his
head to be most especially and particularly sentimental, just when his
repentance could have been most conveniently dispensed with. Immense
tears were rolling down his cheeks, and he was vainly endeavouring to
conceal his grief by applying to his eyes a blue cotton
pocket-handkerchief with white spots,—an article not strictly in
keeping with a suit of armour some three hundred years old, or
thereabouts.

‘Twigger, you villain!’ said Nicholas Tulrumble, quite forgetting his
dignity, ‘go back.’

‘Never,’ said Ned. ‘I’m a miserable wretch. I’ll never leave you.’

The by-standers of course received this declaration with acclamations
of ‘That’s right, Ned; don’t!’

‘I don’t intend it,’ said Ned, with all the obstinacy of a very tipsy
man. ‘I’m very unhappy. I’m the wretched father of an unfortunate
family; but I am very faithful, sir. I’ll never leave you.’ Having
reiterated this obliging promise, Ned proceeded in broken words to
harangue the crowd upon the number of years he had lived in Mudfog, the
excessive respectability of his character, and other topics of the like
nature.

‘Here! will anybody lead him away?’ said Nicholas: ‘if they’ll call on
me afterwards, I’ll reward them well.’

Two or three men stepped forward, with the view of bearing Ned off,
when the secretary interposed.

‘Take care! take care!’ said Mr. Jennings. ‘I beg your pardon, sir; but
they’d better not go too near him, because, if he falls over, he’ll
certainly crush somebody.’

At this hint the crowd retired on all sides to a very respectful
distance, and left Ned, like the Duke of Devonshire, in a little circle
of his own.

‘But, Mr. Jennings,’ said Nicholas Tulrumble, ‘he’ll be suffocated.’

‘I’m very sorry for it, sir,’ replied Mr. Jennings; ‘but nobody can get
that armour off, without his own assistance. I’m quite certain of it
from the way he put it on.’

Here Ned wept dolefully, and shook his helmeted head, in a manner that
might have touched a heart of stone; but the crowd had not hearts of
stone, and they laughed heartily.

‘Dear me, Mr. Jennings,’ said Nicholas, turning pale at the possibility
of Ned’s being smothered in his antique costume—‘Dear me, Mr. Jennings,
can nothing be done with him?’

‘Nothing at all,’ replied Ned, ‘nothing at all. Gentlemen, I’m an
unhappy wretch. I’m a body, gentlemen, in a brass coffin.’ At this
poetical idea of his own conjuring up, Ned cried so much that the
people began to get sympathetic, and to ask what Nicholas Tulrumble
meant by putting a man into such a machine as that; and one individual
in a hairy waistcoat like the top of a trunk, who had previously
expressed his opinion that if Ned hadn’t been a poor man, Nicholas
wouldn’t have dared do it, hinted at the propriety of breaking the
four-wheel chaise, or Nicholas’s head, or both, which last compound
proposition the crowd seemed to consider a very good notion.

It was not acted upon, however, for it had hardly been broached, when
Ned Twigger’s wife made her appearance abruptly in the little circle
before noticed, and Ned no sooner caught a glimpse of her face and
form, than from the mere force of habit he set off towards his home
just as fast as his legs could carry him; and that was not very quick
in the present instance either, for, however ready they might have been
to carry _him_, they couldn’t get on very well under the brass armour.
So, Mrs. Twigger had plenty of time to denounce Nicholas Tulrumble to
his face: to express her opinion that he was a decided monster; and to
intimate that, if her ill-used husband sustained any personal damage
from the brass armour, she would have the law of Nicholas Tulrumble for
manslaughter. When she had said all this with due vehemence, she posted
after Ned, who was dragging himself along as best he could, and
deploring his unhappiness in most dismal tones.

What a wailing and screaming Ned’s children raised when he got home at
last! Mrs. Twigger tried to undo the armour, first in one place, and
then in another, but she couldn’t manage it; so she tumbled Ned into
bed, helmet, armour, gauntlets, and all. Such a creaking as the
bedstead made, under Ned’s weight in his new suit! It didn’t break down
though; and there Ned lay, like the anonymous vessel in the Bay of
Biscay, till next day, drinking barley-water, and looking miserable:
and every time he groaned, his good lady said it served him right,
which was all the consolation Ned Twigger got.

Nicholas Tulrumble and the gorgeous procession went on together to the
town-hall, amid the hisses and groans of all the spectators, who had
suddenly taken it into their heads to consider poor Ned a martyr.
Nicholas was formally installed in his new office, in acknowledgment of
which ceremony he delivered himself of a speech, composed by the
secretary, which was very long, and no doubt very good, only the noise
of the people outside prevented anybody from hearing it, but Nicholas
Tulrumble himself. After which, the procession got back to Mudfog Hall
any how it could; and Nicholas and the corporation sat down to dinner.

But the dinner was flat, and Nicholas was disappointed. They were such
dull sleepy old fellows, that corporation. Nicholas made quite as long
speeches as the Lord Mayor of London had done, nay, he said the very
same things that the Lord Mayor of London had said, and the deuce a
cheer the corporation gave him. There was only one man in the party who
was thoroughly awake; and he was insolent, and called him Nick. Nick!
What would be the consequence, thought Nicholas, of anybody presuming
to call the Lord Mayor of London ‘Nick!’ He should like to know what
the sword-bearer would say to that; or the recorder, or the
toast-master, or any other of the great officers of the city. They’d
nick him.

But these were not the worst of Nicholas Tulrumble’s doings. If they
had been, he might have remained a Mayor to this day, and have talked
till he lost his voice. He contracted a relish for statistics, and got
philosophical; and the statistics and the philosophy together, led him
into an act which increased his unpopularity and hastened his downfall.

At the very end of the Mudfog High-street, and abutting on the
river-side, stands the Jolly Boatmen, an old-fashioned low-roofed,
bay-windowed house, with a bar, kitchen, and tap-room all in one, and a
large fireplace with a kettle to correspond, round which the working
men have congregated time out of mind on a winter’s night, refreshed by
draughts of good strong beer, and cheered by the sounds of a fiddle and
tambourine: the Jolly Boatmen having been duly licensed by the Mayor
and corporation, to scrape the fiddle and thumb the tambourine from
time, whereof the memory of the oldest inhabitants goeth not to the
contrary. Now Nicholas Tulrumble had been reading pamphlets on crime,
and parliamentary reports,—or had made the secretary read them to him,
which is the same thing in effect,—and he at once perceived that this
fiddle and tambourine must have done more to demoralize Mudfog, than
any other operating causes that ingenuity could imagine. So he read up
for the subject, and determined to come out on the corporation with a
burst, the very next time the licence was applied for.

The licensing day came, and the red-faced landlord of the Jolly Boatmen
walked into the town-hall, looking as jolly as need be, having actually
put on an extra fiddle for that night, to commemorate the anniversary
of the Jolly Boatmen’s music licence. It was applied for in due form,
and was just about to be granted as a matter of course, when up rose
Nicholas Tulrumble, and drowned the astonished corporation in a torrent
of eloquence. He descanted in glowing terms upon the increasing
depravity of his native town of Mudfog, and the excesses committed by
its population. Then, he related how shocked he had been, to see
barrels of beer sliding down into the cellar of the Jolly Boatmen week
after week; and how he had sat at a window opposite the Jolly Boatmen
for two days together, to count the people who went in for beer between
the hours of twelve and one o’clock alone—which, by-the-bye, was the
time at which the great majority of the Mudfog people dined. Then, he
went on to state, how the number of people who came out with beer-jugs,
averaged twenty-one in five minutes, which, being multiplied by twelve,
gave two hundred and fifty-two people with beer-jugs in an hour, and
multiplied again by fifteen (the number of hours during which the house
was open daily) yielded three thousand seven hundred and eighty people
with beer-jugs per day, or twenty-six thousand four hundred and sixty
people with beer-jugs, per week. Then he proceeded to show that a
tambourine and moral degradation were synonymous terms, and a fiddle
and vicious propensities wholly inseparable. All these arguments he
strengthened and demonstrated by frequent references to a large book
with a blue cover, and sundry quotations from the Middlesex
magistrates; and in the end, the corporation, who were posed with the
figures, and sleepy with the speech, and sadly in want of dinner into
the bargain, yielded the palm to Nicholas Tulrumble, and refused the
music licence to the Jolly Boatmen.

But although Nicholas triumphed, his triumph was short. He carried on
the war against beer-jugs and fiddles, forgetting the time when he was
glad to drink out of the one, and to dance to the other, till the
people hated, and his old friends shunned him. He grew tired of the
lonely magnificence of Mudfog Hall, and his heart yearned towards the
Lighterman’s Arms. He wished he had never set up as a public man, and
sighed for the good old times of the coal-shop, and the chimney corner.

At length old Nicholas, being thoroughly miserable, took heart of
grace, paid the secretary a quarter’s wages in advance, and packed him
off to London by the next coach. Having taken this step, he put his hat
on his head, and his pride in his pocket, and walked down to the old
room at the Lighterman’s Arms. There were only two of the old fellows
there, and they looked coldly on Nicholas as he proffered his hand.

‘Are you going to put down pipes, Mr. Tulrumble?’ said one.

‘Or trace the progress of crime to ‘bacca?’ growled another.

‘Neither,’ replied Nicholas Tulrumble, shaking hands with them both,
whether they would or not. ‘I’ve come down to say that I’m very sorry
for having made a fool of myself, and that I hope you’ll give me up the
old chair, again.’

The old fellows opened their eyes, and three or four more old fellows
opened the door, to whom Nicholas, with tears in his eyes, thrust out
his hand too, and told the same story. They raised a shout of joy, that
made the bells in the ancient church-tower vibrate again, and wheeling
the old chair into the warm corner, thrust old Nicholas down into it,
and ordered in the very largest-sized bowl of hot punch, with an
unlimited number of pipes, directly.

The next day, the Jolly Boatmen got the licence, and the next night,
old Nicholas and Ned Twigger’s wife led off a dance to the music of the
fiddle and tambourine, the tone of which seemed mightily improved by a
little rest, for they never had played so merrily before. Ned Twigger
was in the very height of his glory, and he danced hornpipes, and
balanced chairs on his chin, and straws on his nose, till the whole
company, including the corporation, were in raptures of admiration at
the brilliancy of his acquirements.

Mr. Tulrumble, junior, couldn’t make up his mind to be anything but
magnificent, so he went up to London and drew bills on his father; and
when he had overdrawn, and got into debt, he grew penitent, and came
home again.

As to old Nicholas, he kept his word, and having had six weeks of
public life, never tried it any more. He went to sleep in the town-hall
at the very next meeting; and, in full proof of his sincerity, has
requested us to write this faithful narrative. We wish it could have
the effect of reminding the Tulrumbles of another sphere, that
puffed-up conceit is not dignity, and that snarling at the little
pleasures they were once glad to enjoy, because they would rather
forget the times when they were of lower station, renders them objects
of contempt and ridicule.

This is the first time we have published any of our gleanings from this
particular source. Perhaps, at some future period, we may venture to
open the chronicles of Mudfog.

FULL REPORT OF THE FIRST MEETING OF THE MUDFOG ASSOCIATION
for the advancement of everything

We have made the most unparalleled and extraordinary exertions to place
before our readers a complete and accurate account of the proceedings
at the late grand meeting of the Mudfog Association, holden in the town
of Mudfog; it affords us great happiness to lay the result before them,
in the shape of various communications received from our able,
talented, and graphic correspondent, expressly sent down for the
purpose, who has immortalized us, himself, Mudfog, and the association,
all at one and the same time. We have been, indeed, for some days
unable to determine who will transmit the greatest name to posterity;
ourselves, who sent our correspondent down; our correspondent, who
wrote an account of the matter; or the association, who gave our
correspondent something to write about. We rather incline to the
opinion that we are the greatest man of the party, inasmuch as the
notion of an exclusive and authentic report originated with us; this
may be prejudice: it may arise from a prepossession on our part in our
own favour. Be it so. We have no doubt that every gentleman concerned
in this mighty assemblage is troubled with the same complaint in a
greater or less degree; and it is a consolation to us to know that we
have at least this feeling in common with the great scientific stars,
the brilliant and extraordinary luminaries, whose speculations we
record.

We give our correspondent’s letters in the order in which they reached
us. Any attempt at amalgamating them into one beautiful whole, would
only destroy that glowing tone, that dash of wildness, and rich vein of
picturesque interest, which pervade them throughout.

‘_Mudfog_, _Monday night_, _seven o’clock_.


‘We are in a state of great excitement here. Nothing is spoken of, but
the approaching meeting of the association. The inn-doors are thronged
with waiters anxiously looking for the expected arrivals; and the
numerous bills which are wafered up in the windows of private houses,
intimating that there are beds to let within, give the streets a very
animated and cheerful appearance, the wafers being of a great variety
of colours, and the monotony of printed inscriptions being relieved by
every possible size and style of hand-writing. It is confidently
rumoured that Professors Snore, Doze, and Wheezy have engaged three
beds and a sitting-room at the Pig and Tinder-box. I give you the
rumour as it has reached me; but I cannot, as yet, vouch for its
accuracy. The moment I have been enabled to obtain any certain
information upon this interesting point, you may depend upon receiving
it.’

‘_Half-past seven_.


I have just returned from a personal interview with the landlord of the
Pig and Tinder-box. He speaks confidently of the probability of
Professors Snore, Doze, and Wheezy taking up their residence at his
house during the sitting of the association, but denies that the beds
have been yet engaged; in which representation he is confirmed by the
chambermaid—a girl of artless manners, and interesting appearance. The
boots denies that it is at all likely that Professors Snore, Doze, and
Wheezy will put up here; but I have reason to believe that this man has
been suborned by the proprietor of the Original Pig, which is the
opposition hotel. Amidst such conflicting testimony it is difficult to
arrive at the real truth; but you may depend upon receiving authentic
information upon this point the moment the fact is ascertained. The
excitement still continues. A boy fell through the window of the
pastrycook’s shop at the corner of the High-street about half an hour
ago, which has occasioned much confusion. The general impression is,
that it was an accident. Pray heaven it may prove so!’

‘_Tuesday_, _noon_.


‘At an early hour this morning the bells of all the churches struck
seven o’clock; the effect of which, in the present lively state of the
town, was extremely singular. While I was at breakfast, a yellow gig,
drawn by a dark grey horse, with a patch of white over his right
eyelid, proceeded at a rapid pace in the direction of the Original Pig
stables; it is currently reported that this gentleman has arrived here
for the purpose of attending the association, and, from what I have
heard, I consider it extremely probable, although nothing decisive is
yet known regarding him. You may conceive the anxiety with which we are
all looking forward to the arrival of the four o’clock coach this
afternoon.

‘Notwithstanding the excited state of the populace, no outrage has yet
been committed, owing to the admirable discipline and discretion of the
police, who are nowhere to be seen. A barrel-organ is playing opposite
my window, and groups of people, offering fish and vegetables for sale,
parade the streets. With these exceptions everything is quiet, and I
trust will continue so.’

‘_Five o’clock_.


‘It is now ascertained, beyond all doubt, that Professors Snore, Doze,
and Wheezy will _not_ repair to the Pig and Tinder-box, but have
actually engaged apartments at the Original Pig. This intelligence is
_exclusive_; and I leave you and your readers to draw their own
inferences from it. Why Professor Wheezy, of all people in the world,
should repair to the Original Pig in preference to the Pig and
Tinder-box, it is not easy to conceive. The professor is a man who
should be above all such petty feelings. Some people here openly impute
treachery, and a distinct breach of faith to Professors Snore and Doze;
while others, again, are disposed to acquit them of any culpability in
the transaction, and to insinuate that the blame rests solely with
Professor Wheezy. I own that I incline to the latter opinion; and
although it gives me great pain to speak in terms of censure or
disapprobation of a man of such transcendent genius and acquirements,
still I am bound to say that, if my suspicions be well founded, and if
all the reports which have reached my ears be true, I really do not
well know what to make of the matter.

‘Mr. Slug, so celebrated for his statistical researches, arrived this
afternoon by the four o’clock stage. His complexion is a dark purple,
and he has a habit of sighing constantly. He looked extremely well, and
appeared in high health and spirits. Mr. Woodensconce also came down in
the same conveyance. The distinguished gentleman was fast asleep on his
arrival, and I am informed by the guard that he had been so the whole
way. He was, no doubt, preparing for his approaching fatigues; but what
gigantic visions must those be that flit through the brain of such a
man when his body is in a state of torpidity!

‘The influx of visitors increases every moment. I am told (I know not
how truly) that two post-chaises have arrived at the Original Pig
within the last half-hour, and I myself observed a wheelbarrow,
containing three carpet bags and a bundle, entering the yard of the Pig
and Tinder-box no longer ago than five minutes since. The people are
still quietly pursuing their ordinary occupations; but there is a
wildness in their eyes, and an unwonted rigidity in the muscles of
their countenances, which shows to the observant spectator that their
expectations are strained to the very utmost pitch. I fear, unless some
very extraordinary arrivals take place to-night, that consequences may
arise from this popular ferment, which every man of sense and feeling
would deplore.’

‘_Twenty minutes past six_.


‘I have just heard that the boy who fell through the pastrycook’s
window last night has died of the fright. He was suddenly called upon
to pay three and sixpence for the damage done, and his constitution, it
seems, was not strong enough to bear up against the shock. The inquest,
it is said, will be held to-morrow.’

‘_Three-quarters part seven_.


‘Professors Muff and Nogo have just driven up to the hotel door; they
at once ordered dinner with great condescension. We are all very much
delighted with the urbanity of their manners, and the ease with which
they adapt themselves to the forms and ceremonies of ordinary life.
Immediately on their arrival they sent for the head waiter, and
privately requested him to purchase a live dog,—as cheap a one as he
could meet with,—and to send him up after dinner, with a pie-board, a
knife and fork, and a clean plate. It is conjectured that some
experiments will be tried upon the dog to-night; if any particulars
should transpire, I will forward them by express.’

‘_Half-past eight_.


‘The animal has been procured. He is a pug-dog, of rather intelligent
appearance, in good condition, and with very short legs. He has been
tied to a curtain-peg in a dark room, and is howling dreadfully.’

‘_Ten minutes to nine_.


‘The dog has just been rung for. With an instinct which would appear
almost the result of reason, the sagacious animal seized the waiter by
the calf of the leg when he approached to take him, and made a
desperate, though ineffectual resistance. I have not been able to
procure admission to the apartment occupied by the scientific
gentlemen; but, judging from the sounds which reached my ears when I
stood upon the landing-place outside the door, just now, I should be
disposed to say that the dog had retreated growling beneath some
article of furniture, and was keeping the professors at bay. This
conjecture is confirmed by the testimony of the ostler, who, after
peeping through the keyhole, assures me that he distinctly saw
Professor Nogo on his knees, holding forth a small bottle of prussic
acid, to which the animal, who was crouched beneath an arm-chair,
obstinately declined to smell. You cannot imagine the feverish state of
irritation we are in, lest the interests of science should be
sacrificed to the prejudices of a brute creature, who is not endowed
with sufficient sense to foresee the incalculable benefits which the
whole human race may derive from so very slight a concession on his
part.’

‘_Nine o’clock_.


‘The dog’s tail and ears have been sent down-stairs to be washed; from
which circumstance we infer that the animal is no more. His forelegs
have been delivered to the boots to be brushed, which strengthens the
supposition.’

‘_Half after ten_.


‘My feelings are so overpowered by what has taken place in the course
of the last hour and a half, that I have scarcely strength to detail
the rapid succession of events which have quite bewildered all those
who are cognizant of their occurrence. It appears that the pug-dog
mentioned in my last was surreptitiously obtained,—stolen, in fact,—by
some person attached to the stable department, from an unmarried lady
resident in this town. Frantic on discovering the loss of her
favourite, the lady rushed distractedly into the street, calling in the
most heart-rending and pathetic manner upon the passengers to restore
her, her Augustus,—for so the deceased was named, in affectionate
remembrance of a former lover of his mistress, to whom he bore a
striking personal resemblance, which renders the circumstances
additionally affecting. I am not yet in a condition to inform you what
circumstance induced the bereaved lady to direct her steps to the hotel
which had witnessed the last struggles of her _protégé_. I can only
state that she arrived there, at the very instant when his detached
members were passing through the passage on a small tray. Her shrieks
still reverberate in my ears! I grieve to say that the expressive
features of Professor Muff were much scratched and lacerated by the
injured lady; and that Professor Nogo, besides sustaining several
severe bites, has lost some handfuls of hair from the same cause. It
must be some consolation to these gentlemen to know that their ardent
attachment to scientific pursuits has alone occasioned these unpleasant
consequences; for which the sympathy of a grateful country will
sufficiently reward them. The unfortunate lady remains at the Pig and
Tinder-box, and up to this time is reported in a very precarious state.

‘I need scarcely tell you that this unlooked-for catastrophe has cast a
damp and gloom upon us in the midst of our exhilaration; natural in any
case, but greatly enhanced in this, by the amiable qualities of the
deceased animal, who appears to have been much and deservedly respected
by the whole of his acquaintance.’

‘_Twelve o’clock_.


‘I take the last opportunity before sealing my parcel to inform you
that the boy who fell through the pastrycook’s window is not dead, as
was universally believed, but alive and well. The report appears to
have had its origin in his mysterious disappearance. He was found half
an hour since on the premises of a sweet-stuff maker, where a raffle
had been announced for a second-hand seal-skin cap and a tambourine;
and where—a sufficient number of members not having been obtained at
first—he had patiently waited until the list was completed. This
fortunate discovery has in some degree restored our gaiety and
cheerfulness. It is proposed to get up a subscription for him without
delay.

‘Everybody is nervously anxious to see what to-morrow will bring forth.
If any one should arrive in the course of the night, I have left strict
directions to be called immediately. I should have sat up, indeed, but
the agitating events of this day have been too much for me.

‘No news yet of either of the Professors Snore, Doze, or Wheezy. It is
very strange!’

‘_Wednesday afternoon_.


‘All is now over; and, upon one point at least, I am at length enabled
to set the minds of your readers at rest. The three professors arrived
at ten minutes after two o’clock, and, instead of taking up their
quarters at the Original Pig, as it was universally understood in the
course of yesterday that they would assuredly have done, drove straight
to the Pig and Tinder-box, where they threw off the mask at once, and
openly announced their intention of remaining. Professor Wheezy may
reconcile this very extraordinary conduct with _his_ notions of fair
and equitable dealing, but I would recommend Professor Wheezy to be
cautious how he presumes too far upon his well-earned reputation. How
such a man as Professor Snore, or, which is still more extraordinary,
such an individual as Professor Doze, can quietly allow himself to be
mixed up with such proceedings as these, you will naturally inquire.
Upon this head, rumour is silent; I have my speculations, but forbear
to give utterance to them just now.’

‘_Four o’clock_.


‘The town is filling fast; eighteenpence has been offered for a bed and
refused. Several gentlemen were under the necessity last night of
sleeping in the brick fields, and on the steps of doors, for which they
were taken before the magistrates in a body this morning, and committed
to prison as vagrants for various terms. One of these persons I
understand to be a highly-respectable tinker, of great practical skill,
who had forwarded a paper to the President of Section D. Mechanical
Science, on the construction of pipkins with copper bottoms and
safety-values, of which report speaks highly. The incarceration of this
gentleman is greatly to be regretted, as his absence will preclude any
discussion on the subject.

‘The bills are being taken down in all directions, and lodgings are
being secured on almost any terms. I have heard of fifteen shillings a
week for two rooms, exclusive of coals and attendance, but I can
scarcely believe it. The excitement is dreadful. I was informed this
morning that the civil authorities, apprehensive of some outbreak of
popular feeling, had commanded a recruiting sergeant and two corporals
to be under arms; and that, with the view of not irritating the people
unnecessarily by their presence, they had been requested to take up
their position before daybreak in a turnpike, distant about a quarter
of a mile from the town. The vigour and promptness of these measures
cannot be too highly extolled.

‘Intelligence has just been brought me, that an elderly female, in a
state of inebriety, has declared in the open street her intention to
“do” for Mr. Slug. Some statistical returns compiled by that gentleman,
relative to the consumption of raw spirituous liquors in this place,
are supposed to be the cause of the wretch’s animosity. It is added
that this declaration was loudly cheered by a crowd of persons who had
assembled on the spot; and that one man had the boldness to designate
Mr. Slug aloud by the opprobrious epithet of “Stick-in-the-mud!” It is
earnestly to be hoped that now, when the moment has arrived for their
interference, the magistrates will not shrink from the exercise of that
power which is vested in them by the constitution of our common
country.’

‘_Half-past ten_.


‘The disturbance, I am happy to inform you, has been completely
quelled, and the ringleader taken into custody. She had a pail of cold
water thrown over her, previous to being locked up, and expresses great
contrition and uneasiness. We are all in a fever of anticipation about
to-morrow; but, now that we are within a few hours of the meeting of
the association, and at last enjoy the proud consciousness of having
its illustrious members amongst us, I trust and hope everything may go
off peaceably. I shall send you a full report of to-morrow’s
proceedings by the night coach.’

‘_Eleven o’clock_.


‘I open my letter to say that nothing whatever has occurred since I
folded it up.’

‘_Thursday_.


‘The sun rose this morning at the usual hour. I did not observe
anything particular in the aspect of the glorious planet, except that
he appeared to me (it might have been a delusion of my heightened
fancy) to shine with more than common brilliancy, and to shed a
refulgent lustre upon the town, such as I had never observed before.
This is the more extraordinary, as the sky was perfectly cloudless, and
the atmosphere peculiarly fine. At half-past nine o’clock the general
committee assembled, with the last year’s president in the chair. The
report of the council was read; and one passage, which stated that the
council had corresponded with no less than three thousand five hundred
and seventy-one persons, (all of whom paid their own postage,) on no
fewer than seven thousand two hundred and forty-three topics, was
received with a degree of enthusiasm which no efforts could suppress.
The various committees and sections having been appointed, and the more
formal business transacted, the great proceedings of the meeting
commenced at eleven o’clock precisely. I had the happiness of occupying
a most eligible position at that time, in




‘SECTION A.—ZOOLOGY AND BOTANY.
GREAT ROOM, PIG AND TINDER-BOX.


_President_—Professor Snore. _Vice-Presidents_—Professors Doze and
Wheezy.

‘The scene at this moment was particularly striking. The sun streamed
through the windows of the apartments, and tinted the whole scene with
its brilliant rays, bringing out in strong relief the noble visages of
the professors and scientific gentlemen, who, some with bald heads,
some with red heads, some with brown heads, some with grey heads, some
with black heads, some with block heads, presented a _coup d’oeil_
which no eye-witness will readily forget. In front of these gentlemen
were papers and inkstands; and round the room, on elevated benches
extending as far as the forms could reach, were assembled a brilliant
concourse of those lovely and elegant women for which Mudfog is justly
acknowledged to be without a rival in the whole world. The contrast
between their fair faces and the dark coats and trousers of the
scientific gentlemen I shall never cease to remember while Memory holds
her seat.

‘Time having been allowed for a slight confusion, occasioned by the
falling down of the greater part of the platforms, to subside, the
president called on one of the secretaries to read a communication
entitled, “Some remarks on the industrious fleas, with considerations
on the importance of establishing infant-schools among that numerous
class of society; of directing their industry to useful and practical
ends; and of applying the surplus fruits thereof, towards providing for
them a comfortable and respectable maintenance in their old age.”

‘The author stated, that, having long turned his attention to the moral
and social condition of these interesting animals, he had been induced
to visit an exhibition in Regent-street, London, commonly known by the
designation of “The Industrious Fleas.” He had there seen many fleas,
occupied certainly in various pursuits and avocations, but occupied, he
was bound to add, in a manner which no man of well-regulated mind could
fail to regard with sorrow and regret. One flea, reduced to the level
of a beast of burden, was drawing about a miniature gig, containing a
particularly small effigy of His Grace the Duke of Wellington; while
another was staggering beneath the weight of a golden model of his
great adversary Napoleon Bonaparte. Some, brought up as mountebanks and
ballet-dancers, were performing a figure-dance (he regretted to
observe, that, of the fleas so employed, several were females); others
were in training, in a small card-board box, for pedestrians,—mere
sporting characters—and two were actually engaged in the cold-blooded
and barbarous occupation of duelling; a pursuit from which humanity
recoiled with horror and disgust. He suggested that measures should be
immediately taken to employ the labour of these fleas as part and
parcel of the productive power of the country, which might easily be
done by the establishment among them of infant schools and houses of
industry, in which a system of virtuous education, based upon sound
principles, should be observed, and moral precepts strictly inculcated.
He proposed that every flea who presumed to exhibit, for hire, music,
or dancing, or any species of theatrical entertainment, without a
licence, should be considered a vagabond, and treated accordingly; in
which respect he only placed him upon a level with the rest of mankind.
He would further suggest that their labour should be placed under the
control and regulation of the state, who should set apart from the
profits, a fund for the support of superannuated or disabled fleas,
their widows and orphans. With this view, he proposed that liberal
premiums should be offered for the three best designs for a general
almshouse; from which—as insect architecture was well known to be in a
very advanced and perfect state—we might possibly derive many valuable
hints for the improvement of our metropolitan universities, national
galleries, and other public edifices.

‘The President wished to be informed how the ingenious gentleman
proposed to open a communication with fleas generally, in the first
instance, so that they might be thoroughly imbued with a sense of the
advantages they must necessarily derive from changing their mode of
life, and applying themselves to honest labour. This appeared to him,
the only difficulty.

‘The Author submitted that this difficulty was easily overcome, or
rather that there was no difficulty at all in the case. Obviously the
course to be pursued, if Her Majesty’s government could be prevailed
upon to take up the plan, would be, to secure at a remunerative salary
the individual to whom he had alluded as presiding over the exhibition
in Regent-street at the period of his visit. That gentleman would at
once be able to put himself in communication with the mass of the
fleas, and to instruct them in pursuance of some general plan of
education, to be sanctioned by Parliament, until such time as the more
intelligent among them were advanced enough to officiate as teachers to
the rest.

‘The President and several members of the section highly complimented
the author of the paper last read, on his most ingenious and important
treatise. It was determined that the subject should be recommended to
the immediate consideration of the council.

‘Mr. Wigsby produced a cauliflower somewhat larger than a
chaise-umbrella, which had been raised by no other artificial means
than the simple application of highly carbonated soda-water as manure.
He explained that by scooping out the head, which would afford a new
and delicious species of nourishment for the poor, a parachute, in
principle something similar to that constructed by M. Garnerin, was at
once obtained; the stalk of course being kept downwards. He added that
he was perfectly willing to make a descent from a height of not less
than three miles and a quarter; and had in fact already proposed the
same to the proprietors of Vauxhall Gardens, who in the handsomest
manner at once consented to his wishes, and appointed an early day next
summer for the undertaking; merely stipulating that the rim of the
cauliflower should be previously broken in three or four places to
ensure the safety of the descent.

‘The President congratulated the public on the _grand gala_ in store
for them, and warmly eulogised the proprietors of the establishment
alluded to, for their love of science, and regard for the safety of
human life, both of which did them the highest honour.

‘A Member wished to know how many thousand additional lamps the royal
property would be illuminated with, on the night after the descent.

‘Mr. Wigsby replied that the point was not yet finally decided; but he
believed it was proposed, over and above the ordinary illuminations, to
exhibit in various devices eight millions and a-half of additional
lamps.

‘The Member expressed himself much gratified with this announcement.

‘Mr. Blunderum delighted the section with a most interesting and
valuable paper “on the last moments of the learned pig,” which produced
a very strong impression on the assembly, the account being compiled
from the personal recollections of his favourite attendant. The account
stated in the most emphatic terms that the animal’s name was not Toby,
but Solomon; and distinctly proved that he could have no near relatives
in the profession, as many designing persons had falsely stated,
inasmuch as his father, mother, brothers and sisters, had all fallen
victims to the butcher at different times. An uncle of his indeed, had
with very great labour been traced to a sty in Somers Town; but as he
was in a very infirm state at the time, being afflicted with measles,
and shortly afterwards disappeared, there appeared too much reason to
conjecture that he had been converted into sausages. The disorder of
the learned pig was originally a severe cold, which, being aggravated
by excessive trough indulgence, finally settled upon the lungs, and
terminated in a general decay of the constitution. A melancholy
instance of a presentiment entertained by the animal of his approaching
dissolution, was recorded. After gratifying a numerous and fashionable
company with his performances, in which no falling off whatever was
visible, he fixed his eyes on the biographer, and, turning to the watch
which lay on the floor, and on which he was accustomed to point out the
hour, deliberately passed his snout twice round the dial. In precisely
four-and-twenty hours from that time he had ceased to exist!

‘Professor Wheezy inquired whether, previous to his demise, the animal
had expressed, by signs or otherwise, any wishes regarding the disposal
of his little property.

‘Mr. Blunderum replied, that, when the biographer took up the pack of
cards at the conclusion of the performance, the animal grunted several
times in a significant manner, and nodding his head as he was
accustomed to do, when gratified. From these gestures it was understood
that he wished the attendant to keep the cards, which he had ever since
done. He had not expressed any wish relative to his watch, which had
accordingly been pawned by the same individual.

‘The President wished to know whether any Member of the section had
ever seen or conversed with the pig-faced lady, who was reported to
have worn a black velvet mask, and to have taken her meals from a
golden trough.

‘After some hesitation a Member replied that the pig-faced lady was his
mother-in-law, and that he trusted the President would not violate the
sanctity of private life.

‘The President begged pardon. He had considered the pig-faced lady a
public character. Would the honourable member object to state, with a
view to the advancement of science, whether she was in any way
connected with the learned pig?

‘The Member replied in the same low tone, that, as the question
appeared to involve a suspicion that the learned pig might be his
half-brother, he must decline answering it.




‘SECTION B.—ANATOMY AND MEDICINE.
COACH-HOUSE, PIG AND TINDER-BOX.


_President_—Dr. Toorell. _Vice-Presidents_—Professors Muff and Nogo.

Dr. Kutankumagen (of Moscow) read to the section a report of a case
which had occurred within his own practice, strikingly illustrative of
the power of medicine, as exemplified in his successful treatment of a
virulent disorder. He had been called in to visit the patient on the
1st of April, 1837. He was then labouring under symptoms peculiarly
alarming to any medical man. His frame was stout and muscular, his step
firm and elastic, his cheeks plump and red, his voice loud, his
appetite good, his pulse full and round. He was in the constant habit
of eating three meals _per diem_, and of drinking at least one bottle
of wine, and one glass of spirituous liquors diluted with water, in the
course of the four-and-twenty hours. He laughed constantly, and in so
hearty a manner that it was terrible to hear him. By dint of powerful
medicine, low diet, and bleeding, the symptoms in the course of three
days perceptibly decreased. A rigid perseverance in the same course of
treatment for only one week, accompanied with small doses of
water-gruel, weak broth, and barley-water, led to their entire
disappearance. In the course of a month he was sufficiently recovered
to be carried down-stairs by two nurses, and to enjoy an airing in a
close carriage, supported by soft pillows. At the present moment he was
restored so far as to walk about, with the slight assistance of a
crutch and a boy. It would perhaps be gratifying to the section to
learn that he ate little, drank little, slept little, and was never
heard to laugh by any accident whatever.

‘Dr. W. R. Fee, in complimenting the honourable member upon the
triumphant cure he had effected, begged to ask whether the patient
still bled freely?

‘Dr. Kutankumagen replied in the affirmative.

‘Dr. W. R. Fee.—And you found that he bled freely during the whole
course of the disorder?

‘Dr. Kutankumagen.—Oh dear, yes; most freely.

‘Dr. Neeshawts supposed, that if the patient had not submitted to be
bled with great readiness and perseverance, so extraordinary a cure
could never, in fact, have been accomplished. Dr. Kutankumagen
rejoined, certainly not.

‘Mr. Knight Bell (M.R.C.S.) exhibited a wax preparation of the interior
of a gentleman who in early life had inadvertently swallowed a
door-key. It was a curious fact that a medical student of dissipated
habits, being present at the _post mortem_ examination, found means to
escape unobserved from the room, with that portion of the coats of the
stomach upon which an exact model of the instrument was distinctly
impressed, with which he hastened to a locksmith of doubtful character,
who made a new key from the pattern so shown to him. With this key the
medical student entered the house of the deceased gentleman, and
committed a burglary to a large amount, for which he was subsequently
tried and executed.

‘The President wished to know what became of the original key after the
lapse of years. Mr. Knight Bell replied that the gentleman was always
much accustomed to punch, and it was supposed the acid had gradually
devoured it.

‘Dr. Neeshawts and several of the members were of opinion that the key
must have lain very cold and heavy upon the gentleman’s stomach.

‘Mr. Knight Bell believed it did at first. It was worthy of remark,
perhaps, that for some years the gentleman was troubled with a
night-mare, under the influence of which he always imagined himself a
wine-cellar door.

‘Professor Muff related a very extraordinary and convincing proof of
the wonderful efficacy of the system of infinitesimal doses, which the
section were doubtless aware was based upon the theory that the very
minutest amount of any given drug, properly dispersed through the human
frame, would be productive of precisely the same result as a very large
dose administered in the usual manner. Thus, the fortieth part of a
grain of calomel was supposed to be equal to a five-grain calomel pill,
and so on in proportion throughout the whole range of medicine. He had
tried the experiment in a curious manner upon a publican who had been
brought into the hospital with a broken head, and was cured upon the
infinitesimal system in the incredibly short space of three months.
This man was a hard drinker. He (Professor Muff) had dispersed three
drops of rum through a bucket of water, and requested the man to drink
the whole. What was the result? Before he had drunk a quart, he was in
a state of beastly intoxication; and five other men were made dead
drunk with the remainder.

‘The President wished to know whether an infinitesimal dose of
soda-water would have recovered them? Professor Muff replied that the
twenty-fifth part of a teaspoonful, properly administered to each
patient, would have sobered him immediately. The President remarked
that this was a most important discovery, and he hoped the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen would patronize it immediately.

‘A Member begged to be informed whether it would be possible to
administer—say, the twentieth part of a grain of bread and cheese to
all grown-up paupers, and the fortieth part to children, with the same
satisfying effect as their present allowance.

‘Professor Muff was willing to stake his professional reputation on the
perfect adequacy of such a quantity of food to the support of human
life—in workhouses; the addition of the fifteenth part of a grain of
pudding twice a week would render it a high diet.

‘Professor Nogo called the attention of the section to a very
extraordinary case of animal magnetism. A private watchman, being
merely looked at by the operator from the opposite side of a wide
street, was at once observed to be in a very drowsy and languid state.
He was followed to his box, and being once slightly rubbed on the palms
of the hands, fell into a sound sleep, in which he continued without
intermission for ten hours.




‘SECTION C.—STATISTICS.
HAY-LOFT, ORIGINAL PIG.


_President_—Mr. Woodensconce. _Vice-Presidents_—Mr. Ledbrain and Mr.
Timbered.

‘Mr. Slug stated to the section the result of some calculations he had
made with great difficulty and labour, regarding the state of infant
education among the middle classes of London. He found that, within a
circle of three miles from the Elephant and Castle, the following were
the names and numbers of children’s books principally in circulation:—

‘Jack the Giant-killer

7,943

Ditto and Bean-stalk

8,621

Ditto and Eleven Brothers

2,845

Ditto and Jill

1,998

Total

21,407


‘He found that the proportion of Robinson Crusoes to Philip Quarlls was
as four and a half to one; and that the preponderance of Valentine and
Orsons over Goody Two Shoeses was as three and an eighth of the former
to half a one of the latter; a comparison of Seven Champions with
Simple Simons gave the same result. The ignorance that prevailed, was
lamentable. One child, on being asked whether he would rather be Saint
George of England or a respectable tallow-chandler, instantly replied,
“Taint George of Ingling.” Another, a little boy of eight years old,
was found to be firmly impressed with a belief in the existence of
dragons, and openly stated that it was his intention when he grew up,
to rush forth sword in hand for the deliverance of captive princesses,
and the promiscuous slaughter of giants. Not one child among the number
interrogated had ever heard of Mungo Park,—some inquiring whether he
was at all connected with the black man that swept the crossing; and
others whether he was in any way related to the Regent’s Park. They had
not the slightest conception of the commonest principles of
mathematics, and considered Sindbad the Sailor the most enterprising
voyager that the world had ever produced.

‘A Member strongly deprecating the use of all the other books
mentioned, suggested that Jack and Jill might perhaps be exempted from
the general censure, inasmuch as the hero and heroine, in the very
outset of the tale, were depicted as going _up_ a hill to fetch a pail
of water, which was a laborious and useful occupation,—supposing the
family linen was being washed, for instance.

‘Mr. Slug feared that the moral effect of this passage was more than
counterbalanced by another in a subsequent part of the poem, in which
very gross allusion was made to the mode in which the heroine was
personally chastised by her mother


“‘For laughing at Jack’s disaster;”


besides, the whole work had this one great fault, _it was not true_.

‘The President complimented the honourable member on the excellent
distinction he had drawn. Several other Members, too, dwelt upon the
immense and urgent necessity of storing the minds of children with
nothing but facts and figures; which process the President very
forcibly remarked, had made them (the section) the men they were.

‘Mr. Slug then stated some curious calculations respecting the
dogs’-meat barrows of London. He found that the total number of small
carts and barrows engaged in dispensing provision to the cats and dogs
of the metropolis was, one thousand seven hundred and forty-three. The
average number of skewers delivered daily with the provender, by each
dogs’-meat cart or barrow, was thirty-six. Now, multiplying the number
of skewers so delivered by the number of barrows, a total of sixty-two
thousand seven hundred and forty-eight skewers daily would be obtained.
Allowing that, of these sixty-two thousand seven hundred and
forty-eight skewers, the odd two thousand seven hundred and forty-eight
were accidentally devoured with the meat, by the most voracious of the
animals supplied, it followed that sixty thousand skewers per day, or
the enormous number of twenty-one millions nine hundred thousand
skewers annually, were wasted in the kennels and dustholes of London;
which, if collected and warehoused, would in ten years’ time afford a
mass of timber more than sufficient for the construction of a
first-rate vessel of war for the use of her Majesty’s navy, to be
called “The Royal Skewer,” and to become under that name the terror of
all the enemies of this island.

‘Mr. X. Ledbrain read a very ingenious communication, from which it
appeared that the total number of legs belonging to the manufacturing
population of one great town in Yorkshire was, in round numbers, forty
thousand, while the total number of chair and stool legs in their
houses was only thirty thousand, which, upon the very favourable
average of three legs to a seat, yielded only ten thousand seats in
all. From this calculation it would appear,—not taking wooden or cork
legs into the account, but allowing two legs to every person,—that ten
thousand individuals (one-half of the whole population) were either
destitute of any rest for their legs at all, or passed the whole of
their leisure time in sitting upon boxes.




‘SECTION D.—MECHANICAL SCIENCE.
COACH-HOUSE, ORIGINAL PIG.


_President_—Mr. Carter. _Vice-Presidents_—Mr. Truck and Mr. Waghorn.

‘Professor Queerspeck exhibited an elegant model of a portable railway,
neatly mounted in a green case, for the waistcoat pocket. By attaching
this beautiful instrument to his boots, any Bank or public-office clerk
could transport himself from his place of residence to his place of
business, at the easy rate of sixty-five miles an hour, which, to
gentlemen of sedentary pursuits, would be an incalculable advantage.

‘The President was desirous of knowing whether it was necessary to have
a level surface on which the gentleman was to run.

‘Professor Queerspeck explained that City gentlemen would run in
trains, being handcuffed together to prevent confusion or
unpleasantness. For instance, trains would start every morning at
eight, nine, and ten o’clock, from Camden Town, Islington, Camberwell,
Hackney, and various other places in which City gentlemen are
accustomed to reside. It would be necessary to have a level, but he had
provided for this difficulty by proposing that the best line that the
circumstances would admit of, should be taken through the sewers which
undermine the streets of the metropolis, and which, well lighted by
jets from the gas pipes which run immediately above them, would form a
pleasant and commodious arcade, especially in winter-time, when the
inconvenient custom of carrying umbrellas, now so general, could be
wholly dispensed with. In reply to another question, Professor
Queerspeck stated that no substitute for the purposes to which these
arcades were at present devoted had yet occurred to him, but that he
hoped no fanciful objection on this head would be allowed to interfere
with so great an undertaking.

‘Mr. Jobba produced a forcing-machine on a novel plan, for bringing
joint-stock railway shares prematurely to a premium. The instrument was
in the form of an elegant gilt weather-glass, of most dazzling
appearance, and was worked behind, by strings, after the manner of a
pantomime trick, the strings being always pulled by the directors of
the company to which the machine belonged. The quicksilver was so
ingeniously placed, that when the acting directors held shares in their
pockets, figures denoting very small expenses and very large returns
appeared upon the glass; but the moment the directors parted with these
pieces of paper, the estimate of needful expenditure suddenly increased
itself to an immense extent, while the statements of certain profits
became reduced in the same proportion. Mr. Jobba stated that the
machine had been in constant requisition for some months past, and he
had never once known it to fail.

‘A Member expressed his opinion that it was extremely neat and pretty.
He wished to know whether it was not liable to accidental derangement?
Mr. Jobba said that the whole machine was undoubtedly liable to be
blown up, but that was the only objection to it.

‘Professor Nogo arrived from the anatomical section to exhibit a model
of a safety fire-escape, which could be fixed at any time, in less than
half an hour, and by means of which, the youngest or most infirm
persons (successfully resisting the progress of the flames until it was
quite ready) could be preserved if they merely balanced themselves for
a few minutes on the sill of their bedroom window, and got into the
escape without falling into the street. The Professor stated that the
number of boys who had been rescued in the daytime by this machine from
houses which were not on fire, was almost incredible. Not a
conflagration had occurred in the whole of London for many months past
to which the escape had not been carried on the very next day, and put
in action before a concourse of persons.

‘The President inquired whether there was not some difficulty in
ascertaining which was the top of the machine, and which the bottom, in
cases of pressing emergency.

‘Professor Nogo explained that of course it could not be expected to
act quite as well when there was a fire, as when there was not a fire;
but in the former case he thought it would be of equal service whether
the top were up or down.’

With the last section our correspondent concludes his most able and
faithful Report, which will never cease to reflect credit upon him for
his scientific attainments, and upon us for our enterprising spirit. It
is needless to take a review of the subjects which have been discussed;
of the mode in which they have been examined; of the great truths which
they have elicited. They are now before the world, and we leave them to
read, to consider, and to profit.

The place of meeting for next year has undergone discussion, and has at
length been decided, regard being had to, and evidence being taken
upon, the goodness of its wines, the supply of its markets, the
hospitality of its inhabitants, and the quality of its hotels. We hope
at this next meeting our correspondent may again be present, and that
we may be once more the means of placing his communications before the
world. Until that period we have been prevailed upon to allow this
number of our Miscellany to be retailed to the public, or wholesaled to
the trade, without any advance upon our usual price.

We have only to add, that the committees are now broken up, and that
Mudfog is once again restored to its accustomed tranquillity,—that
Professors and Members have had balls, and _soirées_, and suppers, and
great mutual complimentations, and have at length dispersed to their
several homes,—whither all good wishes and joys attend them, until next
year!

Signed Boz.




FULL REPORT OF THE SECOND MEETING OF THE MUDFOG ASSOCIATION
for the advancement of everything


In October last, we did ourselves the immortal credit of recording, at
an enormous expense, and by dint of exertions unnpralleled in the
history of periodical publication, the proceedings of the Mudfog
Association for the Advancement of Everything, which in that month held
its first great half-yearly meeting, to the wonder and delight of the
whole empire. We announced at the conclusion of that extraordinary and
most remarkable Report, that when the Second Meeting of the Society
should take place, we should be found again at our post, renewing our
gigantic and spirited endeavours, and once more making the world ring
with the accuracy, authenticity, immeasurable superiority, and intense
remarkability of our account of its proceedings. In redemption of this
pledge, we caused to be despatched per steam to Oldcastle (at which
place this second meeting of the Society was held on the 20th instant),
the same superhumanly-endowed gentleman who furnished the former
report, and who,—gifted by nature with transcendent abilities, and
furnished by us with a body of assistants scarcely inferior to
himself,—has forwarded a series of letters, which, for faithfulness of
description, power of language, fervour of thought, happiness of
expression, and importance of subject-matter, have no equal in the
epistolary literature of any age or country. We give this gentleman’s
correspondence entire, and in the order in which it reached our office.

‘_Saloon of Steamer_, _Thursday night_, _half-past eight_.


‘When I left New Burlington Street this evening in the hackney
cabriolet, number four thousand two hundred and eighty-five, I
experienced sensations as novel as they were oppressive. A sense of the
importance of the task I had undertaken, a consciousness that I was
leaving London, and, stranger still, going somewhere else, a feeling of
loneliness and a sensation of jolting, quite bewildered my thoughts,
and for a time rendered me even insensible to the presence of my
carpet-bag and hat-box. I shall ever feel grateful to the driver of a
Blackwall omnibus who, by thrusting the pole of his vehicle through the
small door of the cabriolet, awakened me from a tumult of imaginings
that are wholly indescribable. But of such materials is our imperfect
nature composed!

‘I am happy to say that I am the first passenger on board, and shall
thus be enabled to give you an account of all that happens in the order
of its occurrence. The chimney is smoking a good deal, and so are the
crew; and the captain, I am informed, is very drunk in a little house
upon deck, something like a black turnpike. I should infer from all I
hear that he has got the steam up.

‘You will readily guess with what feelings I have just made the
discovery that my berth is in the same closet with those engaged by
Professor Woodensconce, Mr. Slug, and Professor Grime. Professor
Woodensconce has taken the shelf above me, and Mr. Slug and Professor
Grime the two shelves opposite. Their luggage has already arrived. On
Mr. Slug’s bed is a long tin tube of about three inches in diameter,
carefully closed at both ends. What can this contain? Some powerful
instrument of a new construction, doubtless.’

‘_Ten minutes past nine_.


‘Nobody has yet arrived, nor has anything fresh come in my way except
several joints of beef and mutton, from which I conclude that a good
plain dinner has been provided for to-morrow. There is a singular smell
below, which gave me some uneasiness at first; but as the steward says
it is always there, and never goes away, I am quite comfortable again.
I learn from this man that the different sections will be distributed
at the Black Boy and Stomach-ache, and the Boot-jack and Countenance.
If this intelligence be true (and I have no reason to doubt it), your
readers will draw such conclusions as their different opinions may
suggest.

‘I write down these remarks as they occur to me, or as the facts come
to my knowledge, in order that my first impressions may lose nothing of
their original vividness. I shall despatch them in small packets as
opportunities arise.’

‘_Half past nine_.


‘Some dark object has just appeared upon the wharf. I think it is a
travelling carriage.’

‘_A quarter to ten_.


‘No, it isn’t.’

‘_Half-past ten_.


The passengers are pouring in every instant. Four omnibuses full have
just arrived upon the wharf, and all is bustle and activity. The noise
and confusion are very great. Cloths are laid in the cabins, and the
steward is placing blue plates—full of knobs of cheese at equal
distances down the centre of the tables. He drops a great many knobs;
but, being used to it, picks them up again with great dexterity, and,
after wiping them on his sleeve, throws them back into the plates. He
is a young man of exceedingly prepossessing appearance—either dirty or
a mulatto, but I think the former.

‘An interesting old gentleman, who came to the wharf in an omnibus, has
just quarrelled violently with the porters, and is staggering towards
the vessel with a large trunk in his arms. I trust and hope that he may
reach it in safety; but the board he has to cross is narrow and
slippery. Was that a splash? Gracious powers!

‘I have just returned from the deck. The trunk is standing upon the
extreme brink of the wharf, but the old gentleman is nowhere to be
seen. The watchman is not sure whether he went down or not, but
promises to drag for him the first thing to-morrow morning. May his
humane efforts prove successful!

‘Professor Nogo has this moment arrived with his nightcap on under his
hat. He has ordered a glass of cold brandy and water, with a hard
biscuit and a basin, and has gone straight to bed. What can this mean?

‘The three other scientific gentlemen to whom I have already alluded
have come on board, and have all tried their beds, with the exception
of Professor Woodensconce, who sleeps in one of the top ones, and can’t
get into it. Mr. Slug, who sleeps in the other top one, is unable to
get out of his, and is to have his supper handed up by a boy. I have
had the honour to introduce myself to these gentlemen, and we have
amicably arranged the order in which we shall retire to rest; which it
is necessary to agree upon, because, although the cabin is very
comfortable, there is not room for more than one gentleman to be out of
bed at a time, and even he must take his boots off in the passage.

‘As I anticipated, the knobs of cheese were provided for the
passengers’ supper, and are now in course of consumption. Your readers
will be surprised to hear that Professor Woodensconce has abstained
from cheese for eight years, although he takes butter in considerable
quantities. Professor Grime having lost several teeth, is unable, I
observe, to eat his crusts without previously soaking them in his
bottled porter. How interesting are these peculiarities!’

‘_Half-past eleven_.


‘Professors Woodensconce and Grime, with a degree of good humour that
delights us all, have just arranged to toss for a bottle of mulled
port. There has been some discussion whether the payment should be
decided by the first toss or the best out of three. Eventually the
latter course has been determined on. Deeply do I wish that both
gentlemen could win; but that being impossible, I own that my personal
aspirations (I speak as an individual, and do not compromise either you
or your readers by this expression of feeling) are with Professor
Woodensconce. I have backed that gentleman to the amount of
eighteenpence.’

‘_Twenty minutes to twelve_.


‘Professor Grime has inadvertently tossed his half-crown out of one of
the cabin-windows, and it has been arranged that the steward shall toss
for him. Bets are offered on any side to any amount, but there are no
takers.

‘Professor Woodensconce has just called “woman;” but the coin having
lodged in a beam, is a long time coming down again. The interest and
suspense of this one moment are beyond anything that can be imagined.’

‘_Twelve o’clock_.


‘The mulled port is smoking on the table before me, and Professor Grime
has won. Tossing is a game of chance; but on every ground, whether of
public or private character, intellectual endowments, or scientific
attainments, I cannot help expressing my opinion that Professor
Woodensconce _ought_ to have come off victorious. There is an
exultation about Professor Grime incompatible, I fear, with true
greatness.’

‘_A quarter past twelve_.


‘Professor Grime continues to exult, and to boast of his victory in no
very measured terms, observing that he always does win, and that he
knew it would be a “head” beforehand, with many other remarks of a
similar nature. Surely this gentleman is not so lost to every feeling
of decency and propriety as not to feel and know the superiority of
Professor Woodensconce? Is Professor Grime insane? or does he wish to
be reminded in plain language of his true position in society, and the
precise level of his acquirements and abilities? Professor Grime will
do well to look to this.’

‘_One o’clock_.


‘I am writing in bed. The small cabin is illuminated by the feeble
light of a flickering lamp suspended from the ceiling; Professor Grime
is lying on the opposite shelf on the broad of his back, with his mouth
wide open. The scene is indescribably solemn. The rippling of the tide,
the noise of the sailors’ feet overhead, the gruff voices on the river,
the dogs on the shore, the snoring of the passengers, and a constant
creaking of every plank in the vessel, are the only sounds that meet
the ear. With these exceptions, all is profound silence.

‘My curiosity has been within the last moment very much excited. Mr.
Slug, who lies above Professor Grime, has cautiously withdrawn the
curtains of his berth, and, after looking anxiously out, as if to
satisfy himself that his companions are asleep, has taken up the tin
tube of which I have before spoken, and is regarding it with great
interest. What rare mechanical combination can be contained in that
mysterious case? It is evidently a profound secret to all.’

‘_A quarter past one_.


‘The behaviour of Mr. Slug grows more and more mysterious. He has
unscrewed the top of the tube, and now renews his observations upon his
companions, evidently to make sure that he is wholly unobserved. He is
clearly on the eve of some great experiment. Pray heaven that it be not
a dangerous one; but the interests of science must be promoted, and I
am prepared for the worst.’

‘_Five minutes later_.


‘He has produced a large pair of scissors, and drawn a roll of some
substance, not unlike parchment in appearance, from the tin case. The
experiment is about to begin. I must strain my eyes to the utmost, in
the attempt to follow its minutest operation.’

‘_Twenty minutes before two_.


‘I have at length been enabled to ascertain that the tin tube contains
a few yards of some celebrated plaster, recommended—as I discover on
regarding the label attentively through my eye-glass—as a preservative
against sea-sickness. Mr. Slug has cut it up into small portions, and
is now sticking it over himself in every direction.’

‘_Three o’clock_.


‘Precisely a quarter of an hour ago we weighed anchor, and the
machinery was suddenly put in motion with a noise so appalling, that
Professor Woodensconce (who had ascended to his berth by means of a
platform of carpet-bags arranged by himself on geometrical principals)
darted from his shelf head foremost, and, gaining his feet with all the
rapidity of extreme terror, ran wildly into the ladies’ cabin, under
the impression that we were sinking, and uttering loud cries for aid. I
am assured that the scene which ensued baffles all description. There
were one hundred and forty-seven ladies in their respective berths at
the time.

‘Mr. Slug has remarked, as an additional instance of the extreme
ingenuity of the steam-engine as applied to purposes of navigation,
that in whatever part of the vessel a passenger’s berth may be
situated, the machinery always appears to be exactly under his pillow.
He intends stating this very beautiful, though simple discovery, to the
association.’

‘_Half-past ten_.


‘We are still in smooth water; that is to say, in as smooth water as a
steam-vessel ever can be, for, as Professor Woodensconce (who has just
woke up) learnedly remarks, another great point of ingenuity about a
steamer is, that it always carries a little storm with it. You can
scarcely conceive how exciting the jerking pulsation of the ship
becomes. It is a matter of positive difficulty to get to sleep.’

‘_Friday afternoon_, _six o’clock_.


‘I regret to inform you that Mr. Slug’s plaster has proved of no avail.
He is in great agony, but has applied several large, additional pieces
notwithstanding. How affecting is this extreme devotion to science and
pursuit of knowledge under the most trying circumstances!

‘We were extremely happy this morning, and the breakfast was one of the
most animated description. Nothing unpleasant occurred until noon, with
the exception of Doctor Foxey’s brown silk umbrella and white hat
becoming entangled in the machinery while he was explaining to a knot
of ladies the construction of the steam-engine. I fear the gravy soup
for lunch was injudicious. We lost a great many passengers almost
immediately afterwards.’

‘_Half-past six_.


‘I am again in bed. Anything so heart-rending as Mr. Slug’s sufferings
it has never yet been my lot to witness.’

‘_Seven o’clock_.


‘A messenger has just come down for a clean pocket-handkerchief from
Professor Woodensconce’s bag, that unfortunate gentleman being quite
unable to leave the deck, and imploring constantly to be thrown
overboard. From this man I understand that Professor Nogo, though in a
state of utter exhaustion, clings feebly to the hard biscuit and cold
brandy and water, under the impression that they will yet restore him.
Such is the triumph of mind over matter.

‘Professor Grime is in bed, to all appearance quite well; but he _will_
eat, and it is disagreeable to see him. Has this gentleman no sympathy
with the sufferings of his fellow-creatures? If he has, on what
principle can he call for mutton-chops—and smile?’

‘_Black Boy and Stomach-ache_,
_Oldcastle_, _Saturday noon_.


‘You will be happy to learn that I have at length arrived here in
safety. The town is excessively crowded, and all the private lodgings
and hotels are filled with _savans_ of both sexes. The tremendous
assemblage of intellect that one encounters in every street is in the
last degree overwhelming.

‘Notwithstanding the throng of people here, I have been fortunate
enough to meet with very comfortable accommodation on very reasonable
terms, having secured a sofa in the first-floor passage at one guinea
per night, which includes permission to take my meals in the bar, on
condition that I walk about the streets at all other times, to make
room for other gentlemen similarly situated. I have been over the
outhouses intended to be devoted to the reception of the various
sections, both here and at the Boot-jack and Countenance, and am much
delighted with the arrangements. Nothing can exceed the fresh
appearance of the saw-dust with which the floors are sprinkled. The
forms are of unplaned deal, and the general effect, as you can well
imagine, is extremely beautiful.’

‘_Half-past nine_.


‘The number and rapidity of the arrivals are quite bewildering. Within
the last ten minutes a stage-coach has driven up to the door, filled
inside and out with distinguished characters, comprising Mr.
Muddlebranes, Mr. Drawley, Professor Muff, Mr. X. Misty, Mr. X. X.
Misty, Mr. Purblind, Professor Rummun, The Honourable and Reverend Mr.
Long Eers, Professor John Ketch, Sir William Joltered, Doctor Buffer,
Mr. Smith (of London), Mr. Brown (of Edinburgh), Sir Hookham Snivey,
and Professor Pumpkinskull. The ten last-named gentlemen were wet
through, and looked extremely intelligent.’

‘_Sunday_, _two o’clock_, _p.m._


‘The Honourable and Reverend Mr. Long Eers, accompanied by Sir William
Joltered, walked and drove this morning. They accomplished the former
feat in boots, and the latter in a hired fly. This has naturally given
rise to much discussion.

‘I have just learnt that an interview has taken place at the Boot-jack
and Countenance between Sowster, the active and intelligent beadle of
this place, and Professor Pumpkinskull, who, as your readers are
doubtless aware, is an influential member of the council. I forbear to
communicate any of the rumours to which this very extraordinary
proceeding has given rise until I have seen Sowster, and endeavoured to
ascertain the truth from him.’

‘_Half-past six_.


‘I engaged a donkey-chaise shortly after writing the above, and
proceeded at a brisk trot in the direction of Sowster’s residence,
passing through a beautiful expanse of country, with red brick
buildings on either side, and stopping in the marketplace to observe
the spot where Mr. Kwakley’s hat was blown off yesterday. It is an
uneven piece of paving, but has certainly no appearance which would
lead one to suppose that any such event had recently occurred there.
From this point I proceeded—passing the gas-works and
tallow-melter’s—to a lane which had been pointed out to me as the
beadle’s place of residence; and before I had driven a dozen yards
further, I had the good fortune to meet Sowster himself advancing
towards me.

‘Sowster is a fat man, with a more enlarged development of that
peculiar conformation of countenance which is vulgarly termed a double
chin than I remember to have ever seen before. He has also a very red
nose, which he attributes to a habit of early rising—so red, indeed,
that but for this explanation I should have supposed it to proceed from
occasional inebriety. He informed me that he did not feel himself at
liberty to relate what had passed between himself and Professor
Pumpkinskull, but had no objection to state that it was connected with
a matter of police regulation, and added with peculiar significance
“Never wos sitch times!”

‘You will easily believe that this intelligence gave me considerable
surprise, not wholly unmixed with anxiety, and that I lost no time in
waiting on Professor Pumpkinskull, and stating the object of my visit.
After a few moments’ reflection, the Professor, who, I am bound to say,
behaved with the utmost politeness, openly avowed (I mark the passage
in italics) _that he had requested Sowster to attend on the Monday
morning at the Boot-jack and Countenance_, _to keep off the boys_; _and
that he had further desired that the under-beadle might be stationed_,
_with the same object_, _at the Black Boy and Stomach-ache_!

‘Now I leave this unconstitutional proceeding to your comments and the
consideration of your readers. I have yet to learn that a beadle,
without the precincts of a church, churchyard, or work-house, and
acting otherwise than under the express orders of churchwardens and
overseers in council assembled, to enforce the law against people who
come upon the parish, and other offenders, has any lawful authority
whatever over the rising youth of this country. I have yet to learn
that a beadle can be called out by any civilian to exercise a
domination and despotism over the boys of Britain. I have yet to learn
that a beadle will be permitted by the commissioners of poor law
regulation to wear out the soles and heels of his boots in illegal
interference with the liberties of people not proved poor or otherwise
criminal. I have yet to learn that a beadle has power to stop up the
Queen’s highway at his will and pleasure, or that the whole width of
the street is not free and open to any man, boy, or woman in existence,
up to the very walls of the houses—ay, be they Black Boys and
Stomach-aches, or Boot-jacks and Countenances, I care not.’

‘_Nine o’clock_.


‘I have procured a local artist to make a faithful sketch of the tyrant
Sowster, which, as he has acquired this infamous celebrity, you will no
doubt wish to have engraved for the purpose of presenting a copy with
every copy of your next number. I enclose it.

[Picture which cannot be reproduced]

The under-beadle has consented to write his life, but it is to be
strictly anonymous.

‘The accompanying likeness is of course from the life, and complete in
every respect. Even if I had been totally ignorant of the man’s real
character, and it had been placed before me without remark, I should
have shuddered involuntarily. There is an intense malignity of
expression in the features, and a baleful ferocity of purpose in the
ruffian’s eye, which appals and sickens. His whole air is rampant with
cruelty, nor is the stomach less characteristic of his demoniac
propensities.’

‘_Monday_.


‘The great day has at length arrived. I have neither eyes, nor ears,
nor pens, nor ink, nor paper, for anything but the wonderful
proceedings that have astounded my senses. Let me collect my energies
and proceed to the account.




‘SECTION A.—ZOOLOGY AND BOTANY.
FRONT PARLOUR, BLACK BOY AND STOMACH-ACHE.


_President_—Sir William Joltered. _Vice-Presidents_—Mr. Muddlebranes
and Mr. Drawley.

‘Mr. X. X. Misty communicated some remarks on the disappearance of
dancing-bears from the streets of London, with observations on the
exhibition of monkeys as connected with barrel-organs. The writer had
observed, with feelings of the utmost pain and regret, that some years
ago a sudden and unaccountable change in the public taste took place
with reference to itinerant bears, who, being discountenanced by the
populace, gradually fell off one by one from the streets of the
metropolis, until not one remained to create a taste for natural
history in the breasts of the poor and uninstructed. One bear,
indeed,—a brown and ragged animal,—had lingered about the haunts of his
former triumphs, with a worn and dejected visage and feeble limbs, and
had essayed to wield his quarter-staff for the amusement of the
multitude; but hunger, and an utter want of any due recompense for his
abilities, had at length driven him from the field, and it was only too
probable that he had fallen a sacrifice to the rising taste for grease.
He regretted to add that a similar, and no less lamentable, change had
taken place with reference to monkeys. These delightful animals had
formerly been almost as plentiful as the organs on the tops of which
they were accustomed to sit; the proportion in the year 1829 (it
appeared by the parliamentary return) being as one monkey to three
organs. Owing, however, to an altered taste in musical instruments, and
the substitution, in a great measure, of narrow boxes of music for
organs, which left the monkeys nothing to sit upon, this source of
public amusement was wholly dried up. Considering it a matter of the
deepest importance, in connection with national education, that the
people should not lose such opportunities of making themselves
acquainted with the manners and customs of two most interesting species
of animals, the author submitted that some measures should be
immediately taken for the restoration of these pleasing and truly
intellectual amusements.

‘The President inquired by what means the honourable member proposed to
attain this most desirable end?

‘The Author submitted that it could be most fully and satisfactorily
accomplished, if Her Majesty’s Government would cause to be brought
over to England, and maintained at the public expense, and for the
public amusement, such a number of bears as would enable every quarter
of the town to be visited—say at least by three bears a week. No
difficulty whatever need be experienced in providing a fitting place
for the reception of these animals, as a commodious bear-garden could
be erected in the immediate neighbourhood of both Houses of Parliament;
obviously the most proper and eligible spot for such an establishment.

‘Professor Mull doubted very much whether any correct ideas of natural
history were propagated by the means to which the honourable member had
so ably adverted. On the contrary, he believed that they had been the
means of diffusing very incorrect and imperfect notions on the subject.
He spoke from personal observation and personal experience, when he
said that many children of great abilities had been induced to believe,
from what they had observed in the streets, at and before the period to
which the honourable gentleman had referred, that all monkeys were born
in red coats and spangles, and that their hats and feathers also came
by nature. He wished to know distinctly whether the honourable
gentleman attributed the want of encouragement the bears had met with
to the decline of public taste in that respect, or to a want of ability
on the part of the bears themselves?

‘Mr. X. X. Misty replied, that he could not bring himself to believe
but that there must be a great deal of floating talent among the bears
and monkeys generally; which, in the absence of any proper
encouragement, was dispersed in other directions.

‘Professor Pumpkinskull wished to take that opportunity of calling the
attention of the section to a most important and serious point. The
author of the treatise just read had alluded to the prevalent taste for
bears’-grease as a means of promoting the growth of hair, which
undoubtedly was diffused to a very great and (as it appeared to him)
very alarming extent. No gentleman attending that section could fail to
be aware of the fact that the youth of the present age evinced, by
their behaviour in the streets, and at all places of public resort, a
considerable lack of that gallantry and gentlemanly feeling which, in
more ignorant times, had been thought becoming. He wished to know
whether it were possible that a constant outward application of
bears’-grease by the young gentlemen about town had imperceptibly
infused into those unhappy persons something of the nature and quality
of the bear. He shuddered as he threw out the remark; but if this
theory, on inquiry, should prove to be well founded, it would at once
explain a great deal of unpleasant eccentricity of behaviour, which,
without some such discovery, was wholly unaccountable.

‘The President highly complimented the learned gentleman on his most
valuable suggestion, which produced the greatest effect upon the
assembly; and remarked that only a week previous he had seen some young
gentlemen at a theatre eyeing a box of ladies with a fierce intensity,
which nothing but the influence of some brutish appetite could possibly
explain. It was dreadful to reflect that our youth were so rapidly
verging into a generation of bears.

‘After a scene of scientific enthusiasm it was resolved that this
important question should be immediately submitted to the consideration
of the council.

‘The President wished to know whether any gentleman could inform the
section what had become of the dancing-dogs?

‘A Member replied, after some hesitation, that on the day after three
glee-singers had been committed to prison as criminals by a late most
zealous police-magistrate of the metropolis, the dogs had abandoned
their professional duties, and dispersed themselves in different
quarters of the town to gain a livelihood by less dangerous means. He
was given to understand that since that period they had supported
themselves by lying in wait for and robbing blind men’s poodles.

‘Mr. Flummery exhibited a twig, claiming to be a veritable branch of
that noble tree known to naturalists as the Shakspeare, which has taken
root in every land and climate, and gathered under the shade of its
broad green boughs the great family of mankind. The learned gentleman
remarked that the twig had been undoubtedly called by other names in
its time; but that it had been pointed out to him by an old lady in
Warwickshire, where the great tree had grown, as a shoot of the genuine
Shakspeare, by which name he begged to introduce it to his countrymen.

‘The President wished to know what botanical definition the honourable
gentleman could afford of the curiosity.

‘Mr. Flummery expressed his opinion that it was a decided plant.




‘SECTION B.—DISPLAY OF MODELS AND MECHANICAL SCIENCE.
LARGE ROOM, BOOT-JACK AND COUNTENANCE.


_President_—Mr. Mallett. _Vice-Presidents_—Messrs. Leaver and Scroo.

‘Mr. Crinkles exhibited a most beautiful and delicate machine, of
little larger size than an ordinary snuff-box, manufactured entirely by
himself, and composed exclusively of steel, by the aid of which more
pockets could be picked in one hour than by the present slow and
tedious process in four-and-twenty. The inventor remarked that it had
been put into active operation in Fleet Street, the Strand, and other
thoroughfares, and had never been once known to fail.

‘After some slight delay, occasioned by the various members of the
section buttoning their pockets,

‘The President narrowly inspected the invention, and declared that he
had never seen a machine of more beautiful or exquisite construction.
Would the inventor be good enough to inform the section whether he had
taken any and what means for bringing it into general operation?

‘Mr. Crinkles stated that, after encountering some preliminary
difficulties, he had succeeded in putting himself in communication with
Mr. Fogle Hunter, and other gentlemen connected with the swell mob, who
had awarded the invention the very highest and most unqualified
approbation. He regretted to say, however, that these distinguished
practitioners, in common with a gentleman of the name of Gimlet-eyed
Tommy, and other members of a secondary grade of the profession whom he
was understood to represent, entertained an insuperable objection to
its being brought into general use, on the ground that it would have
the inevitable effect of almost entirely superseding manual labour, and
throwing a great number of highly-deserving persons out of employment.

‘The President hoped that no such fanciful objections would be allowed
to stand in the way of such a great public improvement.

‘Mr. Crinkles hoped so too; but he feared that if the gentlemen of the
swell mob persevered in their objection, nothing could be done.

‘Professor Grime suggested, that surely, in that case, Her Majesty’s
Government might be prevailed upon to take it up.

‘Mr. Crinkles said, that if the objection were found to be insuperable
he should apply to Parliament, which he thought could not fail to
recognise the utility of the invention.

‘The President observed that, up to this time Parliament had certainly
got on very well without it; but, as they did their business on a very
large scale, he had no doubt they would gladly adopt the improvement.
His only fear was that the machine might be worn out by constant
working.

‘Mr. Coppernose called the attention of the section to a proposition of
great magnitude and interest, illustrated by a vast number of models,
and stated with much clearness and perspicuity in a treatise entitled
“Practical Suggestions on the necessity of providing some harmless and
wholesome relaxation for the young noblemen of England.” His
proposition was, that a space of ground of not less than ten miles in
length and four in breadth should be purchased by a new company, to be
incorporated by Act of Parliament, and inclosed by a brick wall of not
less than twelve feet in height. He proposed that it should be laid out
with highway roads, turnpikes, bridges, miniature villages, and every
object that could conduce to the comfort and glory of Four-in-hand
Clubs, so that they might be fairly presumed to require no drive beyond
it. This delightful retreat would be fitted up with most commodious and
extensive stables, for the convenience of such of the nobility and
gentry as had a taste for ostlering, and with houses of entertainment
furnished in the most expensive and handsome style. It would be further
provided with whole streets of door-knockers and bell-handles of extra
size, so constructed that they could be easily wrenched off at night,
and regularly screwed on again, by attendants provided for the purpose,
every day. There would also be gas lamps of real glass, which could be
broken at a comparatively small expense per dozen, and a broad and
handsome foot pavement for gentlemen to drive their cabriolets upon
when they were humorously disposed—for the full enjoyment of which feat
live pedestrians would be procured from the workhouse at a very small
charge per head. The place being inclosed, and carefully screened from
the intrusion of the public, there would be no objection to gentlemen
laying aside any article of their costume that was considered to
interfere with a pleasant frolic, or, indeed, to their walking about
without any costume at all, if they liked that better. In short, every
facility of enjoyment would be afforded that the most gentlemanly
person could possibly desire. But as even these advantages would be
incomplete unless there were some means provided of enabling the
nobility and gentry to display their prowess when they sallied forth
after dinner, and as some inconvenience might be experienced in the
event of their being reduced to the necessity of pummelling each other,
the inventor had turned his attention to the construction of an
entirely new police force, composed exclusively of automaton figures,
which, with the assistance of the ingenious Signor Gagliardi, of
Windmill-street, in the Haymarket, he had succeeded in making with such
nicety, that a policeman, cab-driver, or old woman, made upon the
principle of the models exhibited, would walk about until knocked down
like any real man; nay, more, if set upon and beaten by six or eight
noblemen or gentlemen, after it was down, the figure would utter divers
groans, mingled with entreaties for mercy, thus rendering the illusion
complete, and the enjoyment perfect. But the invention did not stop
even here; for station-houses would be built, containing good beds for
noblemen and gentlemen during the night, and in the morning they would
repair to a commodious police office, where a pantomimic investigation
would take place before the automaton magistrates,—quite equal to
life,—who would fine them in so many counters, with which they would be
previously provided for the purpose. This office would be furnished
with an inclined plane, for the convenience of any nobleman or
gentleman who might wish to bring in his horse as a witness; and the
prisoners would be at perfect liberty, as they were now, to interrupt
the complainants as much as they pleased, and to make any remarks that
they thought proper. The charge for these amusements would amount to
very little more than they already cost, and the inventor submitted
that the public would be much benefited and comforted by the proposed
arrangement.

‘Professor Nogo wished to be informed what amount of automaton police
force it was proposed to raise in the first instance.

‘Mr. Coppernose replied, that it was proposed to begin with seven
divisions of police of a score each, lettered from A to G inclusive. It
was proposed that not more than half this number should be placed on
active duty, and that the remainder should be kept on shelves in the
police office ready to be called out at a moment’s notice.

‘The President, awarding the utmost merit to the ingenious gentleman
who had originated the idea, doubted whether the automaton police would
quite answer the purpose. He feared that noblemen and gentlemen would
perhaps require the excitement of thrashing living subjects.

‘Mr. Coppernose submitted, that as the usual odds in such cases were
ten noblemen or gentlemen to one policeman or cab-driver, it could make
very little difference in point of excitement whether the policeman or
cab-driver were a man or a block. The great advantage would be, that a
policeman’s limbs might be all knocked off, and yet he would be in a
condition to do duty next day. He might even give his evidence next
morning with his head in his hand, and give it equally well.

‘Professor Muff.—Will you allow me to ask you, sir, of what materials
it is intended that the magistrates’ heads shall be composed?

‘Mr. Coppernose.—The magistrates will have wooden heads of course, and
they will be made of the toughest and thickest materials that can
possibly be obtained.

‘Professor Muff.—I am quite satisfied. This is a great invention.

‘Professor Nogo.—I see but one objection to it. It appears to me that
the magistrates ought to talk.

‘Mr. Coppernose no sooner heard this suggestion than he touched a small
spring in each of the two models of magistrates which were placed upon
the table; one of the figures immediately began to exclaim with great
volubility that he was sorry to see gentlemen in such a situation, and
the other to express a fear that the policeman was intoxicated.

‘The section, as with one accord, declared with a shout of applause
that the invention was complete; and the President, much excited,
retired with Mr. Coppernose to lay it before the council. On his
return,

‘Mr. Tickle displayed his newly-invented spectacles, which enabled the
wearer to discern, in very bright colours, objects at a great distance,
and rendered him wholly blind to those immediately before him. It was,
he said, a most valuable and useful invention, based strictly upon the
principle of the human eye.

‘The President required some information upon this point. He had yet to
learn that the human eye was remarkable for the peculiarities of which
the honourable gentleman had spoken.

‘Mr. Tickle was rather astonished to hear this, when the President
could not fail to be aware that a large number of most excellent
persons and great statesmen could see, with the naked eye, most
marvellous horrors on West India plantations, while they could discern
nothing whatever in the interior of Manchester cotton mills. He must
know, too, with what quickness of perception most people could discover
their neighbour’s faults, and how very blind they were to their own. If
the President differed from the great majority of men in this respect,
his eye was a defective one, and it was to assist his vision that these
glasses were made.

‘Mr. Blank exhibited a model of a fashionable annual, composed of
copper-plates, gold leaf, and silk boards, and worked entirely by milk
and water.

‘Mr. Prosee, after examining the machine, declared it to be so
ingeniously composed, that he was wholly unable to discover how it went
on at all.

‘Mr. Blank.—Nobody can, and that is the beauty of it.




‘SECTION C.—ANATOMY AND MEDICINE.
BAR ROOM, BLACK BOY AND STOMACH-ACHE.


_President_—Dr. Soemup. _Vice-Presidents_—Messrs. Pessell and Mortair.

‘Dr. Grummidge stated to the section a most interesting case of
monomania, and described the course of treatment he had pursued with
perfect success. The patient was a married lady in the middle rank of
life, who, having seen another lady at an evening party in a full suit
of pearls, was suddenly seized with a desire to possess a similar
equipment, although her husband’s finances were by no means equal to
the necessary outlay. Finding her wish ungratified, she fell sick, and
the symptoms soon became so alarming, that he (Dr. Grummidge) was
called in. At this period the prominent tokens of the disorder were
sullenness, a total indisposition to perform domestic duties, great
peevishness, and extreme languor, except when pearls were mentioned, at
which times the pulse quickened, the eyes grew brighter, the pupils
dilated, and the patient, after various incoherent exclamations, burst
into a passion of tears, and exclaimed that nobody cared for her, and
that she wished herself dead. Finding that the patient’s appetite was
affected in the presence of company, he began by ordering a total
abstinence from all stimulants, and forbidding any sustenance but weak
gruel; he then took twenty ounces of blood, applied a blister under
each ear, one upon the chest, and another on the back; having done
which, and administered five grains of calomel, he left the patient to
her repose. The next day she was somewhat low, but decidedly better,
and all appearances of irritation were removed. The next day she
improved still further, and on the next again. On the fourth there was
some appearance of a return of the old symptoms, which no sooner
developed themselves, than he administered another dose of calomel, and
left strict orders that, unless a decidedly favourable change occurred
within two hours, the patient’s head should be immediately shaved to
the very last curl. From that moment she began to mend, and, in less
than four-and-twenty hours was perfectly restored. She did not now
betray the least emotion at the sight or mention of pearls or any other
ornaments. She was cheerful and good-humoured, and a most beneficial
change had been effected in her whole temperament and condition.

‘Mr. Pipkin (M.R.C.S.) read a short but most interesting communication
in which he sought to prove the complete belief of Sir William
Courtenay, otherwise Thorn, recently shot at Canterbury, in the
Homoeopathic system. The section would bear in mind that one of the
Homoeopathic doctrines was, that infinitesimal doses of any medicine
which would occasion the disease under which the patient laboured,
supposing him to be in a healthy state, would cure it. Now, it was a
remarkable circumstance—proved in the evidence—that the deceased Thorn
employed a woman to follow him about all day with a pail of water,
assuring her that one drop (a purely homoeopathic remedy, the section
would observe), placed upon his tongue, after death, would restore him.
What was the obvious inference? That Thorn, who was marching and
countermarching in osier beds, and other swampy places, was impressed
with a presentiment that he should be drowned; in which case, had his
instructions been complied with, he could not fail to have been brought
to life again instantly by his own prescription. As it was, if this
woman, or any other person, had administered an infinitesimal dose of
lead and gunpowder immediately after he fell, he would have recovered
forthwith. But unhappily the woman concerned did not possess the power
of reasoning by analogy, or carrying out a principle, and thus the
unfortunate gentleman had been sacrificed to the ignorance of the
peasantry.




‘SECTION D.—STATISTICS.
OUT-HOUSE, BLACK BOY AND STOMACH-ACHE.


_President_—Mr. Slug. _Vice-Presidents_—Messrs. Noakes and Styles.

‘Mr. Kwakley stated the result of some most ingenious statistical
inquiries relative to the difference between the value of the
qualification of several members of Parliament as published to the
world, and its real nature and amount. After reminding the section that
every member of Parliament for a town or borough was supposed to
possess a clear freehold estate of three hundred pounds per annum, the
honourable gentleman excited great amusement and laughter by stating
the exact amount of freehold property possessed by a column of
legislators, in which he had included himself. It appeared from this
table, that the amount of such income possessed by each was 0 pounds, 0
shillings, and 0 pence, yielding an average of the same. (Great
laughter.) It was pretty well known that there were accommodating
gentlemen in the habit of furnishing new members with temporary
qualifications, to the ownership of which they swore solemnly—of course
as a mere matter of form. He argued from these _data_ that it was
wholly unnecessary for members of Parliament to possess any property at
all, especially as when they had none the public could get them so much
cheaper.




‘SUPPLEMENTARY SECTION, E.—UMBUGOLOGY AND DITCHWATERISICS.


_President_—Mr. Grub. _Vice Presidents_—Messrs. Dull and Dummy.

‘A paper was read by the secretary descriptive of a bay pony with one
eye, which had been seen by the author standing in a butcher’s cart at
the corner of Newgate Market. The communication described the author of
the paper as having, in the prosecution of a mercantile pursuit,
betaken himself one Saturday morning last summer from Somers Town to
Cheapside; in the course of which expedition he had beheld the
extraordinary appearance above described. The pony had one distinct
eye, and it had been pointed out to him by his friend Captain
Blunderbore, of the Horse Marines, who assisted the author in his
search, that whenever he winked this eye he whisked his tail (possibly
to drive the flies off), but that he always winked and whisked at the
same time. The animal was lean, spavined, and tottering; and the author
proposed to constitute it of the family of _Fitfordogsmeataurious_. It
certainly did occur to him that there was no case on record of a pony
with one clearly-defined and distinct organ of vision, winking and
whisking at the same moment.

‘Mr. Q. J. Snuffletoffle had heard of a pony winking his eye, and
likewise of a pony whisking his tail, but whether they were two ponies
or the same pony he could not undertake positively to say. At all
events, he was acquainted with no authenticated instance of a
simultaneous winking and whisking, and he really could not but doubt
the existence of such a marvellous pony in opposition to all those
natural laws by which ponies were governed. Referring, however, to the
mere question of his one organ of vision, might he suggest the
possibility of this pony having been literally half asleep at the time
he was seen, and having closed only one eye.

‘The President observed that, whether the pony was half asleep or fast
asleep, there could be no doubt that the association was wide awake,
and therefore that they had better get the business over, and go to
dinner. He had certainly never seen anything analogous to this pony,
but he was not prepared to doubt its existence; for he had seen many
queerer ponies in his time, though he did not pretend to have seen any
more remarkable donkeys than the other gentlemen around him.

‘Professor John Ketch was then called upon to exhibit the skull of the
late Mr. Greenacre, which he produced from a blue bag, remarking, on
being invited to make any observations that occurred to him, “that he’d
pound it as that ’ere ’spectable section had never seed a more gamerer
cove nor he vos.”

‘A most animated discussion upon this interesting relic ensued; and,
some difference of opinion arising respecting the real character of the
deceased gentleman, Mr. Blubb delivered a lecture upon the cranium
before him, clearly showing that Mr. Greenacre possessed the organ of
destructiveness to a most unusual extent, with a most remarkable
development of the organ of carveativeness. Sir Hookham Snivey was
proceeding to combat this opinion, when Professor Ketch suddenly
interrupted the proceedings by exclaiming, with great excitement of
manner, “Walker!”

‘The President begged to call the learned gentleman to order.

‘Professor Ketch.—“Order be blowed! you’ve got the wrong un, I tell
you. It ain’t no ’ed at all; it’s a coker-nut as my brother-in-law has
been a-carvin’, to hornament his new baked tatur-stall wots a-comin’
down ’ere vile the ’sociation’s in the town. Hand over, vill you?”

‘With these words, Professor Ketch hastily repossessed himself of the
cocoa-nut, and drew forth the skull, in mistake for which he had
exhibited it. A most interesting conversation ensued; but as there
appeared some doubt ultimately whether the skull was Mr. Greenacre’s,
or a hospital patient’s, or a pauper’s, or a man’s, or a woman’s, or a
monkey’s, no particular result was obtained.’

‘I cannot,’ says our talented correspondent in conclusion, ‘I cannot
close my account of these gigantic researches and sublime and noble
triumphs without repeating a _bon mot_ of Professor Woodensconce’s,
which shows how the greatest minds may occasionally unbend when truth
can be presented to listening ears, clothed in an attractive and
playful form. I was standing by, when, after a week of feasting and
feeding, that learned gentleman, accompanied by the whole body of
wonderful men, entered the hall yesterday, where a sumptuous dinner was
prepared; where the richest wines sparkled on the board, and fat
bucks—propitiatory sacrifices to learning—sent forth their savoury
odours. “Ah!” said Professor Woodensconce, rubbing his hands, “this is
what we meet for; this is what inspires us; this is what keeps us
together, and beckons us onward; this is the _spread_ of science, and a
glorious spread it is.”’




THE PANTOMIME OF LIFE


Before we plunge headlong into this paper, let us at once confess to a
fondness for pantomimes—to a gentle sympathy with clowns and
pantaloons—to an unqualified admiration of harlequins and columbines—to
a chaste delight in every action of their brief existence, varied and
many-coloured as those actions are, and inconsistent though they
occasionally be with those rigid and formal rules of propriety which
regulate the proceedings of meaner and less comprehensive minds. We
revel in pantomimes—not because they dazzle one’s eyes with tinsel and
gold leaf; not because they present to us, once again, the well-beloved
chalked faces, and goggle eyes of our childhood; not even because, like
Christmas-day, and Twelfth-night, and Shrove-Tuesday, and one’s own
birthday, they come to us but once a year;—our attachment is founded on
a graver and a very different reason. A pantomime is to us, a mirror of
life; nay, more, we maintain that it is so to audiences generally,
although they are not aware of it, and that this very circumstance is
the secret cause of their amusement and delight.

Let us take a slight example. The scene is a street: an elderly
gentleman, with a large face and strongly marked features, appears. His
countenance beams with a sunny smile, and a perpetual dimple is on his
broad, red cheek. He is evidently an opulent elderly gentleman,
comfortable in circumstances, and well-to-do in the world. He is not
unmindful of the adornment of his person, for he is richly, not to say
gaudily, dressed; and that he indulges to a reasonable extent in the
pleasures of the table may be inferred from the joyous and oily manner
in which he rubs his stomach, by way of informing the audience that he
is going home to dinner. In the fulness of his heart, in the fancied
security of wealth, in the possession and enjoyment of all the good
things of life, the elderly gentleman suddenly loses his footing, and
stumbles. How the audience roar! He is set upon by a noisy and
officious crowd, who buffet and cuff him unmercifully. They scream with
delight! Every time the elderly gentleman struggles to get up, his
relentless persecutors knock him down again. The spectators are
convulsed with merriment! And when at last the elderly gentleman does
get up, and staggers away, despoiled of hat, wig, and clothing, himself
battered to pieces, and his watch and money gone, they are exhausted
with laughter, and express their merriment and admiration in rounds of
applause.

Is this like life? Change the scene to any real street;—to the Stock
Exchange, or the City banker’s; the merchant’s counting-house, or even
the tradesman’s shop. See any one of these men fall,—the more suddenly,
and the nearer the zenith of his pride and riches, the better. What a
wild hallo is raised over his prostrate carcase by the shouting mob;
how they whoop and yell as he lies humbled beneath them! Mark how
eagerly they set upon him when he is down; and how they mock and deride
him as he slinks away. Why, it is the pantomime to the very letter.

Of all the pantomimic _dramatis personae_, we consider the pantaloon
the most worthless and debauched. Independent of the dislike one
naturally feels at seeing a gentleman of his years engaged in pursuits
highly unbecoming his gravity and time of life, we cannot conceal from
ourselves the fact that he is a treacherous, worldly-minded old
villain, constantly enticing his younger companion, the clown, into
acts of fraud or petty larceny, and generally standing aside to watch
the result of the enterprise. If it be successful, he never forgets to
return for his share of the spoil; but if it turn out a failure, he
generally retires with remarkable caution and expedition, and keeps
carefully aloof until the affair has blown over. His amorous
propensities, too, are eminently disagreeable; and his mode of
addressing ladies in the open street at noon-day is down-right
improper, being usually neither more nor less than a perceptible
tickling of the aforesaid ladies in the waist, after committing which,
he starts back, manifestly ashamed (as well he may be) of his own
indecorum and temerity; continuing, nevertheless, to ogle and beckon to
them from a distance in a very unpleasant and immoral manner.

Is there any man who cannot count a dozen pantaloons in his own social
circle? Is there any man who has not seen them swarming at the west end
of the town on a sunshiny day or a summer’s evening, going through the
last-named pantomimic feats with as much liquorish energy, and as total
an absence of reserve, as if they were on the very stage itself? We can
tell upon our fingers a dozen pantaloons of our acquaintance at this
moment—capital pantaloons, who have been performing all kinds of
strange freaks, to the great amusement of their friends and
acquaintance, for years past; and who to this day are making such
comical and ineffectual attempts to be young and dissolute, that all
beholders are like to die with laughter.

Take that old gentleman who has just emerged from the _Café de
l’Europe_ in the Haymarket, where he has been dining at the expense of
the young man upon town with whom he shakes hands as they part at the
door of the tavern. The affected warmth of that shake of the hand, the
courteous nod, the obvious recollection of the dinner, the savoury
flavour of which still hangs upon his lips, are all characteristics of
his great prototype. He hobbles away humming an opera tune, and
twirling his cane to and fro, with affected carelessness. Suddenly he
stops—’tis at the milliner’s window. He peeps through one of the large
panes of glass; and, his view of the ladies within being obstructed by
the India shawls, directs his attentions to the young girl with the
band-box in her hand, who is gazing in at the window also. See! he
draws beside her. He coughs; she turns away from him. He draws near her
again; she disregards him. He gleefully chucks her under the chin, and,
retreating a few steps, nods and beckons with fantastic grimaces, while
the girl bestows a contemptuous and supercilious look upon his wrinkled
visage. She turns away with a flounce, and the old gentleman trots
after her with a toothless chuckle. The pantaloon to the life!

But the close resemblance which the clowns of the stage bear to those
of every-day life is perfectly extraordinary. Some people talk with a
sigh of the decline of pantomime, and murmur in low and dismal tones
the name of Grimaldi. We mean no disparagement to the worthy and
excellent old man when we say that this is downright nonsense. Clowns
that beat Grimaldi all to nothing turn up every day, and nobody
patronizes them—more’s the pity!

‘I know who you mean,’ says some dirty-faced patron of Mr.
Osbaldistone’s, laying down the Miscellany when he has got thus far,
and bestowing upon vacancy a most knowing glance; ‘you mean C. J. Smith
as did Guy Fawkes, and George Barnwell at the Garden.’ The dirty-faced
gentleman has hardly uttered the words, when he is interrupted by a
young gentleman in no shirt-collar and a Petersham coat. ‘No, no,’ says
the young gentleman; ‘he means Brown, King, and Gibson, at the
‘Delphi.’ Now, with great deference both to the first-named gentleman
with the dirty face, and the last-named gentleman in the non-existing
shirt-collar, we do _not_ mean either the performer who so grotesquely
burlesqued the Popish conspirator, or the three unchangeables who have
been dancing the same dance under different imposing titles, and doing
the same thing under various high-sounding names for some five or six
years last past. We have no sooner made this avowal, than the public,
who have hitherto been silent witnesses of the dispute, inquire what on
earth it is we _do_ mean; and, with becoming respect, we proceed to
tell them.

It is very well known to all playgoers and pantomime-seers, that the
scenes in which a theatrical clown is at the very height of his glory
are those which are described in the play-bills as ‘Cheesemonger’s shop
and Crockery warehouse,’ or ‘Tailor’s shop, and Mrs. Queertable’s
boarding-house,’ or places bearing some such title, where the great fun
of the thing consists in the hero’s taking lodgings which he has not
the slightest intention of paying for, or obtaining goods under false
pretences, or abstracting the stock-in-trade of the respectable
shopkeeper next door, or robbing warehouse porters as they pass under
his window, or, to shorten the catalogue, in his swindling everybody he
possibly can, it only remaining to be observed that, the more extensive
the swindling is, and the more barefaced the impudence of the swindler,
the greater the rapture and ecstasy of the audience. Now it is a most
remarkable fact that precisely this sort of thing occurs in real life
day after day, and nobody sees the humour of it. Let us illustrate our
position by detailing the plot of this portion of the pantomime—not of
the theatre, but of life.

The Honourable Captain Fitz-Whisker Fiercy, attended by his livery
servant Do’em—a most respectable servant to look at, who has grown grey
in the service of the captain’s family—views, treats for, and
ultimately obtains possession of, the unfurnished house, such a number,
such a street. All the tradesmen in the neighbourhood are in agonies of
competition for the captain’s custom; the captain is a good-natured,
kind-hearted, easy man, and, to avoid being the cause of disappointment
to any, he most handsomely gives orders to all. Hampers of wine,
baskets of provisions, cart-loads of furniture, boxes of jewellery,
supplies of luxuries of the costliest description, flock to the house
of the Honourable Captain Fitz-Whisker Fiercy, where they are received
with the utmost readiness by the highly respectable Do’em; while the
captain himself struts and swaggers about with that compound air of
conscious superiority and general blood-thirstiness which a military
captain should always, and does most times, wear, to the admiration and
terror of plebeian men. But the tradesmen’s backs are no sooner turned,
than the captain, with all the eccentricity of a mighty mind, and
assisted by the faithful Do’em, whose devoted fidelity is not the least
touching part of his character, disposes of everything to great
advantage; for, although the articles fetch small sums, still they are
sold considerably above cost price, the cost to the captain having been
nothing at all. After various manoeuvres, the imposture is discovered,
Fitz-Fiercy and Do’em are recognized as confederates, and the police
office to which they are both taken is thronged with their dupes.

Who can fail to recognize in this, the exact counterpart of the best
portion of a theatrical pantomime—Fitz-Whisker Fiercy by the clown;
Do’em by the pantaloon; and supernumeraries by the tradesmen? The best
of the joke, too, is, that the very coal-merchant who is loudest in his
complaints against the person who defrauded him, is the identical man
who sat in the centre of the very front row of the pit last night and
laughed the most boisterously at this very same thing,—and not so well
done either. Talk of Grimaldi, we say again! Did Grimaldi, in his best
days, ever do anything in this way equal to Da Costa?

The mention of this latter justly celebrated clown reminds us of his
last piece of humour, the fraudulently obtaining certain stamped
acceptances from a young gentleman in the army. We had scarcely laid
down our pen to contemplate for a few moments this admirable actor’s
performance of that exquisite practical joke, than a new branch of our
subject flashed suddenly upon us. So we take it up again at once.

All people who have been behind the scenes, and most people who have
been before them, know, that in the representation of a pantomime, a
good many men are sent upon the stage for the express purpose of being
cheated, or knocked down, or both. Now, down to a moment ago, we had
never been able to understand for what possible purpose a great number
of odd, lazy, large-headed men, whom one is in the habit of meeting
here, and there, and everywhere, could ever have been created. We see
it all, now. They are the supernumeraries in the pantomime of life; the
men who have been thrust into it, with no other view than to be
constantly tumbling over each other, and running their heads against
all sorts of strange things. We sat opposite to one of these men at a
supper-table, only last week. Now we think of it, he was exactly like
the gentlemen with the pasteboard heads and faces, who do the
corresponding business in the theatrical pantomimes; there was the same
broad stolid simper—the same dull leaden eye—the same unmeaning, vacant
stare; and whatever was said, or whatever was done, he always came in
at precisely the wrong place, or jostled against something that he had
not the slightest business with. We looked at the man across the table
again and again; and could not satisfy ourselves what race of beings to
class him with. How very odd that this never occurred to us before!

We will frankly own that we have been much troubled with the harlequin.
We see harlequins of so many kinds in the real living pantomime, that
we hardly know which to select as the proper fellow of him of the
theatres. At one time we were disposed to think that the harlequin was
neither more nor less than a young man of family and independent
property, who had run away with an opera-dancer, and was fooling his
life and his means away in light and trivial amusements. On reflection,
however, we remembered that harlequins are occasionally guilty of
witty, and even clever acts, and we are rather disposed to acquit our
young men of family and independent property, generally speaking, of
any such misdemeanours. On a more mature consideration of the subject,
we have arrived at the conclusion that the harlequins of life are just
ordinary men, to be found in no particular walk or degree, on whom a
certain station, or particular conjunction of circumstances, confers
the magic wand. And this brings us to a few words on the pantomime of
public and political life, which we shall say at once, and then
conclude—merely premising in this place that we decline any reference
whatever to the columbine, being in no wise satisfied of the nature of
her connection with her parti-coloured lover, and not feeling by any
means clear that we should be justified in introducing her to the
virtuous and respectable ladies who peruse our lucubrations.

We take it that the commencement of a Session of Parliament is neither
more nor less than the drawing up of the curtain for a grand comic
pantomime, and that his Majesty’s most gracious speech on the opening
thereof may be not inaptly compared to the clown’s opening speech of
‘Here we are!’ ‘My lords and gentlemen, here we are!’ appears, to our
mind at least, to be a very good abstract of the point and meaning of
the propitiatory address of the ministry. When we remember how
frequently this speech is made, immediately after _the change_ too, the
parallel is quite perfect, and still more singular.

Perhaps the cast of our political pantomime never was richer than at
this day. We are particularly strong in clowns. At no former time, we
should say, have we had such astonishing tumblers, or performers so
ready to go through the whole of their feats for the amusement of an
admiring throng. Their extreme readiness to exhibit, indeed, has given
rise to some ill-natured reflections; it having been objected that by
exhibiting gratuitously through the country when the theatre is closed,
they reduce themselves to the level of mountebanks, and thereby tend to
degrade the respectability of the profession. Certainly Grimaldi never
did this sort of thing; and though Brown, King, and Gibson have gone to
the Surrey in vacation time, and Mr. C. J. Smith has ruralised at
Sadler’s Wells, we find no theatrical precedent for a general tumbling
through the country, except in the gentleman, name unknown, who threw
summersets on behalf of the late Mr. Richardson, and who is no
authority either, because he had never been on the regular boards.

But, laying aside this question, which after all is a mere matter of
taste, we may reflect with pride and gratification of heart on the
proficiency of our clowns as exhibited in the season. Night after night
will they twist and tumble about, till two, three, and four o’clock in
the morning; playing the strangest antics, and giving each other the
funniest slaps on the face that can possibly be imagined, without
evincing the smallest tokens of fatigue. The strange noises, the
confusion, the shouting and roaring, amid which all this is done, too,
would put to shame the most turbulent sixpenny gallery that ever yelled
through a boxing-night.

It is especially curious to behold one of these clowns compelled to go
through the most surprising contortions by the irresistible influence
of the wand of office, which his leader or harlequin holds above his
head. Acted upon by this wonderful charm he will become perfectly
motionless, moving neither hand, foot, nor finger, and will even lose
the faculty of speech at an instant’s notice; or on the other hand, he
will become all life and animation if required, pouring forth a torrent
of words without sense or meaning, throwing himself into the wildest
and most fantastic contortions, and even grovelling on the earth and
licking up the dust. These exhibitions are more curious than pleasing;
indeed, they are rather disgusting than otherwise, except to the
admirers of such things, with whom we confess we have no
fellow-feeling.

Strange tricks—very strange tricks—are also performed by the harlequin
who holds for the time being the magic wand which we have just
mentioned. The mere waving it before a man’s eyes will dispossess his
brains of all the notions previously stored there, and fill it with an
entirely new set of ideas; one gentle tap on the back will alter the
colour of a man’s coat completely; and there are some expert
performers, who, having this wand held first on one side and then on
the other, will change from side to side, turning their coats at every
evolution, with so much rapidity and dexterity, that the quickest eye
can scarcely detect their motions. Occasionally, the genius who confers
the wand, wrests it from the hand of the temporary possessor, and
consigns it to some new performer; on which occasions all the
characters change sides, and then the race and the hard knocks begin
anew.

We might have extended this chapter to a much greater length—we might
have carried the comparison into the liberal professions—we might have
shown, as was in fact our original purpose, that each is in itself a
little pantomime with scenes and characters of its own, complete; but,
as we fear we have been quite lengthy enough already, we shall leave
this chapter just where it is. A gentleman, not altogether unknown as a
dramatic poet, wrote thus a year or two ago—


‘All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:’


and we, tracking out his footsteps at the scarcely-worth-mentioning
little distance of a few millions of leagues behind, venture to add, by
way of new reading, that he meant a Pantomime, and that we are all
actors in The Pantomime of Life.




SOME PARTICULARS CONCERNING A LION


We have a great respect for lions in the abstract. In common with most
other people, we have heard and read of many instances of their bravery
and generosity. We have duly admired that heroic self-denial and
charming philanthropy which prompts them never to eat people except
when they are hungry, and we have been deeply impressed with a becoming
sense of the politeness they are said to display towards unmarried
ladies of a certain state. All natural histories teem with anecdotes
illustrative of their excellent qualities; and one old spelling-book in
particular recounts a touching instance of an old lion, of high moral
dignity and stern principle, who felt it his imperative duty to devour
a young man who had contracted a habit of swearing, as a striking
example to the rising generation.

All this is extremely pleasant to reflect upon, and, indeed, says a
very great deal in favour of lions as a mass. We are bound to state,
however, that such individual lions as we have happened to fall in with
have not put forth any very striking characteristics, and have not
acted up to the chivalrous character assigned them by their
chroniclers. We never saw a lion in what is called his natural state,
certainly; that is to say, we have never met a lion out walking in a
forest, or crouching in his lair under a tropical sun, waiting till his
dinner should happen to come by, hot from the baker’s. But we have seen
some under the influence of captivity, and the pressure of misfortune;
and we must say that they appeared to us very apathetic, heavy-headed
fellows.

The lion at the Zoological Gardens, for instance. He is all very well;
he has an undeniable mane, and looks very fierce; but, Lord bless us!
what of that? The lions of the fashionable world look just as
ferocious, and are the most harmless creatures breathing. A box-lobby
lion or a Regent-street animal will put on a most terrible aspect, and
roar, fearfully, if you affront him; but he will never bite, and, if
you offer to attack him manfully, will fairly turn tail and sneak off.
Doubtless these creatures roam about sometimes in herds, and, if they
meet any especially meek-looking and peaceably-disposed fellow, will
endeavour to frighten him; but the faintest show of a vigorous
resistance is sufficient to scare them even then. These are pleasant
characteristics, whereas we make it matter of distinct charge against
the Zoological lion and his brethren at the fairs, that they are
sleepy, dreamy, sluggish quadrupeds.

We do not remember to have ever seen one of them perfectly awake,
except at feeding-time. In every respect we uphold the biped lions
against their four-footed namesakes, and we boldly challenge
controversy upon the subject.

With these opinions it may be easily imagined that our curiosity and
interest were very much excited the other day, when a lady of our
acquaintance called on us and resolutely declined to accept our refusal
of her invitation to an evening party; ‘for,’ said she, ‘I have got a
lion coming.’ We at once retracted our plea of a prior engagement, and
became as anxious to go, as we had previously been to stay away.

We went early, and posted ourselves in an eligible part of the
drawing-room, from whence we could hope to obtain a full view of the
interesting animal. Two or three hours passed, the quadrilles began,
the room filled; but no lion appeared. The lady of the house became
inconsolable,—for it is one of the peculiar privileges of these lions
to make solemn appointments and never keep them,—when all of a sudden
there came a tremendous double rap at the street-door, and the master
of the house, after gliding out (unobserved as he flattered himself) to
peep over the banisters, came into the room, rubbing his hands together
with great glee, and cried out in a very important voice, ‘My dear,
Mr.—(naming the lion) has this moment arrived.’

Upon this, all eyes were turned towards the door, and we observed
several young ladies, who had been laughing and conversing previously
with great gaiety and good humour, grow extremely quiet and
sentimental; while some young gentlemen, who had been cutting great
figures in the facetious and small-talk way, suddenly sank very
obviously in the estimation of the company, and were looked upon with
great coldness and indifference. Even the young man who had been
ordered from the music shop to play the pianoforte was visibly
affected, and struck several false notes in the excess of his
excitement.

All this time there was a great talking outside, more than once
accompanied by a loud laugh, and a cry of ‘Oh! capital! excellent!’
from which we inferred that the lion was jocose, and that these
exclamations were occasioned by the transports of his keeper and our
host. Nor were we deceived; for when the lion at last appeared, we
overheard his keeper, who was a little prim man, whisper to several
gentlemen of his acquaintance, with uplifted hands, and every
expression of half-suppressed admiration, that—(naming the lion again)
was in _such_ cue to-night!

The lion was a literary one. Of course, there were a vast number of
people present who had admired his roarings, and were anxious to be
introduced to him; and very pleasant it was to see them brought up for
the purpose, and to observe the patient dignity with which he received
all their patting and caressing. This brought forcibly to our mind what
we had so often witnessed at country fairs, where the other lions are
compelled to go through as many forms of courtesy as they chance to be
acquainted with, just as often as admiring parties happen to drop in
upon them.

While the lion was exhibiting in this way, his keeper was not idle, for
he mingled among the crowd, and spread his praises most industriously.
To one gentleman he whispered some very choice thing that the noble
animal had said in the very act of coming up-stairs, which, of course,
rendered the mental effort still more astonishing; to another he
murmured a hasty account of a grand dinner that had taken place the day
before, where twenty-seven gentlemen had got up all at once to demand
an extra cheer for the lion; and to the ladies he made sundry promises
of interceding to procure the majestic brute’s sign-manual for their
albums. Then, there were little private consultations in different
corners, relative to the personal appearance and stature of the lion;
whether he was shorter than they had expected to see him, or taller, or
thinner, or fatter, or younger, or older; whether he was like his
portrait, or unlike it; and whether the particular shade of his eyes
was black, or blue, or hazel, or green, or yellow, or mixture. At all
these consultations the keeper assisted; and, in short, the lion was
the sole and single subject of discussion till they sat him down to
whist, and then the people relapsed into their old topics of
conversation—themselves and each other.

We must confess that we looked forward with no slight impatience to the
announcement of supper; for if you wish to see a tame lion under
particularly favourable circumstances, feeding-time is the period of
all others to pitch upon. We were therefore very much delighted to
observe a sensation among the guests, which we well knew how to
interpret, and immediately afterwards to behold the lion escorting the
lady of the house down-stairs. We offered our arm to an elderly female
of our acquaintance, who—dear old soul!—is the very best person that
ever lived, to lead down to any meal; for, be the room ever so small,
or the party ever so large, she is sure, by some intuitive perception
of the eligible, to push and pull herself and conductor close to the
best dishes on the table;—we say we offered our arm to this elderly
female, and, descending the stairs shortly after the lion, were
fortunate enough to obtain a seat nearly opposite him.

Of course the keeper was there already. He had planted himself at
precisely that distance from his charge which afforded him a decent
pretext for raising his voice, when he addressed him, to so loud a key,
as could not fail to attract the attention of the whole company, and
immediately began to apply himself seriously to the task of bringing
the lion out, and putting him through the whole of his manoeuvres. Such
flashes of wit as he elicited from the lion! First of all, they began
to make puns upon a salt-cellar, and then upon the breast of a fowl,
and then upon the trifle; but the best jokes of all were decidedly on
the lobster salad, upon which latter subject the lion came out most
vigorously, and, in the opinion of the most competent authorities,
quite outshone himself. This is a very excellent mode of shining in
society, and is founded, we humbly conceive, upon the classic model of
the dialogues between Mr. Punch and his friend the proprietor, wherein
the latter takes all the up-hill work, and is content to pioneer to the
jokes and repartees of Mr. P. himself, who never fails to gain great
credit and excite much laughter thereby. Whatever it be founded on,
however, we recommend it to all lions, present and to come; for in this
instance it succeeded to admiration, and perfectly dazzled the whole
body of hearers.

When the salt-cellar, and the fowl’s breast, and the trifle, and the
lobster salad were all exhausted, and could not afford standing-room
for another solitary witticism, the keeper performed that very
dangerous feat which is still done with some of the caravan lions,
although in one instance it terminated fatally, of putting his head in
the animal’s mouth, and placing himself entirely at its mercy. Boswell
frequently presents a melancholy instance of the lamentable results of
this achievement, and other keepers and jackals have been terribly
lacerated for their daring. It is due to our lion to state, that he
condescended to be trifled with, in the most gentle manner, and finally
went home with the showman in a hack cab: perfectly peaceable, but
slightly fuddled.

Being in a contemplative mood, we were led to make some reflections
upon the character and conduct of this genus of lions as we walked
homewards, and we were not long in arriving at the conclusion that our
former impression in their favour was very much strengthened and
confirmed by what we had recently seen. While the other lions receive
company and compliments in a sullen, moody, not to say snarling manner,
these appear flattered by the attentions that are paid them; while
those conceal themselves to the utmost of their power from the vulgar
gaze, these court the popular eye, and, unlike their brethren, whom
nothing short of compulsion will move to exertion, are ever ready to
display their acquirements to the wondering throng. We have known bears
of undoubted ability who, when the expectations of a large audience
have been wound up to the utmost pitch, have peremptorily refused to
dance; well-taught monkeys, who have unaccountably objected to exhibit
on the slack wire; and elephants of unquestioned genius, who have
suddenly declined to turn the barrel-organ; but we never once knew or
heard of a biped lion, literary or otherwise,—and we state it as a fact
which is highly creditable to the whole species,—who, occasion
offering, did not seize with avidity on any opportunity which was
afforded him, of performing to his heart’s content on the first violin.




MR. ROBERT BOLTON: THE ‘GENTLEMAN CONNECTED WITH THE PRESS’


In the parlour of the Green Dragon, a public-house in the immediate
neighbourhood of Westminster Bridge, everybody talks politics, every
evening, the great political authority being Mr. Robert Bolton, an
individual who defines himself as ‘a gentleman connected with the
press,’ which is a definition of peculiar indefiniteness. Mr. Robert
Bolton’s regular circle of admirers and listeners are an undertaker, a
greengrocer, a hairdresser, a baker, a large stomach surmounted by a
man’s head, and placed on the top of two particularly short legs, and a
thin man in black, name, profession, and pursuit unknown, who always
sits in the same position, always displays the same long, vacant face,
and never opens his lips, surrounded as he is by most enthusiastic
conversation, except to puff forth a volume of tobacco smoke, or give
vent to a very snappy, loud, and shrill _hem_! The conversation
sometimes turns upon literature, Mr. Bolton being a literary character,
and always upon such news of the day as is exclusively possessed by
that talented individual. I found myself (of course, accidentally) in
the Green Dragon the other evening, and, being somewhat amused by the
following conversation, preserved it.

‘Can you lend me a ten-pound note till Christmas?’ inquired the
hairdresser of the stomach.

‘Where’s your security, Mr. Clip?’

‘My stock in trade,—there’s enough of it, I’m thinking, Mr. Thicknesse.
Some fifty wigs, two poles, half-a-dozen head blocks, and a dead
Bruin.’

‘No, I won’t, then,’ growled out Thicknesse. ‘I lends nothing on the
security of the whigs or the Poles either. As for whigs, they’re
cheats; as for the Poles, they’ve got no cash. I never have nothing to
do with blockheads, unless I can’t awoid it (ironically), and a dead
bear’s about as much use to me as I could be to a dead bear.’

‘Well, then,’ urged the other, ‘there’s a book as belonged to Pope,
Byron’s Poems, valued at forty pounds, because it’s got Pope’s
identical scratch on the back; what do you think of that for security?’

‘Well, to be sure!’ cried the baker. ‘But how d’ye mean, Mr. Clip?’

‘Mean! why, that it’s got the _hottergruff_ of Pope.


“Steal not this book, for fear of hangman’s rope;
For it belongs to Alexander Pope.”


All that’s written on the inside of the binding of the book; so, as my
son says, we’re _bound_ to believe it.’

‘Well, sir,’ observed the undertaker, deferentially, and in a
half-whisper, leaning over the table, and knocking over the
hairdresser’s grog as he spoke, ‘that argument’s very easy upset.’

‘Perhaps, sir,’ said Clip, a little flurried, ‘you’ll pay for the first
upset afore you thinks of another.’

‘Now,’ said the undertaker, bowing amicably to the hairdresser, ‘I
_think_, I says I _think_—you’ll excuse me, Mr. Clip, I _think_, you
see, that won’t go down with the present company—unfortunately, my
master had the honour of making the coffin of that ere Lord’s
housemaid, not no more nor twenty year ago. Don’t think I’m proud on
it, gentlemen; others might be; but I hate rank of any sort. I’ve no
more respect for a Lord’s footman than I have for any respectable
tradesman in this room. I may say no more nor I have for Mr. Clip!
(bowing). Therefore, that ere Lord must have been born long after Pope
died. And it’s a logical interference to defer, that they neither of
them lived at the same time. So what I mean is this here, that Pope
never had no book, never seed, felt, never smelt no book (triumphantly)
as belonged to that ere Lord. And, gentlemen, when I consider how
patiently you have ’eared the ideas what I have expressed, I feel
bound, as the best way to reward you for the kindness you have
exhibited, to sit down without saying anything more—partickler as I
perceive a worthier visitor nor myself is just entered. I am not in the
habit of paying compliments, gentlemen; when I do, therefore, I hope I
strikes with double force.’

‘Ah, Mr. Murgatroyd! what’s all this about striking with double force?’
said the object of the above remark, as he entered. ‘I never excuse a
man’s getting into a rage during winter, even when he’s seated so close
to the fire as you are. It is very injudicious to put yourself into
such a perspiration. What is the cause of this extreme physical and
mental excitement, sir?’

Such was the very philosophical address of Mr. Robert Bolton, a
shorthand-writer, as he termed himself—a bit of equivoque passing
current among his fraternity, which must give the uninitiated a vast
idea of the establishment of the ministerial organ, while to the
initiated it signifies that no one paper can lay claim to the enjoyment
of their services. Mr. Bolton was a young man, with a somewhat sickly
and very dissipated expression of countenance. His habiliments were
composed of an exquisite union of gentility, slovenliness, assumption,
simplicity, _newness_, and old age. Half of him was dressed for the
winter, the other half for the summer. His hat was of the newest cut,
the D’Orsay; his trousers had been white, but the inroads of mud and
ink, etc., had given them a pie-bald appearance; round his throat he
wore a very high black cravat, of the most tyrannical stiffness; while
his _tout ensemble_ was hidden beneath the enormous folds of an old
brown poodle-collared great-coat, which was closely buttoned up to the
aforesaid cravat. His fingers peeped through the ends of his black kid
gloves, and two of the toes of each foot took a similar view of society
through the extremities of his high-lows. Sacred to the bare walls of
his garret be the mysteries of his interior dress! He was a short,
spare man, of a somewhat inferior deportment. Everybody seemed
influenced by his entry into the room, and his salutation of each
member partook of the patronizing. The hairdresser made way for him
between himself and the stomach. A minute afterwards he had taken
possession of his pint and pipe. A pause in the conversation took
place. Everybody was waiting, anxious for his first observation.

‘Horrid murder in Westminster this morning,’ observed Mr. Bolton.

Everybody changed their positions. All eyes were fixed upon the man of
paragraphs.

‘A baker murdered his son by boiling him in a copper,’ said Mr. Bolton.

‘Good heavens!’ exclaimed everybody, in simultaneous horror.

‘Boiled him, gentlemen!’ added Mr. Bolton, with the most effective
emphasis; ‘_boiled_ him!’

‘And the particulars, Mr. B.,’ inquired the hairdresser, ‘the
particulars?’

Mr. Bolton took a very long draught of porter, and some two or three
dozen whiffs of tobacco, doubtless to instil into the commercial
capacities of the company the superiority of a gentlemen connected with
the press, and then said—

‘The man was a baker, gentlemen.’ (Every one looked at the baker
present, who stared at Bolton.) ‘His victim, being his son, also was
necessarily the son of a baker. The wretched murderer had a wife, whom
he was frequently in the habit, while in an intoxicated state, of
kicking, pummelling, flinging mugs at, knocking down, and half-killing
while in bed, by inserting in her mouth a considerable portion of a
sheet or blanket.’

The speaker took another draught, everybody looked at everybody else,
and exclaimed, ‘Horrid!’

‘It appears in evidence, gentlemen,’ continued Mr. Bolton, ‘that, on
the evening of yesterday, Sawyer the baker came home in a reprehensible
state of beer. Mrs. S., connubially considerate, carried him in that
condition up-stairs into his chamber, and consigned him to their mutual
couch. In a minute or two she lay sleeping beside the man whom the
morrow’s dawn beheld a murderer!’ (Entire silence informed the reporter
that his picture had attained the awful effect he desired.) ‘The son
came home about an hour afterwards, opened the door, and went up to
bed. Scarcely (gentlemen, conceive his feelings of alarm), scarcely had
he taken off his indescribables, when shrieks (to his experienced ear
_maternal_ shrieks) scared the silence of surrounding night. He put his
indescribables on again, and ran down-stairs. He opened the door of the
parental bed-chamber. His father was dancing upon his mother. What must
have been his feelings! In the agony of the minute he rushed at his
male parent as he was about to plunge a knife into the side of his
female. The mother shrieked. The father caught the son (who had wrested
the knife from the paternal grasp) up in his arms, carried him
down-stairs, shoved him into a copper of boiling water among some
linen, closed the lid, and jumped upon the top of it, in which position
he was found with a ferocious countenance by the mother, who arrived in
the melancholy wash-house just as he had so settled himself.

‘“Where’s my boy?” shrieked the mother.

‘“In that copper, boiling,” coolly replied the benign father.

‘Struck by the awful intelligence, the mother rushed from the house,
and alarmed the neighbourhood. The police entered a minute afterwards.
The father, having bolted the wash-house door, had bolted himself. They
dragged the lifeless body of the boiled baker from the cauldron, and,
with a promptitude commendable in men of their station, they
immediately carried it to the station-house. Subsequently, the baker
was apprehended while seated on the top of a lamp-post in Parliament
Street, lighting his pipe.’

The whole horrible ideality of the Mysteries of Udolpho, condensed into
the pithy effect of a ten-line paragraph, could not possibly have so
affected the narrator’s auditory. Silence, the purest and most noble of
all kinds of applause, bore ample testimony to the barbarity of the
baker, as well as to Bolton’s knack of narration; and it was only
broken after some minutes had elapsed by interjectional expressions of
the intense indignation of every man present. The baker wondered how a
British baker could so disgrace himself and the highly honourable
calling to which he belonged; and the others indulged in a variety of
wonderments connected with the subject; among which not the least
wonderment was that which was awakened by the genius and information of
Mr. Robert Bolton, who, after a glowing eulogium on himself, and his
unspeakable influence with the daily press, was proceeding, with a most
solemn countenance, to hear the pros and cons of the Pope autograph
question, when I took up my hat, and left.




FAMILIAR EPISTLE FROM A PARENT TO A CHILD
aged two years and two months


My Child,

To recount with what trouble I have brought you up—with what an anxious
eye I have regarded your progress,—how late and how often I have sat up
at night working for you,—and how many thousand letters I have received
from, and written to your various relations and friends, many of whom
have been of a querulous and irritable turn,—to dwell on the anxiety
and tenderness with which I have (as far as I possessed the power)
inspected and chosen your food; rejecting the indigestible and heavy
matter which some injudicious but well-meaning old ladies would have
had you swallow, and retaining only those light and pleasant articles
which I deemed calculated to keep you free from all gross humours, and
to render you an agreeable child, and one who might be popular with
society in general,—to dilate on the steadiness with which I have
prevented your annoying any company by talking politics—always assuring
you that you would thank me for it yourself some day when you grew
older,—to expatiate, in short, upon my own assiduity as a parent, is
beside my present purpose, though I cannot but contemplate your fair
appearance—your robust health, and unimpeded circulation (which I take
to be the great secret of your good looks) without the liveliest
satisfaction and delight.

It is a trite observation, and one which, young as you are, I have no
doubt you have often heard repeated, that we have fallen upon strange
times, and live in days of constant shiftings and changes. I had a
melancholy instance of this only a week or two since. I was returning
from Manchester to London by the Mail Train, when I suddenly fell into
another train—a mixed train—of reflection, occasioned by the dejected
and disconsolate demeanour of the Post-Office Guard. We were stopping
at some station where they take in water, when he dismounted slowly
from the little box in which he sits in ghastly mockery of his old
condition with pistol and blunderbuss beside him, ready to shoot the
first highwayman (or railwayman) who shall attempt to stop the horses,
which now travel (when they travel at all) _inside_ and in a portable
stable invented for the purpose,—he dismounted, I say, slowly and
sadly, from his post, and looking mournfully about him as if in dismal
recollection of the old roadside public-house the blazing fire—the
glass of foaming ale—the buxom handmaid and admiring hangers-on of
tap-room and stable, all honoured by his notice; and, retiring a little
apart, stood leaning against a signal-post, surveying the engine with a
look of combined affliction and disgust which no words can describe.
His scarlet coat and golden lace were tarnished with ignoble smoke;
flakes of soot had fallen on his bright green shawl—his pride in days
of yore—the steam condensed in the tunnel from which we had just
emerged, shone upon his hat like rain. His eye betokened that he was
thinking of the coachman; and as it wandered to his own seat and his
own fast-fading garb, it was plain to see that he felt his office and
himself had alike no business there, and were nothing but an elaborate
practical joke.

As we whirled away, I was led insensibly into an anticipation of those
days to come, when mail-coach guards shall no longer be judges of
horse-flesh—when a mail-coach guard shall never even have seen a
horse—when stations shall have superseded stables, and corn shall have
given place to coke. ‘In those dawning times,’ thought I,
‘exhibition-rooms shall teem with portraits of Her Majesty’s favourite
engine, with boilers after Nature by future Landseers. Some Amburgh,
yet unborn, shall break wild horses by his magic power; and in the
dress of a mail-coach guard exhibit his trained animals in a mock
mail-coach. Then, shall wondering crowds observe how that, with the
exception of his whip, it is all his eye; and crowned heads shall see
them fed on oats, and stand alone unmoved and undismayed, while
counters flee affrighted when the coursers neigh!’

Such, my child, were the reflections from which I was only awakened
then, as I am now, by the necessity of attending to matters of present
though minor importance. I offer no apology to you for the digression,
for it brings me very naturally to the subject of change, which is the
very subject of which I desire to treat.

In fact, my child, you have changed hands. Henceforth I resign you to
the guardianship and protection of one of my most intimate and valued
friends, Mr. Ainsworth, with whom, and with you, my best wishes and
warmest feelings will ever remain. I reap no gain or profit by parting
from you, nor will any conveyance of your property be required, for, in
this respect, you have always been literally ‘Bentley’s’ Miscellany,
and never mine.

Unlike the driver of the old Manchester mail, I regard this altered
state of things with feelings of unmingled pleasure and satisfaction.

Unlike the guard of the new Manchester mail, _your_ guard is at home in
his new place, and has roystering highwaymen and gallant desperadoes
ever within call. And if I might compare you, my child, to an engine;
(not a Tory engine, nor a Whig engine, but a brisk and rapid
locomotive;) your friends and patrons to passengers; and he who now
stands towards you _in loco parentis_ as the skilful engineer and
supervisor of the whole, I would humbly crave leave to postpone the
departure of the train on its new and auspicious course for one brief
instant, while, with hat in hand, I approach side by side with the
friend who travelled with me on the old road, and presume to solicit
favour and kindness in behalf of him and his new charge, both for their
sakes and that of the old coachman,

Boz.




Footnotes:


[122] This paper was written before the practice of exhibiting Members
of Parliament, like other curiosities, for the small charge of
half-a-crown, was abolished.

[161] The regulations of the prison relative to the confinement of
prisoners during the day, their sleeping at night, their taking their
meals, and other matters of gaol economy, have been all altered-greatly
for the better—since this sketch was first published. Even the
construction of the prison itself has been changed.

[165] These two men were executed shortly afterwards. The other was
respited during his Majesty’s pleasure.

[429] [In its original form.]




