CHAPTER VIII—THE GREAT WINGLEBURY DUEL


The little town of Great Winglebury is exactly forty-two miles and
three-quarters from Hyde Park corner. It has a long, straggling, quiet
High-street, with a great black and white clock at a small red
Town-hall, half-way up—a market-place—a cage—an assembly-room—a
church—a bridge—a chapel—a theatre—a library—an inn—a pump—and a
Post-office. Tradition tells of a ‘Little Winglebury,’ down some
cross-road about two miles off; and, as a square mass of dirty paper,
supposed to have been originally intended for a letter, with certain
tremulous characters inscribed thereon, in which a lively imagination
might trace a remote resemblance to the word ‘Little,’ was once stuck
up to be owned in the sunny window of the Great Winglebury Post-office,
from which it only disappeared when it fell to pieces with dust and
extreme old age, there would appear to be some foundation for the
legend. Common belief is inclined to bestow the name upon a little hole
at the end of a muddy lane about a couple of miles long, colonised by
one wheelwright, four paupers, and a beer-shop; but, even this
authority, slight as it is, must be regarded with extreme suspicion,
inasmuch as the inhabitants of the hole aforesaid, concur in opining
that it never had any name at all, from the earliest ages down to the
present day.

The Winglebury Arms, in the centre of the High-street, opposite the
small building with the big clock, is the principal inn of Great
Winglebury—the commercial-inn, posting-house, and excise-office; the
‘Blue’ house at every election, and the judges’ house at every assizes.
It is the head-quarters of the Gentlemen’s Whist Club of Winglebury
Blues (so called in opposition to the Gentlemen’s Whist Club of
Winglebury Buffs, held at the other house, a little further down): and
whenever a juggler, or wax-work man, or concert-giver, takes Great
Winglebury in his circuit, it is immediately placarded all over the
town that Mr. So-and-so, ‘trusting to that liberal support which the
inhabitants of Great Winglebury have long been so liberal in bestowing,
has at a great expense engaged the elegant and commodious
assembly-rooms, attached to the Winglebury Arms.’ The house is a large
one, with a red brick and stone front; a pretty spacious hall,
ornamented with evergreen plants, terminates in a perspective view of
the bar, and a glass case, in which are displayed a choice variety of
delicacies ready for dressing, to catch the eye of a new-comer the
moment he enters, and excite his appetite to the highest possible
pitch. Opposite doors lead to the ‘coffee’ and ‘commercial’ rooms; and
a great wide, rambling staircase,—three stairs and a landing—four
stairs and another landing—one step and another landing—half-a-dozen
stairs and another landing—and so on—conducts to galleries of bedrooms,
and labyrinths of sitting-rooms, denominated ‘private,’ where you may
enjoy yourself, as privately as you can in any place where some
bewildered being walks into your room every five minutes, by mistake,
and then walks out again, to open all the doors along the gallery until
he finds his own.

Such is the Winglebury Arms, at this day, and such was the Winglebury
Arms some time since—no matter when—two or three minutes before the
arrival of the London stage. Four horses with cloths on—change for a
coach—were standing quietly at the corner of the yard surrounded by a
listless group of post-boys in shiny hats and smock-frocks, engaged in
discussing the merits of the cattle; half a dozen ragged boys were
standing a little apart, listening with evident interest to the
conversation of these worthies; and a few loungers were collected round
the horse-trough, awaiting the arrival of the coach.

The day was hot and sunny, the town in the zenith of its dulness, and
with the exception of these few idlers, not a living creature was to be
seen. Suddenly, the loud notes of a key-bugle broke the monotonous
stillness of the street; in came the coach, rattling over the uneven
paving with a noise startling enough to stop even the large-faced clock
itself. Down got the outsides, up went the windows in all directions,
out came the waiters, up started the ostlers, and the loungers, and the
post-boys, and the ragged boys, as if they were
electrified—unstrapping, and unchaining, and unbuckling, and dragging
willing horses out, and forcing reluctant horses in, and making a most
exhilarating bustle. ‘Lady inside, here!’ said the guard. ‘Please to
alight, ma’am,’ said the waiter. ‘Private sitting-room?’ interrogated
the lady. ‘Certainly, ma’am,’ responded the chamber-maid. ‘Nothing but
these ’ere trunks, ma’am?’ inquired the guard. ‘Nothing more,’ replied
the lady. Up got the outsides again, and the guard, and the coachman;
off came the cloths, with a jerk; ‘All right,’ was the cry; and away
they went. The loungers lingered a minute or two in the road, watching
the coach until it turned the corner, and then loitered away one by
one. The street was clear again, and the town, by contrast, quieter
than ever.

‘Lady in number twenty-five,’ screamed the landlady.—‘Thomas!’

‘Yes, ma’am.’

‘Letter just been left for the gentleman in number nineteen. Boots at
the Lion left it. No answer.’

‘Letter for you, sir,’ said Thomas, depositing the letter on number
nineteen’s table.

‘For me?’ said number nineteen, turning from the window, out of which
he had been surveying the scene just described.

‘Yes, sir,’—(waiters always speak in hints, and never utter complete
sentences,)—‘yes, sir,—Boots at the Lion, sir,—Bar, sir,—Missis said
number nineteen, sir—Alexander Trott, Esq., sir?—Your card at the bar,
sir, I think, sir?’

‘My name _is_ Trott,’ replied number nineteen, breaking the seal. ‘You
may go, waiter.’ The waiter pulled down the window-blind, and then
pulled it up again—for a regular waiter must do something before he
leaves the room—adjusted the glasses on the side-board, brushed a place
that was _not_ dusty, rubbed his hands very hard, walked stealthily to
the door, and evaporated.

There was, evidently, something in the contents of the letter, of a
nature, if not wholly unexpected, certainly extremely disagreeable. Mr.
Alexander Trott laid it down, and took it up again, and walked about
the room on particular squares of the carpet, and even attempted,
though unsuccessfully, to whistle an air. It wouldn’t do. He threw
himself into a chair, and read the following epistle aloud:—


‘Blue Lion and Stomach-warmer,
‘Great Winglebury.
‘_Wednesday Morning_.


‘Sir. Immediately on discovering your intentions, I left our
counting-house, and followed you. I know the purport of your
journey;—that journey shall never be completed.

‘I have no friend here, just now, on whose secrecy I can rely. This
shall be no obstacle to my revenge. Neither shall Emily Brown be
exposed to the mercenary solicitations of a scoundrel, odious in her
eyes, and contemptible in everybody else’s: nor will I tamely submit to
the clandestine attacks of a base umbrella-maker.

‘Sir. From Great Winglebury church, a footpath leads through four
meadows to a retired spot known to the townspeople as Stiffun’s Acre.’
[Mr. Trott shuddered.] ‘I shall be waiting there alone, at twenty
minutes before six o’clock to-morrow morning. Should I be disappointed
in seeing you there, I will do myself the pleasure of calling with a
horsewhip.

‘Horace Hunter.


‘PS. There is a gunsmiths in the High-street; and they won’t sell
gunpowder after dark—you understand me.

‘PPS. You had better not order your breakfast in the morning until you
have met me. It may be an unnecessary expense.’


‘Desperate-minded villain! I knew how it would be!’ ejaculated the
terrified Trott. ‘I always told father, that once start me on this
expedition, and Hunter would pursue me like the Wandering Jew. It’s bad
enough as it is, to marry with the old people’s commands, and without
the girl’s consent; but what will Emily think of me, if I go down there
breathless with running away from this infernal salamander? What
_shall_ I do? What _can_ I do? If I go back to the city, I’m disgraced
for ever—lose the girl—and, what’s more, lose the money too. Even if I
did go on to the Browns’ by the coach, Hunter would be after me in a
post-chaise; and if I go to this place, this Stiffun’s Acre (another
shudder), I’m as good as dead. I’ve seen him hit the man at the
Pall-mall shooting-gallery, in the second button-hole of the waistcoat,
five times out of every six, and when he didn’t hit him there, he hit
him in the head.’ With this consolatory reminiscence Mr. Alexander
Trott again ejaculated, ‘What shall I do?’

Long and weary were his reflections, as, burying his face in his hand,
he sat, ruminating on the best course to be pursued. His mental
direction-post pointed to London. He thought of the ‘governor’s’ anger,
and the loss of the fortune which the paternal Brown had promised the
paternal Trott his daughter should contribute to the coffers of his
son. Then the words ‘To Brown’s’ were legibly inscribed on the said
direction-post, but Horace Hunter’s denunciation rung in his ears;—last
of all it bore, in red letters, the words, ‘To Stiffun’s Acre;’ and
then Mr. Alexander Trott decided on adopting a plan which he presently
matured.

First and foremost, he despatched the under-boots to the Blue Lion and
Stomach-warmer, with a gentlemanly note to Mr. Horace Hunter,
intimating that he thirsted for his destruction and would do himself
the pleasure of slaughtering him next morning, without fail. He then
wrote another letter, and requested the attendance of the other
boots—for they kept a pair. A modest knock at the room door was heard.
‘Come in,’ said Mr. Trott. A man thrust in a red head with one eye in
it, and being again desired to ‘come in,’ brought in the body and the
legs to which the head belonged, and a fur cap which belonged to the
head.

‘You are the upper-boots, I think?’ inquired Mr. Trott.

‘Yes, I am the upper-boots,’ replied a voice from inside a velveteen
case, with mother-of-pearl buttons—‘that is, I’m the boots as b’longs
to the house; the other man’s my man, as goes errands and does odd
jobs. Top-boots and half-boots, I calls us.’

‘You’re from London?’ inquired Mr. Trott.

‘Driv a cab once,’ was the laconic reply.

‘Why don’t you drive it now?’ asked Mr. Trott.

‘Over-driv the cab, and driv over a ’ooman,’ replied the top-boots,
with brevity.

‘Do you know the mayor’s house?’ inquired Mr. Trott.

‘Rather,’ replied the boots, significantly, as if he had some good
reason to remember it.

‘Do you think you could manage to leave a letter there?’ interrogated
Trott.

‘Shouldn’t wonder,’ responded boots.

‘But this letter,’ said Trott, holding a deformed note with a paralytic
direction in one hand, and five shillings in the other—‘this letter is
anonymous.’

‘A—what?’ interrupted the boots.

‘Anonymous—he’s not to know who it comes from.’

‘Oh! I see,’ responded the reg’lar, with a knowing wink, but without
evincing the slightest disinclination to undertake the charge—‘I
see—bit o’ Sving, eh?’ and his one eye wandered round the room, as if
in quest of a dark lantern and phosphorus-box. ‘But, I say!’ he
continued, recalling the eye from its search, and bringing it to bear
on Mr. Trott. ‘I say, he’s a lawyer, our mayor, and insured in the
County. If you’ve a spite agen him, you’d better not burn his house
down—blessed if I don’t think it would be the greatest favour you could
do him.’ And he chuckled inwardly.

If Mr. Alexander Trott had been in any other situation, his first act
would have been to kick the man down-stairs by deputy; or, in other
words, to ring the bell, and desire the landlord to take his boots off.
He contented himself, however, with doubling the fee and explaining
that the letter merely related to a breach of the peace. The top-boots
retired, solemnly pledged to secrecy; and Mr. Alexander Trott sat down
to a fried sole, maintenon cutlet, Madeira, and sundries, with greater
composure than he had experienced since the receipt of Horace Hunter’s
letter of defiance.

The lady who alighted from the London coach had no sooner been
installed in number twenty-five, and made some alteration in her
travelling-dress, than she indited a note to Joseph Overton, esquire,
solicitor, and mayor of Great Winglebury, requesting his immediate
attendance on private business of paramount importance—a summons which
that worthy functionary lost no time in obeying; for after sundry
openings of his eyes, divers ejaculations of ‘Bless me!’ and other
manifestations of surprise, he took his broad-brimmed hat from its
accustomed peg in his little front office, and walked briskly down the
High-street to the Winglebury Arms; through the hall and up the
staircase of which establishment he was ushered by the landlady, and a
crowd of officious waiters, to the door of number twenty-five.

‘Show the gentleman in,’ said the stranger lady, in reply to the
foremost waiter’s announcement. The gentleman was shown in accordingly.

The lady rose from the sofa; the mayor advanced a step from the door;
and there they both paused, for a minute or two, looking at one another
as if by mutual consent. The mayor saw before him a buxom,
richly-dressed female of about forty; the lady looked upon a sleek man,
about ten years older, in drab shorts and continuations, black coat,
neckcloth, and gloves.

‘Miss Julia Manners!’ exclaimed the mayor at length, ‘you astonish me.’

‘That’s very unfair of you, Overton,’ replied Miss Julia, ‘for I have
known you, long enough, not to be surprised at anything you do, and you
might extend equal courtesy to me.’

‘But to run away—actually run away—with a young man!’ remonstrated the
mayor.

‘You wouldn’t have me actually run away with an old one, I presume?’
was the cool rejoinder.

‘And then to ask me—me—of all people in the world—a man of my age and
appearance—mayor of the town—to promote such a scheme!’ pettishly
ejaculated Joseph Overton; throwing himself into an arm-chair, and
producing Miss Julia’s letter from his pocket, as if to corroborate the
assertion that he _had_ been asked.

‘Now, Overton,’ replied the lady, ‘I want your assistance in this
matter, and I must have it. In the lifetime of that poor old dear, Mr.
Cornberry, who—who—’

‘Who was to have married you, and didn’t, because he died first; and
who left you his property unencumbered with the addition of himself,’
suggested the mayor.

‘Well,’ replied Miss Julia, reddening slightly, ‘in the lifetime of the
poor old dear, the property had the incumbrance of your management; and
all I will say of that, is, that I only wonder it didn’t die of
consumption instead of its master. You helped yourself then:—help me
now.’

Mr. Joseph Overton was a man of the world, and an attorney; and as
certain indistinct recollections of an odd thousand pounds or two,
appropriated by mistake, passed across his mind he hemmed
deprecatingly, smiled blandly, remained silent for a few seconds; and
finally inquired, ‘What do you wish me to do?’

‘I’ll tell you,’ replied Miss Julia—‘I’ll tell you in three words. Dear
Lord Peter—’

‘That’s the young man, I suppose—’ interrupted the mayor.

‘That’s the young Nobleman,’ replied the lady, with a great stress on
the last word. ‘Dear Lord Peter is considerably afraid of the
resentment of his family; and we have therefore thought it better to
make the match a stolen one. He left town, to avoid suspicion, on a
visit to his friend, the Honourable Augustus Flair, whose seat, as you
know, is about thirty miles from this, accompanied only by his
favourite tiger. We arranged that I should come here alone in the
London coach; and that he, leaving his tiger and cab behind him, should
come on, and arrive here as soon as possible this afternoon.’

‘Very well,’ observed Joseph Overton, ‘and then he can order the
chaise, and you can go on to Gretna Green together, without requiring
the presence or interference of a third party, can’t you?’

‘No,’ replied Miss Julia. ‘We have every reason to believe—dear Lord
Peter not being considered very prudent or sagacious by his friends,
and they having discovered his attachment to me—that, immediately on
his absence being observed, pursuit will be made in this direction:—to
elude which, and to prevent our being traced, I wish it to be
understood in this house, that dear Lord Peter is slightly deranged,
though perfectly harmless; and that I am, unknown to him, awaiting his
arrival to convey him in a post-chaise to a private asylum—at Berwick,
say. If I don’t show myself much, I dare say I can manage to pass for
his mother.’

The thought occurred to the mayor’s mind that the lady might show
herself a good deal without fear of detection; seeing that she was
about double the age of her intended husband. He said nothing, however,
and the lady proceeded.

‘With the whole of this arrangement dear Lord Peter is acquainted; and
all I want you to do, is, to make the delusion more complete by giving
it the sanction of your influence in this place, and assigning this as
a reason to the people of the house for my taking the young gentleman
away. As it would not be consistent with the story that I should see
him until after he has entered the chaise, I also wish you to
communicate with him, and inform him that it is all going on well.’

‘Has he arrived?’ inquired Overton.

‘I don’t know,’ replied the lady.

‘Then how am I to know!’ inquired the mayor. ‘Of course he will not
give his own name at the bar.’

‘I begged him, immediately on his arrival, to write you a note,’
replied Miss Manners; ‘and to prevent the possibility of our project
being discovered through its means, I desired him to write anonymously,
and in mysterious terms, to acquaint you with the number of his room.’

‘Bless me!’ exclaimed the mayor, rising from his seat, and searching
his pockets—‘most extraordinary circumstance—he has arrived—mysterious
note left at my house in a most mysterious manner, just before
yours—didn’t know what to make of it before, and certainly shouldn’t
have attended to it.—Oh! here it is.’ And Joseph Overton pulled out of
an inner coat-pocket the identical letter penned by Alexander Trott.
‘Is this his lordship’s hand?’

‘Oh yes,’ replied Julia; ‘good, punctual creature! I have not seen it
more than once or twice, but I know he writes very badly and very
large. These dear, wild young noblemen, you know, Overton—’

‘Ay, ay, I see,’ replied the mayor.—‘Horses and dogs, play and
wine—grooms, actresses, and cigars—the stable, the green-room, the
saloon, and the tavern; and the legislative assembly at last.’

‘Here’s what he says,’ pursued the mayor; ‘“Sir,—A young gentleman in
number nineteen at the Winglebury Arms, is bent on committing a rash
act to-morrow morning at an early hour.” (That’s good—he means
marrying.) “If you have any regard for the peace of this town, or the
preservation of one—it may be two—human lives”—What the deuce does he
mean by that?’

‘That he’s so anxious for the ceremony, he will expire if it’s put off,
and that I may possibly do the same,’ replied the lady with great
complacency.

‘Oh! I see—not much fear of that;—well—“two human lives, you will cause
him to be removed to-night.” (He wants to start at once.) “Fear not to
do this on your responsibility: for to-morrow the absolute necessity of
the proceeding will be but too apparent. Remember: number nineteen. The
name is Trott. No delay; for life and death depend upon your
promptitude.” Passionate language, certainly. Shall I see him?’

‘Do,’ replied Miss Julia; ‘and entreat him to act his part well. I am
half afraid of him. Tell him to be cautious.’

‘I will,’ said the mayor.

‘Settle all the arrangements.’

‘I will,’ said the mayor again.

‘And say I think the chaise had better be ordered for one o’clock.’

‘Very well,’ said the mayor once more; and, ruminating on the absurdity
of the situation in which fate and old acquaintance had placed him, he
desired a waiter to herald his approach to the temporary representative
of number nineteen.

The announcement, ‘Gentleman to speak with you, sir,’ induced Mr. Trott
to pause half-way in the glass of port, the contents of which he was in
the act of imbibing at the moment; to rise from his chair; and retreat
a few paces towards the window, as if to secure a retreat, in the event
of the visitor assuming the form and appearance of Horace Hunter. One
glance at Joseph Overton, however, quieted his apprehensions. He
courteously motioned the stranger to a seat. The waiter, after a little
jingling with the decanter and glasses, consented to leave the room;
and Joseph Overton, placing the broad-brimmed hat on the chair next
him, and bending his body gently forward, opened the business by saying
in a very low and cautious tone,

‘My lord—’

‘Eh?’ said Mr. Alexander Trott, in a loud key, with the vacant and
mystified stare of a chilly somnambulist.

‘Hush—hush!’ said the cautious attorney: ‘to be sure—quite right—no
titles here—my name is Overton, sir.’

‘Overton?’

‘Yes: the mayor of this place—you sent me a letter with anonymous
information, this afternoon.’

‘I, sir?’ exclaimed Trott with ill-dissembled surprise; for, coward as
he was, he would willingly have repudiated the authorship of the letter
in question. ‘I, sir?’

‘Yes, you, sir; did you not?’ responded Overton, annoyed with what he
supposed to be an extreme degree of unnecessary suspicion. ‘Either this
