The Project Gutenberg EBook of Human Personality and its Survival of
Bodily Death, by Frederick W. H. Myers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death

Author: Frederick W. H. Myers

Editor: Leopold Hamilton Myers

Release Date: January 3, 2012 [EBook #38492]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUMAN PERSONALITY ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)








HUMAN PERSONALITY

AND ITS SURVIVAL OF
BODILY DEATH

BY
FREDERIC W. H. MYERS

EDITED AND ABRIDGED
BY HIS SON
LEOPOLD HAMILTON MYERS

                            _Cessas in vota procesque,
    Tros, ait, Aenea, cessas? Neque enim ante dehiscent
    Adtonitœ magna ora domus._--VIRGIL.

    "_Nay!" quoth the Sybil, "Trojan! wilt thou spare
    The impassioned effort and the conquering prayer?
    Nay! not save thus those doors shall open roll,--
    That Power within them burst upon the soul._"

_NEW IMPRESSION_

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON FOURTH AVENUE & 30TH
STREET, NEW YORK BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, AND MADRAS
1918

COPYRIGHT, 1906, BY
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.

_All rights reserved_

First Edition, December, 1906
Reprinted, March, 1907
October, 1909; April, 1913
August, 1917; April, 1918

THE PLIMPTON PRESS
NORWOOD·MASS·U·S·A




_DEDICATED_
TO
HENRY SIDGWICK
AND
EDMUND GURNEY




CONTENTS


                                          PAGE

EDITOR'S NOTE                              vii

PREFACE                                     ix

GLOSSARY                                  xiii


CHAP.

   I. INTRODUCTION                           1

  II. DISINTEGRATIONS OF PERSONALITY        26

 III. GENIUS                                55

  IV. SLEEP                                 93

   V. HYPNOTISM                            116

  VI. SENSORY AUTOMATISM                   168

 VII. PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD                212

VIII. MOTOR AUTOMATISM                     254

  IX. TRANCE, POSSESSION, AND ECSTASY      297

   X. EPILOGUE                             340

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER II                   356

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER IV                   364

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER V                    378

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER VI                   384

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER VII                  400

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER VIII                 430

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER IX                   441

INDEX                                      453




EDITOR'S NOTE


Nearly four years have elapsed since the first appearance of my Father's
book "Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death." It cost two
guineas and was published in two volumes, each of which was little under
700 pages in length.

The price and dimensions of such a work made the future issue of a more
popular edition not improbable. Indeed, my Father himself indicated
briefly the lines on which an abridgment could best be made. In
accordance with his indications I have endeavoured to keep as closely as
possible to the original scheme and construction of the book.

The task of abridging, however, must always be an ungrateful one. It is
inevitable that somewhere or other I should disappoint the reader who,
already acquainted with the unabridged edition, finds some admired
passage curtailed in favour of others that are to him of secondary
interest. This I cannot avoid. All I can hope to do is so to reconcile
the principles of _omission_ and _condensation_ as least to do violence
to the style while preserving as far as possible the completeness of the
exposition.

One half of each volume in the unabridged edition consists of appendices
containing examples of the various kinds of phenomena discussed and
analyzed in the text. It has been possible to reduce considerably the
number of these cases without, I think, detracting much from the value
of the work for the purposes of the ordinary reader. Those cases,
however, which are included in this edition are quoted in full, an
abridged version having very little value.

It must be remembered that the author in his preface insists that "the
book is an exposition rather than a proof," and the remark naturally
applies with even greater force to this abridgment. Here the cases must
be regarded simply as illustrative of the different types of the
evidence upon which _in its entirety_ the argument of the book
ultimately rests.

The reader who may feel disposed to study this evidence will find
numerous references given in the foot-notes. The cases, however, to
which he is thus referred are scattered in many different publications,
some of which will probably be less easy of access than the unabridged
edition. In the many instances, therefore, where a case is quoted in
the latter its place therein is indicated by means of a number or a
number and letter in square brackets, thus [434 A]: these being in
accordance with the plan of arrangement observed in the larger book.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wish to express my sincere thanks to Miss Alice Johnson, who very
kindly read over the whole of the proof of this abridgment. I have
profited largely by her advice as well as from that given me by Miss
Jane Barlow, to whom my thanks are also due.

L. H. M.




PREFACE


     [This unfinished preface consists of several passages written at
     different times by the author, who died on January 17th, 1901. In
     1896 he arranged that the completion of his book should be in the
     hands of Dr. Richard Hodgson in case of his death before its
     publication. In the meantime he had entrusted the general
     supervision of the press work and much of the detail in marshalling
     the Appendices to Miss Alice Johnson (now Secretary of the Society
     for Psychical Research), who was therefore associated with Dr.
     Hodgson also in the editorial work needed for the completion of the
     book, and much the greater part of the labour involved fell to her
     share.]


The book which is now at last given to the world is but a partial
presentation of an ever-growing subject which I have long hoped to
become able to treat in more adequate fashion. But as knowledge
increases life rolls by, and I have thought it well to bring out while I
can even this most imperfect text-book to a branch of research whose
novelty and strangeness call urgently for some provisional
systematisation, which, by suggesting fresh inquiries and producing
further accumulation of evidence, may tend as speedily as possible to
its own supersession. Few critics of this book can, I think, be more
fully conscious than its author of its defects and its lacunæ; but also
few critics, I think, have yet realised the importance of the new facts
which in some fashion the book does actually present.

Many of these facts have already appeared in _Phantasms of the Living_;
many more in the _Proceedings_ of the Society for Psychical Research;
but they are far indeed from having yet entered into the scientific
consciousness of the age. In future years the wonder, I think, will be
that their announcement was so largely left to a writer with leisure so
scanty, and with scientific equipment so incomplete.

Whatever value this book may possess is in great measure due to other
minds than its actual author's. Its very existence, in the first place,
probably depends upon the existence of the two beloved friends and
invaluable coadjutors to whose memory I dedicate it now.

The help derived from these departed colleagues, Henry Sidgwick and
Edmund Gurney, although of a kind and quantity absolutely essential to
the existence of this work, is not easy to define in all its fulness
under the changed circumstances of to-day. There was indeed much which
is measurable;--much of revision of previous work of my own, of
collaborative experiments, of original thought and discovery. Large
quotations purposely introduced from Edmund Gurney indicate, although
imperfectly, how closely interwoven our work on all these subjects
continued to be until his death. But the benefit which I drew from the
association went deeper still. The conditions under which this inquiry
was undertaken were such as to emphasise the need of some intimate moral
support. A recluse, perhaps, or an eccentric,--or a man living mainly
with his intellectual inferiors, may find it easy to work steadily and
confidently at a task which he knows that the bulk of educated men will
ignore or despise. But this is more difficult for a man who feels
manifold links with his kind, a man whose desire it is to live among
minds equal or superior to his own. It is hard, I say, for such a man to
disregard altogether the expressed or implied disapproval of those
groups of weighty personages to whom in other matters he is accustomed
to look up.

I need not say that the attitude of the scientific world--of all the
intellectual world--then was very much more marked than now. Even now I
write in full consciousness of the low value commonly attached to
inquiries of the kind which I pursue. Even now a book on such a subject
must still expect to evoke, not only legitimate criticism of many kinds,
but also much of that disgust and resentment which novelty and
heterodoxy naturally excite. But I have no wish to exalt into a deed of
daring an enterprise which to the next generation must seem the most
obvious thing in the world. _Nihil ausi nisi vana contemnere_ will
certainly be the highest compliment which what seemed to us our bold
independence of men will receive. Yet gratitude bids me to say that
however I might in the privacy of my own bosom have 'dared to contemn
things contemptible,' I should never have ventured my amateurish
acquirements on a publication of this scale were it not for that slow
growth of confidence which my respect for the judgment of these two
friends inspired. Their countenance and fellowship, which at once
transformed my own share in the work into a delight, has made its
presentation to the world appear as a duty.

My thanks are due also to another colleague who has passed away, my
brother, Dr. A. T. Myers, F.R.C.P., who helped me for many years in all
medical points arising in the work.

To the original furnishers of the evidence my obligations are great and
manifest, and to the Council of the S.P.R. I also owe thanks for
permission to use that evidence freely. But I must leave it to the book
itself to indicate in fuller detail how much is owing to how many men
and women:--how widely diffused are the work and the interest which have
found in this book their temporary outcome and exposition.

The book, indeed, is an exposition rather than a proof. I cannot
summarise within my modest limits the mass of evidence already gathered
together in the sixteen volumes of _Proceedings_ and the nine volumes of
the _Journal_ of the S.P.R., in _Phantasms of the Living_ and other
books hereafter referred to, and in MS. collections. The attempt indeed
would be quite out of place. This branch of knowledge, like others, must
be studied carefully and in detail by those who care to understand or to
advance it.

What I have tried to do here is to render that knowledge more
assimilable by co-ordinating it in a form as clear and intelligible as
my own limited skill and the nature of the facts themselves have
permitted. I have tried to give, in text and in Appendices, enough of
actual evidence to illustrate each step in my argument:--and I have
constantly referred the reader to places where further evidence will be
found.

In minor matters I have aimed above all things at clearness and
readiness in reference. The division of the book into sections, with
Appendices bearing the same numbers, will, it is hoped, facilitate the
use both of syllabus and of references in general. I have even risked
the appearance of pedantry in adding a glossary. Where many unfamiliar
facts and ideas have to be dealt with, time is saved in the end if the
writer explains precisely what his terms mean.

       *       *       *       *       *

F. W. H. MYERS.




GLOSSARY

     NOTE.--The words and phrases here included fall under three main
     heads:--

     (1) Words common only in philosophical or medical use.

     (2) Words or phrases used in psychical research with some special
     significance.

     (3) A few words, distinguished by an asterisk, for which the author
     is himself responsible.


_Aboulia._--Loss of power of willing.

_After-image._--A retinal picture of an object seen after removing the
gaze from the object.

_Agent._--The person who seems to initiate a telepathic transmission.

_Agraphia._--Lack of power to write words.

_Alexia_ or _Word-blindness_.--Lack of power to understand words
written.

_Anæsthesia_, or the loss of sensation generally, must be distinguished
from _analgesia_, or the loss of the sense of pain alone.

_Analgesia._--Insensibility to pain.

_Aphasia._--Incapacity of coherent utterance, not caused by structural
impairment of the vocal organs, but by lesion of the cerebral centres
for speech.

_Aphonia._--Incapacity of uttering sounds.

_Automatic._--Used of mental images arising and movements made without
the initiation, and generally without the concurrence, of conscious
thought and will. _Sensory automatism_ will thus include visual and
auditory hallucinations. _Motor automatism_ will include messages
written and words uttered without intention (automatic script,
trance-utterance, etc.).

_Automnesia._--Spontaneous revival of memories of an earlier condition
of life.

_Autoscope._--Any instrument which reveals a subliminal motor impulse or
sensory impression, _e.g._, a divining rod, a tilting table, or a
planchette.

_Bilocation._--The sensation of being in two different places at once,
namely where one's organism is, and in a place distant from it.

_Catalepsy._--"An intermittent neurosis producing inability to change
the position of a limb, while another person can place the muscles in a
state of flexion or contraction as he will." (Tuke's _Dictionary of
Psychological Medicine_.)

_Centre of Consciousness._--The place where a percipient imagines
himself to be. The point of view from which he seems to himself to be
surveying some phantasmal scene.

_Chromatism._--See _Secondary Sensations_.

_Clair-audience._--The sensation of hearing an internal (but in some way
veridical) voice.

_Clairvoyance_ (_Lucidité_).--The faculty or act of perceiving, as
though visually, with some coincidental truth, some distant scene.

_Cænesthesia._--That consensus or agreement of many organic sensations
which is a fundamental element in our conception of personal identity.

_Control._--This word is used of the intelligence which purports to
communicate messages which are written or uttered by the _automatist_,
_sensitive_ or _medium_.

_*Cosmopathic._--Open to the access of supernormal knowledge or emotion.

_Cryptomnesia._--Submerged or subliminal memory of events forgotten by
the supraliminal self.

_*Dextro-cerebral_ (opposed to _*Sinistro-cerebral_) of left-handed
persons as employing preferentially the _right_ hemisphere of the brain.

_Diathesis._--Habit, capacity, constitutional disposition or tendency.

_Dimorphism._--In crystals the property of assuming two incompatible
forms: in plants and animals, difference of form between members of the
same species. Used of a condition of alternating personalities, in which
memory, character, etc., present themselves at different times in
different forms in the same person.

_Discarnate._--Disembodied, opposed to _incarnate_.

_Disintegration of Personality._--Used of any condition where the sense
of personality is not unitary and continuous: especially when secondary
and transitory personalities intervene.

_Dynamogeny._--The increase of nervous energy by appropriate stimuli,
often opposed to _inhibition_.

_Ecmnesia._--Loss of memory of a period of time.

_*Entencephalic._--On the analogy of _entoptic_: of sensations, etc.,
which have their origin within the brain, not in the external world.

_Eugenics._--The science of improving the race.

_Falsidical._--Of hallucinations _delusive_, _i.e._, when there is
nothing objective to which they correspond. The correlative term to
_veridical_.

_Glossolaly._--"Speaking with tongues," _i.e._, automatic utterance of
words not belonging to any real language.

_Hallucination._--Any sensory perception which has no objective
counterpart within the field of vision, hearing, etc., is termed a
hallucination.

_Heteræsthesia._--A form of sensibility decidedly different from any of
those which can be referred to the action of the known senses.

_Hyperboulia._--Increased power over the organism,--resembling the power
which we call _will_ when it is exercised over the voluntary
muscles,--which is seen in the bodily changes effected by
self-suggestion.

_Hyperæsthesia._--Unusual acuteness of the senses.

_Hypermnesia._--"Over-activity of the memory; a condition in which past
acts, feelings, or ideas are brought vividly to the mind, which, in its
normal condition, has wholly lost the remembrance of them." (Tuke's
_Dict._)

_*Hyperpromethia._--Supernormal power of foresight.

_Hypnagogic._--_Illusions hypnagogiques_ (Maury) are the vivid illusions
of sight or sound--"faces in the dark," etc.--which sometimes accompany
the oncoming of sleep. To similar illusions accompanying the _departure_
of sleep, as when a dream-figure persists for a few moments into waking
life, I have given the name _*hypnopompic_.

_Hypnogenous zones._--Regions by pressure on which hypnosis is induced
in some hysterical persons.

_*Hypnopompic._--See _Hypnagogic_.

_Hysteria._--"A disordered condition of the nervous system, the
anatomical seat and nature of which are unknown to medical science, but
of which the symptoms consist in well-marked and very varied
disturbances of nerve-function" (_Ency. Brit._). Hysterical affections
are not dependent on any discoverable lesion.

_Hysterogenous zones._--Points or tracts on the skin of a hysterical
person, pressure on which will induce a hysterical attack.

_Ideational._--Used of impressions which display some distinct notion,
but not of sensory nature.

_Induced._--Of hallucinations, etc., intentionally produced.

_Levitation._--A raising of objects from the ground by supposed
supernormal means; especially of living persons.

_Medium._--A person through whom communication is deemed to be carried
on between living men and spirits of the departed. It is often better
replaced by _automatist_ or _sensitive_.

_Message._--Used for any communication, not necessarily verbal, from one
to another stratum of the automatist's personality, or from an external
intelligence to the automatist's mind.

_Metallæsthesia._--A form of sensibility alleged to exist which enables
some hypnotised or hysterical subjects to discriminate between the
contacts of various metals by sensations not derived from their ordinary
properties of weight, etc.

_Metastasis._--Change of the seat of a bodily function from one place
(_e.g._, brain-centre) to another.

_*Metetherial._--That which appears to lie after or beyond the ether:
the metetherial environment denotes the spiritual or transcendental
world in which the soul may be supposed to exist.

_*Methectic._--Of communications between one stratum of a man's
intelligence and another.

_Mirror-writing_ (_écriture renversée, Spiegel-schrift_).--Writing so
inverted, or, more exactly, _perverted_, as to resemble writing
reflected in a mirror.

_Mnemonic chain._--A continuous series of memories, especially when the
continuity persists after an interruption.

_Motor._--Used of an impulse to action not carrying with it any definite
idea or sensory impression.

_Negative hallucination_ or _systematised anæthesia_.--Signifies the
condition of an entranced subject who, as the result of a suggestion, is
unable to perceive some object or to hear some sound, etc.

_Number forms._--See _Secondary sensations_.

_Objectify._--To externalize a phantom as if it were a material object;
to see it as a part of the waking world.

_*Panmnesia._--A potential recollection of all impressions.

_Paræsthesia._--Erroneous or morbid sensation.

_Paramnesia._--All forms of erroneous memory.

_Paraphasia._--The erroneous and involuntary use of one word for
another.

_Percipient._--The correlative term to Agent; the person on whose mind
the telepathic impact falls; or, more generally, the person who
perceives any motor or sensory impression.

_Phantasm and Phantom._--Phantasm and phantom are, of course, mere
variants of the same word; but since phantom has become generally
restricted to _visual_ hallucinations, it is convenient to take phantasm
to cover a wider range, and to signify any hallucinatory sensory
impression, whatever sense--whether sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste,
or diffused sensibility--may happen to be affected.

_Phantasmogenetic centre._--A point in space apparently modified by a
spirit in such a way that persons present near it perceive a phantasm.

_Phobies._--Irrational restricting or disabling preoccupations or fears;
_e.g._, _agoraphobia_, fear of open spaces.

_Photism._--See _Secondary sensations_.

_Point de repère._--Guiding mark. Used of some (generally inconspicuous)
real object which a hallucinated subject sometimes sees as the nucleus
of his hallucination, and the movements of which suggest corresponding
movements of the hallucinatory object.

_Polyzoism._--The property, in a complex organism, of being composed of
minor and quasi-independent organisms. This is sometimes called
"colonial constitution," from animal _colonies_.

_Possession._--A developed form of motor automatism, in which the
automatist's own personality disappears for a time, while there appears
to be a more or less complete substitution of personality, writing or
speech being given by another spirit through the entranced organism.

_Post-hypnotic._--Used of a suggestion given during the hypnotic trance,
but intended to operate after that trance has ceased.

_Precognition._--Knowledge of impending events supernormally acquired.

_Premonition._--A supernormal indication of any kind of event still in
the future.

_*Preversion._--A tendency to characteristics assumed to lie at a
further point of the evolutionary progress of a species than has yet
been reached; opposed to reversion.

_*Promnesia._--The paradoxical sensation of recollecting a scene which
is only now occurring for the first time; the sense of the _déjà vu_.

_*Psychorrhagy._--A special idiosyncrasy which tends to make the
phantasm of a person easily perceptible; the breaking loose of a
psychical element, definable mainly by its power of producing a
phantasm, perceptible by one or more persons, in some portion of space.

_*Psychorrhagic diathesis._--A habit or capacity of detaching some
psychical element, involuntarily and without purpose, in such a manner
as to produce a phantasm.

_Psycho-therapeutics._--"Treatment of disease by the influence of the
mind on the body." (Tuke's _Dict._)

_Reciprocal._--Used of cases where there is both agency and percipience
at each end of the telepathic chain, so that A perceives P, and P
perceives A also.

_*Retrocognition._--Knowledge of the past, supernormally acquired.

_Secondary personality._--It sometimes happens, as the result of shock,
disease, or unknown causes, that an individual experiences an alteration
of memory and character, amounting to a change of personality, which
generally seems to have come on during sleep. The new personality is in
that case termed _secondary_, in distinction to the original, or
_primary_, personality.

_Secondary sensations_ (_Secunddrempfindungen_, _audition colorée_,
_sound-seeing_, _synæsthesia_, _etc._).--With some persons every
sensation of one type is accompanied by a sensation of another type; as
for instance, a special sound may be accompanied by a special sensation
of colour or light (_chromatisms_ or _photisms_). This phenomenon is
analogous to that of _number-forms_,--a kind of diagrammatic mental
picture which accompanies the conception of a progression of numbers.
See Galton's _Inquiries into Human Faculty_.

_Shell-hearing._--The induction of hallucinatory voices, etc., by
listening to a shell. Analogous to crystal-gazing.

_Stigmatisation._--The production of blisters or other cutaneous changes
on the hands, feet, or elsewhere, by suggestion or self-suggestion.

_Subliminal._--Of thoughts, feelings, etc., lying beneath the ordinary
_threshold_ (_limen_) of consciousness, as opposed to _supraliminal_,
lying _above_ the threshold.

_Suggestion._--The process of effectively impressing upon the subliminal
intelligence the wishes of some other person. _Self-suggestion_ means a
suggestion conveyed by the subject himself from one stratum of his
personality to another, without external intervention.

_*Supernormal._--Of a faculty or phenomenon which transcends ordinary
experience. Used in preference to the word _supernatural_, as not
assuming that there is anything outside nature or any arbitrary
interference with natural law.

_Supraliminal._--See _Subliminal_.

_Synæsthesia._--See _Secondary Sensations_.

_Synergy._--A number of actions correlated together, or combined into a
group.

_Telekinesis._--Used of alleged supernormal movements of objects, not
due to any known force.

_*Telepathy._--The communication of impressions of any kind from one
mind to another, independently of the recognised channels of sense.

_*Telæsthesia._--Any direct sensation or perception of objects or
conditions independently of the recognised channels of sense, and also
under such circumstances that no known mind external to the percipient's
can be suggested as the source of the knowledge thus gained.

_*Telergy._--The force exercised by the mind of an agent in impressing a
percipient,--involving a direct influence of the extraneous spirit on
the brain or organism of the percipient.

_Veridical._--Of hallucinations, when they correspond to real events
happening elsewhere and unknown to the percipient.




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

    Maior agit deus, atque opera la maiora remittit.

    --VIRGIL.


In the long story of man's endeavours to understand his own environment
and to govern his own fates, there is one gap or omission so singular
that, however we may afterwards contrive to explain the fact, its simple
statement has the air of a paradox. Yet it is strictly true to say that
man has never yet applied to the problems which most profoundly concern
him those methods of inquiry which in attacking all other problems he
has found the most efficacious.

The question for man most momentous of all is whether or no he has an
immortal soul; or--to avoid the word _immortal_, which belongs to the
realm of infinities--whether or no his personality involves any element
which can survive bodily death. In this direction have always lain the
gravest fears, the farthest-reaching hopes, which could either oppress
or stimulate mortal minds.

On the other hand, the method which our race has found most effective in
acquiring knowledge is by this time familiar to all men. It is the
method of modern Science--that process which consists in an
interrogation of Nature entirely dispassionate, patient, systematic;
such careful experiment and cumulative record as can often elicit from
her slightest indications her deepest truths. That method is now
dominant throughout the civilised world; and although in many directions
experiments may be difficult and dubious, facts rare and elusive,
Science works slowly on and bides her time,--refusing to fall back upon
tradition or to launch into speculation, merely because strait is the
gate which leads to valid discovery, indisputable truth.

I say, then, that this method has never yet been applied to the
all-important problem of the existence, the powers, the destiny of the
human soul.

Nor is this strange omission due to any general belief that the problem
is in its nature incapable of solution by any observation whatever which
mankind could make. That resolutely agnostic view--I may almost say that
scientific superstition--"_ignoramus et ignorabimus_"--is no doubt held
at the present date by many learned minds. But it has never been the
creed, nor is it now the creed, of the human race generally. In most
civilised countries there has been for nearly two thousand years a
distinct belief that survival has actually been proved by certain
phenomena observed at a given date in Palestine. And beyond the
Christian pale--whether through reason, instinct, or superstition--it
has ever been commonly held that ghostly phenomena of one kind or
another exist to testify to a life beyond the life we know.

But, nevertheless, neither those who believe on vague grounds nor those
who believe on definite grounds that the question might possibly be
solved, or has actually been solved, by human observation of objective
facts, have hitherto made any serious attempt to connect and correlate
that belief with the general scheme of belief for which Science already
vouches. They have not sought for fresh corroborative instances, for
analogies, for explanations; rather they have kept their convictions on
these fundamental matters in a separate and sealed compartment of their
minds, a compartment consecrated to religion or to superstition, but not
to observation or to experiment.

It is my object in the present work--as it has from the first been the
object of the Society for Psychical Research, on whose behalf most of
the evidence here set forth has been collected,--to do what can be done
to break down that artificial wall of demarcation which has thus far
excluded from scientific treatment precisely the problems which stand in
most need of all the aids to discovery which such treatment can afford.

Yet let me first explain that by the word "scientific" I signify an
authority to which I submit myself--not a standard which I claim to
attain. Any science of which I can here speak as possible must be a
_nascent_ science--not such as one of those vast systems of connected
knowledge which thousands of experts now steadily push forward in
laboratories in every land--but such as each one of those great sciences
was in its dim and poor beginning, when a few monks groped among the
properties of "the noble metals," or a few Chaldean shepherds outwatched
the setting stars.

What I am able to insist upon is the mere Socratic rudiment of these
organisms of exact thought--the first axiomatic prerequisite of any
valid progress. My one contention is that in the discussion of the
deeper problems of man's nature and destiny there ought to be exactly
the same openness of mind, exactly the same diligence in the search for
objective evidence of any kind, exactly the same critical analysis of
results, as is habitually shown, for instance, in the discussion of the
nature and destiny of the planet upon which man now moves.

Obvious truism although this statement may at first seem, it will
presently be found, I think, that those who subscribe to it are in fact
committing themselves to inquiries of a wider and stranger type than any
to which they are accustomed;--are stepping outside certain narrow
limits within which, by ancient convention, disputants on either side of
these questions are commonly confined.

A brief recall to memory of certain familiar historical facts will serve
to make my meaning clearer. Let us consider how it has come about that,
whereas the problem of man's survival of death is by most persons
regarded as a problem in its nature soluble by sufficient evidence, and
whereas to many persons the traditional evidence commonly adduced
appears insufficient,--nevertheless no serious effort has been made on
either side to discover whether other and more recent evidence can or
cannot be brought forward.

A certain broad answer to this inquiry, although it cannot be said to be
at all points familiar, is not in reality far to seek. It is an answer
which would seem strange indeed to some visitant from a planet peopled
wholly by scientific minds. Yet among a race like our own, concerned
first and primarily to live and work with thoughts undistracted from
immediate needs, the answer is natural enough. For the fact simply is
that the intimate importance of this central problem has barred the way
to its methodical, its scientific solution.

There are some beliefs for which mankind cannot afford to wait. "What
must I do to be saved?" is a question quite otherwise urgent than the
cause of the tides or the meaning of the marks on the moon. Men must
settle roughly somehow what it is that from the Unseen World they have
reason to fear or to hope. Beliefs grow up in direct response to this
need of belief; in order to support themselves they claim unique
sanction; and thus along with these specific beliefs grows also the
general habit of regarding matters that concern that Unseen World as
somehow tabooed or segregated from ordinary observation or inquiry.

Let us pass from generalities to the actual history of Western
civilisation. In an age when scattered ritual, local faiths--tribal
solutions of cosmic problems--were destroying each other by mere contact
and fusion, an event occurred which in the brief record of man's still
incipient civilisation may be regarded as unique. A life was lived in
which the loftiest response which man's need of moral guidance had ever
received was corroborated by phenomena which have been widely regarded
as convincingly miraculous, and which are said to have culminated in a
Resurrection from the dead. To those phenomena or to that Resurrection
it would at this point be illegitimate for me to refer in defence of my
argument. I have appealed to Science, and to Science I must go;--in the
sense that it would be unfair for me to claim support from that which
Science in her strictness can set aside as the tradition of a
pre-scientific age. Yet this one great tradition, as we know, has, as a
fact, won the adhesion and reverence of the great majority of European
minds. The complex results which followed from this triumph of
Christianity have been discussed by many historians. But one result
which here appears to us in a new light was this--that the Christian
religion, the Christian Church, became for Europe the accredited
representative and guardian of all phenomena bearing upon the World
Unseen. So long as Christianity stood dominant, all phenomena which
seemed to transcend experience were absorbed in her realm--were
accounted as minor indications of the activity of her angels or of her
fiends. And when Christianity was seriously attacked, these minor
manifestations passed unconsidered. The priests thought it safest to
defend their own traditions, their own intuitions, without going afield
in search of independent evidence of a spiritual world. Their assailants
kept their powder and shot for the orthodox ramparts, ignoring any
isolated strongholds which formed no part of the main line of defence.

Meantime, indeed, the laws of Nature held their wonted way. As ever,
that which the years had once brought they brought again; and every here
and there some marvel, liker to the old stories than any one cared to
assert, cropped up between superstition on the one hand and contemptuous
indifference on the other. Witchcraft, Swedenborgianism, Mesmerism,
Spiritism--these especially, amid many minor phenomena, stood out in
turn as precursory of the inevitable wider inquiry. A very few words on
each of these four movements may suffice here to show their connection
with my present theme.

_Witchcraft._--The lesson which witchcraft teaches with regard to the
validity of human testimony is the more remarkable because it was so
long and so completely misunderstood. The belief in witches long
passed--as well it might--as the culminant example of human ignorance
and folly; and in so comparatively recent a book as Mr. Lecky's "History
of Rationalism," the sudden decline of this popular conviction, without
argument or disapproval, is used to illustrate the irresistible melting
away of error and falsity in the "intellectual climate" of a wiser age.
Since about 1880, however, when French experiments especially had
afforded conspicuous examples of what a hysterical woman could come to
believe under suggestion from others or from herself, it has begun to be
felt that the phenomena of witchcraft were very much what the phenomena
of the Salpêtrière would seem to be to the patients themselves, if left
alone in the hospital without a medical staff. And in _Phantasms of the
Living_, Edmund Gurney, after subjecting the literature of witchcraft to
a more careful analysis than any one till then had thought it worth
while to apply, was able to show that practically all recorded
first-hand depositions (made apart from torture) in the long story of
witchcraft may quite possibly have been _true_, to the best belief of
the deponents; true, that is to say, as representing the conviction of
sane (though often hysterical) persons, who merely made the almost
inevitable mistake of confusing self-suggested hallucinations with
waking fact. Nay, even the insensible spots on the witches were no doubt
really anæsthetic--involved a first discovery of a now familiar clinical
symptom--the _zones analgésiques_ of the patients of Pitres or Charcot.
Witchcraft, in fact, was a gigantic, a cruel psychological and
pathological experiment conducted by inquisitors upon hysteria; but it
was conducted in the dark, and when the barbarous explanation dropped
out of credence much of possible discovery was submerged as well.

_Mesmer._--Again, the latent possibilities of "suggestion,"--though not
yet under that name, and mingled with who knows what else?--broke forth
into a blaze in the movement headed by Mesmer;--at once discoverer and
charlatan. Again the age was unripe, and scientific opposition, although
not so formidable as the religious opposition which had sent witches to
the stake, was yet strong enough to check for the second time the
struggling science. Hardly till our own generation--hardly even now--has
a third effort found better acceptance, and hypnotism and
psycho-therapeutics, in which every well-attested fact of witchcraft or
of mesmerism finds, if not its explanation, at least its parallel, are
establishing themselves as a recognised and advancing method of
relieving human ills.

This brief sketch of the development as it were by successive impulses,
under strong disbelief and discouragement, of a group of mental
tendencies, faculties, or sensibilities now recognised as truly existing
and as often salutary, is closely paralleled by the development, under
similar difficulties, of another group of faculties or sensibilities,
whose existence is still disputed, but which if firmly established may
prove to be of even greater moment for mankind.

At no time known to us, whether before or since the Christian era, has
the series of _trance-manifestations_,--of supposed communications with
a supernal world,--entirely ceased. Sometimes, as in the days of St.
Theresa, such trance or ecstasy has been, one may say, the central or
culminant fact in the Christian world. Of these experiences I must not
here treat. The evidence for them is largely of a subjective type, and
they may belong more fitly to some future discussion as to the amount of
confidence due to the interpretation given by entranced persons to their
own phenomena.

But in the midst of this long series, and in full analogy to many minor
cases, occurs the exceptional trance-history of Emmanuel Swedenborg. In
this case, as is well known, there appears to have been excellent
objective evidence both of clairvoyance or telæsthesia[1] and of
communication with departed persons;--and we can only regret that the
philosopher Kant, who satisfied himself of some part of Swedenborg's
supernormal[2] gift, did not press further an inquiry surpassed in
importance by none of those upon which his master-mind was engaged.
Apart, however, from these objective evidences, the mere subject-matter
of Swedenborg's trance-revelations was enough to claim respectful
attention. I cannot here discuss the strange mixture which they present
of slavish literalism with exalted speculation, of pedantic orthodoxy
with physical and moral insight far beyond the level of that age. It is
enough to say here that even as Socrates called down philosophy from
heaven to earth, so in a somewhat different sense it was Swedenborg who
called up philosophy again from earth to heaven;--who originated the
notion of science in the spiritual world, as earnestly, though not so
persuasively, as Socrates originated the idea of science in this world
which we seem to know. It was to Swedenborg first that that unseen world
appeared before all things as a realm of law; a region not of mere
emotional vagueness or stagnancy of adoration, but of definite progress
according to definite relations of cause and effect, resulting from
structural laws of spiritual existence and intercourse which we may in
time learn partially to apprehend. For my own part I regard
Swedenborg,--not, assuredly, as an inspired teacher, nor even as a
trustworthy interpreter of his own experiences,--but yet as a true and
early precursor of that great inquiry which it is our present object to
advance.

The next pioneer--fortunately still amongst us--whom I must mention even
in this summary notice, is the celebrated physicist and chemist, Sir W.
Crookes. Just as Swedenborg was the first leading man of science who
distinctly conceived of the spiritual world as a world of law, so was
Sir W. Crookes the first leading man of science who seriously
endeavoured to test the alleged mutual influence and interpenetration of
the spiritual world and our own by experiments of scientific
precision.[3] Beyond the establishment of certain supernormal facts
Crookes declined to go. But a large group of persons have founded upon
these and similar facts a scheme of belief known as Modern Spiritualism,
or Spiritism. Later chapters in this book will show how much I owe to
certain observations made by members of this group--how often my own
conclusions concur with conclusions at which they have previously
arrived. And yet this work of mine is in large measure a critical attack
upon the main Spiritist position, as held, say, by Mr. A. R. Wallace,
its most eminent living supporter,--the belief, namely, that all or
almost all supernormal phenomena are due to the action of spirits of the
dead. By far the larger proportion, as I hold, are due to the action of
the still embodied spirit of the agent or percipient himself. Apart from
speculative differences, moreover, I altogether dissent from the
conversion into a sectarian creed of what I hold should be a branch of
scientific inquiry, growing naturally out of our existing knowledge. It
is, I believe, largely to this temper of uncritical acceptance,
degenerating often into blind credulity, that we must refer the lack of
progress in Spiritualistic literature, and the encouragement which has
often been bestowed upon manifest fraud,--so often, indeed, as to create
among scientific men a strong indisposition to the study of phenomena
recorded or advocated in a tone so alien from Science.

I know not how much of originality or importance may be attributed by
subsequent students of the subject to the step next in order in this
series of approximations. To those immediately concerned, the feeling of
a new departure was inevitably given by the very smallness of the
support which they for a long time received, and by the difficulty
which they found in making their point of view intelligible to the
scientific, to the religious, or even to the spiritualistic world. In
about 1873--at the crest, as one may say, of perhaps the highest wave of
materialism which has ever swept over these shores--it became the
conviction of a small group of Cambridge friends that the deep questions
thus at issue must be fought out in a way more thorough than the
champions either of religion or of materialism had yet suggested. Our
attitudes of mind were in some ways different; but to myself, at least,
it seemed that no adequate attempt had yet been made even to determine
whether anything could be learnt as to an unseen world or no; for that
if anything were knowable about such a world in such fashion that
Science could adopt and maintain that knowledge, it must be discovered
by no analysis of tradition, and by no manipulation of metaphysics, but
simply by experiment and observation;--simply by the application to
phenomena within us and around us of precisely the same methods of
deliberate, dispassionate, exact inquiry which have built up our actual
knowledge of the world which we can touch and see. I can hardly even now
guess to how many of my readers this will seem a truism, and to how many
a paradox. Truism or paradox, such a thought suggested a kind of effort,
which, so far as we could discover, had never yet been made. For what
seemed needful was an inquiry of quite other scope than the mere
analysis of historical documents, or of the _origines_ of any alleged
revelation in the past. It must be an inquiry resting primarily, as all
scientific inquiries in the stricter sense now must rest, upon objective
facts actually observable, upon experiments which we can repeat to-day,
and which we may hope to carry further to-morrow. It must be an inquiry
based, to use an old term, on the uniformitarian hypothesis; on the
presumption, that is to say, that _if a spiritual world exists, and if
that world has at any epoch been manifest or even discoverable, then it
ought to be manifest or discoverable now_.

It was from this side, and from these general considerations, that the
group with which I have worked approached the subject. Our methods, our
canons, were all to make. In those early days we were more devoid of
precedents, of guidance, even of criticism that went beyond mere
expressions of contempt, than is now readily conceived. Seeking evidence
as best we could--collecting round us a small group of persons willing
to help in that quest for residual phenomena in the nature and
experience of man--we were at last fortunate enough to discover a
convergence of experimental and of spontaneous evidence upon one
definite and important point. We were led to believe that there was
truth in a thesis which at least since Swedenborg and the early
mesmerists had been repeatedly, but cursorily and ineffectually,
presented to mankind--the thesis that a communication can take place
from mind to mind without the agency of the recognised organs of sense.
We found that this agency, discernible even on trivial occasions by
suitable experiment, seemed to connect itself with an agency more
intense, or at any rate more recognisable, which operated at moments of
crisis or at the hour of death. Edmund Gurney--the invaluable
collaborator and friend whose loss in 1888 was our heaviest
discouragement--set forth this evidence in a large work, _Phantasms of
the Living_, in whose preparation Mr. Podmore and I took a minor part.
The fifteen years which have elapsed since the publication of this book
in 1886 have added to the evidence on which Gurney relied, and have
shown (I venture to say) the general soundness of the canons of evidence
and the lines of argument which it was his task to shape and to
employ.[4]

Of fundamental importance, indeed, is this doctrine of telepathy--the
first law, may one not say?--laid open to man's discovery, which, in my
view at least, while operating in the material, is itself a law of the
spiritual or _metetherial_ world. In the course of this work it will be
my task to show in many connections how far-reaching are the
implications of this direct and supersensory communion of mind with
mind. Among those implications none can be more momentous than the light
thrown by this discovery upon man's intimate nature and possible
survival of death.

We gradually discovered that the accounts of apparitions at the moment
of death--testifying to a supersensory communication between the dying
man and the friend who sees him--led on without perceptible break to
apparitions occurring after the death of the person seen, but while that
death was yet unknown to the percipient, and thus apparently due, not to
mere brooding memory, but to a continued action of that departed spirit.
The task next incumbent on us therefore seemed plainly to be the
collection and analysis of evidence of this and other types, pointing
directly to the survival of man's spirit. But after pursuing this task
for some years I felt that in reality the step from the action of
embodied to the action of disembodied spirits would still seem too
sudden if taken in this direct way. So far, indeed, as the evidence from
apparitions went, the series seemed continuous from phantasms of the
living to phantasms of the dead. But the whole mass of evidence _primâ
facie_ pointing to man's survival was of a much more complex kind. It
consisted largely, for example, in written or spoken utterances, coming
through the hand or voice of living men, but claiming to proceed from a
disembodied source. To these utterances, as a whole, no satisfactory
criterion had ever been applied.

In considering cases of this kind, then, it became gradually plain to me
that before we could safely mark off any group of manifestations as
definitely implying an influence from beyond the grave, there was need
of a more searching review of the capacities of man's incarnate
personality than psychologists unfamiliar with this new evidence had
thought it worth their while to undertake.

It was only slowly, and as it were of necessity, that I embarked on a
task which needed for its proper accomplishment a knowledge and training
far beyond what I could claim. The very inadequate sketch which has
resulted from my efforts is even in its author's view no more than
preparatory and precursive to the fuller and sounder treatment of the
same subject which I doubt not that the new century will receive from
more competent hands. The truest success of this book will lie in its
rapid supersession by a better. For this will show that at least I have
not erred in supposing that a serious treatise on these topics is
nothing else than the inevitable complement and conclusion of the slow
process by which man has brought under the domain of science every group
of attainable phenomena in turn--every group save this.

Let me then without further preamble embark upon that somewhat detailed
survey of human faculty, as manifested during various phases of human
personality, which is needful in order to throw fresh light on these
unfamiliar themes. My discussion, I may say at once, will avoid
metaphysics as carefully as it will avoid theology. I avoid theology, as
already explained, because I consider that in arguments founded upon
experiment and observation I have no right to appeal for support to
traditional or subjective considerations, however important. For
somewhat similar reasons I do not desire to introduce the idea of
personality with any historical _résumé_ of the philosophical opinions
which have been held by various thinkers in the past, nor myself to
speculate on matters lying beyond the possible field of objective proof.
I shall merely for the sake of clearness begin by the briefest possible
statement of two views of human personality which cannot be ignored,
namely, the old-fashioned or common-sense view thereof, which is still
held by the mass of mankind, and the newer view of experimental
psychology, bringing out that composite or "colonial" character which on
a close examination every personality of men or animals is seen to
wear.

The following passage, taken from a work once of much note, Reid's
"Essay on the Intellectual Powers of Man," expresses the simple _primâ
facie_ view with care and precision, yet with no marked impress of any
one philosophical school:

     The conviction which every man has of his identity, as far back as
     his memory reaches, needs no aid of philosophy to strengthen it;
     and no philosophy can weaken it without first producing some degree
     of insanity.... My personal identity, therefore, implies the
     continued existence of that indivisible thing which I call myself.
     Whatever this self may be, it is something which thinks, and
     deliberates, and resolves, and acts, and suffers. I am not thought,
     I am not action, I am not feeling; I am something that thinks, and
     acts, and suffers. My thoughts and actions and feelings change
     every moment; they have no continued, but a successive existence;
     but that _self_ or _I_, to which they belong, is permanent, and has
     the same relation to all succeeding thoughts, actions, and feelings
     which I call mine.... The identity of a person is a perfect
     identity; wherever it is real it admits of no degrees; and it is
     impossible that a person should be in part the same and in part
     different, because a person is a _monad_, and is not divisible into
     parts. Identity, when applied to persons, has no ambiguity, and
     admits not of degrees, or of more and less. It is the foundation of
     all rights and obligations, and of all accountableness; and the
     notion of it is fixed and precise.

Contrast with this the passage with which M. Ribot concludes his essay
on "Les Maladies de la Personnalité."

     It is the organism, with the brain, its supreme representative,
     which constitutes the real personality; comprising in itself the
     remains of all that we have been and the possibilities of all that
     we shall be. The whole individual character is there inscribed,
     with its active and passive aptitudes, its sympathies and
     antipathies, its genius, its talent or its stupidity, its virtues
     and its vices, its torpor or its activity. The part thereof which
     emerges into consciousness is little compared with what remains
     buried, but operative nevertheless. The conscious personality is
     never more than a small fraction of the psychical personality. The
     unity of the Ego is not therefore the unity of a single entity
     diffusing itself among multiple phenomena; it is the co-ordination
     of a certain number of states perpetually renascent, and having for
     their sole common basis the vague feeling of our body. This unity
     does not diffuse itself downwards, but is aggregated by ascent from
     below; it is not an initial but a terminal point.

     Does then this perfect unity really exist? In the rigorous, the
     mathematical sense, assuredly it does _not_. In a relative sense it
     is met with,--rarely and for a moment. When a good marksman takes
     aim, or a skilful surgeon operates, his whole body and mind
     converge towards a single act. But note the result; under those
     conditions the sentiment of real personality disappears, for the
     conscious individual is simplified into a single idea, and the
     personal sentiment is excluded by the complete unification of
     consciousness. We thus return by another route to the same
     conclusion; _the Self is a co-ordination_. It oscillates between
     two extremes at each of which it ceases to exist;--absolute unity
     and absolute incoherence.

     The last word of all this is that since the consensus of
     consciousness is subordinated to the consensus of the organism, the
     problem of the unity of the Ego is in its ultimate form a problem
     of Biology. Let Biology explain, if it can, the genesis of
     organisms and the solidarity of their constituent parts. The
     psychological explanation must needs follow on the same track.

Here, then, we have two clear and definite views,--supported, the one by
our inmost consciousness, the other by unanswerable observation and
inference,--yet apparently incompatible the one with the other. And in
fact by most writers they have been felt and acknowledged to be even
hopelessly incompatible. The supporters of the view that "The Self is a
co-ordination,"--and this, I need hardly say, is now the view prevalent
among experimental psychologists,--have frankly given up any notion of
an underlying unity,--of a life independent of the organism,--in a word,
of a human soul. The supporters of the unity of the Ego, on the other
hand, if they have not been able to be equally explicit in _denying_ the
opposite view, have made up for this by the thorough-going way in which
they have _ignored_ it. I know of no source from which valid help has
been offered towards the reconcilement of the two opposing systems in a
profounder synthesis. If I believe--as I do believe--that in the present
work some help in this direction is actually given, this certainly does
not mean that I suppose myself capable of stitching the threadbare
metaphysical arguments into a more stable fabric. It simply means that
certain fresh evidence can now be adduced, which has the effect of
showing the case on each side in a novel light;--nay, even of closing
the immediate controversy by a judgment more decisively in favour of
_both_ parties than either could have expected. On the one side, and in
favour of the co-ordinators,--all their analysis of the Self into its
constituent elements, all that they urge of positive observation, of
objective experiment, must--as I shall maintain on the strength of the
new facts which I shall adduce--be unreservedly conceded. Let them push
their analysis as far as they like,--let them get down, if they can, to
those ultimate infinitesimal psychical elements from which is upbuilt
the complex, the composite, the "colonial" structure and constitution of
man. All this may well be valid and important work. It is only on their
_negative_ side that the conclusions of this school need a complete
overhauling. Deeper, bolder inquiry along their own line shows that
they have erred when they asserted that analysis showed no trace of
faculty beyond such as the life of earth--as they conceive it--could
foster, or the environment of earth employ. For in reality analysis
shows traces of faculty which this material or planetary life could not
have called into being, and whose exercise even here and now involves
and necessitates the existence of a spiritual world.

On the other side, and in favour of the partisans of the unity of the
Ego, the effect of the new evidence is to raise their claim to a far
higher ground, and to substantiate it for the first time with the
strongest presumptive proof which can be imagined for it;--a proof,
namely, that the Ego can and does survive--not only the minor
disintegrations which affect it during earth-life--but the crowning
disintegration of bodily death. In view of this unhoped-for ratification
of their highest dream, they may be more than content to surrender as
untenable the far narrower conception of the unitary Self which was all
that "common-sense philosophies" had ventured to claim. The "conscious
Self" of each of us, as we call it,--the empirical, the supraliminal
Self, as I should prefer to say,--does not comprise the whole of the
consciousness or of the faculty within us. There exists a more
comprehensive consciousness, a profounder faculty, which for the most
part remains potential only so far as regards the life of earth, but
from which the consciousness and the faculty of earth-life are mere
selections, and which reasserts itself in its plenitude after the
liberating change of death.

Towards this conclusion, which assumed for me something like its present
shape some fourteen years since,[5] a long series of tentative
speculations, based on gradually accruing evidence, has slowly conducted
me. The conception is one which has hitherto been regarded as purely
mystical; and if I endeavour to plant it upon a scientific basis I
certainly shall not succeed in stating it in its final terms or in
supporting it with the best arguments which longer experience will
suggest. Its validity, indeed, will be impressed--if at all--upon the
reader only by the successive study of the various kinds of evidence to
which this book will refer him.

Yet so far as the initial possibility or plausibility of such a widened
conception of human consciousness is concerned;--and this is all which
can be dealt with at this moment of its first introduction;--I have not
seen in such criticism as has hitherto been bestowed upon my theory any
very weighty demurrer.[6]

"Normally at least," says one critic, summarising in a few words the
ordinary view, "all the consciousness we have at any moment corresponds
to all the activity which is going on at that moment in the brain. There
is one unitary conscious state accompanying all the simultaneous brain
excitations together, and each single part of the brain-process
contributes something to its nature. None of the brain-processes split
themselves off from the rest and have a separate consciousness of their
own." This is, no doubt, the apparent dictum of consciousness, but it is
nothing more. And the dicta of consciousness have already been shown to
need correction in so many ways which the ordinary observer could never
have anticipated that we have surely no right to trust consciousness, so
to say, a step further than we can feel it,--to hold that anything
whatever--even a separate consciousness in our own organisms--can be
proved _not_ to exist by the mere fact that we--as we know
ourselves--are not aware of it.

But indeed this claim to a unitary consciousness tends to become less
forcible as it is more scientifically expressed. It rests on the plain
man's conviction that there is only one of him; and this conviction the
experimental psychologist is always tending to weaken or narrow by the
admission of coexistent localised degrees of consciousness in the brain,
which are at any rate not obviously reducible to a single state. Even
those who would stop far short of my own position find it needful to
resort to metaphors of their own to express the different streams of
"awareness" which we all feel to be habitually coexistent within us.
They speak of "fringes" of ordinary consciousness; of "marginal"
associations; of the occasional perception of "currents of low
intensity." These metaphors may all of them be of use, in a region where
metaphor is our only mode of expression; but none of them covers all the
facts now collected. And on the other side, I need not say, are plenty
of phrases which beg the question of soul and body, or of the man's own
spirit and external spirits, in no scientific fashion. There seems to be
need of a term of wider application, which shall make as few assumptions
as possible. Nor is such a term difficult to find.

The idea of a _threshold (limen, Schwelle)_, of consciousness;--of a
level above which sensation or thought must rise before it can enter
into our conscious life;--is a simple and familiar one. The word
_subliminal_,--meaning "beneath that threshold,"--has already been used
to define those sensations which are too feeble to be individually
recognised. I propose to extend the meaning of the term, so as to make
it cover _all_ that takes place beneath the ordinary threshold, or say,
if preferred, outside the ordinary margin of consciousness;--not only
those faint stimulations whose very faintness keeps them submerged, but
much else which psychology as yet scarcely recognises; sensations,
thoughts, emotions, which may be strong, definite, and independent, but
which, by the original constitution of our being, seldom emerge into
that _supraliminal_ current of consciousness which we habitually
identify with _ourselves_. Perceiving (as this book will try to show)
that these submerged thoughts and emotions possess the characteristics
which we associate with conscious life, I feel bound to speak of a
_subliminal_ or _ultra-marginal consciousness_,--a consciousness which
we shall see, for instance, uttering or writing sentences quite as
complex and coherent as the supraliminal consciousness could make them.
Perceiving further that this conscious life beneath the threshhold or
beyond the margin seems to be no discontinuous or intermittent thing;
that not only are these isolated subliminal processes comparable with
isolated supraliminal processes (as when a problem is solved by some
unknown procedure in a dream), but that there also is a continuous
subliminal chain of memory (or more chains than one) involving just that
kind of individual and persistent revival of old impressions, and
response to new ones, which we commonly call a Self,--I find it
permissible and convenient to speak of subliminal Selves, or more
briefly of a subliminal Self. I do not indeed by using this term assume
that there are two correlative and parallel selves existing always
within each of us. Rather I mean by the subliminal Self that part of the
Self which is commonly subliminal; and I conceive that there may
be,--not only _co-operations_ between these quasi-independent trains of
thought,--but also upheavals and alternations of personality of many
kinds, so that what was once below the surface may for a time, or
permanently, rise above it. And I conceive also that no Self of which we
can here have cognisance is in reality more than a fragment of a larger
Self,--revealed in a fashion at once shifting and limited through an
organism not so framed as to afford it full manifestation.

Now this hypothesis is exposed manifestly to two main forms of attack,
which to a certain extent neutralise each other. On the one hand it has
been attacked, as has already been indicated, as being too elaborate for
the facts,--as endowing transitory moments of subconscious intelligence
with more continuity and independence than they really possess. These
ripples over the threshold, it may be said, can be explained by the wind
of circumstance, without assuming springs or currents in the personality
deep below.

But soon we shall come upon a group of phenomena which this view will
by no means meet. For we shall find that the subliminal uprushes,--the
impulses or communications which reach our emergent from our submerged
selves,--are (in spite of their miscellaneousness) often
characteristically different in quality from any element known to our
ordinary supraliminal life. They are different in a way which implies
faculty of which we have had no previous knowledge, operating in an
environment of which hitherto we have been wholly unaware. This broad
statement it is of course the purpose of my whole work to justify.
Assuming its truth here for argument's sake, we see at once that the
problem of the hidden self entirely changes its aspect. Telepathy and
telæsthesia--the perception of distant thoughts and of distant scenes
without the agency of the recognised organs of sense;--those faculties
suggest either incalculable extension of our own mental powers, or else
the influence upon us of minds freer and less trammelled than our own.
And this second hypothesis,--which would explain by the agency of
discarnate minds, or spirits, all these supernormal phenomena,--does at
first sight simplify the problem, and has by Mr. A. R. Wallace and
others been pushed so far as to remove all need of what he deems the
gratuitous and cumbrous hypothesis of a subliminal self.

I believe, indeed, that it will become plain as we proceed that some
such hypothesis as this,--of almost continuous spirit-intervention and
spirit-guidance,--is at once rendered necessary if the subliminal
faculties for which I argue are denied to man. And my conception of a
subliminal self will thus appear, not as an extravagant and needless,
but as a limiting and rationalising hypothesis, when it is applied to
phenomena which at first sight suggest Mr. Wallace's extremer view, but
which I explain by the action of man's own spirit, without invoking
spirits external to himself. I do not indeed say that the explanation
here suggested is applicable in all cases, or to the complete exclusion
of the spirit-hypothesis. On the contrary, the one view gives support to
the other. For these faculties of distant communication exist none the
less, even though we should refer them to our own subliminal selves. We
can, in that case, affect each other at a distance, telepathically;--and
if our incarnate spirits can act thus in at least apparent independence
of the fleshly body, the presumption is strong that other spirits may
exist independently of the body, and may affect us in similar manner.

The much-debated hypothesis of spirit-intervention, in short, still
looms behind the hypothesis of the subliminal Self; but that
intermediate hypothesis should, I think, in this early stage of what
must be a long inquiry, prove useful to the partisans of either side.
For those who are altogether unwilling to admit the action of agencies
other than the spirits of living men, it will be needful to form as
high an estimate as possible of the faculties held in reserve by these
spirits while still in the flesh. For those, on the other hand, who
believe in the influence of discarnate spirits, this scheme affords a
path of transition, and as it were a provisional intelligibility.

These far-reaching speculations make the element of keenest interest in
the inquiry which follows. But even apart from its possible bearing on a
future life, the further study of our submerged mentation,--of the
processes within us of which we catch only indirect, and as it were,
refracted glimpses,--seems at this time especially called for by the
trend of modern research. For of late years we have realised more and
more fully upon how shifting and complex a foundation of ancestral
experience each individual life is based. In recapitulation, in summary,
in symbol, we retraverse, from the embryo to the corpse, the history of
life on earth for millions of years. During our self-adaptation to
continually wider environments, there may probably have been a continual
displacement of the threshold of consciousness;--involving the lapse and
submergence of much that once floated in the main stream of our being.
Our consciousness at any given stage of our evolution is but the
phosphorescent ripple on an unsounded sea. And, like the ripple, it is
not only superficial but manifold. Our psychical unity is federative and
unstable; it has arisen from irregular accretions in the remote past; it
consists even now only in the limited collaboration of multiple groups.
These discontinuities and incoherences in the Ego the elder
psychologists managed to ignore. Yet infancy, idiocy, sleep, insanity,
decay;--these breaks and stagnancies in the conscious stream were always
present to show us, even more forcibly than more delicate analyses show
us now, that the first obvious conception of man's continuous and
unitary personality was wholly insecure; and that if indeed a soul
inspired the body, that soul must be sought for far beneath these bodily
conditions by which its self-manifestation was clouded and obscured.

The difference between older and newer conceptions of the unifying
principle or soul (if soul there be) in man, considered as manifesting
through corporeal limitations, will thus resemble the difference between
the older and newer conceptions of the way in which the sun reveals
himself to our senses. Night and storm-cloud and eclipse men have known
from the earliest ages; but now they know that even at noonday the
sunbeam which reaches them, when fanned out into a spectrum, is barred
with belts and lines of varying darkness;--while they have learnt also
that where at either end the spectrum fades out into what for us is
blackness, there stretches onwards in reality an undiscovered
illimitable ray.

It will be convenient for future reference if I draw out this parallel
somewhat more fully. I compare, then, man's gradual progress in
self-knowledge to his gradual decipherment of the nature and meaning of
the sunshine which reaches him as light and heat indiscernibly
intermingled. So also Life and Consciousness--the sense of a world
within him and a world without--come to the child indiscernibly
intermingled in a pervading glow. Optical analysis splits up the white
ray into the various coloured rays which compose it. Philosophical
analysis in like manner splits up the vague consciousness of the child
into many faculties;--into the various external senses, the various
modes of thought within. This has been the task of descriptive and
introspective psychology. Experimental psychology is adding a further
refinement. In the sun's spectrum, and in stellar spectra, are many dark
lines or bands, due to the absorption of certain rays by certain vapours
in the atmosphere of sun or stars or earth. And similarly in the range
of spectrum of our own sensation and faculty there are many
inequalities--permanent and temporary--of brightness and definition. Our
mental atmosphere is clouded by vapours and illumined by fires, and is
clouded and illumined differently at different times. The psychologist
who observes, say, how his reaction-times are modified by alcohol is
like the physicist who observes what lines are darkened by the
interposition of a special gas. Our knowledge of our conscious spectrum
is thus becoming continually more accurate and detailed.

But turning back once more to the physical side of our simile, we
observe that our knowledge of the visible solar spectrum, however
minute, is but an introduction to the knowledge which we hope ultimately
to attain of the sun's rays. The limits of our spectrum do not inhere in
the sun that shines, but in the eye that marks his shining. Beyond each
end of that prismatic ribbon are ether-waves of which our retina takes
no cognisance. Beyond the red end come waves whose potency we still
recognise, but as heat and not as light. Beyond the violet end are waves
still more mysterious; whose very existence man for ages never
suspected, and whose ultimate potencies are still but obscurely known.
Even thus, I venture to affirm, beyond each end of our conscious
spectrum extends a range of faculty and perception, exceeding the known
range, but as yet indistinctly guessed. The artifices of the modern
physicist have extended far in each direction the visible spectrum known
to Newton. It is for the modern psychologist to discover artifices which
may extend in each direction the conscious spectrum as known to Plato or
to Kant. The phenomena cited in this work carry us, one may say, as far
onwards as fluorescence carries us beyond the violet end. The "X rays"
of the psychical spectrum remain for a later age to discover.

Our simile, indeed--be it once for all noted--is a most imperfect one.
The range of human faculty cannot be truly expressed in any linear form.
Even a three-dimensional scheme,--a radiation of faculties from a centre
of life,--would ill render its complexity. Yet something of clearness
will be gained by even this rudimentary mental picture;--representing
conscious human faculty as a linear spectrum whose red rays begin where
voluntary muscular control and organic sensation begin, and whose violet
rays fade away at the point at which man's highest strain of thought or
imagination merges into reverie or ecstasy.

At both ends of this spectrum I believe that our evidence indicates a
momentous prolongation. Beyond the _red_ end, of course, we already know
that vital faculty of some kind must needs extend. We know that organic
processes are constantly taking place within us which are not subject to
our control, but which make the very foundation of our physical being.
We know that the habitual limits of our voluntary action can be far
extended under the influence of strong excitement. It need not surprise
us to find that appropriate artifices--hypnotism or self-suggestion--can
carry the power of our will over our organism to a yet further point.

The faculties that lie beyond the _violet_ end of our psychological
spectrum will need more delicate exhibition and will command a less
ready belief. The actinic energy which lies beyond the violet end of the
solar spectrum is less obviously influential in our material world than
is the dark heat which lies beyond the red end. Even so, one may say,
the influence of the ultra-intellectual or supernormal faculties upon
our welfare as terrene organisms is less marked in common life than the
influence of the organic or subnormal faculties. Yet it is _that_
prolongation of our spectrum upon which our gaze will need to be most
strenuously fixed. It is _there_ that we shall find our inquiry opening
upon a cosmic prospect, and inciting us upon an endless way.

Even the first stages of this progress are long and labyrinthine; and it
may be useful to conclude this introductory chapter by a brief summary
of the main tracts across which our winding road must lie. It will be my
object to lead by transitions as varied and as gradual as possible from
phenomena held as normal to phenomena held as supernormal, but which
like the rest are simply and solely the inevitable results and
manifestations of universal Law.

Following then on this first or introductory chapter is one containing
a discussion of the ways in which human personality disintegrates and
decays. _Alternations of personality_ and hysterical phenomena generally
are in this connection the most instructive to us.

In the third chapter we utilize the insight thus gained and discuss the
line of evolution which enables man to maintain and intensify his true
normality. What type of man is he to whom the epithet of _normal_,--an
epithet often obscure and misleading,--may be most fitly applied? I
claim that that man shall be regarded as normal who has the fullest
grasp of faculties which inhere in the whole race. Among these faculties
I count subliminal as well as supraliminal powers;--the mental processes
which take place below the conscious threshold as well as those which
take place above it; and I attempt to show that those who reap most
advantage from this submerged mentation are men of _genius_.

The fourth chapter deals with the alternating phase through which man's
personality is constructed habitually to pass. I speak of _sleep_; which
I regard as a phase of personality, adapted to maintain our existence in
the spiritual environment, and to draw from thence the vitality of our
physical organisms. In this chapter I also discuss certain supernormal
phenomena which sometimes occur in the state of sleep.

The fifth chapter treats of _hypnotism_, considered as an _empirical
development of sleep_. It will be seen that hypnotic suggestion
intensifies the physical recuperation of sleep, and aids the emergence
of those supernormal phenomena which ordinary sleep and spontaneous
somnambulism sometimes exhibit.

From hypnotism we pass on in the sixth chapter to experiments, less
familiar to the public than those classed as hypnotic, but which give a
still further insight into our subliminal faculty. With these
experiments are intermingled many spontaneous phenomena; and the chapter
will take up and continue the spontaneous phenomena of Chapters III. and
IV. as well as the experiments of Chapter V. Its theme will be the
messages which the subliminal self sends up to the supraliminal in the
form of sensory hallucinations:--the visions fashioned internally, but
manifested not to the inward eye alone; the voices which repeat as
though in audible tones the utterance of the self within.

These _sensory automatisms_, as I have termed them, are very often
_telepathic_--involve, that is to say, the transmission of ideas and
sensations from one mind to another without the agency of the recognised
organs of sense. Nor would it seem that such transmission need
necessarily cease with the bodily death of the transmitting agent. In
the seventh chapter evidence is brought forward to show that those who
communicated with us telepathically in this world may communicate with
us telepathically from the other. Thus _phantasms of the dead_ receive a
new meaning from observations of the phenomena occurring between living
men.

But besides the hallucinatory hearing or picture-seeing which we have
classed as sensory automatisms, there is another method by which the
subliminal may communicate with the supraliminal self.

In Chapter VIII., we consider in what ways _motor automatism_--the
unwilled activity of hand or voice--may be used as a means of such
communication. Unwilled writings and utterances furnish the opportunity
for experiment more prolonged and continuous than the phantasms or
pictures of sensory automatism can often give, and, like them, may
sometimes originate in telepathic impressions received by the subliminal
self from another mind. These motor automatisms, moreover, as the ninth
chapter shows, are apt to become more complete, more controlling, than
sensory automatisms. They may lead on, in some cases, to the apparent
_possession_ of the sensitive by some extraneous spirit, who seems to
write and talk through the sensitive's organism, giving evidence of his
own surviving identity.

The reader who may feel disposed to give his adhesion to this
culminating group of the long series of evidences which have pointed
with more and more clearness to the survival of human personality, and
to the possibility for men on earth of actual commerce with a world
beyond, may feel perhaps that the _desiderium orbis catholici_, the
intimate and universal hope of every generation of men, has never till
this day approached so near to fulfilment. There has never been so fair
a prospect for Life and Love. But the goal to which we tend is not an
ideal of personal happiness alone. The anticipation of our own future is
but one element in the prospect which opens to us now. Our inquiry has
broadened into a wider scope. The point from which we started was an
analysis of the latent faculties of man. The point towards which our
argument has carried us is the existence of a spiritual environment in
which those faculties operate, and of unseen neighbours who speak to us
thence with slowly gathering power. Deep in this spiritual environment
the cosmic secret lies. It is our business to collect the smallest
indications; to carry out from this treasury of Rhampsinitus so much as
our bare hands can steal away. We have won our scraps of spiritual
experience, our messages from behind the veil; we can try them in their
connection with certain enigmas which philosophy hardly hoped to be able
to put to proof. Can we, for instance, learn anything,--to begin with
fundamental problems,--of the relation of spiritual phenomena to Space,
to Time, to the material world?

As to the idea of Space, the evidence which will have been presented
will enable us to speak with perhaps more clearness than could have been
hoped for in such a matter. Spiritual life, we infer, is not bound and
confined by space-considerations in the same way as the life of earth.
But in what way is that greater freedom attained? It appears to be
attained by the mere extension of certain licenses (so to call them)
permitted to ourselves. We on earth submit to two familiar laws of the
ordinary material universe. A body can only act where it is. Only one
body can occupy the same part of space at the same moment. Applied to
common affairs these rules are of plain construction. But once get
beyond ponderable matter,--once bring life and ether into play, and
definitions become difficult indeed. The orator, the poet, we say, can
only act where he is;--but where is he? He has transformed the sheet of
paper into a spiritual agency;--nay, the mere memory of him persists as
a source of energy in other minds. Again, we may say that no other body
can be in the same place as this writing-table; but what of the ether?
What we have thus far learnt of spiritual operation seems merely to
extend these two possibilities. Telepathy indefinitely extends the range
of an unembodied spirit's potential presence. The interpenetration of
the spiritual with the material environment leaves this ponderable
planet unable to check or to hamper spiritual presence or operation.
Strange and new though our evidence may be, it needs at present in its
relation to space nothing more than an immense extension of conceptions
which the disappearance of earthly limitations was certain immensely to
extend.

How, then, does the matter stand with regard to our relation to Time? Do
we find that our new phenomena point to any mode of understanding or of
transcending Time fundamentally different from those modes which we have
at our command?

In dealing with Time Past we have memory and written record; in dealing
with Time Future we have forethought, drawing inferences from the past.

Can, then, the spiritual knowledge of Past and Future which our evidence
shows be explained by assuming that these existing means of knowledge
are raised to a higher power? Or are we driven to postulate something in
the nature of Time which is to us inconceivable;--some co-existence of
Past and Future in an eternal Now? It is plainly with Time Past that we
must begin the inquiry.

The knowledge of the past which automatic communications manifest is in
most cases apparently referable to the actual memory of persons still
existing beyond the tomb. It reaches us telepathically, as from a mind
in which remote scenes are still imprinted. But there are certain scenes
which are not easily assigned to the individual memory of any given
spirit. And if it be possible for us to learn of present facts by
telæsthesia as well as by telepathy;--by some direct supernormal
percipience without the intervention of any other mind to which the
facts are already known,--may there not be also a retrocognitive
telæsthesia by which we may attain a direct knowledge of facts in the
past?

Some conception of this kind may possibly come nearest to the truth. It
may even be that some World-Soul is perennially conscious of all its
past; and that individual souls, as they enter into deeper
consciousness, enter into something which is at once reminiscence and
actuality. But nevertheless a narrower hypothesis will cover the actual
cases with which we have to deal. Past facts are known to men on earth
not from memory only, but by written record; and there may be records,
of what kind we know not, which persist in the spiritual world. Our
retrocognitions seem often a recovery of isolated fragments of thought
and feeling, pebbles still hard and rounded amid the indecipherable
sands over which the mighty waters are "rolling evermore."

When we look from Time Past to Time Future we are confronted with
essentially the same problems, though in a still more perplexing form,
and with the world-old mystery of Free Will _versus_ Necessity looming
in the background. Again we find that, just as individual memory would
serve to explain a large proportion of Retrocognition, so individual
forethought--a subliminal forethought, based often on profound organic
facts not normally known to us--will explain a large proportion of
Precognition. But here again we find also precognitions which transcend
what seems explicable by the foresight of any mind such as we know; and
we are tempted to dream of a World-Soul whose Future is as present to it
as its Past. But in this speculation also, so vast and vague an
explanation seems for the present beyond our needs; and it is safer--if
aught be safe in this region which only actual evidence could have
emboldened us to approach--to take refuge in the conception of
intelligences not infinite, yet gifted with a foresight which strangely
transcends our own.

Closely allied to speculations such as these is another speculation,
more capable of subjection to experimental test, yet which remains still
inconclusively tested, and which has become for many reasons a
stumbling-block rather than a corroboration in the spiritual inquiry. I
refer to the question whether any influence is exercised by spirits upon
the gross material world otherwise than through ordinary organic
structures. We know that the spirit of a living man controls his own
organism, and we shall see reason to conclude that discarnate spirits
may also control, by some form of "possession," the organisms of living
persons,--may affect directly, that is to say, some portions of matter
which we call living, namely, the brain of the entranced sensitive.
There seems to me, then, no paradox in the supposition that some effect
should be produced by spiritual agency--possibly through the mediation
of some kind of energy derived from living human beings--upon inanimate
matter as well. And I believe that as a fact such effects have been
observed and recorded in a trustworthy manner by Sir W. Crookes, the
late Dr. Speer, and others, in the cases especially of D. D. Home and of
W. Stainton Moses. If, indeed, I call these and certain other records
still inconclusive, it is mainly on account of the mass of worthless
narratives with which they have been in some sense smothered; the long
history of so-called investigations which have consisted merely in an
interchange of credulity and fraud. For the present the evidence of this
kind which has real value is better presented, I think, in separate
records than collected or discussed in any generalised form. All that I
purpose in this work, therefore, is briefly to indicate the relation
which these "physical phenomena" hold to the psychical phenomena with
which my book is concerned. Alongside of the faculty or achievement of
man's ordinary or supraliminal self I shall demarcate the faculty or
achievement which I ascribe to his subliminal self; and alongside of
this again I shall arrange such few well-attested phenomena as seem
_primâ facie_ to demand the physical intervention of discarnate
intelligences.

I have traced the utmost limits to which any claim to a scientific basis
for these inquiries can at present be pushed. Yet the subject-matter has
not yet been exhausted of half its significance. The conclusions to
which our evidence points are not such as can be discussed or dismissed
as a mere matter of speculative curiosity. They affect every belief,
every faculty, every hope and aim of man; and they affect him the more
intimately as his interests grow more profound. Whatever meaning be
applied to ethics, to philosophy, to religion, the concern of all these
is here.

It would have been inconsistent with my main purpose had I interpolated
considerations of this kind into the body of this work. For that purpose
was above all to show that realms left thus far to philosophy or to
religion,--too often to mere superstition and idle dream,--might in the
end be brought under steady scientific rule. I contend that Religion and
Science are no separable or independent provinces of thought or action;
but rather that each name implies a different aspect of the same
ideal;--that ideal being the completely normal reaction of the
individual spirit to the whole of cosmic law.

Assuredly this deepening response of man's spirit to the Cosmos
deepening round him must be affected by all the signals which now are
glimmering out of night to tell him of his inmost nature and his endless
fate. Who can think that either Science or Revelation has spoken as yet
more than a first half-comprehended word? But if in truth souls departed
call to us, it is to them that we shall listen most of all. We shall
weigh their undesigned concordances, we shall analyse the congruity of
their message with the facts which such a message should explain. To
some thoughts which may thus be generated I shall try to give expression
in an Epilogue to the present work.




