CHAPTER III

GENIUS

    Igneus est ollis vigor et cœlestis origo
    Seminibus, quantum non noxia corpora tardant
    Terrenique hebetant artus moribundaque membra.

    --VIRGIL.


In my second chapter I made no formal attempt to define that human
personality which is to form the main subject of this book. I was
content to take the conception roughly for granted, and to enter at once
on the study of the lapses of personality into abnormal
conditions,--short of the lowest depths of idiocy or madness. From that
survey it appeared that these degenerations could be traced to some
defect in that central control which ought to clasp and integrate into
steady manhood the hierarchies of living cells which compose the human
organism. This insight into the Self's decay was the needed prerequisite
to our present task--that of apprehending its true normality, and
thereafter of analysing certain obscurer faculties which indicate the
line of its evolution during and after the life of earth.

Strength and concentration of the inward unifying control--_that_ must
be the true normality which we seek; and in seeking it we must remember
how much of psychical operation goes on below the conscious threshold,
imperfectly obedient to any supraliminal appeal. What advance can we
make in inward mastery? how far extend our grasp over the whole range of
faculty with which we are obscurely endowed?

"Human perfectibility" has been the theme of many enthusiasts; and many
utopian schemes of society have been and still are suggested, which
postulate in the men and women of the future an increase in moral and
physical health and vigour. And it is plain that in a broad and general
way natural selection, sexual selection, and the advance of science are
working together towards improvements of these kinds. But it is plain
also that these onward tendencies, at least in comparison with our
desires and ideals, are slow and uncertain; and it is possible to argue
that the apparent advance in our race is due merely to the improvement
which science has affected in its material environment, and not to any
real development, during the historical period, in the character or
faculties of man himself. Nay, since we have no means of knowing to what
extent any genus has an inward potentiality of improvement, it is
possible for the pessimist to argue that the _genus homo_ has reached
its fore-ordained evolutionary limit; so that it cannot be pushed
further in any direction without risk of nervous instability, sterility,
and ultimate extinction. Some dim apprehension of this kind lends
plausibility to many popular diatribes. Dr. Max Nordau's works afford a
well-known example of this line of protest against the present age as an
age of overwork and of nervous exhaustion. And narrowing the vague
discussion to a somewhat more definite test, Professor Lombroso and
other anthropologists have discussed the characteristics of the "man of
genius"; with the result of showing (as they believe) that this
apparently highest product of the race is in reality not a culminant but
an aberrant manifestation; and that men of genius must be classed with
criminals and lunatics, as persons in whom a want of balance or
completeness of organisation has led on to an over-development of one
side of the nature;--helpful or injurious to other men as accident may
decide.

On this point I shall join issue; and I shall suggest, on the other
hand, that Genius--if that vaguely used word is to receive anything like
a psychological definition--should rather be regarded as a power of
utilising a wider range than other men can utilise of faculties in some
degree innate in all;--a power of appropriating the results of
subliminal mentation to subserve the supraliminal stream of thought;--so
that an "inspiration of Genius" will be in truth a _subliminal uprush_,
an emergence into the current of ideas which the man is consciously
manipulating of other ideas which he has not consciously originated, but
which have shaped themselves beyond his will, in profounder regions of
his being. I shall urge that there is here no real departure from
normality; no abnormality, at least in the sense of degeneration; but
rather a fulfilment of the true norm of man, with suggestions, it may
be, of something _supernormal_;--of something which transcends existing
normality as an advanced stage of evolutionary progress transcends an
earlier stage.

But before proceeding further I wish to guard against a possible
misapprehension. I shall be obliged in this chapter to dwell on valuable
aid rendered by subliminal mentation; but I do not mean to imply that
such mentation is _ipso facto superior_ to supraliminal, or even that it
covers a large proportion of practically useful human achievement. When
I say "The differentia of genius lies in an increased control over
subliminal mentation," I express, I think, a well-evidenced thesis, and
I suggest an important inference,--namely, that the man of genius is for
us the best type of the normal man, in so far as he effects a successful
co-operation of an unusually large number of elements of his
personality--reaching a stage of integration slightly in advance of our
own. Thus much I wish to say: but my thesis is not to be pushed
further:--as though I claimed that all our best thought was subliminal,
or that all that was subliminal was potentially "inspiration."

It is true, however, that the range of our subliminal mentation is more
extended than the range of our supraliminal. At one end of the scale we
find _dreams_,--a normal subliminal product, but of less practical value
than any form of sane supraliminal thought. At the other end of the
scale we find that the rarest, most precious knowledge comes to us from
outside the ordinary field,--through the eminently subliminal processes
of telepathy, telæsthesia, ecstasy. And between these two extremes lie
many subliminal products, varying in value according to the dignity and
trustworthiness of the subliminal mentation concerned.

This last phrase--inevitably obscure--may be illustrated by reference to
that hierarchical arrangement of _supraliminal_ action and perception
which Dr. Hughlings Jackson has so used as to clear up much previous
confusion of thought. Following him, we now speak of highest-level
nerve-centres, governing our highest, most complex thought and will; of
middle-level centres, governing movements of voluntary muscles, and the
like; and of lowest-level centres (which from my point of view are
purely subliminal), governing those automatic processes, as respiration
and circulation, which are independent of conscious rule, but necessary
to the maintenance of life. We can roughly judge from the nature of any
observed action whether the highest-level centres are directing it, or
whether they are for the time inhibited, so that middle-level centres
operate uncontrolled.

Thus ordinary speech and writing are ruled by highest-level centres. But
when an epileptic discharge of nervous energy has exhausted the
highest-level centres, we see the middle-level centres operating
unchecked, and producing the convulsive movements of arms and legs in
the "fit." As these centres in their turn become exhausted, the patient
is left to the guidance of lowest-level centres alone;--that is to say,
he becomes comatose, though he continues to breathe as regularly as
usual.

Now this series of phenomena,--_descending_ in coherence and
coordination from an active consensus of the whole organism to a mere
automatic maintenance of its most stably organised processes,--may be
pretty closely paralleled by the series of subliminal phenomena also.

Sometimes we seem to see our subliminal perceptions and faculties acting
truly in unity, truly as a Self;--co-ordinated into some harmonious
"inspiration of genius," or some profound and reasonable hypnotic
self-reformation, or some far-reaching supernormal achievement of
clairvoyant vision or of self-projection into a spiritual world.
Whatever of subliminal personality is thus acting corresponds with the
highest-level centres of supraliminal life. At such moments the
_subliminal_ represents (as I believe) most nearly what will become the
_surviving_ Self.

But it seems that this degree of clarity, of integration, cannot be long
preserved. Much oftener we find the subliminal perceptions and faculties
acting in less co-ordinated, less coherent ways. We have products which,
while containing traces of some faculty beyond our common scope,
involve, nevertheless, something as random and meaningless as the
discharge of the uncontrolled middle-level centres of arms and legs in
the epileptic fit. We get, in short, a series of phenomena which the
term _dream-like_ seems best to describe.

In the realm of genius,--of uprushes of thought and feeling fused
beneath the conscious threshold into artistic shape,--we get no longer
masterpieces but half-insanities,--not the Sistine Madonna, but Wiertz's
Vision of the Guillotined Head; not _Kubla Khan_, but the disordered
opium dream. Throughout all the work of William Blake (I should say) we
see the subliminal self flashing for moments into unity, then
smouldering again in a lurid and scattered glow.

In the realm of hypnotism, again, we sink from the reasonable
self-suggestion to the "platform experiments,"--the smelling of ammonia,
the eating of tallow candles;--all the tricks which show a _profound_
control, but not a _wise_ control, over the arcana of organic life. I
speak, of course, of the subject's _own_ control over his organism; for
in the last resort it is _he_ and not his hypnotiser who really
exercises that directive power. And I compare these tricks of
middle-level subliminal centres to the powerful yet irrational control
which the middle-level centres ruling the epileptic's arms and legs
exercise over his muscles in the violence of the epileptic attack.

And so again with the _automatisms_ which are, one may say, the
subliminal self's peculiar province. Automatic script, for instance, may
represent highest-level subliminal centres, even when no extraneous
spirit, but the automatist's own mind alone, is concerned. It will then
give us true telepathic messages, or perhaps messages of high moral
import, surpassing the automatist's conscious powers. But much oftener
the automatic script is regulated by what I have called middle-level
subliminal centres only;--and then, though we may have scraps of
supernormal intelligence, we have confusion and incoherence as well. We
have the falsity which the disgusted automatist is sometimes fain to
ascribe to a devil; though it is in reality not a devil, but a dream.

And hence again, just as the epileptic sinks lower and lower in the
fit,--from the incoordinated movements of the limbs down to the mere
stertorous breathing of coma,--so do these incoherent automatisms sink
down at last, through the utterances and drawings of the degenerate and
the paranoiac,--through mere fragmentary dreams, or vague impersonal
bewilderment,--into the minimum psychical concomitant, whatever that be,
which must coexist with brain-circulation.

Such is the apparent parallelism; but of course no knowledge of a
hierarchy of the familiar forms of nervous action can really explain to
us the mysterious fluctuations of subliminal power.

When we speak of the highest-level and other centres which govern our
supraliminal being, and which are fitted to direct this planetary life
in a material world, we can to some extent point out actual
brain-centres whose action enables us to meet those needs. What are the
needs of our cosmic life we do not know; nor can we indicate any point
in our organism (as in the "solar plexus," or the like), which is
adapted to meet them. We cannot even either affirm or deny that such
spiritual life as we maintain while incarnated in this material envelope
involves any physical concomitants at all.

For my part, I feel forced to fall back upon the old-world conception of
a _soul_ which exercises an imperfect and fluctuating control over the
organism; and exercises that control, I would add, along two main
channels, only partly coincident--that of ordinary consciousness,
adapted to the maintenance and guidance of earth-life; and that of
subliminal consciousness, adapted to the maintenance of our larger
spiritual life during our confinement in the flesh.

We men, therefore, _clausi tenebris et carcere cæco_, can sometimes
widen, as we must sometimes narrow, our outlook on the reality of
things. In mania or epilepsy we lose control even of those highest-level
supraliminal centres on which our rational earth-life depends. But
through automatism and in trance and allied states we draw into
supraliminal life some rivulet from the undercurrent stream. If the
subliminal centres which we thus impress into our waking service
correspond to the _middle-level_ only, they may bring to us merely error
and confusion; if they correspond to the highest-level, they may
introduce us to previously unimagined truth.

It is to work done by the aid of some such subliminal uprush, I say once
more, that the word "genius" may be most fitly applied. "A work of
genius," indeed, in common parlance, means a work which satisfies two
quite distinct requirements. It must involve something original,
spontaneous, unteachable, unexpected; and it must also in some way win
for itself the admiration of mankind. Now, psychologically speaking, the
first of these requirements corresponds to a real class, the second to a
purely accidental one. What the poet feels while he writes his poem is
the psychological fact in _his_ history; what his friends feel while
they read it may be a psychological fact in _their_ history, but does
not alter the poet's creative effort, which was what it was, whether any
one but himself ever reads his poem or no.

And popular phraseology justifies our insistence upon this subjective
side of genius. Thus it is common to say that "Hartley Coleridge" (for
example) "was a genius, although he never produced anything worth
speaking of." Men recognise, that is to say, from descriptions of
Hartley Coleridge, and from the fragments which he has left, that ideas
came to him with what I have termed a sense of subliminal uprush,--with
an authentic, although not to us an instructive, inspiration.

As psychologists, I maintain, we are bound to base our definition of
genius upon some criterion of this strictly psychological kind, rather
than on the external tests which as artists or men of letters we should
employ;--and which consider mainly the degree of delight which any given
achievement can bestow upon other men. The artist will speak of the
pictorial genius of Raphael, but not of Haydon; of the dramatic genius
of Corneille, but not of Voltaire. Yet Haydon's Autobiography--a record
of tragic intensity, and closing in suicide--shows that the tame yet
contorted figures of his "Raising of Lazarus" flashed upon him with an
overmastering sense of direct inspiration. Voltaire, again, writes to
the president Hénault of his unreadable tragedy _Catilina_: "Five acts
in a week! I know that this sounds ridiculous; but if men could guess
what enthusiasm can do,--how a poet in spite of himself, idolising his
subject, devoured by his genius, can accomplish in a few days a task for
which without that genius a year would not suffice;--in a word, _si
scirent donum Dei_,--_if they knew the gift of God_,--their astonishment
might be less than it must be now." I do not shrink from these extreme
instances. It would be absurd, of course, to place Haydon's "Raising of
Lazarus" in the same _artistic_ class as Raphael's "Madonna di San
Sisto." But in the same _psychological_ class I maintain that both
works must be placed. For each painter, after his several kind, there
was the same inward process,--the same sense of subliminal uprush;--that
extension, in other words, of mental concentration which draws into
immediate cognisance some workings or elements of the hidden self.

Let me illustrate this conception by a return to the metaphor of the
"conscious spectrum" to which I introduced my reader in the first
chapter. I there described our conscious spectrum as representing but a
small fraction of the _aurai simplicis ignis_, or individual psychical
ray;--just as our visible solar spectrum represents but a small fraction
of the solar ray. And even as many waves of ether lie beyond the red
end, and many beyond the violet end, of that visible spectrum, so have I
urged that much of unrecognised or subliminal faculty lies beyond the
red (or organic) end, and much beyond the violet (or intellectual) end
of my imaginary spectrum. My main task in this book will be to prolong
the psychical spectrum beyond either limit, by collecting traces of
latent faculties, organic or transcendental:--just as by the bolometer,
by fluorescence, by other artifices, physicists have prolonged the solar
spectrum far beyond either limit of ordinary visibility.

But at present, and before entering on that task of rendering manifest
supernormal faculty, I am considering what we ought to regard as the
normal range of faculty from which we start;--what, in relation to man,
the words _norm_ and _normal_ should most reasonably mean.

The word _normal_ in common speech is used almost indifferently to imply
either of two things, which may be very different from each
other--conformity to a standard and position as an average between
extremes. Often indeed the average constitutes the standard--as when a
gas is of normal density; or is practically equivalent to the
standard--as when a sovereign is of normal weight. But when we come to
living organisms a new factor is introduced. Life is change; each living
organism changes; each generation differs from its predecessor. To
assign a fixed norm to a changing species is to shoot point-blank at a
flying bird. The actual average at any given moment is no ideal
standard; rather, the furthest evolutionary stage now reached is
tending, given stability in the environment, to become the average of
the future. Human evolution is not so simple or so conspicuous a thing
as the evolution of the pouter pigeon. But it would be rash to affirm
that it is not even swifter than any variation among domesticated
animals. Not a hundred generations separate us from the dawn of
history;--about as many generations as some microbes can traverse in a
month;--about as many as separate the modern Derby-winner from the
war-horse of Gustavus Adolphus. Man's change has been less than the
horse's change in physical contour,--probably only because man has not
been specially bred with that view;--but taking as a test the power of
self-adaptation to environment, man has traversed in these thirty
centuries a wider arc of evolution than separates the racehorse from the
eohippus. Or if we go back further, and to the primal germ, we see that
man's ancestors must have varied faster than any animal's, since they
have travelled farthest in the same time. They have varied also in the
greatest number of directions; they have evoked in greatest multiplicity
the unnumbered faculties latent in the irritability of a speck of slime.
Of all creatures man has gone furthest both in differentiation and in
integration; he has called into activity the greatest number of those
faculties which lay potential in the primal germ,--and he has
established over those faculties the strongest central control. The
process still continues. Civilisation adds to the complexity of his
faculties; education helps him to their concentration. It is in the
direction of a still wider range, a still firmer hold, that his
evolution now must lie. I shall maintain that this ideal is best
attained by the man of genius.

Let us consider the way in which the maximum of faculty is habitually
manifested; the circumstances in which a man does what he has never
supposed himself able to do before. We may take an instance where the
faculty drawn upon lies only a little way beneath the surface. A man, we
say, outdoes himself in a great emergency. If his house is on fire, let
us suppose, he carries his children out over the roof with a strength
and agility which seem beyond his own. That effective impulse seems more
akin to instinct than to calculation. We hardly know whether to call the
act reflex or voluntary. It is performed with almost no conscious
intervention of thought or judgment, but it involves a new and complex
adaptation of voluntary muscles such as would need habitually the man's
most careful thought to plan and execute. From the point of view here
taken the action will appear to have been neither reflex nor voluntary
in the ordinary sense, but _subliminal_;--a subliminal uprush, an
emergence of hidden faculty,--of nerve co-ordinations potential in his
organism but till now unused,--which takes command of the man and guides
his action at the moment when his being is deeply stirred.

This stock instance of a man's possible behaviour in moments of great
physical risk does but illustrate in a gross and obvious manner, and in
the motor region, a phenomenon which, as I hold, is constantly occurring
on a smaller scale in the inner life of most of us. We identify
ourselves for the most part with a stream of voluntary, fully conscious
ideas,--cerebral movements connected and purposive as the movement of
the hand which records them. Meantime we are aware also of a substratum
of fragmentary automatic, _liminal_ ideas, of which we take small
account. These are bubbles that break on the surface; but every now and
then there is a stir among them. There is a rush upwards as of a
subaqueous spring; an inspiration flashes into the mind for which our
conscious effort has not prepared us. This so-called inspiration may in
itself be trivial or worthless; but it is the initial stage of a
phenomenon to which, when certain rare attributes are also present, the
name of genius will be naturally given.

I am urging, then, that where life is concerned, and where, therefore,
change is normality, we ought to place our norm somewhat ahead of the
average man, though on the evolutionary track which our race is
pursuing. I have suggested that that evolutionary track is at present
leading him in the direction of greater complexity in the perceptions
which he forms of things without, and of greater concentration in his
own will and thought,--in that response to perceptions which he makes
from within. Lastly I have argued that men of genius, whose perceptions
are presumably more vivid and complex than those of average men, are
also the men who carry the power of concentration furthest;--reaching
downwards, by some self-suggestion which they no more than we can
explain, to treasures of latent faculty in the hidden Self.

I am not indeed here assuming that the faculty which is at the service
of the man of genius is of a kind different from that of common men, in
such a sense that it would need to be represented by a prolongation of
either end of the conscious spectrum. Rather it will be represented by
such a brightening of the familiar spectrum as may follow upon an
intensification of the central light. For the spectrum of man's
conscious faculty, like the solar spectrum, is not continuous but
banded. There are groups of the dark lines of obstruction and
incapacity, and even in the best of us a dim unequal glow.

It will, then, be the special characteristic of genius that its uprushes
of subliminal faculty will make the bright parts of the habitual
spectrum more brilliant, will kindle the dim absorption-bands to fuller
brightness, and will even raise quite dark lines into an occasional
glimmer.

But, if, as I believe, we can best give to the idea of genius some
useful distinctness by regarding it in some such way as this, we shall
find also that genius will fall into line with many other sensory and
motor automatisms to which the word could not naturally be applied.
Genius represents a narrow selection among a great many cognate
phenomena;--among a great many uprushes or emergences of subliminal
faculty both within and beyond the limits of the ordinary conscious
spectrum.

It will be more convenient to study all these together, under the
heading of sensory or of motor automatism. It will then be seen that
there is no kind of perception which may not emerge from beneath the
threshold in an indefinitely heightened form, with just that convincing
suddenness of impression which is described by men of genius as
characteristic of their highest flights. Even with so simple a range of
sensation as that which records the lapse of time there are subliminal
uprushes of this type, and we shall see that a man may have a sudden and
accurate inspiration of what o'clock it is, in just the same way as
Virgil might have an inspiration of the second half of a difficult
hexameter.

For the purpose of present illustration of the workings of genius it
seems well to choose a kind of ability which is quite indisputable, and
which also admits of some degree of quantitative measurement. I would
choose the higher mathematical processes, were data available; and I may
say in passing how grateful I should be to receive from mathematicians
any account of the mental processes of which they are conscious during
the attainment of their highest results. Meantime there is a lower class
of mathematical gift which by its very specialisation and isolation
seems likely to throw light on our present inquiry.

During the course of the present century,--and alas! the scientific
observation of unusual specimens of humanity hardly runs back further,
or so far,--the public of great cities has been from time to time
surprised and diverted by some so-called "calculating boy," or
"arithmetical prodigy," generally of tender years, and capable of
performing "in his head," and almost instantaneously, problems for which
ordinary workers would require pencil and paper and a much longer time.
In some few cases, indeed, the ordinary student would have no means
whatever of solving the problem which the calculating boy unriddled with
ease and exactness.

The especial advantage of the study of arithmetical prodigies is that in
their case the subjective impression coincides closely with the
objective result. The subliminal computator feels that the sum is right,
and it _is_ right. Forms of real or supposed genius which are more
interesting are apt to be less undeniable.

An American and a French psychologist[28] have collected such hints and
explanations as these prodigies have given of their methods of working;
methods which one might naturally hope to find useful in ordinary
education. The result, however, has been very meagre, and the records
left to us, imperfect as they are, are enough to show that the main and
primary achievement has in fact been subliminal, while conscious or
supraliminal effort has sometimes been wholly absent, sometimes has
supervened only after the gift has been so long exercised that the
accesses between different strata have become easy by frequent
traversing. The prodigy grown to manhood, who now recognises the
arithmetical artifices which he used unconsciously as a boy, resembles
the hypnotic subject trained by suggestion to remember in waking hours
the events of the trance.

In almost every point, indeed, where comparison is possible, we shall
find this computative gift resembling other manifestations of subliminal
faculty,--such as the power of seeing hallucinatory figures,--rather
than the results of steady supraliminal effort, such as the power of
logical analysis. In the first place, this faculty, in spite of its
obvious connection with general mathematical grasp and insight, is found
almost at random,--among non-mathematical and even quite stupid persons,
as well as among mathematicians of mark. In the second place, it shows
itself mostly in early childhood, and tends to disappear in later
life;--in this resembling visualising power in general, and the power of
seeing hallucinatory figures in particular; which powers, as both Mr.
Galton's inquiries and our own tend to show, are habitually stronger in
childhood and youth than in later years. Again, it is noticeable that
when the power disappears early in life it is apt to leave behind it no
memory whatever of the processes involved. And even when, by long
persistence in a reflective mind, the power has become, so to say,
adopted into the supraliminal consciousness, there nevertheless may
still be flashes of pure "inspiration," when the answer "comes into the
mind" with absolutely no perception of intermediate steps.

I subjoin a table, compiled by the help of Dr. Scripture's collection,
which will broadly illustrate the main points above mentioned. Some more
detailed remarks may then follow.

  TABLE OF PRINCIPAL ARITHMETICAL PRODIGIES.

  +-----------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
  |        Name           | Age when gift |  Duration of  |               |
  |  (alphabetically).    | was observed. |     gift.     | Intelligence. |
  +-----------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
  |Ampère                 |      4        |       ?       |    eminent    |
  |Bidder                 |     10        |  through life |      good     |
  |Buxton                 |      ?        |       ?       |      low      |
  |Colburn                |      6        |   few years   |    average    |
  |Dase [or Dahse]        |   boyhood     |  through life |    very low   |
  |Fuller                 |   boyhood     |       ?       |      low      |
  |Gauss                  |      3        |       ?       |    eminent    |
  |Mangiamele             |     10        |   few years   |    average?   |
  |Mondeux                |     10        |   few years   |      low      |
  |Prolongeau             |      6        |   few years   |      low      |
  |Safford                |      6        |   few years   |      good     |
  |"Mr. Van R., of Utica" |      6        |   few years   |    average?   |
  |Whately                |      3        |   few years   |      good     |
  +-----------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

Now among these thirteen names we have two men of transcendent, and
three of high ability. What accounts have they given us of their
methods?

Of the gift of Gauss and Ampère we know nothing except a few striking
anecdotes. After manifesting itself at an age when there is usually no
continuous supraliminal mental effort worth speaking of, it appears to
have been soon merged in the general blaze of their genius. With Bidder
the gift persisted through life, but grew weaker as he grew older. His
paper in Vol. XV. of the _Proceedings of the Institute of Civil
Engineers_, while furnishing a number of practical hints to the
calculator, indicates also a singular readiness of communication between
different mental strata. "Whenever," he says (p. 255) "I feel called
upon to make use of the stores of my mind, they seem to rise with the
rapidity of lightning." And in Vol. CIII. of the same _Proceedings_, Mr.
W. Pole, F.R.S., in describing how Mr. Bidder could determine mentally
the logarithm of any number to 7 or 8 places, says (p. 252): "He had an
almost miraculous power of seeing, as it were, intuitively what factors
would divide any large number, not a prime. Thus, if he were given the
number 17,861, he would instantly remark it was 337×53.... He could not,
he said, explain how he did this; it seemed a natural instinct to him."

Passing on to the two other men of high ability known to have possessed
this gift, Professor Safford and Archbishop Whately, we are struck with
the evanescence of the power after early youth,--or even before the end
of childhood. I quote from Dr. Scripture Archbishop Whately's account of
his powers.

     There was certainly something peculiar in my calculating faculty.
     It began to show itself at between five and six, and lasted about
     three years.... I soon got to do the most difficult sums, always in
     my head, for I knew nothing of figures beyond numeration. I did
     these sums much quicker than any one could upon paper, and I never
     remember committing the smallest error. _When I went to school, at
     which time the passion wore off, I was a perfect dunce at
     ciphering, and have continued so ever since._

Still more remarkable, perhaps, was Professor Safford's loss of power.
Professor Safford's whole bent was mathematical; his boyish gift of
calculation raised him into notice; and he is now a Professor of
Astronomy. He had therefore every motive and every opportunity to retain
the gift, if thought and practice could have retained it. But whereas at
ten years old he worked correctly in his head, in one minute, a
multiplication sum whose answer consisted of 36 figures, he is now, I
believe, neither more nor less capable of such calculation than his
neighbours.

Similar was the fate of a personage who never rises above initials, and
of whose general capacity we know nothing.

"Mr. Van R., of Utica," says Dr. Scripture on the authority of Gall, "at
the age of six years distinguished himself by a singular faculty for
calculating in his head. At eight he entirely lost this faculty, and
after that time he could calculate neither better nor faster than any
other person. _He did not retain the slightest idea of the manner in
which he performed his calculations in childhood._"

Turning now to the stupid or uneducated prodigies, Dase alone seems to
have retained his power through life. Colburn and Mondeux, and
apparently Prolongeau and Mangiamele, lost their gift after childhood.

On the whole the ignorant prodigies seldom appear to have been conscious
of any continuous logical process, while in some cases the separation of
the supraliminal and subliminal trains of thought must have been very
complete. "Buxton would talk freely whilst doing his questions, that
being no molestation or hindrance to him."[29] Fixity and clearness of
inward visualisation seems to have been the leading necessity in all
these achievements; and it apparently mattered little whether the mental
blackboard (so to say) on which the steps of the calculation were
recorded were or were not visible to the mind's eye of the supraliminal
self.

I have been speaking only of visualisation; but it would be interesting
if we could discover how much actual mathematical insight or
inventiveness can be subliminally exercised. Here, however, our
materials are very imperfect. From Gauss and Ampère we have, so far as I
know, no record. At the other end of the scale, we know that Dase
(perhaps the most successful of all these prodigies) was singularly
devoid of mathematical grasp. "On one occasion Petersen tried in vain
for six weeks to get the first elements of mathematics into his head."
"He could not be made to have the least idea of a proposition in Euclid.
Of any language but his own he could never master a word." Yet Dase
received a grant from the Academy of Sciences at Hamburg, on the
recommendation of Gauss, for mathematical work; and actually in twelve
years made tables of factors and prime numbers for the seventh and
nearly the whole of the eighth million,--a task which probably few men
could have accomplished, without mechanical aid, in an ordinary
lifetime. He may thus be ranked as the only man who has ever done
valuable service to Mathematics without being able to cross the Ass's
Bridge.

No support is given by what we know of this group to the theory which
regards subliminal mentation as necessarily a sign of some morbid
dissociation of physical elements. Is there, on the other hand, anything
to confirm a suggestion which will occur in some similar cases, namely,
that,--inasmuch as the addition of subliminal to supraliminal mentation
may often be a completion and integration rather than a fractionation or
disintegration of the total individuality,--we are likely sometimes to
find traces of a more than common activity of the _right_ or less used
cerebral hemisphere? Finding no mention of ambidexterity in the meagre
notices which have come down to us of the greater "prodigies," I begged
the late Mr. Bidder, Q.C., and Mr. Blyth, of Edinburgh (the well-known
civil engineer and perhaps the best living English representative of
what we may call the calculating diathesis), to tell me whether their
left hands possessed more than usual power. And I find that in
these--the only two cases in which I have been able to make
inquiry--there is somewhat more of dextro-cerebral capacity than in the
mass of mankind.

We may now pass on to review some further instances of subliminal
co-operation with conscious thought;--first looking about us for any
cases comparable in _definiteness_ with the preceding; and then
extending our view over the wider and vaguer realm of creative and
artistic work.

But before we proceed to the highly-specialised senses of hearing and
sight, we must note the fact that there are cases of subliminal
intensification of those perceptions of a less specialised kind which
underlie our more elaborate modes of cognising the world around us. The
sense of the _efflux of time_, and the sense of _weight_, or of
muscular resistance, are amongst the profoundest elements in our organic
being. And the sense of time is indicated in several ways as a largely
subliminal faculty. There is much evidence to show that it is often more
exact in men sleeping than in men awake, and in men hypnotised than in
men sleeping. The records of spontaneous somnambulism are full of
predictions made by the subject as to his own case, and accomplished,
presumably by self-suggestion, but without help from clocks, at the
precise minute foretold. Or this hidden knowledge may take shape in the
imagery of dream, as in a case published by Professor Royce, of
Harvard,[30] where his correspondent describes "a dream in which I saw
an enormous flaming clock-dial with the hands standing at 2.20. Awaking
immediately, I struck a match, and upon looking at my watch found it was
a few seconds past 2.20."

Similarly we find cases where the uprush of subliminal faculty is
concerned with the deep organic sensation of muscular resistance. We
need not postulate any direct or supernormal knowledge,--but merely a
subliminal calculation, such as we see in the case of "arithmetical
prodigies," expressing itself supraliminally, sometimes in a phantasmal
picture, sometimes as a mere "conviction," without sensory clothing.[31]

Passing on here to subliminal products of _visual_ type, I am glad to be
able to quote the following passage which seems to me to give in germ
the very theory for which I am now contending on the authority of one of
the most lucid thinkers of the last generation.

The passage occurs in an article by Sir John Herschel on "Sensorial
Vision," in his _Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects_, 1816. Sir
John describes some experiences of his own, "which consist in the
involuntary production of visual impressions, into which geometrical
regularity of form enters as the leading character, and that, under
circumstances which altogether preclude any explanation drawn from a
possible regularity of structure in the retina or the optic nerve."[32]
Twice these patterns appeared in waking daylight hours,--with no illness
or discomfort at the time or afterwards. More frequently they appeared
in darkness; but still while Sir John was fully awake. They appeared
also twice when he was placed under chloroform; "and I should observe
that I never lost my consciousness of being awake and in full
possession of my mind, though quite insensible to what was going on....
Now the question at once presents itself--What _are_ these Geometrical
Spectres? and how, and in what department of the bodily or mental
economy do they originate? They are evidently not dreams. The mind is
not dormant, but active and conscious of the direction of its thoughts;
while these things obtrude themselves on notice, and by calling
attention to them, _direct_ the train of thought into a channel it would
not have taken of itself.... If it be true that the conception of a
regular geometrical pattern implies the exercise of thought and
intelligence, it would almost seem that in such cases as those above
adduced we have evidence of a _thought_, an intelligence, working within
our own organisation distinct from that of our own personality." And Sir
John further suggests that these complex figures, entering the mind in
this apparently arbitrary fashion, throw light upon "the suggestive
principle" to which "we must look for much that is determinant and
decisive of our volition when carried into action." "It strikes me as
not by any means devoid of interest to contemplate cases where, in a
matter so entirely abstract, so completely devoid of any moral or
emotional bearing, as the production of a geometrical figure, we, as it
were, seize upon that principle in the very act, and in the performance
of its office."

From my point of view, of course, I can but admire the acumen which
enabled this great thinker to pierce to the root of the matter by the
aid of so few observations. He does not seem to have perceived the
connection between these "schematic phantasms," to borrow a phrase from
Professor Ladd,[33] and the hallucinatory figures of men or animals seen
in health or in disease. But even from his scanty data his inference
seems to me irresistible;--"we have evidence of a _thought_, an
intelligence, working within our own organisation, distinct from that of
our own personality." I shall venture to claim him as the first
originator of the theory to which the far fuller evidence now accessible
had independently led myself.

Cases observed as definitely as those just quoted are few in number; and
I must pass on into a much trodden--even a confusedly
trampled--field;--the records, namely, left by eminent men as to the
element of subconscious mentation, which was involved in their best
work. Most of these stories have been again and again repeated;--and
they have been collected on a large scale in a celebrated work,--to me
especially distasteful, as containing what seems to me the loose and
extravagant parody of important truth. It is not my business here to
criticise Dr. Von Hartmann's _Philosophy of the Unconscious_ in detail;
but I prefer to direct my readers' attention to a much more modest
volume, in which a young physician has put together the results of a
direct inquiry addressed to some Frenchmen of distinction as to their
methods especially of imaginative work.[34] I quote a few of the replies
addressed to him, beginning with some words from M. Sully Prudhomme,--at
once psychologist and poet,--who is here speaking of the subconscious
clarification of a chain of abstract reasoning. "I have sometimes
suddenly understood a geometrical demonstration made to me a year
previously without having in any way directed thereto my attention or
will. It seemed that the mere spontaneous ripening of the conceptions
which the lectures had implanted in my brain had brought about within me
this novel grasp of the proof."

With this we may compare a statement of Arago's--"Instead of obstinately
endeavouring to understand a proposition at once, I would admit its
truth provisionally;--and next day I would be astonished at
understanding thoroughly that which seemed all dark before."

Condillac similarly speaks of finding an incomplete piece of work
finished next day in his head.

Somewhat similarly, though in another field, M. Retté, a poet, tells Dr.
Chabaneix that he falls asleep in the middle of an unfinished stanza,
and when thinking of it again in the morning finds it completed. And M.
Vincent d'Indy, a musical composer, says that he often has on waking a
fugitive glimpse of a musical effect which (like the memory of a dream)
needs a strong immediate concentration of mind to keep it from
vanishing.

De Musset writes, "On ne travaille pas, on écoute, c'est comme un
inconnu qui vous parle à l'oreille."

Lamartine says, "Ce n'est pas moi qui pense; ce sont mes idées qui
pensent pour moi."

Rémy de Gourmont: "My conceptions rise into the field of consciousness
like a flash of lightning or like the flight of a bird."

M. S. writes: "In writing these dramas I seemed to be a spectator at the
play; I gazed at what was passing on the scene in an eager, wondering
expectation of what was to follow. And yet I felt that all this came
from the depth of my own being."

Saint-Saens had only to listen, as Socrates to his Dæmon; and M. Ribot,
summing up a number of similar cases, says: "It is the unconscious which
produces what is vulgarly called inspiration. This condition is a
positive fact, accompanied with physical and psychical characteristics
peculiar to itself. Above all, it is impersonal and involuntary, it acts
like an instinct, when and how it chooses; it may be wooed, but cannot
be compelled. Neither reflection nor will can supply its place in
original creation.... The bizarre habits of artists when composing tend
to create a special physiological condition,--to augment the cerebral
circulation in order to provoke or to maintain the unconscious
activity."

In what precise way the cerebral circulation is altered we can hardly at
present hope to know. Meantime a few psychological remarks fall more
easily within our reach.

In the first place, we note that a very brief and shallow submergence
beneath the conscious level is enough to infuse fresh vigour into
supraliminal trains of thought. Ideas left to mature unnoticed for a few
days, or for a single night, seem to pass but a very little way beneath
the threshold. They represent, one may say, the first stage of a process
which, although often inconspicuous, is not likely to be
discontinuous,--the sustenance, namely, of the supraliminal life by
impulse or guidance from below.

In the second place, we see in some of these cases of deep and fruitful
_abstraction_ a slight approach to duplication of personality. John
Stuart Mill, intent on his _Principles of Logic_, as he threaded the
crowds of Leadenhall Street, recalls certain morbid cases of hysterical
_distraction_;--only that with Mill the process was an integrative one
and not a dissolutive one--a gain and not a loss of power over the
organism.

And thirdly, in some of these instances we see the man of genius
achieving spontaneously, and unawares, much the same result as that
which is achieved for the hypnotic subject by deliberate artifice. For
he is in fact co-ordinating the waking and the sleeping phases of his
existence. He is carrying into sleep the knowledge and the purpose of
waking hours;--and he is carrying back into waking hours again the
benefit of those profound assimilations which are the privilege of
sleep. Hypnotic suggestion aims at co-operations of just this kind
between the waking state in which the suggestion, say, of some
functional change, is planned and the sleeping state in which that
change is carried out,--with benefit persisting anew into waking life.
The hypnotic trance, which is a _developed_ sleep, thus accomplishes for
the ordinary man what ordinary sleep accomplishes for the man of genius.

The coming chapters on Sleep and Hypnotism will illustrate this point
more fully. But I may here anticipate my discussion of _dreams_ by
quoting one instance where dreams, self-suggested by waking will,
formed, as one may say, an integral element in distinguished genius.

The late Robert Louis Stevenson, being in many ways a typical man of
genius, was in no way more markedly gifted with that integrating
faculty--that increased power over all strata of the personality--which
I have ascribed to genius, than in his relation to his dreams (see "A
Chapter on Dreams" in his volume _Across the Plains_). Seldom has the
essential analogy between dreams and inspiration been exhibited in such
a striking way. His dreams had always (he tells us) been of great
vividness, and often of markedly _recurrent_ type. But the point of
interest is that, when he began to write stories for publication, the
"little people who managed man's internal theatre" understood the change
as well as he.

     When he lay down to prepare himself for sleep, he no longer sought
     amusement, but printable and profitable tales; and after he had
     dozed off in his box-seat, his little people continued their
     evolutions with the same mercantile designs.... For the most part,
     whether awake or asleep, he is simply occupied--he or his little
     people--in consciously making stories for the market....

     The more I think of it, the more I am moved to press upon the world
     my question: "Who are the Little People?" They are near connections
     of the dreamer's, beyond doubt; they share in his financial worries
     and have an eye to the bank book; they share plainly in his
     training; ... they have plainly learned like him to build the
     scheme of a considerate story and to arrange emotion in progressive
     order; only I think they have more talent; and one thing is beyond
     doubt,--they can tell him a story piece by piece, like a serial,
     and keep him all the while in ignorance of where they aim....

     That part [of my work] which is done while I am sleeping is the
     Brownies' part beyond contention; but that which is done when I am
     up and about is by no means necessarily mine, since all goes to
     show the Brownies have a hand in it even then.

Slight and imperfect as the above statistics and observations admittedly
are, they seem to me to point in a more useful direction than do some of
the facts collected by that modern group of anthropologists who hold
that genius is in itself a kind of nervous malady, a disturbance of
mental balance, akin to criminality or even to madness.

It is certainly not true, as I hold, either that the human race in
general is nervously degenerating, or that nervous degeneration tends to
a maximum in its most eminent members. But it can be plausibly
maintained that the proportion of nervous to other disorders tends to
increase. And it is certain that not nervous degeneration but nervous
change or development is now proceeding among civilised peoples more
rapidly than ever before, and that this self-adaptation to wider
environments must inevitably be accompanied in the more marked cases by
something of nervous instability. And it is true also that from one
point of view these changes might form matter for regret; and that in
order to discern what I take to be their true meaning we have to regard
the problem of human evolution from a somewhat unfamiliar standpoint.

The nervous system is probably tending in each generation to become more
complex and more delicately ramified. As is usual when any part of an
organism is undergoing rapid evolutive changes, this nervous progress is
accompanied with some instability. Those individuals in whom the
hereditary or the acquired change is the most rapid are likely also to
suffer most from a _perturbation which masks evolution_--an occasional
appearance of what may be termed "nervous sports" of a useless or even
injurious type. Such are the fancies and fanaticisms, the bizarre likes
and dislikes, the excessive or aberrant sensibilities, which have been
observed in some of the eminent men whom Lombroso discusses in his book
on the Man of Genius. Their truest analogue, as we shall presently see
more fully, lies in the oddities or morbidities of sentiment or
sensation which so often accompany the development of the human organism
into its full potencies, or precede the crowning effort by which a fresh
organism is introduced into the world.

Such at least is my view; but the full acceptance of this view must
depend upon some very remote and very speculative considerations bearing
upon the nature and purport of the whole existence and evolution of man.
Yet however remote and speculative the thesis which I defend may be, it
is not one whit remoter or more speculative than the view which, _faute
de mieux_, is often tacitly assumed by scientific writers.

In our absolute ignorance of the source from whence life came, we have
no ground for assuming that it was a purely planetary product, or that
its unknown potentialities are concerned with purely planetary ends. It
would be as rash for the biologist to assume that life on earth can only
point to generations of further life on earth as it would have been for
some cosmic geologist to assume--before the appearance of life on
earth--that geological forces must needs constitute all the activity
which could take place on this planet.

Since the germ of life appeared on earth, its history has been a history
not only of gradual _self-adaptation_ to a known environment, but of
gradual _discovery_ of an environment, always there, but unknown. What
we call its primitive simple irritability was in fact a dim panæsthesia;
a potential faculty, as yet unconscious of all the stimuli to which it
had not yet learnt to respond. As these powers of sensation and of
response have developed, they have gradually revealed to the living germ
environments of which at first it could have no conception.

It is probable, to begin with, that the only environment which the vast
majority of our ancestors knew was simply hot water. For the greater
part of the time during which life has existed on earth it would have
been thought chimerical to suggest that we could live in anything else.
It was a great day for us when an ancestor crawled up out of the
slowly-cooling sea;--or say rather when a previously unsuspected
capacity for directly breathing air gradually revealed the fact that we
had for long been breathing air in the water;--and that we were living
in the midst of a vastly extended environment,--the atmosphere of the
earth. It was a great day again when another ancestor felt on his
pigment-spot the solar ray;--or say rather when a previously unsuspected
capacity for perceiving light revealed the fact that we had for long
been acted upon by light as well as by heat; and that we were living in
the midst of a vastly extended environment,--namely, the illumined
Universe that stretches to the Milky Way. It was a great day when the
first skate (if skate he were) felt an unknown virtue go out from him
towards some worm or mudfish;--or say rather when a previously
unsuspected capacity for electrical excitation demonstrated the fact
that we had long been acted upon by electricity as well as by heat and
by light; and that we were living in an inconceivable and limitless
environment,--namely, an ether charged with infinite energy, overpassing
and interpenetrating alike the last gulf of darkness and the extremest
star. All this,--phrased perhaps in some other fashion,--all men admit
as true. May we not then suppose that there are yet other environments,
other interpretations, which a further awakening of faculty still
subliminal is yet fated by its own nascent response to discover? Will it
be alien to the past history of evolution if I add: It was a great day
when the first thought or feeling flashed into some mind of beast or man
from a mind distant from his own?--when a previously unsuspected
capacity of telepathic percipience revealed the fact that we had long
been acted upon by telepathic as well as by sensory stimuli; and that we
were living in an inconceivable and limitless environment,--a
thought-world or spiritual universe charged with infinite life, and
interpenetrating and overpassing all human spirits,--up to what some
have called World-Soul, and some God?

And now it will be easily understood that one of the corollaries from
the conception of a constantly widening and deepening perception of an
environment infinite in infinite ways, will be that the faculties which
befit the material environment have absolutely no primacy, unless it be
of the merely chronological kind, over those faculties which science has
often called _by-products_, because they have no manifest tendency to
aid their possessor in the struggle for existence in a material world.
The higher gifts of genius--poetry, the plastic arts, music, philosophy,
pure mathematics--all of these are precisely as much in the central
stream of evolution--are perceptions of new truth and powers of new
action just as decisively predestined for the race of man--as the
aboriginal Australian's faculty for throwing a boomerang or for swarming
up a tree for grubs. There is, then, about those loftier interests
nothing exotic, nothing accidental; they are an intrinsic part of that
ever-evolving response to our surroundings which forms not only the
planetary but the cosmic history of all our race.

What inconsistencies, what absurdities, underlie that assumption that
evolution means nothing more than the survival of animals fittest to
conquer enemies and to overrun the earth. On that bare hypothesis the
genus _homo_ is impossible to explain. No one really attempts to explain
him except on the tacit supposition that Nature somehow tended to evolve
intelligence--somehow needed to evolve joy; was not satisfied with such
an earth-over-runner as the rabbit, or such an invincible conqueror as
the influenza microbe. But _how much_ intelligence, _what_ kind of joy
Nature aimed at--is this to be left to be settled by the instinct of
_l'homme sensuel moyen?_ or ought we not rather to ask of the best
specimens of our race what it is that they live for?--whether they
labour for the meat that perisheth, or for Love and Wisdom? To more and
more among mankind the need of food is supplied with as little conscious
effort as the need of air; yet these are often the very men through whom
evolution is going on most unmistakably--who are becoming the typical
figures of the swiftly-changing race.

Once more. If this point of view be steadily maintained, we shall gain
further light on some of those strangenesses and irregularities of
genius which have led to its paradoxical juxtaposition with insanity as
a divergence from the accepted human type. The distinctive
characteristic of genius is the large infusion of the subliminal in its
mental output; and one characteristic of the subliminal in my view is
that it is in closer relation than the supraliminal to the spiritual
world, and is thus nearer to the primitive source and extra-terrene
initiation of life. And earthly Life itself--embodied as it is in
psycho-physically individualised forms--is, on the theory advanced in
these pages, a product or characteristic of the etherial or metetherial
and not of the gross material world. Thence in some unknown fashion it
came; there in some unknown fashion it subsists even throughout its
earthly manifestation; thither in some unknown fashion it must after
earthly death return. If indeed the inspirations of genius spring from
a source one step nearer to primitive reality than is that specialised
consensus of faculties which natural selection has lifted above the
threshold for the purposes of working-day existence, then surely we need
not wonder if the mind and frame of man should not always suffice for
smooth and complete amalgamation; if some prefiguration of faculties
adapted to a later stage of being should mar the symmetry of the life of
earth.

And thus there may really be something at times _incommensurable_
between the inspirations of genius and the results of conscious logical
thought. Just as the calculating boy solves his problems by methods
which differ from the methods of the trained mathematician, so in
artistic matters also that "something of strangeness" which is in "all
excellent beauty," may be the expression of a real difference between
subliminal and supraliminal modes of perception. I cannot help thinking
that such a difference is perceptible in subliminal relations to speech;
that the subliminal self will sometimes surpass conscious effort, if it
is treating speech as a branch of Art, in Poetry;--or else in some sense
will fall short of conscious effort, when it is merely using words as an
unavoidable medium to express ideas which common speech was hardly
designed to convey.

Thus, on the one hand, when in presence of one of the great verbal
achievements of the race--say the _Agamemnon_ of Æschylus--it is hard to
resist the obscure impression that some form of intelligence other than
supraliminal reason or conscious selection has been at work. The result
less resembles the perfection of rational choice among known data than
the imperfect presentation of some scheme based on perceptions which we
cannot entirely follow.

But, on the other hand, even though words may thus be used by genius
with something of the mysterious remoteness of music itself, it seems to
me that our subliminal mentation is less closely bound to the faculty of
speech than is our supraliminal. There is a phrase in common use which
involves perhaps more of psychological significance than has yet been
brought out. Of all which we can call genius, or which we can ally with
genius--of art, of love, of religious emotion--it is common to hear men
say that they _transcend the scope of speech_. Nor have we any reason
for regarding this as a mere vague sentimental expression.

There is no _a priori_ ground for supposing that language will have the
power to express all the thoughts and emotions of man. It may indeed be
maintained that the inevitable course of its development tends to
exhibit more and more clearly its inherent limitations. "Every
language," it has been said, "begins as poetry and ends as algebra." To
use the terms employed in this work, every language begins as a
subliminal uprush and ends as a supraliminal artifice. Organic instincts
impel to primitive ejaculation; unconscious laws of mind shape early
grammar. But even in our own day--and we are still in the earth's
infancy--this naïveté of language is fast disappearing. The needs of
science and of commerce have become dominant, and although our
vocabulary, based as it is on concrete objects and direct sensations, is
refined for the expression of philosophic thought, still we cannot
wonder if our supraliminal manipulation leaves us with an instrument
less and less capable of expressing the growing complexity of our whole
psychical being.

What then, we may ask, is the attitude and habit of the subliminal self
likely to be with regard to language? Is it not probable that other
forms of symbolism may retain a greater proportional importance among
those submerged mental operations which have not been systematised for
the convenience of communication with other men?

I think that an intelligent study of visual and motor automatism will
afford us sufficient proof that symbolism, at any rate pictorial
symbolism, becomes increasingly important as we get at the contents of
those hidden strata. Telepathic messages, especially, which form, as we
shall see, the special prerogative or characteristic of subliminal
communication, seem to be conveyed by vague impression or by inward or
externalised picture oftener than by articulate speech. And I may so far
anticipate later discussion of _automatic writings_ (whether
self-inspired or telepathic) as to point out a curious linguistic
quality which almost all such writings share. The "messages" of a number
of automatists, taken at random, will be sure to resemble each other
much more closely than do the supraliminal writings of the same persons.
Quite apart from their general correspondence in _ideas_--which belongs
to another branch of our subject--there is among the automatic writings
of quite independent automatists a remarkable correspondence of literary
style. There is a certain quality which reminds one of a _translation_,
or of the compositions of a person writing in a language which he is not
accustomed to talk. These characteristics appear at once in automatic
script, even of the incoherent kind; they persist when there is no
longer any dream-like incoherence; they are equally marked, even when,
as often happens, the automatic script surpasses in intelligence, and
even in its own kind of eloquence, the products of the waking or
supraliminal mind.

And side by side and intercurrent with these written messages come those
strange meaningless arabesques which have been baptized as
"spirit-drawings"--though they rarely show any clear trace of the
operation of an external intelligence.[35] These complex and fanciful
compositions--often absolutely automatic--appear to me like a stammering
or rudimentary symbolism; as though the subliminal intelligence were
striving to express itself through a vehicle perhaps more congenial to
its habits than articulate language.

Returning, then, from these illustrations drawn from actual _automatism_
to our proper subject of _genius_,--that happy mixture of subliminal
with supraliminal faculty,--we may ask ourselves in what kind of
subliminal uprush this hidden habit of wider symbolism, of
self-communion beyond the limits of speech, will be likely to manifest
itself above the conscious threshold.

The obvious answer to this question lies in the one word Art. The
inspiration of Art of all kinds consists in the invention of precisely
such a wider symbolism as has been above adumbrated. I am not speaking,
of course, of symbolism of a forced and mechanical kind--symbolism
designed and elaborated as such--but rather of that pre-existent but
hidden concordance between visible and invisible things, between matter
and thought, between thought and emotion, which the plastic arts, and
music, and poetry, do each in their own special field discover and
manifest for human wisdom and joy.

In using these words, I must repeat, I am far from adopting the formulæ
of any special school. The symbolism of which I speak implies nothing of
mysticism. Nor indeed, in my view, can there be any real gulf or deep
division between so-called realistic and idealistic schools. All that
exists is continuous; nor can Art symbolise any one aspect of the
universe without also implicitly symbolising aspects which lie beyond.

And thus in the Arts we have symbolism at every stage of transparency
and obscurity; from symbolisms which merely summarise speech to
symbolisms which transcend it. Sometimes, as with Music, it is worse
than useless to press for too close an interpretation. Music marches,
and will march for ever, through an ideal and unimaginable world. Her
melody may be a mighty symbolism, but it is a symbolism to which man has
lost the key. Poetry's material, on the other hand, is the very language
which she would fain transcend. But her utterance must be subliminal and
symbolic, if it is to be poetry indeed; it must rise (as has been
already hinted) from a realm profounder than deliberate speech; it must
come charged, as Tennyson has it, with that "charm in words, a charm no
words can give."

Here, too, we must dwell for a moment upon another and higher kind of
internal visualisation. I have spoken of the arithmetical prodigy as
possessing a kind of internal blackboard, on which he inscribes with
ease and permanence his imaginary memoranda. But blackboards are not the
only surfaces on which inscriptions can be made. There are other
men--prodigies of a different order--whose internal _tabula_ is not of
blackened wood, but of canvas or of marble; whose inscriptions are not
rows of Arabic numerals but living lines of colour, or curves of
breathing stone. Even the most realistic art is something more than
transcript and calculation; and for art's higher imaginative
achievements there must needs be moments of inward idealisation when
visible beauty seems but the token and symbol of beauty unrevealed; when
Praxiteles must "draw from his own heart the archetype of the Eros that
he made;" when Tintoret must feel with Heraclitus that "whatsoever we
see waking is but deadness, and whatsoever sleeping, is but dream."

But when we reach this point we have begun (as I say) to transcend the
special province to which, in Chapter I, I assigned the title of
_genius_. I there pointed out that the influence of the subliminal on
the supraliminal might conveniently be divided under three main heads.
When the subliminal mentation co-operates with and supplements the
supraliminal, without changing the apparent phase of personality, we
have _genius_. When subliminal operations change the apparent phase of
personality from the state of waking in the direction of trance, we have
_hypnotism_. When the subliminal mentation forces itself up through the
supraliminal, without amalgamation, as in crystal-vision, automatic
writing, etc., we have _sensory or motor automatism_. In accordance with
this definition, the _content_ of the inspirations of genius is supposed
to be of the same general type as the content of ordinary thought. We
have regarded genius as crystallising fluid ideas; or, if you will, as
concentrating and throwing upwards in its clear fountain a maze of
subterranean streams. But we have not regarded it as modifying, in such
operation, the ordinary alert wakefulness of the thinker, nor as
providing bun with any fresh knowledge, obtainable by supernormal
methods alone.

It is plain, however, that such distinctions as those which I have drawn
between genius, trance, automatism, cannot possibly be rigid or
absolute. They are distinctions made for convenience between different
phases of what must really be a continuous process--namely, the
influence of the Self below the threshold upon the Self above it.
Between each of these definite phases all kinds of connections and
intermediate stages must surely exist.

Connections between _trance_ and _automatism_, indeed, are obvious
enough. The difficulty has rather lain in their clear separation.
Trance, when habitual, is pretty sure to lead to automatic speech or
writing. Automatism, when prolonged, is similarly apt to induce a state
of trance.

The links between _Genius_ and these cognate states are of a less
conspicuous kind. They do, however, exist in such variety as to confirm
in marked fashion the analogies suggested above.

And first, as to the connection between genius and automatism, one may
say that just as anger is a brief madness, so the flash of Genius is
essentially a brief automatism.

Wordsworth's moments of inspiration, when, as he says,

    "Some lovely image in the song rose up
     Full-formed, like Venus rising from the sea,"

were in effect moments of automatic utterance; albeit of utterance held
fast in immediate co-operation with the simultaneous workings of the
supraliminal self. Such a sudden poetic creation, like the calculating
boy's announcement of the product of two numbers, resembles the sudden
rush of planchette or pencil, in haste to scrawl some long-wished-for
word.

Now extend this momentary automatism a little further. We come then to
what is called the faculty of improvisation. How much is meant by this
term? Is the extempore oration, "the unpremeditated lay," in truth a
subliminal product? or have we to do merely with the rapid exercise of
ordinary powers?

In the first place, it is clear that much of what is called
improvisation is a matter of memory. The so-called secondary automatism
which enables the pianist to play a known piece without conscious
attention passes easily into improvisations which the player himself may
genuinely accept as original; but which really consist of remembered
fragments united by conventional links of connection. Thus also the
orator, "thinking on his legs," trusts himself at first to the automatic
repetition of a few stock phrases, but gradually finds that long periods
flow unforeseen and unremembered from his tongue.

We thus get beyond the range of stereotyped synergies, of habituations
of particular groups of nerve-centres to common action. There is some
adaptability and invention; some new paths are traversed; adjustments
are made for which no mere recurrence to old precedents will suffice.

The problem here resembles that well-known difficulty of explaining what
goes on during the restoration or "substitution" of function after an
injury to the brain. In that case, the brain-elements which remain
uninjured slowly assume functions which they apparently never exercised
before,--rearranging paths of cerebral communication in order to get the
old efficiency out of the damaged and diminished brain-material. This
recovery is not rapid like an extemporisation, but gradual, like a
healing or re-growth, and it therefore does not suggest an intelligent
control so much as a physiological process, like the re-budding on a
certain pre-ordained pattern of the severed claw of a crab. Of course
this restoration of brain-functions is inexplicable, as all growth is at
present inexplicable. We may call it indeed with some reason the highest
process of human growth. So viewed, it forms a kind of middle term
between ordinary growth of bone or muscle, always on a predetermined
plan, and that sudden creation of new cerebral connections or pathways
which is implied in an inspiration of genius. Such a juxtaposition need
not weaken my claim that the inspirations of genius represent a
co-operant stream of submerged mentation, fully as developed in its own
way as the mentation of which we are conscious above the threshold. The
nature and degree of subliminal faculty must of course be judged by its
highest manifestations. And this analogy between the hidden operations
of _genius_ and of _growth_ would rather support me in regarding organic
growth also as controlled by something of intelligence or memory, which
under fitting conditions--as in the hypnotic trance--may be induced to
co-operate with the waking will.

Moreover, the talent of improvisation, which suggested these analogies,
will sometimes act much more persistently than in the case of the orator
or the musician. There is reason to believe (both from internal style
and from actual statements) that it plays a large part in imaginative
literature. Various passages from George Sand's life-history,
corroborated by the statements of other persons familiar with her
methods of working, reveal in her an unusual vigour and fertility of
literary outflow going on in an almost dream-like condition; a condition
midway between the actual inventive dreams of R. L. Stevenson and the
conscious labour of an ordinary man's composition.

What George Sand felt in the act of writing was a continuous and
effortless flow of ideas, sometimes with and sometimes without an
apparent _externalisation_ of the characters who spoke in her romances.
And turning to another author, as sane and almost as potent as George
Sand herself, we find a phenomenon which would have suggested to us
actual insanity if observed in a mind less robust and efficient. If the
allusions to the apparent independence of Dickens's characters which are
scattered through his letters be read with our related facts in view, it
will no longer be thought that they are intended as a mystification.
Mrs. Gamp, his greatest creation, spoke to him, he tells us (generally
in church) as with an inward monitory voice.

And note further that as scientific introspection develops we are likely
to receive fuller accounts of these concurrent mental processes, these
partial externalisations of the creatures of the romancer's brain. One
such account, both definite and elaborate, has been published by M.
Binet in _L'Année Psychologique_ for 1894.[36]

This account,--contributed as serious evidence, as M. Binet's long
article shows,--is thoroughly concordant with several other cases
already known to us. It comes midway between Stevenson's dreams and the
hysteric's _idées fixes_.

I have thus far endeavoured to show that Genius represents not only the
crystallisation of ideas already existing in floating form in the
supraliminal intelligence, but also an independent, although concurrent,
stream of mentation, spreading often to wider range, although still
concerned with matters in themselves cognisable by the normal
intelligence.

Let us proceed to push the inquiry a step further. It has been claimed
in this work for subliminal uprushes generally that they often contain
knowledge which no ordinary method of research could acquire. Is this
supernormal knowledge--we ought now to ask--ever represented in the
uprushes to which we give the name of Genius?

What is the relation, in short, of the man of Genius to the sensitive?

If the man of Genius be, as I have urged, on the whole the completest
type of humanity, and if the sensitive's special gift be in itself one
of the most advanced forms of human faculty, ought not the inspirations
of genius to bring with them flashes of supernormal knowledge as
intimate as those which the sensitive--perhaps in other respects a
commonplace person--from time to time is privileged to receive?

Some remarkable instances of this kind undoubtedly do exist. The most
conspicuous and most important of all cannot, from motives of reverence,
be here discussed. Nor will I dwell upon other founders of religions, or
on certain traditional saints or sages. But among historical characters
of the first mark the names of Socrates and of Joan of Arc are enough to
cite. I believe that the monitions of the Dæmon of Socrates--the
subliminal self of a man of transcendent genius--have in all probability
been described to us with literal truth: and did in fact convey to that
great philosopher precisely the kind of telæsthetic or precognitive
information which forms the sensitive's privilege to-day. We have thus
in Socrates the ideal unification of human powers.

It must, however, be admitted that such complete unification is not the
general rule for men of genius; that their inspirations generally stop
short of telepathy or of telæsthesia. I think we may explain this
limitation somewhat as follows. The man of genius is what he is by
virtue of possessing a readier communication than most men possess
between his supraliminal and his subliminal self. From his subliminal
self, he can only draw what it already possesses; and we must not assume
as a matter of course that the subliminal region of any one of us
possesses that particular sensitivity--that specific transparency--which
can receive and register _definite facts_ from the unseen. _That_ may be
a gift which stands as much alone--in independence of other gifts or
faculties--in the subliminal region as, say, a perfect musical ear in
the supraliminal. The man of genius may draw much from those hidden
wells of being without seeing reflected therein any actual physical
scene in the universe beyond his ordinary ken.

And yet neither must we hastily assume that because the man of genius
gets no _definite_ impression of a world beyond our senses he does not
therefore get any _true_ impression, which is all his own.

I believe, on the contrary, that true, though vague, impressions of a
world beyond the range of sense are actually received--I do not say by
all men of genius, but by men of genius of certain types.[37]

A dim but genuine consciousness of the spiritual environment; that (it
seems) is the degree of revelation which artistic or philosophic genius
is capable of conferring. Subliminal uprushes, in other words, so far as
they are intellectual, tend to become _telæsthetic_. They bring with
them indefinite intimations of what I hold to be the great truth that
the human spirit is essentially capable of a deeper than sensorial
perception, of a direct knowledge of facts of the universe outside the
range of any specialised organ or of any planetary view.

But this conclusion points the way to a speculation more important
still. Telæsthesia is not the only spiritual law, nor are subliminal
uprushes affairs of the intellect alone. Beyond and above man's innate
power of world-wide perception, there exists also that universal link of
spirit with spirit which in its minor earthly manifestations we call
telepathy. Our submerged faculty--the subliminal uprushes of genius--can
expand in that direction as well as in the direction of telæsthesia.
The emotional content, indeed, of those uprushes is even profounder and
more important than the intellectual;--in proportion as Love and
Religion are profounder and more important than Science or Art.

That primary passion, I repeat, which binds life to life, which links us
both to life near and visible and to life imagined but unseen;--_that_
is no mere organic, no mere planetary impulse, but the inward aspect of
the telepathic law. Love and religion are thus _continuous_; they
represent different phases of one all-pervading mutual gravitation of
souls. The flesh does not conjoin, but dissever; although through its
very severance it suggests a shadow of the union which it cannot bestow.
We have to do here neither with a corporeal nor with a purely human
emotion. Love is the energy of integration which makes a Cosmos of the
Sum of Things.

But here there is something of controversy to traverse before a revived
Platonic conception of love can hope to be treated by the physiologist
as more than a pedantic jest. And naturally so; since there is no
emotion subliminal over so wide a range of origin,--fed so obscurely by
"all thoughts, all passions, all delights,"--and consequently so
mysterious even to the percipient himself. At one end of its scale love
is based upon an instinct as primitive as the need of nutrition; even if
at the other end it becomes, as Plato has it, the ἑρμεὑον καἱ
διαπορθμεὑον "the Interpreter and Mediator between God and Man." The
controversy as to the planetary or cosmical scope of the passion of Love
is in fact central to our whole subject.

It will give clearness to the question in dispute if I quote here a
strong expression of each view in turn. For the physiological or
materialist conception of the passion of love,--where love's subliminal
element is held to be of the organic type,--set forth in no light or
cynical spirit, but with the moral earnestness of a modern Lucretius, I
can turn to no better authority than Professor Pierre Janet. The passage
which follows is no mere _boutade_ or paradox; it is a kind of
culminating expression of the theory which regards the supraliminal man
as the normal man, and distrusts all deep disturbance of his accustomed
psychical routine.

     It is commonly said that love is a passion to which man is always
     liable, and which may surprise him at any moment of his life from
     15 to 75. This does not seem to me accurate; and a man is not
     throughout all his life and at every moment susceptible of falling
     in love (_de devenir amoureux_). When a man is in good physical and
     moral health, when he has easy and complete command of all his
     ideas, he may expose himself to circumstances the most capable of
     giving rise to a passion, but he will not feel it. His desires will
     be reasonable and obedient to his will, leading the man only so far
     as he wishes to go, and disappearing when he wishes to be rid of
     them. On the other hand, if a man is morally below the mark
     (_malade au moral_),--if in consequence of physical fatigue or
     excessive intellectual work, or of violent shocks and prolonged
     sorrow, he is exhausted, melancholy, distracted, timid, incapable
     of controlling his ideas,--in a word, _depressed_,--then he will
     fall in love, or receive the germ of some kind of passion, on the
     first and most trivial occasion.... The least thing is then enough;
     the sight of some face, a gesture, a word, which previously would
     have left us altogether indifferent, strikes us, and becomes the
     starting point of a long amorous malady. Or more than this, an
     object which had made no impression on us, at a moment when our
     mind was healthier and not capable of inoculation, may have left in
     us some insignificant memory which reappears in a moment of morbid
     receptivity. That is enough; the germ is sown in a favourable soil;
     it will develop itself and grow.

     There is at first, as in every virulent malady, a period of
     incubation; the new idea passes and repasses in the vague reveries
     of the enfeebled consciousness; then seems for a few days to have
     disappeared and to leave the mind to recover from its passing
     trouble. But the idea has done its work below the surface; it has
     become strong enough to shake the body; and to provoke movements
     whose origin lies outside the primary consciousness. What is the
     surprise of a sensible man when he finds himself piteously
     returning beneath the windows of his charmer, whither his wandering
     feet have taken him without his knowledge;--or when in the midst of
     his daily work he hears his lips murmuring perpetually the
     well-known name!... Such is passion in its reality; not as
     idealised by fantastic description, but reduced to its essential
     psychological characteristics. (_L'Automatisme Psychologique_, p.
     466.)

On the other side I will appeal to Plato himself, giving a brief sketch
merely of one of the leading passages (_Symposium_, 192-212) where the
Platonic conception of love is set forth.[38]

Plato begins by recognising, as fully as pessimist or cynic could do,
the absolute inadequacy of what is called on earth the satisfaction of
this profound desire. Lovers who love aright will feel that no physical
nearness can content them, but what _will_ content them they cannot say.
"Their soul," says Plato, "is manifestly desiring something else; and
what it is she cannot tell, only she darkly prophesies thereof and
guesses it from afar. But if Hephæstus with his forging fire were to
stand beside that pair and say: 'Is this what ye desire--to be wholly
one? to be together by night and day?--for I am ready to melt you
together and to make you grow in one, so that from two ye shall become
one only, and in this life shall be undivided, and dying shall die
together, and in the underworld shall be a single soul';--there is no
lover who would not eagerly accept the offer, and acknowledge it as the
expression of the unknown yearning and the fulfilment of the ancient
need." And through the mouth of Diotima, Plato insists that it is an
unfailing sign of true love that its desires are _for ever_; nay, that
love may be even defined as the desire of the _everlasting_ possession
of the good. And in all love's acts he finds the impress of man's
craving for immortality,--for immortality whose only visible image for
us on earth is the birth of children to us as we ourselves decay,--so
that when the slow self-renewal of our own everchanging bodies has worn
out and ceased, we may be renewed in brighter, younger bodies which we
desire to be born to us from whomsoever we find most fair. "And then,"
says Plato, rising, as ever, from visible to invisible things, "if
active _bodies_ have so strong a yearning that an endless series of
lovely images of themselves may constitute, as it were, an earthly
immortality for them when they have worn away, how greatly must creative
_souls_ desire that partnership and close communion with other souls as
fair as they may bring to birth a brood of lofty thoughts, poems,
statues, institutions, laws,--the fitting progeny of the soul?

"And he who in his youth hath the need of these things in him, and grows
to be a godlike man, wanders about in search of a noble and
well-nurtured soul; and finding it, and in presence of that beauty which
he forgets not night or day, brings forth the beautiful which he
conceived long ago; and the twain together tend that which he hath
brought forth, and are bound by a far closer bond than that of earthly
children, since the children which are born to them are fairer and more
immortal far. Who would not choose to have Homer's offspring rather than
any sons or daughters of men? Who would not choose the offspring which
Lycurgus left behind him, to be the very salvation of Lacedæmon and of
Greece? or the children of Solon, whom we call Father of our Laws? or of
other men like these, whether Greeks or barbarians, who by great deeds
that they have done have become the begetters of every kind of
virtue?--ay, and to these men's children have temples been set up, and
never to any other progeny of man...."

"He, then, who to this end would strive aright, must begin in youth to
seek fair forms, and should learn first to love one fair form only, and
therein to engender noble thoughts. And then he will perceive that the
beauty of one fair form is to the beauty of another near akin; and that
if it be Beauty's self he seek, it were madness not to account the
beauty of all forms as one same thing; and considering this, he will be
the lover of all lovely shapes, and will abate his passion for one shape
alone, despising and deeming it but a little thing. And this will lead
him on to see that the beauty of the soul is far more precious than any
beauty of outward form, so that if he find a fair soul, though it be in
a body which hath but little charm, he will be constant thereunto, and
bring to birth such thoughts as teach and strengthen, till he lead that
soul on to see the beauty of actions and of laws, and how all beauty is
in truth akin, and the body's beauty is but a little matter; and from
actions he will lead him on to sciences, that he may see how sciences
are fair; and looking on the abundance of beauty may no longer be as the
slave or bondman of one beauty or of one law; but setting sail into the
ocean of beauty, and creating and beholding many fair and glorious
thoughts and images in a philosophy without stint or stay, he may thus
at last wax strong and grow, and may perceive that there is one science
only, the science of infinite beauty.

"For he who hath thus far had intelligence of love, and hath beheld all
fair things in order and aright,--he drawing near to the end of things
lovable shall behold a BEING marvellously fair; for whose sake in truth
it is that all the previous labours have been undergone: One who is from
everlasting, and neither is born nor perisheth, nor can wax nor wane,
nor hath change or turning or alteration of foul and fair; nor can that
beauty be imagined after the fashion of face or hands or bodily parts
and members, nor in any form of speech or knowledge, nor as dwelling in
aught but in itself; neither in beast nor man nor earth nor heaven nor
any other creature; but Beauty only and alone and separate and eternal,
which, albeit all other fair things partake thereof and grow and perish,
itself without change or increase or diminution endures for everlasting.
And whoso being led on and upward by human loves begins to see that
Beauty, he is not far, I say, from reaching the end of all. And surely
then, O Socrates (said that guest from Mantinea), man's life is worth
the living, when he beholds that Primal Fair; which when thou seest it
shall not seem to thee to be made after the fashion of gold or raiment
or those forms of earth,--whom now beholding thou art stricken dumb, and
fain, if it were possible, without thought of meat or drink, wouldst
look and love for ever. What would it be, then, were it granted to any
man to see Very Beauty clear;--incorruptible and undefiled, not mingled
with colour or flesh of man, or with aught that can consume away, but
single and divine? Could man's life, in that vision and beatitude, be
poor or low? or deemest thou not (said she), that then alone it will be
possible for this man, discerning spiritual beauty with those eyes by
which it is spiritually discerned, to beget no shadows of virtue, since
that is no shadow to which he clings, but virtue in very truth, since he
hath the very Truth in his embrace? and begetting and rearing Virtue as
his child, he must needs become the friend of God; and if there be any
man who is immortal, that man is he."

Between the aspects of love here expressed in extreme terms,--the
planetary aspect, if I may so term it, and the cosmical,--the choice is
momentous. I do not indeed say that in our estimate of love is involved
our estimate of Religion; for Religion should mean the sane response of
the spirit to all that is known of Cosmic Law. But Religion in the sense
in which it is often used,--our emotional and ethical attitude towards
Life Unseen;--this is in reality too closely parallel to Platonic Love
to allow the psychologist who denies reality in the one to assume
reality in the other. For the Platonic lover the image of the Beloved
one--no longer a matter of conscious summons and imagination--has become
the indwelling and instinctive impulse to noble thought and deed. Even
such to a Francis or to a Theresa is the image of the Divinity whom they
adore; and if they claim that sometimes in moments of crisis they feel a
sway, a guidance, a _communicatio idiomatum_ with the Divine, we may
point in reply to the humbler, but more tangible, evidence which assures
us that even between souls still inhabiting and souls who have quitted
the flesh there may exist a telepathic intercommunication and an
impalpable confluence from afar.

Brief as this survey has been, it has served to indicate that the
psychical type to which we have applied the name of genius may be
recognized in every region of thought and emotion, as in each direction
a man's every-day self may be more or less permeable to subliminal
impulses. Coming, then, to the question, "What is the origin of genius?"
I cannot accept the ordinary explanation that it is a mere "sport" or
mental by-product, occurring as physical "sports" do in the course of
evolution. The view which I hold,--the view which I am here suggesting,
is in some sort a renewal of the old Platonic "reminiscence," in the
light of that fuller knowledge which is common property to-day. I hold
that in the protoplasm or primary basis of all organic life there must
have been an inherent adaptability to the manifestation of all faculties
which organic life has in fact manifested. I hold, of course, that
"sports" or variations occur, which are at present unpredictable, and
which reveal in occasional offspring faculties which their parents
showed no signs of possessing. But I differ from those who hold that the
faculty itself thus manifested is now for the first time initiated in
that stock by some chance combination of hereditary elements. I hold
that it is not initiated, but only revealed; that the "sport" has not
called a new faculty into being, but has merely raised an existing
faculty above the threshold of supraliminal consciousness.

This view, if pushed back far enough, is no doubt inconsistent with the
way in which evolution is generally conceived. For it denies that all
human faculties must have been evoked by terrene experience. It assumes
a subliminal self, with unknown faculties, originated in some unknown
way, and not merely by contact with the needs which the terrene organism
has had to meet. It thus seems at first sight to be introducing a new
mystery, and to be introducing it in a gratuitous way.

To this I reply in the first place that so far as the origin of man's
known powers is concerned, no fresh mystery is in fact introduced. All
human powers, to put the thing broadly, have somehow or other to be got
into protoplasm and then got out again. You have to explain first how
they became implicit in the earliest and lowest living thing, and then
how they have become thus far explicit in the latest and highest. All
the faculties of that highest being, I repeat, existed _virtually_ in
the lowest, and in so far as the admitted faculties are concerned, the
difference between my view and the ordinary view may be said to be
little more than a difference as to the sense which that word
_virtually_ is here to assume.

The real difference between the two views appears when the faculties
which I have called unknown come to be considered. If they are held to
be real, my view is certainly the better able to embrace them. I hold
that telepathy and telæsthesia do in fact exist--telepathy, a
communication between incarnate mind and incarnate mind, and perhaps
between incarnate minds and minds unembodied; telæsthesia, a knowledge
of things terrene which overpasses the limits of ordinary perception,
and which perhaps also achieves an insight into some other than terrene
world. And these faculties, I say, cannot have been acquired by natural
selection, for the preservation of the race, during the process of
terrene evolution; they were (as we may phrase it) the products of
extra-terrene evolution. And if they were so, man's other powers may
well have been so also. The specialised forms of terrene perception were
not real novelties in the universe, but imperfect adaptations of
protoplasm to the manifestation of the indwelling general perceptive
power. The mathematical faculty, for instance (we may, perhaps, say
with Plato), pre-existed. When Dase solved all those sums in his head,
his power of solving them was not a fresh development in his ancestral
stock, but depended on the accidental adaptation of his organism to the
manifestation of the indwelling computative power. I do not indeed
venture to follow Plato in his ontogenetic argument--his claim that the
individual computator has had already an individual training in
computation. I do not say that Dase himself learnt or divined the
multiplication-table in some ideal world. I only say that Dase and all
the rest of us are the spawn or output of some unseen world in which the
multiplication-table is, so to speak, in the air. Dase trailed it after
him, as the poet says of the clouds of glory, when he "descended into
generation" in a humble position at Hamburg.

In him and in his ancestors were many faculties which were called out by
the struggle for existence, and became supraliminal. But there were many
faculties also which were not thus called out, and which consequently
remained subliminal. To these faculties, as a rule, his supraliminal
self could get no access. But by some chance of evolution--some sport--a
vent-hole was opened at this one point between the different strata of
his being, and a subliminal uprush carried his computative faculty into
the open day.

Two things, of course, are assumed in this argument for which Science
offers no guarantee. I assume in the man a soul which can draw strength
and grace from a spiritual Universe, and conversely I assume in the
Universe a Spirit accessible and responsive to the soul of man. These
are familiar postulates. Every religion has claimed them in turn;
although every religion in turn has so narrowed their application as
grievously to narrow the evidence available for their support. But that
which religions have claimed for their Founders or for their Saints--and
what is sanctity but the genius of the ethical realm?--Psychology must
claim for every form of spiritual indrawing, every form of spiritual
response; for sleeping vision, for hypnotic rejuvenation, for sensory
and motor automatisms, for trance, for ecstasy. The philosopher who has
cried with Marcus Aurelius "Either Providence or atoms!"--who has
declared that without this basis in the Unseen, "the moral Cosmos would
be reduced to a Chaos";--should he not welcome even the humblest line of
research which fain would gather from every unsolved problem some hint
as to the spiritual law unknown which in time may give the solution of
all?

We know not in what directions--directions how definitely
predetermined--even physical organisms can vary from the common type. We
know not what amount of energy any given plant or animal can absorb and
incorporate from earth and air and sun. Still less can we predict or
limit the possible variations of the soul, the fulness which it may
receive from the World-Soul, its possible heritage of grace and truth.
But in genius we can watch at each stage the processes of this celestial
nurture. We can imagine the outlook of joyous trustfulness; we can
almost seem, with Wordsworth, to remember the child's soul entering into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Childhood is genius without capacity; it makes
for most of us our best memory of inspiration, and our truest outlook
upon the real, which is the ideal, world.

From a greater distance we can watch the inward stir of mighty thought,
the same for Æschylus, for Newton, for Virgil;--a stir independent of
worldly agitation; like the swing and libration of the tide-wave across
the ocean, which takes no note of billow or of storm.

Nay, we can see against the sun "the eagle soaring above the tomb of
Plato," and in Paul, as in Plotinus, we can catch that sense of
self-fulfilment in self-absorption, of rapture, of deliverance, which
the highest minds have bequeathed to us as the heritage of their highest
hours.

These our spiritual ancestors are no eccentrics nor degenerates; they
have made for us the sanest and most fruitful experiment yet made by
man; they have endeavoured to exalt the human race in a way in which it
can in truth be exalted; they have drawn on forces which exist, and on a
Soul which answers; they have dwelt on those things "by dwelling on
which it is," as Plato has it, "that even God is divine."




