CHAPTER IV

SLEEP

  δλβἱα δ' ἑπαντες αἱσα λυσἱπονον μετανἱσσονται τελευτἁν.
  καἱ σὡμα μἑν πἁντων ἑπεται θανἁτὡ περισθενεἱ,
  ξὡὁν δ' ἑτι λεἱπεται αἱὡνος εἱδωλον' τὁ γἁρ ἑστι μὁνον
  ἑκ θεὡν' εὑδει δἑ πρασσὁντων μελἑων, ἁτἁρ εὑδὁντεσσιν ἑν πολλοἱς ὁνεἱροις
  δεἱκνυσι τερπνὡν ἑφἑρποισαν χαλεπὡν τε κρἱσιν.

  --PINDAR.


The preceding chapters have carried us two steps upon our way. In
Chapter II. we gained some insight into the structure of human
personality by analysing some of the accidents to which it is subject;
in the third chapter we viewed this personality in its normal waking
state, and considered how that norm should be defined, and in what
manner certain fortunate persons had integrated the personality still
further by utilising uprushes of subliminal faculty to supplement or to
crystallise the products of supraliminal thought.

The review of these two chapters indicates clearly enough what my next
step must be. It is obvious that in my review of phases or alternations
of personality I have left out of sight the most constant, the most
important alternation of all. I have thus far said nothing of _sleep_.
Yet _that_ change of personality, at least, has been borne in on every
one's notice;--not, certainly, as a morbid curiosity, but as an
essential part of life.

Let us then consider the specific characteristics of sleep. The
definition of sleep is an acknowledged _crux_ in physiology. And I would
point out that the increased experience of hypnotic sleep which recent
years have afforded has made this difficulty even more striking than
before. A physiological explanation must needs assume that some special
bodily condition,--such, for instance, as the clogging of the brain by
waste-products,--is at least the usual antecedent of sound sleep. But it
is certain, on the other hand, that with a large percentage of persons
profound and prolonged sleep can be induced, in _any_ bodily condition,
by simple suggestion. Hypnosis, indeed (as Wetterstrand and others have
shown) may be prolonged, with actual benefit to the sleeper, far beyond
the point which the spontaneous sleep of a healthy subject ever reaches.
A good subject can be awakened and thrown into hypnosis again almost at
pleasure, and independently of any state either of nutrition or of
fatigue. Such sleep belongs to those phenomena which we may call nervous
if we will, but which we can observe or influence from the psychological
side alone.

We can hardly hope, from the ordinary data, to arrive at a definition of
sleep more satisfactory than others have reached. We must defer that
attempt until we have collected something more than the ordinary
evidence as to what occurs or does not occur during the abeyance of
waking life. One point, however, is plain at once. We cannot treat
sleep,--as it has generally been treated,--in its purely _negative_
aspect. We cannot be content merely to dwell, with the common
text-books, on the mere _absence_ of waking faculties;--on the
diminution of external perception, the absence of controlling
intelligence. We must treat sleep _positively_, so far as we can, as a
definite phase of our personality, co-ordinate with the waking phase.
Each phase, as I believe, has been differentiated alike from a primitive
indifference;--from a condition of lowly organisms which merited the
name neither of sleep nor of waking. Nay, if there were to be a contest
as to which state should be deemed primary and which secondary, sleep
might put forward its claim to be regarded as the more primitive phase.
It is sleep rather than vigilance which prenatal and infantile life
suggest; and even for us adults, however much we may associate ourselves
in thought with the waking state alone, that state has at least thus
much of secondary and adventitious that it is maintained for short
periods only, which we cannot artificially lengthen, being plainly
unable to sustain itself without frequent recourse to that fuller influx
of vitality which slumber brings.

Out of slumber proceeds each fresh arousal and initiation of waking
activities. What other activities may in slumber be aroused and
initiated the evidence to be set forth in this chapter should help us to
say. To some extent at least the abeyance of the supraliminal life must
be the liberation of the subliminal. To some extent the obscuration of
the noonday glare of man's waking consciousness must reveal the
far-reaching faint corona of his unsuspected and impalpable powers.

Entering, then, upon a review of sleeping faculty, thus inevitably
imperfect, we may best begin from the red end of our spectrum of
consciousness;--the red end which represents the deepest power which
waking effort can exert upon our physical organism.

Our survey of the efficacy of sleep, indeed, must make its beginning
_beyond_ that limit. For assuredly in sleep some agency is at work which
far surpasses waking efficacy in this respect. It is a fully admitted,
although an absolutely unexplained fact, that the regenerative quality
of healthy sleep is something _sui generis_, which no completeness of
waking quiescence can rival or approach. A few moments of sleep--a mere
blur across the field of consciousness--will sometimes bring a
renovation which hours of lying down in darkness and silence would not
yield. A mere bowing of the head on the breast, if consciousness ceases
for a second or two, may change a man's outlook on the world. At such
moments,--and many persons, like myself, can fully vouch for their
reality,--one feels that what has occurred in one's
organism,--alteration of blood-pressure, or whatever it be,--has been in
some sense discontinuous; that there has been a break in the inward
_régime_, amounting to much more than a mere brief ignoring of stimuli
from without. The break of consciousness is associated in some way with
a potent physiological change. That is to say, even in the case of a
moment of ordinary sleep we already note the appearance of that special
recuperative energy which is familiar in longer periods of sleep, and
which, as we shall presently see, reaches a still higher level in
hypnotic trance.

This recuperative power, then, lies just beyond the red end of our
spectrum of waking faculty. In that obscure region we note only added
power; an increased control over organic functions at the foundation of
bodily life. But when we pass on within the limits of our spectrum of
waking consciousness;--when we come to control over voluntary muscles,
or to sensory capacity, we find that our comparison between sleeping and
waking faculty is no longer a simple one. On the one hand, there is of
course a general blank and abeyance of control over the realm of waking
energies;--or in partial sleep a mere fantastic parody of those energies
in incoherent dream. On the other hand, we find that sleep is capable of
strange developments,--and that night can sometimes suddenly outdo the
most complex achievements of day.

Take first the degree of control over the voluntary muscles. In ordinary
sleep this is neither possessed nor desired; in nightmare its loss is
exaggerated, in quasi-hysterical fashion, into an appalling fear; while
in somnambulism,--a kind of new personality developed _ad hoc_,--the
sleeper (as we shall see later on) walks on perilous ridges with steady
feet. I have already said that morbid somnambulism bears to sound sleep
a relation something like that which hysteria bears to normal life. But
between the healthy somnambulist and the subject of nightmare we find
from another point of view a contrast resembling that between the man
of genius and the hysteric. The somnambulist, like the man of genius,
brings into play resources which are beyond ordinary reach. On the other
hand, just as in many hysterics certain ordinary powers of movement have
lapsed below voluntary control, so also the dreamer who dimly wishes to
move a constrained limb is often unable to send thither a sufficient
current of motor energy to effect the desired change of position. That
nightmare inability to move, which we thus feel in dream,--"when neither
he that fleeth can flee, nor he that pursueth pursue,"--that sensation
which both Homer and Virgil have selected as the type of paralysing
bewilderment,[39]--this is just the _aboulia_ of the hysteric;--the
condition when it takes a man half an hour to put on his hat, or when a
woman sits all the morning looking at her knitting, but unable to add a
stitch.

"Somnambulism," however, is too vague and undefined a term for our
present discussion. It will only be by a comparison with hypnotism, in
the next chapter, that we can hope to get some clearer notion of
"sleep-waking" states.

Let us pass on to consider _entencephalic sensory faculty_,--"mind's
eye" faculty,--as shown in sleep or dream. Here too we shall find the
same rule to prevail as with motor faculty. That is to say, on the whole
the sensory faculty is of course dimmed and inhibited by sleep; but
there are nevertheless indications of a power subsisting as vividly as
ever, or with even added acuteness.

Baillarger in France and Griesinger in Germany (both about 1845) were
among the first to call attention to the vivid images which rise before
the internal vision of many persons, between sleep and waking. M. Alfred
Maury, the well-known Greek scholar and antiquary, gave to these images
a few years later the title of _illusions hypnagogiques_, and published
a remarkable series of observations upon himself. Mr. Galton has further
treated of them in his _Inquiry into Human Faculty_; and cases will be
found in _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i, pp. 390, 473, etc.

These visions may be _hypnopompic_ as well as _hypnagogic_;--may appear,
that is to say, at the moment when slumber is departing as well as at
the moment when it is coming on;--and in either case they are closely
related to dreams; the "hypnagogic illusions" or pictures being
sometimes repeated in dream (as with Maury), and the hypnopompic
pictures consisting generally in the persistence of some dream-image
into the first moments of waking. In either case they testify to an
intensified power of inward visualisation at a very significant
moment;--a moment which is actually or virtually one of sleep, but which
yet admits of definite comparison with adjacent moments of waking. We
may call the condition one of cerebral or "mind's eye"
hyperæsthesia,--an exalted sensibility of special brain-centres in
response to those unknown internal stimuli which are always giving rise
to similar but fainter inward visions even in broadly waking hours.

For those who are already good visualisers such phenomena as these,
though striking enough, present no quite unique experience. For bad
visualisers, on the other hand, the vividness of these hypnagogic
pictures may be absolutely a revelation.

The degree of acuteness, not of the visualising faculty alone, but of
all the senses in dream, is a subject for direct observation, and
even--for persons who can at all control their dreams--for direct
experiment. Some correspondents report a considerable apparent accession
of sensory power in dream. Others again speak of the increased vividness
of dramatic conception, or of what has been called in a hypnotic subject
"objectivation of types." "In each of these dreams," writes one lady, "I
was a man;--in one of them a low brute, in the other a dipsomaniac. I
never had the slightest conception of how such persons felt or thought
until these experiences." Another correspondent speaks of dreaming two
disconnected dreams,--one emotional and one
geometrical,--simultaneously, and of consequent sense of confusion and
fatigue.

The "Chapter on Dreams," in R. L. Stevenson's volume, _Across the
Plains_ (already referred to in the last chapter), contains a
description of the most successful dream-experiments thus far recorded.
By self-suggestion before sleep Stevenson could secure a visual and
dramatic intensity of dream-representation which furnished him with the
motives for some of his most striking romances. His account, written
with admirable psychological insight, is indispensable to students of
this subject. I am mentioning these well-known phenomena, as the reader
will understand, with a somewhat novel purpose--to show, namely, that
the internal sensory perceptions or imaginative faculty of sleep may
exceed that of vigilance in something the same way as the recuperative
agency of sleep surpasses the _vis medicatrix_ of waking hours.

I pass on to a less frequent phenomenon, which shows us at once intense
imagination during sleep, and a lasting imprint left by these
imaginations upon the waking organism;--an unintended self-suggestion
which we may compare with Stevenson's voluntary self-suggestion
mentioned just above.

The permanent result of a dream, I say, is sometimes such as to show
that the dream has not been a mere superficial confusion of past waking
experiences, but has had an unexplained potency of its own,--drawn, like
the potency of hypnotic suggestion, from some depth in our being which
the waking self cannot reach. Two main classes of this kind are
conspicuous enough to be easily recognised--those, namely, where the
dream has led to a "conversion" or marked religious change, and those
where it has been the starting-point of an "insistent idea" or of a fit
of actual insanity.[40] The dreams which convert, reform, change
character and creed, have of course a _primâ facie_ claim to be
considered as something other than ordinary dreams; and their discussion
may be deferred till a later stage of our inquiry. Those, on the other
hand, which suddenly generate an insistent idea of an irrational type
are closely and obviously analogous to post-hypnotic self-suggestions,
which the self that inspired them cannot be induced to countermand. Such
is the dream related by M. Taine,[41] where a gendarme, impressed by an
execution at which he has assisted, dreams that he himself is to be
guillotined, and is afterwards so influenced by the dream that he
attempts suicide. Several cases of this kind have been collected by Dr.
Faure;[42] and Dr. Tissié, in his interesting little work, _Les Rêves_,
has added some curious instances from his own observation.

A striking illustration may be drawn from the following incident in the
story of Krafft-Ebing's patient,[43] Ilma S., the genuineness of whose
stigmata seems proved by that physician's care in observation, and by
the painfulness of certain experiments performed upon her by students as
practical jokes and against her will:--

     _May 6th, 1888._--The patient is disturbed to-day. She complains to
     the sister of severe pain under the left breast, thinks that the
     professor has burnt her in the night, and begs the sister to obtain
     a retreat for her in a convent, where she will be secure against
     such attacks. The sister's refusal causes a hystero-epileptic
     attack. [At length, in the hypnotic trance] the patient gives the
     following explanation of the origin of the pain: "Last night an old
     man came to me; he looked like a priest and came in company with a
     Sister of Charity, on whose collet there was a large golden B. I
     was afraid of her. The old man was amiable and friendly. He dipped
     a pen in the sister's pocket, and with it wrote a W and B on my
     skin under the left breast. Once he dipped his pen badly and made a
     blot in the middle of the figure. This spot and the B pain me
     severely, but the W does not. The man explained the W as meaning
     that I should go to the M church and confess at the W
     confessional."

     After this account the patient cried out and said, "There stands
     the man again. Now he has chains on his hands."

     When the patient woke into ordinary life she was suffering pain in
     the place indicated, where there were "superficial losses of
     substance, penetrating to the corium, which have a resemblance to a
     reversed W and B," with "a hyperæmic raised spot between the two."
     Nowhere in this peculiar neurotrophic alteration of the skin, which
     is identical with those previously produced experimentally, are
     there traces of inflammation. The pain and the memory of the dream
     were removed by the doctor's suggestion; but the dream
     self-suggestion to confess at the M church persisted; and the
     patient, without knowing why, did actually go and confess to the
     priest of her vision.

In this last case we have a dream playing the part of a powerful
post-hypnotic suggestion. The meaning of this vague term "suggestion" we
shall have to discuss in a later chapter. It is enough to notice here
the great power of a subliminal suggestion which can make an impression
so much stronger not only than the usual evanescent touch of dream, but
than the actual experiences of waking day.

But this case may also serve to lead us on to further reflections as to
the connection between dream-memory and hypnotic memory, a connection
which points, as we shall presently see, towards the existence of some
subliminal continuity of memory, lying deeper down than the evocable
memory of common life--the stock of conscious reminiscences on which we
can draw at will.

With regard to memory, as with regard to sensation, we seem in waking
life to be dealing with a selection made for purposes of earthly use.
From the pre-conscious unselective memory which depends on the mere
organisation of living matter, it is the task of consciousness, as it
dawns in each higher organism, to make its own appropriate selection and
to develop into distinctness certain helpful lines of reminiscence. The
question of self-preservation--What must I needs be aware of in order to
escape my foes?--involves the question, What must I needs remember in
order to act upon the facts of which I am aware? The selected currents
of memory follow the selected avenues of sensation; what by disuse I
lose the power of noticing at the time, I also lose the power of
recalling afterwards.

For simpler organisms this rule may perhaps suffice. Man needs a more
complex formula. For it may happen, as we have already seen, that two or
more phases of personality in one man may each select from the mass of
potential reminiscences a special group of memories of its own. These
special groups, moreover, may bear to one another all kinds of
relations; one may include another, or they may alternate and may be
apparently co-exclusive.

From these dissociations and alternations of memory there will be many
lessons to learn. The lesson which here presents itself is not the least
important. What is the relation of the sleeping state to these
dissociated, these parallel or concentric memories? Is it the case that
when one memory includes another it is the waking memory--as one might
expect from that state's apparently superior vividness--which shows
itself the deeper, the more comprehensive record?

The answer of actual experience to these questions is unexpectedly
direct and clear. In every recorded instance--so far at least as my
memory serves me, where there has been any _unification_ between
alternating states, so as to make comparison possible--it is the memory
furthest from waking life whose span is the widest, whose grasp of the
organism's upstored impressions is the most profound. Inexplicable as
this phenomenon has been to observers who have encountered it without
the needed key, the independent observations of hundreds of physicians
and hypnotists have united in affirming its reality. The commonest
instance, of course, is furnished by the ordinary hypnotic trance. The
degree of intelligence, indeed, which finds its way to expression in
that trance or slumber varies greatly in different subjects and at
different times. But whensoever there is enough of alertness to admit of
our forming a judgment, we find that in the hypnotic state there is a
considerable memory--though not necessarily a complete or a reasoned
memory--of the waking state; whereas with most subjects in the waking
state--unless some special command be imposed upon the hypnotic
self--there is no memory whatever of the hypnotic state. In many
hysterical conditions also the same general rule subsists; namely, that
the further we get from the surface the wider is the expanse of memory
which we encounter.

If all this be true, there are several points on which we may form
expectations definite enough to suggest inquiry. Ordinary sleep is
roughly intermediate between waking life and deep hypnotic trance; and
it seems _a priori_ probable that its memory will have links of almost
equal strength with the memory which belongs to waking life and the
memory which belongs to the hypnotic trance. And this is in fact the
case; the fragments of dream-memory are interlinked with both these
other chains. Thus, for example, without any suggestion to that effect,
acts accomplished in the hypnotic trance may be remembered in dream; and
remembered under the illusion which was thrown round them by the
hypnotiser. Thus Dr. Auguste Voisin suggested to a hypnotised subject
to stab a patient--really a stuffed figure--in the neighbouring bed.[44]
The subject did so; and of course knew nothing of it on waking. But
three days afterwards he returned to the hospital complaining that his
dreams were haunted by the figure of a woman, who accused him of having
stabbed and killed her. Appropriate suggestion laid this ghost of a
doll.

Conversely, dreams forgotten in waking life may be remembered in the
hypnotic trance. Thus Dr. Tissié's patient, Albert, dreamt that he was
about to set out on one of his somnambulic "fugues," or aimless
journeys, and when hypnotised mentioned to the physician this dream,
which in his waking state he had forgotten.[45] The probable truth of
this statement was shown by the fact that he did actually set out on the
journey thus dreamt of, and that his journeys were usually preceded and
incited by remembered dreams.

I need not dwell on the existence, but at the same time the
incompleteness, of our dream-memory of waking life; nor on the
occasional formation of a separate chain of memory, constructed from
successive and cohering dreams. It should be added that we do not really
know how far our memory in dream of waking life may have extended; since
we can only _infer_ this from our notoriously imperfect waking memory of
past dreams.

A cognate anticipation to which our theory will point will be that
dream-memory will occasionally be found to fill up gaps in waking
memory, other than those due to hypnotic trance; such so-called
"ecmnesic" periods, for instance, as sometimes succeed a violent shock
to the system, and may even embrace some space of time _anterior_ to the
shock. These periods themselves resemble prolonged and unremembered
dreams. Such accidents, however, are so rare, and such dream-memory so
hard to detect, that I mention the point mainly for the sake of
theoretical completeness; and must think myself fortunate in being able
to refer the reader to a recent case of M. Charcot's which affords an
interesting confirmation of the suggested view.[46]

I pass on to the still more novel and curious questions involved in the
apparent existence of a dream-memory which, while accompanying the
memory of ordinary life, seems also to have a wider purview, and to
indicate that the record of external events which is kept within us is
far fuller than we know.

Let us consider what stages such a memory may show.

I. It may include events once known to the waking self, but now
definitely forgotten.

II. It may include facts which have fallen within the sensory field, but
which have never been supraliminally "apperceived" or cognised in any
way. And thus also it may indicate that from this wider range of
remembered facts dream-_inferences_ have been drawn;--which inferences
may be _retrospective_, _prospective_, or,--if I may use a word of
Pope's with a new meaning, _circumspective_,--that is to say, relating
not to the past or to the future, but to the present condition of
matters beyond the range of ordinary perception. It is plain that
inferences of this kind (if they exist) will be liable to be mistaken
for direct retrocognition, direct premonition, direct clairvoyance;
while yet they need not actually prove anything more than a perception
on the part of the subliminal self more far-reaching,--a memory more
stable,--than is the perception or the memory of the supraliminal self
which we know.

These hypermnesic dreams, then, may afford a means of drawing our lines
of evidence more exactly; of relegating some marvellous narratives to a
realm of lesser marvel, and at the same time of realising more clearly
what it is in the most advanced cases which ordinary theories are really
powerless to explain.

As to the _first_ of the above-mentioned categories no one will raise
any doubt. It is a familiar fact--or a fact only sufficiently unfamiliar
to be noted with slight surprise--that we occasionally recover in sleep
a memory which has wholly dropped out of waking consciousness.

In such cases the original piece of knowledge has at the time made a
definite impress on the mind,--has come well within the span of
apprehension of the supraliminal consciousness. Its reappearance after
however long an interval is a fact to which there are already plenty of
parallels. But the conclusion to which some cases seem to me to point is
one of a much stranger character. I think that there is evidence to show
that many facts or pictures which have never even for a moment come
within the apprehension of the supraliminal consciousness are
nevertheless retained by the subliminal memory, and are occasionally
presented in dreams with what seems a definite purpose. I quote an
interesting case in Appendix IV. A.[47]

The same point, as we shall hereafter see, is illustrated by the
phenomena of crystal-vision. Miss Goodrich-Freer,[48] for example, saw
in the crystal the announcement of the death of a friend;--a piece of
news which certainly had never been apprehended by her ordinary
conscious self. On referring to the _Times_, it was found that an
announcement of the death of some one of the same unusual name was
contained in a sheet with which she had screened her face from the
fire;--so that the words may have fallen within her range of vision,
although they had not reached what we broadly call her waking mind.

This instance was of value from the strong probability that the news
could never have been supraliminally known at all;--since it was too
important to have been merely glanced at and forgotten.

In these cases the dream-self has presented a significant scene,--has
chosen, so to say, from its gallery of photographs the special picture
which the waking mind desired,--but has not needed to draw any more
complex inference from the facts presumably at its disposal. I have now
to deal with a small group of dreams which reason as well as
remember;--if indeed in some of them there be not something more than
mere reasoning on facts already in some way acquired,--something which
overpasses the scheme prescribed for the present chapter.

In the first place we cannot doubt that definite data already known may
sometimes be treated in somnambulism or ordinary dream with more than
waking intelligence. Such are the cases of mathematical problems solved
in somnambulism, or of the skeletal arrangement discovered by Agassiz in
common sleep for scattered bones which had baffled his waking skill. I
give in Appendix IV. B. the striking case of Professor Hilprecht where
dream-intelligence is carried to its highest point. Professor Romaine
Newbold (who records the case) is well versed in the analysis of
evidence making for supernormal powers, and his explanation of the
vision as the result of "processes of associative reasoning analogous to
those of the upper consciousness" must, I think, be taken as correct.
But had the incident occurred in a less critical age of the world,--in
any generation, one may say, but _this_,--how majestic a proof would the
phantasmal Babylonian's message be held to have afforded of his
veritable co-operation with the modern _savant_ in the reconstruction of
his remote past!

I repeat that with this case of Professor Hilprecht's we seem to have
reached the utmost intensity of sleep faculty within the limits of our
ordinary spectrum. In almost every region of that spectrum we have
found that the sleeper's faculty, under its narrow conditions, shows
scattered signs of at least a potential equality with the faculty of
waking hours.

We have already seen this as regards muscular movements, as regards
inward vision and audition, and as regards memory; and these last
records complete the series by showing us the achievement in sleep of
intellectual work of the severest order. Coleridge's _Kubla Khan_ had
long ago shown the world that a great poet might owe his masterpiece to
the obscuration of waking sense.[49] And the very imperfection of _Kubla
Khan_--the memory truncated by an interruption--may again remind us how
partial must ever be our waking knowledge of the achievements of sleep.

May I not, then, claim a real analogy between certain of the
achievements of _sleep_ and the achievements of _genius_? In both there
is the same triumphant spontaneity, the same sense of drawing no longer
upon the narrow and brief endurance of nerves and brain, but upon some
unknown source exempt from those limitations.

Thus far, indeed, the sleep-faculties which we have been considering,
however strangely intensified, have belonged to the same class as the
normal faculties of waking life. We have now to consider whether we can
detect in sleep any manifestation of _supernormal_ faculty--any
experience which seems to suggest that man is a cosmical spirit as well
as a terrestrial organism, and is in some way in relation with a
spiritual as well as with a material world. It will seem, in this view,
to be natural that this commerce with a spiritual environment should be
more perceptible in sleep than in waking. The dogma which my point of
view thus renders probable is perhaps, as a mere matter of history, the
dogma of all dogmas which has been most universally believed by mankind.

"_Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus_"--for how many narrow
theological propositions have we not heard this proud claim--that they
have been believed everywhere, and by everybody, and in every age? Yet
what can approach the antiquity, the ubiquity, the unanimity of man's
belief in the wanderings of the spirit in dream? In the Stone Age, the
sceptic would have been rash indeed who ventured to contradict it. And
though I grant that this "palæolithic psychology" has gone out of
fashion for the last few centuries, I do not think that (in view of the
telæsthetic evidence now collected) we can any longer dismiss as a mere
_bizarrerie_ of dream-imagery the constant recurrence of the idea of
visiting in sleep some distant scene,--with the acquisition thereby of
new facts not otherwise accessible.

Starting, then, not from savage authority, but from the evidential
scrutiny of modern facts, we shall find, I think, that there are
coincidences of dream with truth which neither pure chance nor any
subconscious mentation of an ordinary kind will adequately explain. We
shall find that there is a perception of concealed material objects or
of distant scenes and also a perception of a communion with the thoughts
and emotions of other minds. Both these phenomena have been noted
sporadically in many ages and countries, and were observed with serious
attention especially by the early French mesmerists. The first group of
phenomena was called _clairvoyance_ or _lucidité_, and the second
_communication de pensées_, or in English, _thought-transference_. These
terms are scarcely comprehensive enough to satisfy a more systematic
study. The distant perception is not _optical_, nor is it confined even
to the apparent sense of sight alone. It extends to all the senses, and
includes also impressions hardly referable to any special sense.
Similarly the communication between distant persons is not a
transference of thought alone, but of emotion, of motor impulses, and of
many impressions not easy to define. I ventured in 1882 to suggest the
wider terms _telæsthesia_, sensation at a distance, and _telepathy_,
fellow-feeling at a distance, and shall use these words in the present
work. But I am far from assuming that these terms correspond with
definite and dearly separated groups of phenomena, or comprise the whole
field of supernormal faculty. On the contrary, I think it probable that
the facts of the metetherial world are far more complex than the facts
of the material world; and the ways in which spirits perceive and
communicate, apart from fleshly organisms, are subtler and more varied
than any perception or communication which we know.

I have halted above at another line of demarcation which the dreamer's
own sensations suggest,--the distinction between active psychical
excursion or invasion and the passive reception of psychical invasion
from without. But even here, as was also hinted, a clear line of
division is hard to draw. For whether we are dealing with
dream-perceptions of distant material scenes, or of distant living
persons, or of discarnate spirits, it is often impossible for the
dreamer himself to say either from what point he is himself observing,
or where the scene of the vision is laid.

For the present I must confine myself to a brief sketch of some of the
main types of supernormal dreams, arranged in a kind of ascending order.
I shall begin with such dreams as primarily suggest a kind of
heightening or extension of the dreamer's own innate perceptive powers,
as exercised on the world around him. And I shall end with dreams which
suggest his entrance into a spiritual world, where commerce with
incarnate or discarnate spirits is subject no longer to the conditions
of earthly thought.

I begin, then, with some dreams which seem to carry perceptive faculty
beyond the point at which some unusual form of common vision can be
plausibly suggested in explanation. Mr. Lewis's dream of the
landing-order (Appendix IV. A) may be taken as an instance of such a
dream.[50]

I will next refer to certain cases where the sleeper by clairvoyant
vision discerns a scene of direct interest to a mind other than his
own;--as the danger or death of some near friend. Sometimes there is a
flash of vision, which seems to represent correctly the critical scene.
Sometimes there is what seems like a longer gaze, accompanied, perhaps
by some sense of _communion_ with the invaded person. And in some few
cases--the most interesting of all--the circumstances of a death seem to
be symbolically _shown_ to a dreamer, as though by the deceased person,
or by some intelligence connected with him. (See Mrs. Storie's narrative
p. 109.)

One of the best instances of the flash of vision is Canon Warburton's,
which I quote from _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 338--a case
whose remoteness is rendered less of a drawback than usual by the
character of the narrator and the simplicity and definiteness of the
fact attested.

The following is his account:--


THE CLOSE, WINCHESTER, _July 16th, 1883_.

     Somewhere about the year 1848 I went up from Oxford to stay a day
     or two with my brother, Acton Warburton, then a barrister, living
     at 10 Fish Street, Lincoln's Inn. When I got to his chambers I
     found a note on the table apologising for his absence, and saying
     that he had gone to a dance somewhere in the West End, and intended
     to be home soon after one o'clock. Instead of going to bed, I dozed
     in an arm-chair, but started up wide awake exactly at one,
     ejaculating "By Jove! he's down!" and seeing him coming out of a
     drawing-room into a brightly illuminated landing, catching his foot
     in the edge of the top stair, and falling headlong, just saving
     himself by his elbows and hands. (The house was one which I had
     never seen, nor did I know where it was.) Thinking very little of
     the matter, I fell a-doze again for half an hour, and was awakened
     by my brother suddenly coming in and saying, "Oh, there you are! I
     have just had as narrow an escape of breaking my neck as I ever had
     in my life. Coming out of the ballroom, I caught my foot, and
     tumbled full length down the stairs."

     That is all. It may have been "only a dream," but I always thought
     it must have been something more.

W. WARBURTON.

In a second letter Canon Warburton adds:--


  _July 20th, 1883._

     My brother was hurrying home from his dance, with some little
     self-reproach in his mind for not having been at his chambers to
     receive his guest, so the chances are that he was thinking of me.
     The whole scene was vividly present to me at the moment, but I did
     not note particulars any more than one would in real life. The
     general impression was of a narrow landing brilliantly illuminated,
     and I remember verifying the correctness of this by questions at
     the time.

     This is my sole experience of the kind.

     [The last words are in answer to the question whether he had had
     similar vivid visions which had _not_ corresponded with any real
     event.]

The impression here produced is as though a jerk were given to some
delicate link connecting the two brothers. The brother suffering the
crisis thinks vividly of the other; and one can of course explain the
incident, as we did on its first publication, as the endangered man's
projection of the scene upon his brother's mind. The passive dozing
brother, on the other hand, feels as though he were suddenly _present_
in the scene,--say in response to some sudden call from the brother in
danger,--and I am here bringing into relief _that_ aspect of the
incident, on account of its analogy with cases soon to be quoted. But
the main lesson no doubt may be that no hard and fast line can be drawn
between the two explanations.[51]

And here I feel bound to introduce a sample of a certain class of
dreams,--more interesting, perhaps, and certainly more perplexing than
any;--but belonging to a category of phenomena which at present I can
make no attempt to explain. I mean precognitive dreams;--pictures or
visions in which future events are foretold or depicted, generally with
more or less of symbolism,--and generally also in a mode so remote from
the previsions of our earthly sagacity that we shall find ourselves
driven, in a later discussion, to speak in vague terms of glimpses into
a cosmic picture-gallery;--or of scenic representations composed and
offered to us by intelligences higher and more distant than any spirit
whom we have known. I give in Appendix IV. C, a thoroughly
characteristic example;--characteristic alike in its definiteness, its
purposelessness, its isolated unintelligibility.

Dr. Bruce's narrative, which I next give in Appendix IV. D, written by
an intelligent man, while the facts were yet fresh, seems to me of high
importance. If we accept the rest of his story, we must, I think,
suppose that the sense of spiritual presence with which the incident
began was more than a mere subjective fancy. Shall we refer it to the
murdered man's wife;--with whom the dreamer seemed afterwards to be in
telepathic relation? Or shall we interpret it as a kind of summons from
the dying man, drawing on, as it were, his friend's spirit to witness
the actual murder and the subsequent scene? The fact that another
friend, in another locality apparently, had a vision of similar nature,
tells somewhat in favour of the supposition that the decedent's spirit
was operative in both cases; since we very seldom--if ever--find an
agent producing an impression in two separate places at once--or nearly
so--except at or just after the moment of death.

In this view, the incident resembles a scene passing in a spiritual
world. The dying man summons his brother-in-law; the brother-in-law
visits the scene of murder, and there spiritually communicates with his
sister, the widow, who is corporeally in that scene, and then sees
further details of the scene after death, which he does not understand,
and which are not explained to him.

Fantastic though this explanation seems, it is not easy to hit on a
simpler one which will cover the facts as stated. Could we accept it, we
should have a kind of transition between two groups of cases, which
although apparently so different may form parts of a continuous series.
I mean the cases where the dreamer visits a distant scene, and the cases
where another spirit visits the dreamer.

Taking, then, Dr. Bruce's case to bridge the interval between these two
groups, I go on to a case which properly belongs to the _second_, though
it still has much in common with the _first_. I shall quote Mrs.
Storie's narrative at full length in the text; because the case is, in
my judgment, both evidentially very strong, and also, in the naiveté of
its confusion, extremely suggestive of the way in which these psychical
communications are made. Mrs. Storie, who is now dead, was, by the
testimony of Edmund Gurney, Professor Sidgwick, and others, a witness
eminently deserving of trust; and, besides a corroboration from her
husband of the manifestation of a troubled dream, before the event was
known, we have the actual notes written down by her, as she informed us,
the day, or the day after, the news of the fatal accident arrived,
solely for her own use, and unmistakably reflecting the incoherent
impressiveness of the broken vision. These notes form the narrative
given in _Phantasms of the Living_ (vol. i. p. 370) which I reproduce
here. The fact that the deceased brother was a _twin_ of Mrs. Storie's
adds interest to the case, since one clue (a vague one as yet) to the
causes directing and determining telepathic communications lies in what
seems their exceptional frequency between _twins_;--the closest of all
relations.


HOBART TOWN, _July 1874_.

     On the evening of the 18th July, I felt unusually nervous. This
     seemed to begin [with the occurrence of a small domestic annoyance]
     about half past eight o'clock. When I went to my room I even felt
     as if some one was there. I fancied, as I stepped into bed, that
     some one _in thought_ tried to stop me. At 2 o'clock I woke from
     the following dream. It seemed like in dissolving views. In a
     twinkle of light I saw a railway, and the puff of the engine. I
     thought, "What's going on up there? Travelling? I wonder if any of
     us are travelling and I dreaming of it." _Some one_ unseen by me
     answered, "No; something quite different--something wrong." "I
     don't like to look at these things," I said. Then I saw behind and
     above my head William's upper half reclining, eyes and mouth half
     shut; his chest moved forward convulsively, and he raised his right
     arm. Then he bent forward, saying, "I suppose I should move out of
     this." Then I saw him lying, eyes shut, on the ground, flat. The
     chimney of an engine at his head. I called in excitement, "That
     will strike him!" The _some one_ answered "Yes--well, here's what
     it was"; and immediately I saw William sitting in the open
     air--faint moonlight--on a raised place sideways. He raised his
     right arm, shuddered, and said, "I can't go on, or back, _No_."
     Then he seemed lying flat. I cried out, "Oh! Oh!" and others seemed
     to echo, "Oh! Oh!" He seemed then upon his elbow, saying, "Now it
     comes." Then as if struggling to rise, turned twice round quickly,
     saying, "Is it the train? _the train, the train_," his right
     shoulder reverberating as if struck from behind. He fell back like
     fainting; his eyes rolled. A large dark object came between us like
     panelling of wood, and rather in the dark something rolled over,
     and like an arm was thrown up, and the whole thing went away with a
     _swish_. Close beside me on the ground there seemed a long dark
     object. I called out, "They've left something behind; it's like a
     man." It then raised its shoulders and head, and fell down again.
     The same _some one_ answered, "_Yes, sadly_." [? "_Yes_," sadly.]
     After a moment I seemed called on to look up, and said, "Is that
     _thing_ not away yet?" Answered, "_No_." And in front, in light,
     there was a railway compartment in which sat Rev. Mr. Johnstone, of
     Echuca. I said, "What's he doing there?" Answered, "He's there." A
     railway porter went up to the window asking, "Have you seen any
     of----." I caught no more, but I _thought_ he referred to the
     _thing_ left behind. Mr. Johnstone seemed to answer "_No_"; and the
     man went quickly away--I thought to look for it. After all this the
     _some one_ said close to me, "Now I'm going." I started, and at
     once saw
     {a tall dark figure at my head}
     {William's back at my side. } He put his right hand (in grief) over
     his face, and the other almost touching my shoulder, he crossed in front,
     looking stern and solemn. There was a flash from the eyes, and I
     caught a glimpse of a fine pale face like ushering him along, and
     indistinctly another. I felt frightened, and called out, "Is he angry?"
     "Oh, no." "Is he going away?" Answered, "_Yes_," by the same _some one_,
     and I woke with a loud sigh, which woke my husband, who said, "What is
     it?" I told him I had been dreaming "something unpleasant"--named a
     "railway," and dismissed it all from my mind as a dream. As I fell
     asleep again I fancied the _some one_ said, "It's all gone," and another
     answered, "I'll come and remind her."

     The news reached me one week afterwards. The accident had happened
     to my brother on the same night about half past 9 o'clock. Rev. Mr.
     Johnstone and his wife were actually in the train which struck him.
     He was walking along the line which is raised two feet on a level
     country. He seemed to have gone 16 miles--must have been tired and
     sat down to take off his boot, which was beside him, dozed off and
     was very likely roused by the sound of the train; 76 sheep-trucks
     had passed without touching him, but some wooden projection, likely
     the step, had touched the _right_ side of his head, bruised his
     right shoulder, and killed him instantaneously. The night was very
     dark. I believe now that the _some one_ was (from something in the
     _way_ he spoke) William _himself_. The face with him was white as
     alabaster and something like this [a small sketch pasted on] in
     profile. There were many other thoughts or words seemed to pass,
     but they are too many to write down here.

     The voice of the _some one_ unseen seemed _always above_ the figure
     of William which I saw. And when I was shown the compartment of the
     carriage with Mr. Johnstone, the _some one_ seemed on a line
     between me and it--_above_ me.

     [In an account-book of Mrs. Storie's, on a page, headed July 1874,
     we find the 18th day marked, and the words, "Dear Willie died," and
     "Dreamed, dreamed of it all," appended.

     The first letter, from the Rev. J. C. Johnstone to the Rev. John
     Storie, announcing the news of the accident, is lost. The following
     are extracts from his second and third letters on the subject:--]


ECHUCA, _10th August 1874_.

     The place where Hunter was killed is on an open plain, and there
     was consequently plenty of room for him to escape the train had he
     been conscious; but I think Meldrum's theory is the correct one,
     that he had sat down to adjust some bandages on his leg and had
     thoughtlessly gone off to sleep. There is only one line of rails,
     and the ground is raised about 2 feet--the ground on which the
     rails rest. He had probably sat down on the edge, and lain down
     backwards so as to be within reach of some part of the train. It
     was not known at the time that an accident had occurred. Mrs.
     Johnstone and myself were in the train. Meldrum says he was not
     very much crushed. The top of the skull was struck off, and some
     ribs were broken under the armpit on one side. His body was found
     on the Sunday morning by a herd-boy from the adjoining station.


_August 29th, 1874._

     The exact time at which the train struck poor Hunter must have been
     about 9.55 P.M., and his death must have been instantaneous.

     [The above corresponds with the account of the inquest in the
     _Riverine Herald_ for July 22nd. The _Melbourne Argus_ also
     describes the accident as having taken place on the night of
     Saturday, the 18th.

     The following remarks are taken from notes made by Professor
     Sidgwick, during an interview with Mrs. Storie, in April 1884, and
     by Mrs. Sidgwick after another interview in September 1885:--]

     Mrs. Storie cannot regard the experience exactly as a dream, though
     she woke up from it. She is sure that it did not grow more definite
     in recollection afterwards. She never had a series of scenes in a
     dream at any other time; and she has never had anything like a
     hallucination. They were introduced by a voice in a whisper, not
     recognised as her brother's. He had sat on the bank as he appeared
     in the dream. The engine she saw behind him had a chimney of
     peculiar shape, such as she had not at that time seen; and she
     remembers that Mr. Storie thought her foolish about insisting on
     the chimney--unlike (he said) any which existed; but he informed
     her when he came back from Victoria, where her brother was, that
     engines of this kind had just been introduced there. She had no
     reason to think that any conversation between the porter and the
     clergyman actually occurred. The persons who seemed to lead her
     brother away were not recognised by her, and she only saw the face
     of one of them.

     Mr. Storie confirms his wife having said to him at the time of the
     dream, "What is that light?" Before writing the account first
     quoted, she had just mentioned the dream to her husband, but had
     not described it. She desired not to think of it, and also was
     unwilling to worry him about it because of his Sunday's work. This
     last point, it will be observed, is a confirmation of the fact that
     the dream took place on the Saturday night; and "it came out
     clearly" (Mrs. Sidgwick says) "that her recollection about the
     Saturday night was an independent recollection, and not read back
     after the accident was known." The strongly nervous state that
     preceded the dream was quite unique in Mrs. S.'s experience. But as
     it appeared that, according to her recollection, it commenced at
     least an hour before the accident took place, it must be regarded
     as of no importance evidentially. The feeling of a presence in the
     room was also quite unique.

"Here," says Gurney, "the difficulty of referring the true elements of
the dream to the agent's mind [is very great]. For Mr. Hunter was
asleep; and even if we can conceive that the image of the advancing
engine may have had some place in his mind, the presence of Mr.
Johnstone could not have been perceived by him. But it is possible, of
course, to regard this last item of correspondence as accidental, even
though the dream was telepathic. It will be observed that the dream
followed the accident by about four hours; such _deferment_ is, I
think, a strong point in favour of telepathic, as opposed to
independent, clairvoyance."

I propose as an alternative explanation,--for reasons which I endeavour
to justify in later chapters,--that the deceased brother, aided by some
other dimly discerned spirit, was endeavouring to present to Mrs. Storie
a series of pictures representing his death--as realised _after_ his
death. I add this last clause, because one of the marked points in the
dream was the presence in the train of Mr. Johnstone of Echuca--a fact
which (as Gurney remarks) the dying man could not possibly know.

I have dwelt on these two cases of Dr. Bruce and Mrs. Storie, because
the reader will, I think, come to feel, as our evidence unrolls itself,
that he has here complex experiences which are confirmed at various
points by simpler experiences, in such a way as to make these stories
seem a confused but an intimate transcript of what other narratives show
in hints and glimpses alone.

In Mrs. Storie's case the whole experience, as we have seen, presented
itself as a _dream_; yet as a dream of quite unusual type, like a series
of pictures presented to the sleeper who was still conscious that she
was lying in bed. In other cases the "psychical invasion" of the spirit
either of a living or of a deceased person seems to set up a variety of
sleep-waking states--both in agent and percipient. In one bizarre
narrative a man dreaming that he has returned home is _heard_ in his
home calling for hot water--and has himself a singular sense of
"bilocation" between the railway carriage and his bedroom.[52] In
another curious case is recorded a kind of _encounter_ in dreamland,
apparently more or less remembered by both persons.[53]

An invasion of this type coming upon a sleeping person is apt to induce
some change in the sleeper's state, which, even if he regards it as a
complete awakening, is generally shown not to be so in fact by the
dreamlike character of his own recorded feelings and utterances. Gurney
called these "Borderland Cases," and the whole collection in _Phantasms
of the Living_ will repay perusal. I introduce one such case in Appendix
IV. E, as being at once very perplexing and, I think, very strongly
attested. I knew Mr. and Mrs. T., who certainly were seriously anxious
for complete accuracy, and who had (as the narrative shows) made a
brief memorandum and consulted various persons on the incident at the
time.

These cases of invasion by the spirits of living persons pass on into
cases of invasion by the dying, the impression being generally that of
the presence of the visitant in the percipient's surroundings.[54]
Sometimes the phantasm is seen as nearly as can be ascertained at the
time of death. But there is no perceptible break in the series at this
point. Some appear shortly after death, but before the death is known to
the percipient. [See Appendix IV. F]. Finally, there are cases when the
appearance takes place some time after death, but presents features
unknown to the percipient.[55]

We have now briefly reviewed certain phenomena of sleep from a
standpoint somewhat differing from that which is commonly taken. We have
not (as is usual) fixed our attention primarily on the _negative_
characteristics of sleep, or the extent to which it lacks the capacities
of waking hours. On the contrary, we have regarded sleep as an
independent phase of personality, existing with as good a right as the
waking phase, and dowered with imperfectly expressed faculties of its
own. In investigating those faculties we have been in no wise deterred
by the fact of the apparent uselessness of some of them for our waking
ends. _Useless_ is a pre-scientific, even an anti-scientific term, which
has perhaps proved a greater stumbling-block to research in psychology
than in any other science. In science the _use_ of phenomena is to prove
laws, and the more bizarre and trivial the phenomena, the greater the
chance of their directing us to some law which has been overlooked till
now. In reviewing the phenomena of sleep, then, we found in the first
place that it possesses a specific recuperative energy which the
commonly accepted data of physiology and psychology cannot explain. We
saw that in sleep there may be an increased co-ordination or
centralisation of muscular control, and also an increased vividness of
entencephalic perception, indicating a more intimate appreciation of
intra-peripheral changes than is manifest in waking life. In accordance
with this view, we found that the dreaming self may undergo sensory and
emotional experiences apparently more intense than those of vigilance,
and may produce thereby lasting effects upon the waking body and mind.
Similarly again, we saw that that specific impress on body and mind
which we term memory may in sleeping or hypnotic states be both wider in
range and fuller in content than the evocable memory of the waking day.
Nay, not memory only, but power of inference, of argument, may be thus
intensified, as is shown by the solution in sleep of problems which have
baffled waking effort.

All these are fragmentary indications,--useless for practical purposes
if you will,--of sleeping faculty exercised on the same order of things
as waking faculty, and with comparable or even superior power. But we
were bound to push our inquiry further still--we were bound to ask
whether the self of sleep showed any faculty of a quite different order
from that by which waking consciousness maintains the activity of man.
We found that this was so indeed; that there was evidence that the
sleeping spirit was susceptible of relations unfettered by spatial
bonds; of telæsthetic perception of distant scenes; of telepathic
communication with distant persons, or even with spirits of whom we can
predicate neither distance nor nearness, since they are released from
the prison of the flesh.

The inference which all this evidence suggests is entirely in accordance
with the hypothesis on which my whole work is based.

I have assumed that man is an organism informed or possessed by a soul.
This view obviously involves the hypothesis that we are living a life in
two worlds at once; a planetary life in this material world, to which
the organism is intended to react; and also a cosmic life in that
spiritual or metetherial world, which is the native environment of the
soul. From that unseen world the energy of the organism needs to be
perpetually replenished. That replenishment we cannot understand: we may
figure it to ourselves as a protoplasmic process;--as some relation
between protoplasm, ether, and whatever is beyond ether, on which it is
at present useless to speculate.

Admitting, for the sake of argument, these vast assumptions, it will be
easy to draw the further inference that it may be needful that the
soul's attention should be frequently withdrawn from the business of
earthly life, so as to pursue with greater intensity what we may call
its protoplasmic task,--the maintenance of the fundamental, pervading
connection between the organism and the spiritual world. Nay, this
profounder condition, as responding to more primitive, more fundamental
needs, will itself be more primitive than the waking state. And this is
so: sleep is the infant's dominant phase: the pre-natal state resembles
sleep rather than waking; and so does the whole life-condition of our
lowly ancestors. And as the sleeping state is the more _primitive_, so
also is it the more _generalised_, and the more _plastic_. Out of this
dreamy abeyance between two worlds, the needs of the material world are
constantly developing some form of alert activity, some faculty which
was _potential_ only until search for food and the defence against
enemies compelled a closer heed to "the life of relation," lest the
relation should become only that of victim to devourer.

We shall thus have two phases of personality developing into separate
purposes and in separate directions from a parent stem. The waking
personality will develop external sense organs and will fit itself
progressively for the life of relation to the external world. It will
endeavour to attain an ever completer control over the resources of the
personality, and it will culminate in what we term _genius_ when it has
unified the subliminal as far as possible with the supraliminal in its
pursuit of deliberate waking ends.

The sleeping personality will develop in ways less easy to foresee.
What, on any theory, will it aim at, beyond the familiar intensification
of recuperative power? We can only guess, on my theory, that its
development will show some increasing trace of the soul's less exclusive
absorption in the activity of the organism. The soul has withdrawn from
the specialised material surface of things (to use such poor metaphor as
we can) into a realm where the nature of the connection between matter
and spirit--whether through the intermediacy of the ether or
otherwise--is more profoundly discerned. That same withdrawal from the
surface which, while it diminishes power over complex muscular
processes, increases power over profound organic processes, may at the
same time increase the soul's power of operating in that spiritual world
to which sleep has drawn it nearer.

On this view of sleep, be it observed, there will be nothing to surprise
us in the possibility of increasing the proportion of the sleeping to
the waking phase of life by hypnotic suggestion. All we can say is that,
while the soul must insist on at least the minimum quantity of sleep
needful to keep the body alive, we can see no superior limit to the
quantity of sleep which it may choose to take,--the quantity of
attention, that is, which it may choose to give to the special
operations of sleep as compared with those of waking life.

At this point we must for the present pause. The suggested hypothesis
will indeed cover the actual facts as to sleep adduced in this chapter.
But it covers them by virtue of assumptions too vast to be accepted
without further confirmation. It must necessarily be our duty in later
chapters to trace the development of the sleeping personality in both
the directions indicated above;--in the direction of organic
recuperation through the hypnotic trance, and in the direction of the
soul's independent operation through that form of trance which leads to
possession and to ecstasy. We shall begin at once in the next chapter to
trace out that great experimental modification of sleep, from which,
under the names of mesmerism or of hypnotism, results of such
conspicuous practical value have already been won.




