Chapter IX.) will know how full and accurate may be these recollections
from beyond the grave. Mere apparitions, such as those with which we are
now dealing, can rarely give more than one brief message, probably felt
by the deceased to be of urgent importance.

A well-attested case where the information communicated in a vision
proved to be definite, accurate, and important to the survivors is given
in Appendix VII. D. In the same Appendix another case in this group is
also quoted. It illustrates the fact that the cases of deepest interest
are often the hardest for the inquirer to get hold of.

In this connection I may refer again to Mrs. Storie's dream of the death
of her brother in a railway accident, given in Chapter IV. While I think
that Gurney was right--in the state of the evidence at the time
_Phantasms of the Living_ was written--in doing his best to bring this
incident under the head of telepathic clairvoyance, I yet feel that the
knowledge since gained makes it impossible for me to adhere to that
view. I cannot regard the visionary scene as wholly reflected from the
mind of the dying man. I cannot think, in the first place, that the
vision of Mr. Johnstone--interpolated with seeming irrelevance among the
details of the disaster--did only by accident coincide with the fact
that that gentleman really _was_ in the train, and with the further fact
that it was _he_ who communicated the fact of Mr. Hunter's death to Mr.
and Mrs. Stone. I must suppose that the communicating intelligence was
aware of Mr. Johnstone's presence, and at least guessed that upon him
(as a clergyman) that task would naturally fall. Nor can I pass over as
purely symbolic so important a part of the vision as the _second
figure_, and the scrap of conversation, which seemed to be half heard. I
therefore consider that the case falls among those where a friend
recently departed appears in company of some other friend, dead some
time before.

We have thus seen the spirit occupied shortly after death with various
duties or engagements, small or great, which it has incurred during life
on earth. Such ties seem to prompt or aid its action upon its old
surroundings. And here an important reflection occurs. Can we _prepare_
such a tie for the departing spirit? Can we create for it some welcome
and helpful train of association which may facilitate the
self-manifestation which many souls appear to desire? I believe that we
can to some extent do this. At an early stage of our collection, Edmund
Gurney was struck by the unexpectedly large proportion of cases where
the percipient informed us that there had been a _compact_ between
himself and the deceased person that whichever passed away first should
try to appear to the other. "Considering," he adds, "what an extremely
small number of persons make such a compact, compared with those who do
not, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that its existence has a
certain efficacy."

Let us now review the compact-cases given in _Phantasms of the Living_
and consider how far they seem to indicate _ante-mortem_ or
_post-mortem_ communication. The twelve cases there recorded are such as
fell, or may have fallen, within twelve hours of the death. In three of
these cases, the agent whose phantasm appeared was certainly still
alive. In most of the other cases the exact time relation is obscure; in
a few of them there is strong probability that the agent was already
dead. The inference will be that the existence of a promise or compact
may act effectively both on the subliminal self before death and also
probably on the spirit after death.

This conclusion is confirmed by several other cases, one of which is
given in Appendix VII. E. This case suggests an important practical
reflection. When a compact to appear, if possible, after death is made,
it should be understood that the appearance need not be to the special
partner in the compact, but to any one whom the agent can succeed in
impressing. It is likely enough that many such attempts, which have
faded on account of the surviving friend's lack of appropriate
sensitivity, might have succeeded if the agent had tried to influence
some one already known to be capable of receiving these
impressions.[146] There is a case given in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v.
p. 440, in which a lady, having made a compact with her husband and also
with a friend, her phantom is seen after her death by her husband and
daughter and the latter's nurse, collectively; but not by the friend,
who was living elsewhere.

Again, we cannot tell how long the spirit may continue the effort, or,
so to say, renew the experiment. In a case recorded in _Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. x. p. 378, the compact is fulfilled after a space of five
years. In another case,[147] there had been no formal compact; but there
is an attempt to express gratitude on an anniversary of death; and this
implies the same kind of mindful effort as the fulfilment of a definite
promise.

I have now traced certain _post-mortem_ manifestations which reveal a
recollection of events known at death, and also a persistence of purpose
in carrying out intentions formed before death. In this next group I
shall trace the knowledge of the departed a little further, and shall
discuss some cases where they appear cognisant of the aspect of their
bodies after death, or of the scenes in which those bodies are
temporarily deposited or finally laid. Such knowledge may appear
trivial,--unworthy the attention of spirits transported into a higher
world. But it is in accordance with the view of a gradual transference
of interests and perceptions,--a period of intermediate confusion, such
as may follow especially upon a death of a sudden or violent kind, or
perhaps upon a death which interrupts very strong affections.

Thus we have already (Appendix VII. B) encountered one striking case of
this type,--the _scratch on the cheek_, perceived by the departed
daughter, as we may conjecture, by reason of the close sympathy which
united her to the mother who was caring for her remains.

There are also two cases closely resembling each other, though from
percipients in widely different parts of the world, where a clairvoyant
vision seems to be presented of a tranquil death-chamber. In that of Mr.
Hector of Valencia, South Australia (see _Phantasms of the Living_, vol.
i. p. 353), the percipient sees in a dream his father dying in the room
he usually occupied, with a candle burning on a chair by his bed; and
the father is found dead in the morning, with a candle by his bedside in
the position seen in the dream. There is not, however, in this case any
sure indication that the dead or dying person was cognisant of his own
body's aspect or surroundings. There may have been a clairvoyant
excursion on the percipient's part, evoked by some impulse from the
agent which did not itself develop into distinctness.[148]

But in certain cases of violent death there seems to have been an
intention on the deceased person's part to show the condition in which
his body is left. Such was Mrs. Storie's dream, or rather series of
visions referred to earlier in this chapter. Such are the cases given in
_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 365 [429 A], and _Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. iii. (1885) p. 95 [§ 730]. Here, too, may be placed two
cases--those of Dr. Bruce (in Appendix IV. D) and Miss Hall (_Journal_
S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 173 [731 A])--where there are _successive_ pictures
of a death and the subsequent arrangement of the body. The _milieux_ of
the percipients, the nature of the deaths, are here again totally
disparate; yet we seem to see the same unknown laws producing effects
closely similar.

In Dr. Bruce's case one might interpret the visions as coming to the
percipient through the mind of his wife, who was present at the scene of
the murder. But this explanation would be impossible in Miss Hall's
case. Rather it seems as though some telepathic link, set up between the
dying brother and the sister, had been maintained after death until all
duties had been fulfilled to the departed. The case reminds one of the
old Homeric notions of the restless appeal of unburied comrades.

In the case of Mrs. Green (_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. p. 420 [429
D]), we come across an interesting problem. Two women are drowned under
very peculiar circumstances. A friend has apparently a clairvoyant
vision of the scene, yet not at the moment when it occurred, but many
hours afterwards, and about the time when another person, deeply
interested, heard of the death. It is therefore possible to suppose that
the apparently clairvoyant scene was in reality impressed telepathically
on the percipient by another living mind. I think, however, that both
the nature of the vision and certain analogies, which will appear later
in our argument, point to a different view, involving an agency both of
the dead and of the living. I conjecture that a current of influence may
be started by a deceased person, which, however, only becomes strong
enough to be perceptible to its object when reinforced by some vivid
current of emotion arising in living minds. I do not say that this is
yet provable; yet the hint may be of value when the far-reaching
interdependencies of telepathy between the two worlds come to be better
understood.

Two singular cases in this group remain, where the departed spirit, long
after death, seems preoccupied with the spot where his bones are laid.
The first of these cases (_Journal_ S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 230 [733 A])
approaches farce; the second (in which the skeleton of a man who had
probably been murdered about forty years before was discovered by means
of a dream; see _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 35), stands alone
among our narratives in the tragedy which follows on the communication.
Mr. Podmore in an article in the same volume (p. 303) suggests other
theories to account for this case without invoking the agency of the
dead; but to me the least impossible explanation is still the notion
that the murdered man's dreams harked back after all those years to his
remote unconsecrated grave. I may refer further to another case (in
_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 155, footnote) where feelings of
horror and depression were constantly experienced in a room over which a
baby's body was afterwards found. This case makes, perhaps, for another
explanation--depending not so much on any _continued_ influence of the
departed spirit as on some _persistent_ influence inhering in the bones
themselves--deposited under circumstances of terror or anguish, and
possibly in some way still radiating a malignant memory. Bizarre as this
interpretation looks, we shall find some confirmation of such a
possibility in our chapter on Possession. Yet another case belonging to
the same group (_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. p. 418) supplies a variant
on this view; suggesting, as Edward Gurney has remarked, the local
imprintation of a tragic picture, by _whom_ and upon _what_ we cannot
tell.

I think it well to suggest even these wild conjectures; so long as they
are understood to be conjectures and nothing more. I hold it probable
that those communications, of which telepathy from one spirit to another
forms the most easily traceable variety, are in reality infinitely
varied and complex, and show themselves from time to time in forms which
must for long remain quite beyond our comprehension.

The next class of cases in this series well illustrates this
unexpectedness. It has only been as the result of a gradual accumulation
of concordant cases that I have come to believe there is some reality in
the bizarre supposition that the departed spirit is sometimes specially
aware of the tune at which news of his death is about to reach some
given friend.[149] Proof of such knowledge on his part is rendered
harder by the alternative possibility that the friend may by
clairvoyance become aware of a letter in his own proximity. As was shown
in _Phantasms of the Living_, there is some evidence for such
clairvoyance even in cases where the letter seen is quite unimportant.

Again, there are cases where the percipient states that a cloud of
unreasonable depression fell upon him about the time of his friend's
death at a distance, and continued until the actual news arrived; when,
instead of becoming intensified, it lifted suddenly. In one or two such
cases there was an actual presence or apparition, which seemed to hang
about until the news arrived, and then disappeared. Or, on the other
hand, there is sometimes a happy vision of the departed preluding the
news, as though to prepare the percipient's mind for the shock
(_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 90 [735 A]). The suggested inference
is that in such cases the spirit's attention is more or less
continuously directed to the survivor until the news reaches him. This
does not, of course, explain how the spirit learns as to the arrival of
the news; yet it makes that piece of knowledge seem a less isolated
thing.

Having thus referred to a number of cases where the apparition shows
varying degrees of knowledge or memory, I pass on to the somewhat
commoner type, where the apparition lacks the power or the impulse to
communicate any message much more definite than that all-important
one--of his own continued life and love. These cases, nevertheless,
might be subdivided on many lines. Each apparition, even though it be
momentary, is a phenomenon complex in more ways than our minds can
follow. We must look for some broad line of demarcation, which may apply
to a great many different incidents, while continuing to some extent
the series which we have already been descending--from knowledge and
purpose on the deceased person's part down to vagueness and apparent
automatism.

Such a division--gradual, indeed, but for that very reason the more
instructive--exists between _personal_ and _local_ apparitions; between
manifestations plainly intended to impress the minds of certain definite
survivors and manifestations in accustomed haunts, some of which,
indeed, may be destined to impress survivors, but which degenerate and
disintegrate into sights and sounds too meaningless to prove either
purpose or intelligence.

Let us look, then, for these characteristics, not expecting, of course,
that our series will be logically simple; for it must often happen that
the personal and local impulses will be indistinguishable, as when the
desired percipient is inhabiting the familiar home. But we may begin
with some cases where the apparition has shown itself in some scene
altogether strange to the deceased person.

We have had, of course, some cases of this type already. Such was the
case of the apparition with the _red scratch_ (Appendix VII. B); such
too was the apparition in the Countess Kapnist's carriage (Appendix VII.
E). Such cases, indeed, occur most frequently--and this fact is itself
significant--among the higher and more developed forms of manifestation.
Among the briefer, less-developed apparitions with which we have now to
deal, invasions by the phantasm of quite unknown territory are
relatively few. I will begin by referring to a curious case, where the
impression given is that of a spiritual presence which seeks and finds
the percipient, but is itself too confused for coherent communication
(Mrs. Lightfoot's case, _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 453 [429
B]). It will be seen that this narrative is thoroughly in accordance
with previous indications of a state of posthumous _bewilderment_
supervening before the spirit has adjusted its perceptions to the new
environment.

In cases like Mrs. Lightfoot's, where the percipient's surroundings are
unknown to the deceased person, and especially in cases where the
intimation of a death reaches the percipient when _at sea_, there is
plainly nothing except the percipient's own personality to guide the
spirit in his search. We have several narratives of this type. In one of
these--Archdeacon Farler's, already referred to (p. 227), the apparition
appears _twice_, the second appearance at least being subsequent to the
death. It is plain that if in such a case the _second_ apparition
conveys no fresh intelligence, we cannot prove that it is more than a
subjective recrudescence of the _first_. Yet analogy is in favour of
its veridical character, since we have cases where successive
manifestations _do_ bring fresh knowledge, and seem to show a continued
effort to communicate.[150]

Then, again, there are _auditory_ cases where the phantasmal speech has
occurred in places not known to the deceased person. (_Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 90, and vol. v. p. 455.)

One specially impressive characteristic of apparitions (as has been
already remarked) is their occasional _collectivity_--the fact that more
percipients than one sometimes see or hear the phantasmal figure or
voice simultaneously. When one is considering the gradual decline in
definiteness and apparent purpose from one group of apparitions to
another, it is natural to ask whether this characteristic--in my view so
important--is found to accompany especially the higher, more intelligent
manifestations.

I cannot find that this is so. On the contrary, it is, I think, in cases
of mere _haunting_ that we oftenest find that the figure is seen by
several persons at once, or else (a cognate phenomenon) by several
persons successively. I know not how to explain this apparent tendency.
Could we admit the underlying assumptions, it would suit the view that
the "haunting" spirits are "earthbound," and thus somehow nearer to
matter than spirits more exalted. Yet instances of collectivity are
scattered through all classes of apparitions; and the irregular
appearance of a characteristic which seems to us so fundamental affords
another lesson how great may be the variety of inward mechanism in cases
which to us might seem constructed on much the same type.

I pass on to a group of cases which are both personal and local;
although the personal element in most of them--the desire to manifest to
the friend--may seem more important than the local element--the impulse
to revisit some accustomed haunt.

In the case which I shall now cite the deceased person's image is seen
simultaneously by several members of his own household, in his own
house. Note the analogy to a collective crystal vision.[151]

The account is taken from _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p. 213. It
is given by Mr. Charles A. W. Lett, of the Military and Royal Naval
Club, Albemarle Street, W.


_December 3rd, 1885._

     On the 5th April 1873 my wife's father, Captain Towns, died at his
     residence, Cranbrook, Rose Bay, near Sidney, N. S. Wales. About six
     weeks after his death my wife had occasion, one evening about nine
     o'clock, to go to one of the bedrooms in the house. She was
     accompanied by a young lady, Miss Berthon, and as they entered the
     room--the gas was burning all the time--they were amazed to see,
     reflected as it were on the polished surface of the wardrobe, the
     image of Captain Towns. It was barely half figure, the head,
     shoulders, and part of the arms only showing--in fact, it was like
     an ordinary medallion portrait, but life-size. The face appeared
     wan and pale, as it did before his death, and he wore a kind of
     grey flannel jacket, in which he had been accustomed to sleep.
     Surprised and half alarmed at what they saw, their first idea was
     that a portrait had been hung in the room, and that what they saw
     was its reflection; but there was no picture of the kind.

     Whilst they were looking and wondering, my wife's sister, Miss
     Towns, came into the room, and before either of the others had time
     to speak she exclaimed, "Good gracious! Do you see papa?" One of
     the housemaids happened to be passing downstairs at the moment, and
     she was called in, and asked if she saw anything, and her reply
     was, "Oh, miss! the master." Graham--Captain Towns' old body
     servant--was then sent for, and he also immediately exclaimed, "Oh,
     Lord save us! Mrs. Lett, it's the Captain!" The butler was called,
     and then Mrs. Crane, my wife's nurse, and they both said what they
     saw. Finally, Mrs. Towns was sent for, and, seeing the apparition,
     she advanced towards it with her arm extended as if to touch it,
     and as she passed her hand over the panel of the wardrobe the
     figure gradually faded away, and never again appeared, though the
     room was regularly occupied for a long time after.

     These are the simple facts of the case, and they admit of no doubt;
     no kind of intimation was given to any of the witnesses; the same
     question was put to each one as they came into the room, and the
     reply was given without hesitation by each. It was by the merest
     accident that I did not see the apparition. I was in the house at
     the time, but did not hear when I was called.

C. A. W. LETT.

     We, the undersigned, having read the above statement, certify that
     it is strictly accurate, as we both were witnesses of the
     apparition.

SARA LETT.
SIBBIE SMYTH (_nee_ TOWNS).

Gurney writes:--

     Mrs. Lett assures me that neither she nor her sister ever
     experienced a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion.
     She is positive that the recognition of the appearance on the part
     of each of the later witnesses was _independent_, and not due to
     any suggestion from the persons already in the room.

There is another collective case which is noticeable from the fact that
the departed spirit appears to influence two persons at a distance from
each other in a concordant way, so that one of them becomes conscious of
the appearance to the other.[152] Compare with this the incident given
at the end of Appendix VII. G, when Miss Campbell has a vision of her
friend seeing an apparition at a time when this is actually
occurring.[153]

The case given in Appendix VII. F--which comes from excellent
informants--is one of those which correspond most nearly to what one
would _desire_ in a posthumous message. I may refer also to General
Campbell's case (in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. p. 476) in which a
long continued series of unaccountable noises and an apparition twice
seen by a child in the house suggested to the narrator the agency of his
dead wife. The case, which depends for its evidential force on a great
mass of detail, is too long for me to quote; but it is worth study, as
is any case where there seems evidence of persistent effort to manifest,
meeting with one knows not what difficulty. It may be that in such a
story there is nothing but strange coincidence, or it may be that from
records of partially successful effort, renewed often and in ambiguous
ways, we shall hereafter learn something of the nature of that curtain
of obstruction which now seems so arbitrary in its sudden lifting, its
sudden fall.

I will conclude this group by referring the reader to three cases
closely similar, all well attested, and all of them capable of
explanation either on local or personal grounds. In the first
(_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p. 619 [744 A]) an apparition is
seen by two persons in a house in Edinburgh, a few hours before the
death of a lady who had lived there, and whose body was to be brought
back to it. In the second (_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 57 [744 B])
the dead librarian haunts his library, but in the library are members of
his old staff. In the third (_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 212
[§ 744]), the dead wife loiters round her husband's tomb, but near it
passes a gardener who had been in her employ.

In this last case the apparition was seen about seven and a half hours
after the death. This, as Gurney remarked, makes it still more difficult
to regard the case as a telepathic impression transmitted at the moment
of death, and remaining latent in the mind of the percipient. The
incident suggests rather that Bard, the gardener, had come upon Mrs. de
Fréville's spirit, so to say, unawares. One cannot imagine that she
specially wished him to see her, and to see her engaged in what seems so
needless and undignified a retracing of currents of earthly thought.
Rather this seems a rudimentary _haunting_--an incipient lapse into
those aimless, perhaps unconscious, reappearances in familiar spots
which may persist (as it would seem) for many years after death.

A somewhat similar case is that of Colonel Crealock (in _Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. v. p. 432) where a soldier who had been dead some hours was
seen by his superior officer in camp at night rolling up and taking away
his bed.

It is, indeed, mainly by dwelling on these intermediate cases, between a
message-bringing apparition and a purposeless haunt, that we have most
hope of understanding the typical haunt which, while it has been in a
sense the most popular of all our phenomena, is yet to the careful
inquirer one of the least satisfactory. One main evidential difficulty
generally lies in identifying the haunting figure, in finding anything
to connect the history of the house with the vague and often various
sights and sounds which perplex or terrify its flesh and blood
inhabitants. We must, at any rate, rid ourselves of the notion that some
great crime or catastrophe is always to be sought as the groundwork of a
haunt of this kind. To that negative conclusion our cases concordantly
point us.[154] The apparition is most often seen by a stranger, several
months after the death, with no apparent reason for its appearance at
that special time. This last point is of interest in considering the
question whether the hallucinatory picture could have been projected
from any still incarnate mind. In one case--the vision of the Bishop of
St. Brieuc (given in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. p. 460), there _was_
such a special reason--the Bishop's body, unknown to the percipient, was
at that moment being buried at the distance of a few miles. Mr. Podmore
suggests (_op. cit._, vol. vi. p. 301) that it was from the minds of the
living mourners that the Bishop's phantasm was generated. That
hypothesis may have its portion of truth; the surrounding emotion may
have been one of the factors which made the apparition possible. But the
assumption that it was the only admissible factor--that the departed
Bishop's own possible agency must be set aside altogether--lands us, I
think, in difficulties greater than those which we should thus escape.
The reader who tries to apply it to the apparitions quoted in my earlier
groups will find himself in a labyrinth of complexity. Still more will
this be the case in dealing with the far fuller and more explicit
_motor___ communications, by automatic writing or speech, which we shall
have to discuss in the two next chapters. Unless the actual evidence be
disallowed in a wholesale manner, we shall be forced, I think, to admit
the continued action of the departed as a main element in these
apparitions.

I do not say as the _only_ element. I myself hold, as already implied,
that the thought and emotion of living persons does largely intervene,
as aiding or conditioning the independent action of the departed. I even
believe that it is possible that, say, an intense fixation of my own
mind on a departed spirit may aid that spirit to manifest at a special
moment--and not even to me, but to a percipient more sensitive than
myself. In the boundless ocean of mind innumerable currents and tides
shift with the shifting emotion of each several soul.

But now we are confronted by another possible element in these vaguer
classes of apparitions, harder to evaluate even than the possible action
of incarnate minds. I mean the possible _results_ of past mental action,
which, for aught we know, may persist in some perceptible manner,
without fresh reinforcement, just as the results of past bodily action
persist. This question leads to the still wider question of
_retrocognition_, and of the relation of psychical phenomena to _time_
generally--a problem whose discussion cannot be attempted here.[155] Yet
we must remember that such possibilities exist; they may explain certain
phenomena into which little of fresh intelligence seems to enter, as,
for instance, the alleged persistence, perhaps for years, of meaningless
sounds in a particular room or house.

And since we are coming now to cases into which this element of
meaningless sound will enter largely, it seems right to begin their
discussion with a small group of cases where there is evidence for the
definite agency of some dying or deceased person in connection with
inarticulate sounds, or I should rather say of the _connection_ of some
deceased person with the sounds; since the best explanation may perhaps
be that they are _sounds of welcome_--before or after actual
death--corresponding to those _apparitions of welcome_ of which we have
already had specimens. One of our cases (see _Phantasms of the Living_,
vol. ii. p. 639 [§ 747]) is remarkable in that the auditory
hallucination--a sound as of female voices gently singing--was heard by
five persons, by four of them, as it seems, independently, and in two
places, on different sides of the house. At the same time, one
person--the Eton master whose mother had just died, and who was
therefore presumably in a frame of mind more prone to hallucination than
the physician, matron, friend, or servants who actually did hear the
singing--himself heard nothing at all. In this case the physician felt
no doubt that Mrs. L. was actually dead; and in fact it was during the
laying out of the body that the sounds occurred.

I have already discussed (Chapter VI.) the nature of these phantasmal
sounds;--nor is it contrary to our analogies that the person most deeply
concerned in the death should in this case fail to hear them. But the
point on which I would here lay stress is that phantasmal sounds--even
non-articulate sounds--may be as clear a manifestation of personality as
phantasmal figures. Among non-articulate noises music is, of course, the
most pleasing; but sounds, for instance, which imitate the work of a
carpenter's shop, may be equally human and intelligent. In some of the
cases of this class we see apparent attempts of various kinds to
simulate sounds such as men and women--or manufactured, as opposed to
natural, objects--are accustomed to produce. To claim this humanity, to
indicate this intelligence, seems the only motive of sounds of this
kind.[156]

These sounds, in their rudimentary attempt at showing intelligence, are
about on a level with the exploits of the "Poltergeist," where coals are
thrown about, water spilt, and so forth. Poltergeist phenomena, however,
seldom coincide with the ordinary phenomena of a haunt. We have one
remarkable case (_Journal_ S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 280-84 [868 B]) where
Poltergeist phenomena coincide with a death, and a few cases where they
are supposed to follow on a death; but, as a rule, where figures appear
there are no movements; and where there are movements no apparition is
seen. If alleged Poltergeist phenomena are always fraudulent, there
would be nothing to be surprised at here. If, as I suspect, they are
sometimes genuine, their dissociation from visual hallucinations may
sometimes afford us a hint of value.

But after Poltergeists have been set aside,--after a severe line has
been drawn excluding all those cases (in themselves singular enough)
where the main phenomena observed consist of non-articulate
sounds,--there remains a great mass of evidence to haunting,--that is,
broadly speaking, to the fact that there are many houses in which more
than one person has independently seen phantasmal figures, which
usually, though not always, bear at least some resemblance to each
other.[157] The facts thus baldly stated are beyond dispute. Their true
interpretation is a very difficult matter. Mrs. Sidgwick gives four
hypotheses, which I must quote at length as the first serious attempt
ever made (so far as I know) to collect and face the difficulties of
this problem, so often, but so loosely, discussed through all historical
times. (From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 146-8.)

"I will, therefore, proceed briefly to state and discuss the only four
theories that have occurred to me.

"The two which I will take first in order assume that the apparitions
are due to the agency or presence of the spirits of deceased men.

"There is first the popular view, that the apparition is something
belonging to the external world--that, like ordinary matter, it occupies
and moves through space, and would be in the room whether the percipient
were there to see it or not. This hypothesis involves us in many
difficulties, of which one serious one--that of accounting for the
clothes of the ghost--has often been urged, and never, I think,
satisfactorily answered. Nevertheless, I am bound to admit that there is
some little evidence tending to suggest this theory. For instance, in
the account,[158] of which I have given an abstract, of the weeping lady
who has appeared so frequently in a certain house, the following passage
occurs:--'They went after it (the figure) together into the
drawing-room; it then came out, and went down the aforesaid passage
(leading to the kitchen), but was the next minute seen by another Miss
[M.] ... come up the outside steps from the kitchen. On this particular
day, Captain [M.'s] married daughter happened to be at an upstairs
window ... and independently saw the figure continue her course across
the lawn and into the orchard.' A considerable amount of clear evidence
to the appearance of ghosts to independent observers in successive
points in space would certainly afford a strong argument for their
having a definite relation to space; but in estimating evidence of this
kind it would be necessary to know how far the observer's attention had
been drawn to the point in question. If it had been a real woman whom
the Miss [M.'s] were observing, we should have inferred, with perfect
certainty, from our knowledge that she could not be in two places at
once, that she had been successively, in a certain order, in the places
where she was seen by the three observers. If they had noted the moments
at which they saw her, and comparing notes afterwards, found that
according to these notes they had all seen her at the same time, or in
some other order to that inferred, we should still feel absolute
confidence in our inference, and should conclude that there must be
something wrong about the watches or the notes. From association of
ideas, it would be perfectly natural to make the same inference in the
case of a ghost which looks exactly like a woman. But in the case of the
ghost the inference would not be legitimate, because, unless the
particular theory of ghosts which we are discussing be true, there is no
reason, so far as we know, why it should not appear in two or more
places at once. Hence, in the case of the ghost, a well-founded
assurance that the appearances were successive would require a careful
observation of the times, which, so far as I know, has never been made.
On the whole, therefore, I must dismiss the popular theory as not
having, in my opinion, even a _primâ facie_ ground for serious
consideration.

"The theory that I will next examine seems to me decidedly more
plausible, from its analogy to the conclusion to which I am brought by
the examination of the evidence for phantasms of the living. This theory
is that the apparition has no real relation to the external world, but
is a hallucination caused in some way by some communication, without the
intervention of the senses, between the disembodied spirit and the
percipient, its form depending on the mind either of the spirit or of
the percipient, or of both. In the case of haunted houses, however, a
difficulty meets us that we do not encounter, or at least rarely
encounter, in applying a similar hypothesis to explain phantasms of the
living, or phantasms of the dead other than fixed local ghosts. In these
cases we have generally to suppose a simple _rapport_ between mind and
mind, but in a haunted house we have a _rapport_ complicated by its
apparent dependence on locality. It seems necessary to make the
improbable assumption, that the spirit is interested in an entirely
special way in a particular house (though possibly this interest may be
of a subconscious kind), and that his interest in it puts him into
connection with another mind, occupied with it in the way that that of a
living person actually there must consciously or unconsciously be, while
he does not get into similar communication with the same, or with other
persons elsewhere.

"If, notwithstanding these difficulties, it be true that haunting is due
in any way to the agency of deceased persons, and conveys a definite
idea of them to the percipients through the resemblance to them of the
apparition, then, by patiently continuing our investigations, we may
expect, sooner or later, to obtain a sufficient amount of evidence to
connect clearly the commencement of hauntings with the death of
particular persons, and to establish clearly the likeness of the
apparition to those persons. The fact that almost everybody is now
photographed ought to be of material assistance in obtaining evidence of
this latter kind.

"My third theory dispenses with the agency of disembodied spirits, but
involves us in other and perhaps equally great improbabilities. It is
that the first appearance is a purely subjective hallucination, and that
the subsequent similar appearances, both to the original percipient and
to others, are the result of the first appearance; unconscious
expectancy causing them in the case of the original percipient, and some
sort of telepathic communication from the original percipient in the
case of others. In fact, it assumes that a tendency to a particular
hallucination is in a way infectious. If this theory be true, I should
expect to find that the apparently independent appearances after the
first depended on the percipient's having had some sort of intercourse
with some one who had seen the ghost before, and that any decided
discontinuity of occupancy would stop the haunting. I should also expect
to find, as we do in one of the cases I have quoted, that sometimes the
supposed ghost would follow the family from one abode to another,
appearing to haunt them rather than any particular house.

"The fourth theory that I shall mention is one which I can hardly expect
to appear plausible, and which, therefore, I only introduce because I
think that it corresponds best to a certain part of the evidence;--and,
as I have already said, considering the altogether tentative way in
which we are inevitably dealing with this obscure subject, it is as well
to express definitely every hypothesis which an impartial consideration
of the facts suggests. It is that there is something in the actual
building itself--some subtle physical influence--which produces in the
brain that effect which, in its turn, becomes the cause of a
hallucination. It is certainly difficult on this hypothesis alone to
suppose that the hallucinations of different people would be similar,
but we might account for this by a combination of this hypothesis and
the last. The idea is suggested by the case, of which I have given an
abstract, where the haunting continued through more than one occupancy,
but changed its character; and if there be any truth in the theory, I
should expect in time to obtain a good deal more evidence of this kind,
combined with evidence that the same persons do not as a rule encounter
ghosts elsewhere. I should also expect evidence to be forthcoming
supporting the popular idea that repairs and alterations of the building
sometimes cause the haunting to cease."[159]

These hypotheses--none of which, as Mrs. Sidgwick expressly states (_op.
cit._, p. 145), seemed to herself satisfactory--did nevertheless, I
think, comprise all the deductions which could reasonably be made from
the evidence as it at that time stood. A few modifications, which the
experience of subsequent years has led me to introduce, can hardly be
said to afford further _explanation_, although they state the
difficulties in what now seems to me a more hopeful way.

In the first place then--as already explained in Chapter VI.--I in some
sense fuse into one Mrs. Sidgwick's two first hypotheses by my own
hypothesis of actual presence, actual spatial changes induced in the
metetherial, but not in the material world. I hold that when the
phantasm is discerned by more than one person at once (and on some
other, but not all other occasions) it is actually effecting a change in
that portion of space where it is perceived, although not, as a rule, in
the matter which occupies that place. It is, therefore, not optically
nor acoustically perceived; perhaps no rays of light are reflected nor
waves of air set in motion; but an unknown form of supernormal
perception, not necessarily acting through the sensory end-organs, comes
into play. In the next place, I am inclined to lay stress on the
parallel between these narratives of haunting and those phantasms of the
living which I have already classed as _psychorrhagic_. In each case,
as it seems to me, there is an involuntary detachment of some element of
the spirit, probably with no knowledge thereof at the main centre of
consciousness. Those "haunts by the living," as they may be called,
where, for instance, a man is seen phantasmally standing before his own
fireplace, seem to me to be repeated, perhaps more readily, after the
spirit is freed from the flesh.

Again, I think that the curious question as to the influence of certain
_houses_ in generating apparitions may be included under the broader
heading of Retrocognition. That is to say, we are not here dealing with
a special condition of certain houses, but with a branch of the wide
problem as to the relation of supernormal phenomena to _time_.
Manifestations which occur in haunted houses depend, let us say, on
something which has taken place a long time ago. In what way do they
depend on that past event? Are they a sequel, or only a residue? Is
there fresh operation going on, or only fresh perception of something
already accomplished? Or can we in such a case draw any real distinction
between a continued action and a continued perception of a past action?
The closest parallel, as it seems to me, although not at first sight an
obvious one, lies between these phenomena of haunting, these persistent
sights and sounds, and certain phenomena of crystal-vision and of
automatic script, which also seem to depend somehow upon long-past
events,--to be their sequel or their residue. One specimen case I give
in Appendix (VII. G), where the connection of the haunting apparition
with a certain person long deceased may be maintained with more than
usual plausibility. From that level the traceable connections get weaker
and weaker, until we come to phantasmal scenes where there is no longer
any even apparent claim to the contemporary agency of human spirits.
Such a vision, for instance, as that of a line of spectral deer crossing
a ford, may indeed, if seen in the same place by several independent
observers, be held to be something more than a mere subjective fancy;
but what in reality such a picture signifies is a question which brings
us at once to theories of the permanence or simultaneity of all
phenomena in a timeless Universal Soul.

Such conceptions, however difficult, are among the highest to which our
mind can reach. Could we approach them more nearly, they might deeply
influence our view, even of our own remote individual destiny. So,
perhaps, shall it some day be; at present we may be well satisfied if we
can push our knowledge of that destiny one step further than of old,
even just behind that veil which has so long hung impenetrably before
the eyes of men.

Here, then, is a natural place of pause in our inquiry.

The discussion of the ethical aspect of these questions I have postponed
to my concluding chapter. But one point already stands out from the
evidence--at once so important and so manifest that it seems well to
call attention to it at once--as a solvent more potent than any
Lucretius could apply to human superstition and human fears.

In this long string of narratives, complex and bizarre though their
details may be, we yet observe that the character of the appearance
varies in a definite manner with their distinctness and individuality.
Haunting phantoms, incoherent and unintelligent, may seem restless and
unhappy. But as they rise into definiteness, intelligence,
individuality, the phantoms rise also into love and joy. I cannot recall
one single case of a proved posthumous combination of intelligence with
wickedness. Such evil as our evidence will show us--we have as yet
hardly come across it in this book--is scarcely more than monkeyish
mischief, childish folly. In dealing with automatic script, for
instance, we shall have to wonder whence come the occasional vulgar
jokes or silly mystifications. We shall discuss whether they are a kind
of dream of the automatist's own, or whether they indicate the existence
of unembodied intelligences on the level of the dog or the ape. But, on
the other hand, all that world-old conception of Evil Spirits, of
malevolent Powers, which has been the basis of so much of actual
devil-worship and of so much more of vague supernatural fear;--all this
insensibly melts from the mind as we study the evidence before us.

    Hunc igitur terrorem animi tenebrasque necessest
    Non radii solis, neque lucida tela diei
    Discutiant sed, naturæ species ratioque.

Here surely is a fact of no little meaning. Our narratives have been
collected from men and women of many types, holding all varieties of
ordinary opinion. Yet the upshot of all these narratives is to emphasise
a point which profoundly differentiates the scientific from the
superstitious view of spiritual phenomena. The terror which shaped
primitive theologies still tinges for the populace every hint of
intercourse with disembodied souls. The transmutation of savage fear
into scientific curiosity is of the essence of civilisation. Towards
that transmutation each separate fragment of our evidence, with
undesigned concordance, indisputably tends. In that faintly opening
world of spirit I can find nothing worse than living men; I seem to
discern not an intensification but a disintegration of selfishness,
malevolence, pride. And is not this a natural result of any cosmic moral
evolution? If the selfish man (as Marcus Antoninus has it) "is a kind of
boil or imposthume upon the universe," must not his egoistic impulses
suffer in that wider world a sure, even if a painful, decay; finding no
support or sustenance among those permanent forces which maintain the
stream of things?

I have thus indicated one point of primary importance on which the
undesignedly coincident testimony of hundreds of first-hand narratives
supports a conclusion, not yet popularly accepted, but in harmony with
the evolutionary conceptions which rule our modern thought. Nor does
this point stand alone. I can find, indeed, no guarantee of absolute and
idle bliss; no triumph in any exclusive salvation. But the student of
these narratives will, I think, discover throughout them uncontradicted
indications of the persistence of Love, the growth of Joy, the willing
submission to Law.

These indications, no doubt, may seem weak and scattered la comparison
with the wholesale, thorough-going assertions of philosophical or
religious creeds. Their advantage is that they occur incidentally in the
course of our independent and cumulative demonstration of the
profoundest cosmical thesis which we can at present conceive as
susceptible of any kind of scientific proof. Cosmical questions, indeed,
there may be which are in themselves of deeper import than our own
survival of bodily death. The nature of the First Cause; the blind or
the providential ordering of the sum of things;--these are problems
vaster than any which affect only the destinies of men. But to whatever
moral certainty we may attain on those mightiest questions, we can
devise no way whatever of bringing them to scientific test. They deal
with infinity; and our modes of investigation have grasp only on finite
things.

But the question of man's survival of death stands in a position
uniquely intermediate between matters capable and matters incapable of
proof. It is in itself a definite problem, admitting of conceivable
proof which, even if not technically rigorous, might amply satisfy the
scientific mind. And at the same time the conception which it involves
is in itself a kind of avenue and inlet into infinity. Could a proof of
our survival be obtained, it would carry us deeper into the true nature
of the universe than we should be carried by an even perfect knowledge
of the material scheme of things. It would carry us deeper both by
achievement and by promise. The discovery that there was a life in man
independent of blood and brain would be a cardinal, a dominating fact in
all science and in all philosophy. And the prospect thus opened to human
knowledge, in this or in other worlds, would be limitless indeed.




