CHAPTER II

DISINTEGRATIONS OF PERSONALITY

  θἁντὁς ἑστιν ὁκὁσα ἑγερθἑντες ὁρἑομεν, ὁκὁσα δε εὑδοντες, ὑπνος.

  --HERACLITUS.


Of the race of man we know for certain that it has been evolved through
many ages and through countless forms of change. We know for certain
that its changes continue still; nay, that more causes of change act
upon us in "fifty years of Europe" than in "a cycle of Cathay." We may
reasonably conjecture that the race will continue to change with
increasing rapidity, and through a period in comparison with which our
range of recorded history shrinks into a moment.

The actual nature of these coming changes, indeed, lies beyond our
imagination. Many of them are probably as inconceivable to us now as
eyesight would have been to our eyeless ancestors. All that we can do is
to note so far as possible the structural laws of our personality as
deduced from its changes thus far; inferring that for some time to come,
at any rate, its further changes will proceed upon similar lines.

I have already (Chapter I) indicated the general view as to the nature
of human personality which is maintained in this work. I regard each man
as at once profoundly unitary and almost infinitely composite, as
inheriting from earthly ancestors a multiplex and "colonial"
organism--polyzoic and perhaps polypsychic in an extreme degree; but
also as ruling and unifying that organism by a soul or spirit absolutely
beyond our present analysis--a soul which has originated in a spiritual
or metetherial environment; which even while embodied subsists in that
environment; and which will still subsist therein after the body's
decay.

It is, of course, impossible for us to picture to ourselves the way in
which the individual life of each cell of the body is reconciled with
the unity of the central life which controls the body as a whole. But
this difficulty is not created or intensified by the hypothesis of a
separate and persistent soul. On no hypothesis can we really understand
the collaboration and subordination of the cell-lives of any
multicellular animal. It is as mysterious in the starfish as it is in
Plato; and the "eight brains of Aurelia," with their individual and
their common life, are as inconceivable as the life of the phagocytes in
the philosopher's veins, in their relation to his central thought.[7]

I claim, in fact, that the ancient hypothesis of an indwelling soul,
possessing and using the body as a whole, yet bearing a real, though
obscure relation to the various more or less apparently disparate
conscious groupings manifested in connection with the organism and in
connection with more or less localised groups of nerve-matter, is a
hypothesis not more perplexing, not more cumbrous, than any other
hypothesis yet suggested. I claim also that it is conceivably
provable,--I myself hold it as actually proved,--by direct observation.
I hold that certain manifestations of central individualities,
associated now or formerly with certain definite organisms, have been
observed in operation apart from those organisms, both while the
organisms were still living, and after they had decayed. Whether or no
this thesis be as yet sufficiently proved, it is at least at variance
with no scientific principle nor established fact whatever; and it is of
a nature which continued observation may conceivably establish to the
satisfaction of all. The negative thesis, on the other hand, is a thesis
in unstable equilibrium. It cannot be absolutely proved by any number of
negative instances; and it may be absolutely disproved by a single
positive instance. It may have at present a greater scientific
_currency_, but it can have no real scientific authority as against the
view defended in these pages.

Leaving these questions, however, aside for the present, we may agree
that in the organism as we can observe it in common life we have no
complete or unchanging unity, but rather a complex hierarchy of groups
of cells exercising vaguely limited functions, and working together with
rough precision, tolerable harmony, fair success. That these powers ever
work _perfectly_ together we have no evidence. Our feeling of health is
but a rough haphazard register of what is passing within us. Nor would
it ever be possible to define a permanently ideal status in an organism
in moving equilibrium,--an organism which lives by exploding unstable
compounds, and which is constantly aiming at new ends at the expense of
the old.

Many disturbances and disintegrations of the personality must presently
fall to be discussed. But the reader who may follow me must remember the
point of view from which I am writing. The aim of my analysis is not to
destroy but to fulfil;--or say, rather, my hope is that observation of
the ways in which the personality tends to disintegrate may suggest
methods which may tend on the other hand to its more complete
integration.

Such improvements upon the natural conditions of the organism are not
unknown. Just as the study of hysteria deals mainly with instabilities
in the threshold of consciousness, so does the study of zymotic disease
deal mainly with instabilities in the constitution of the blood. The
ordinary object of the physician is to check these instabilities when
they occur; to restore healthy blood in the place of vitiated. The
experimental biologist has a further aim. He wishes to provide men with
_better_ blood than nature has bestowed; to elicit from virus and decay
some element whose infusion into the veins may give immunity against
microbic invasion. As the adult is safer against such attacks than the
child by dint of his more advanced development, so is the immunised
adult safer than the common man. The change of his blood which healthy
maturity has induced has made him safe against whooping-cough. The
change in his blood which we effect by injecting antitoxin makes him
temporarily safe against diphtheria. We have improved upon nature;--and
our artifice has been _prophylactic_ by virtue of being in a certain
sense _developmental_.

Even such, I trust, may be the achievement of experimental psychology in
a later day. I shall be well content if in this chapter I can give hints
for some future colligation of such evolutive phenomena as may lurk amid
a mass of phenomena mainly dissolutive--phenomena whose records are
scattered and imperfect, and have as yet only in some few directions,
and by quite recent writers, been collated or systematised on any
definite plan.

The discussion of these disintegrations of personality needs, I think,
some little clearing of the ground beforehand, if it is to avoid
confusion. It will be needful to speak of concurrent and alternating
streams of consciousness,--of subliminal and supraliminal strata of
personality and the like;--phrases which save much trouble when used
with care, but which need some words of preliminary explanation. It is
not easy to realise that anything which deserves the name of
consciousness can be going on within us, apart from that central stream
of thought and feeling with which we identify ourselves in common life.
Something of definition is needed;--not indeed of any formal or dogmatic
kind;--but enough to make clear the sense given to such words as
consciousness, memory, personality, in the ensuing pages.

I begin, then, with the obvious remark that when we conceive any act
other than our own as a conscious act, we do so either because we
regard it as _complex_, and therefore _purposive_, or because we
perceive that it has been _remembered_. Thus we call the fencer or the
chess-player fully conscious; or, again, we say, "The man who seemed
stunned after that blow on the head must really have been conscious all
the time; for he afterwards recalled every incident." The _memorability_
of an act is, in fact, a better proof of consciousness than its
complexity. Thus consciousness has been denied both to hypnotised
subjects and to dogs; but it is easier to prove that the hypnotised
subject is conscious than that the dog is conscious. For the hypnotised
subject, though he may forget the incidents of the trance when he
awakes, will remember them in the next trance; or he may be trained to
remember them in the waking state also; while with regard to the dog we
cannot decide from the mere complexity of his actions how far he is
conscious of their performance. With him, too, the best line of proof
lies in his obvious memory of past acts. And yet, although all agree
that our own memory, broadly speaking, proves our past consciousness,
some persons would not admit that a dog's memory does so too. The dog's
organism, they would say, responds, no doubt, in a new manner to a
second repetition of a previous stimulus; but this is more or less true
of all living organisms, or parts of organisms, even far below what we
generally regard as a conscious level.

Reflections of this kind naturally lead to a wider conception of
consciousness. It is gradually seen that the earlier inquiries which men
have made about consciousness have been of a merely ethical or legal
character;--have simply aimed at deciding whether at a given moment a
man was _responsible_ for his acts, either to a human or to a divine
tribunal. Commonsense has seemed to encourage this method of definite
demarcation; we judge practically either that a man is conscious or that
he is not; in the experience of life intermediate states are of little
importance.

As soon, however, as the problem is regarded as a psychological one, to
be decided by observation and experiment, these hard and fast lines grow
fainter and fainter. We come to regard consciousness as an attribute
which may possibly be present in all kinds of varying degrees in
connection with the animal and vegetable worlds; as the psychical
counterpart of life; as conceivably the psychical counterpart of all
phenomenal existence. Or, rather, we may say this of _mind_, to which,
in its more elementary forms, consciousness bears somewhat the same
relation as self-consciousness bears to consciousness, or some higher
evolution may bear to self-consciousness.

This being so, I cannot see how we can phrase our definition more simply
than by saying that any act or condition must be regarded as conscious
if it is _potentially memorable_;--if it can be recollected, under any
circumstances, by the subject concerned. It does not seem needful that
the circumstances under which such recollection may occur should arise
while the subject is still incarnated on this planet. We shall never on
this planet remember the great majority of our dreams; but those dreams
were presumably no less conscious than the dreams which a sudden
awakening allowed us to keep in memory. Certain hypnotic subjects,
indeed, who can be made to remember their dreams by suggestion,
apparently remember dreams previously latent just as easily as dreams
previously remembered. And we shall have various other examples of the
unexpected recollection of experiences supposed to have been entirely
devoid of consciousness.

We are bound, I think, to draw at least this negative conclusion: that
we must not take for granted that our apparently central consciousness
is something wholly different in kind from the minor consciousnesses out
of which it is in some sense elaborated. I do indeed believe it to be in
an important sense different; but this difference must not be assumed on
the basis of our subjective sensations alone. We must approach the whole
subject of split or duplicated personalities with no prepossession
against the possibility of any given arrangement or division of the
total mass of consciousness which exists within us.

Before we can picture to ourselves how that mass of consciousness may
_disintegrate_, we ought, were it possible, to picture to ourselves how
it is in the first instance _integrated_. That, however, is a difficulty
which does not begin with the constitution of man. It begins when
unicellular develop into multicellular organisms. It is, of course, a
mystery how a single cell can hold together, and what kind of unity it
can possess. But it is a fresh mystery when several cells cohere in a
conjoint and independent life. In the collective unity of certain
"colonial animals" we have a kind of sketch or parody of our own complex
being. Higher intelligences may possibly see us as we see the
hydrozoon--a creature split up into different "persons," a "hydriform
person" who feeds, a "medusiform person" who propagates, and so
on--elements of the animal differentiated for different
ends--interconnected from one point of view as closely as our stomach
and brain, yet from another point of view separable existences, capable
of detachment and of independent regeneration in all kinds of different
ways. Still more composite, though less conspicuously composite, is
every animal that we meet as we rise through the scale; and in man we
reach the summit both of colonial complexity and of centralised control.

I need hardly say that as regards the inner nature of this close
co-ordination, this central government, science can at present tell us
little or nothing. The growth of the nervous mechanism may be to some
extent deciphered; but how this mechanism is centrally governed; what is
the tendency which makes for unity; where precisely this unity resides,
and what is its exact relation to the various parts of the multicellular
organism--all these are problems in the nature of _life_, to which as
yet no solution is known.

The needed clue, as I believe, can be afforded only by the discovery of
laws affecting primarily that unseen or spiritual plane of being where I
imagine the origin of life to lie. If we can suppose telepathy to be a
first indication of a law of this type, and to occupy in the spiritual
world some such place as gravitation occupies in the material world, we
might imagine something analogous to the force of cohesion as operating
in the psychical contexture of a human personality. Such a personality,
at any rate, as the development of higher from lower organisms shows,
involves the aggregation of countless minor psychical entities, whose
characteristics still persist, although in a manner consistent with the
possibility that one larger psychical entity, whether pre-existent or
otherwise, is the unifying continuum of which those smaller entities are
fragments, and exercises over them a pervading, though an incomplete,
control.

It is plainly impossible to say beforehand what will be the relation to
the ordinary stream of consciousness of a personality thus composed. We
have no right to assume that all our psychical operations will fall at
the same time, or at any time, into the same central current of
perception, or rise above what we have called the ordinary conscious
threshold. We can be sure, in fact, that there will be much which will
not so rise; can we predict what _will_ rise?

We can only reply that the perception of stimuli by the supraliminal
consciousness is a kind of exercise of function; and that here, as in
other cases where a function is exercised, part of its range will
consist of such operation as the primary structure of the organism
obliges it to perform, and part will consist of such operation as
natural selection (after the structure has come into being) has trained
it to perform. There will be something which is structurally inevitable,
and something which was not structurally inevitable, but which has
proved itself practically advantageous.

Thus it may be inevitable--a necessary result of nervous structure--that
consciousness should accompany unfamiliar cerebral combinations;--that
the "fraying of fresh channels" should carry with it a perceptible
tingle of novelty. Or it is possible, again, that this vivid
consciousness of new cerebral combinations may be a later acquisition,
and merely due to the obvious advantage of preventing new achievements
from stereotyping themselves before they have been thoroughly
practised;--as a musician will keep his attention fixed on a difficult
novelty, lest his execution should become automatic before he has learnt
to render the piece as he desires. It seems likely, at any rate, that
the greater part of the contents of our supraliminal consciousness may
be determined in some such fashion as this, by natural selection so
operating as to keep ready to hand those perceptions which are most
needed for the conduct of life.

The notion of the upbuilding of the personality here briefly given is of
use, I think, in suggesting its practical tendencies to dissolution.
Subjected continually to both internal and external stress and strain,
its ways of yielding indicate the grain of its texture.

It is possible that if we could discern the minute psychology of this
long series of changes, ranging from modifications too minute to be
noted as abnormal to absolute revolutions of the whole character and
intelligence, we might find no definite break in all the series; but
rather a slow, continuous detachment of one psychical unit or element of
consciousness after another from the primary synthesis. It is possible,
on the other hand, that there may be a real break at a point where there
appears to our external observation to be a break, namely, where the
personality passes into its new phase through an interval of sleep or
trance. And I believe that there is another break, at a point much
further advanced, and not to be reached in this chapter, where some
external intelligence begins in some way to possess the organism and to
replace for a time the ordinary intellectual activity by an activity of
its own. Setting, however, this last possibility for the present aside,
we must adopt some arrangement on which to hang our cases. For this
purpose the appearance of sleep or trance will make a useful, although
not a definite, line of demarcation.

We may begin with localised psychical hypertrophies and
isolations,--terms which I shall explain as we proceed; and then pass on
through hysterical instabilities (where intermediate periods of trance
may or may not be present) to those more advanced sleep-wakings and
dimorphisms which a barrier of trance seems always to separate from the
primary stream of conscious life. All such changes, of course, are
generally noxious to the psychical organism; and it will be simpler to
begin by dwelling on their noxious aspect, and regarding them as steps
on the road--on one of the many roads--to mental overthrow.

The process begins, then, with something which is to the psychical
organism no more than a boil or a corn is to the physical. In
consequence of some suggestion from without, or of some inherited
tendency, a small group of psychical units set up a process of
exaggerated growth which shuts them off from free and healthy
interchange with the rest of the personality.

The first symptom of disaggregation is thus the _idée fixe_, that is to
say, the persistence of an uncontrolled and unmodifiable group of
thoughts or emotions, which from their brooding isolation,--from the
very fact of deficient interchange with the general current of
thought,--become alien and intrusive, so that some special idea or image
presses into consciousness with undue and painful frequency.

The fixed idea, thus originating, may develop in different ways. It may
become a centre of explosion, or a nucleus of separation, or a beginning
of death. It may induce an access of hysterical convulsions, thus acting
like a material foreign body which presses on a sensitive part of the
organism. Or it may draw to its new parasitic centre so many psychical
elements that it forms a kind of secondary personality, co-existing
secretly with the primary one, or even able at times (as in some
well-known cases) to carry the whole organism by a _coup-de-main_. (Such
changes, it may be noted in passing, are not always for the _worse_.)
Or, again, the new quasi-independent centres may be merely _anarchical_;
the revolt may spread to every cell; and the forces of the environment,
ever making war upon the organism, may thus effect its total decay.

Let us dwell for a few moments on the nature of these fixed or insistent
ideas. They are not generally or at the first outset extravagant
fancies,--as that one is made of glass or the like. Rather will "fixed
ideas" come to seem a mere expression for something in a minor degree
common to most of us. Hardly any mind, I suppose, is wholly free from
tendencies to certain types of thought or emotion for which we cannot
summon any adequate check--useless recurrent broodings over the past or
anxieties for the future, perhaps traces of old childish experience
which have become too firmly fixed wholly to disappear. Nay, it may well
be that we must look even further back than our own childhood for the
origin of many haunting troubles. Inherited tendencies to terror,
especially, seem to reach far back into a prehistoric past. In a recent
"Study of Fears," which Professor Stanley Hall has based on a wide
statistical collection,[8] it would seem that the fears of childhood
often correspond to no existing cause for uneasiness, but rather to the
vanished perils of primitive man. The fear of darkness, for instance,
the fear of solitude, the fear of thunder-storms, the fear of the loss
of orientation, speak of primitive helplessness, just as the fear of
animals, the fear of strangers, suggest the fierce and hazardous life of
early man. To all such instinctive feelings as these a morbid
development is easily given.

Of what nature must we suppose this morbid development to be? Does it
fall properly within our present discussion? or is it not simply a
beginning of brain-disease, which concerns the physician rather than the
psychologist? The psychologist's best answer to this question will be to
show cases of fixed ideas _cured_ by psychological means.[9] And indeed
there are few cases to show which have been cured by any methods
_except_ the psychological; if hypnotic suggestion does not succeed with
an _idée fixe_, it is seldom that any other treatment will cure it. We
may, of course, say that the brain troubles thus cured were functional,
and that those which went on inevitably into insanity were organic,
although the distinction between functional and organic is not easily
demonstrable in this ultra-microscopic realm.

At any rate, we have actually on record,--and that is what our argument
needs,--a great series of _idées fixes_, of various degrees of
intensity, cured by suggestion;--cured, that is to say, by a subliminal
setting in action of minute nervous movements which our supraliminal
consciousness cannot in even the blindest manner manage to set to work.
Some such difference as exists on a gross scale between striped and
unstriped muscle seems to exist on a minute scale among these smallest
involved cells and fibres, or whatever they be. Some of them obey our
conscious will, but most of them are capable of being governed only by
subliminal strata of the self.

If, however, it be the subliminal self which can reduce these elements
to order, it is often probably the subliminal self to which their
disorder is originally due. If a fixed idea, say agoraphobia, grows up
in me, this may probably be because the proper controlling
co-ordinations of thought, which I ought to be able to summon up at
will, have sunk below the level at which will can reach them. I am no
longer able, that is to say, to convince myself by reasoning that there
is no danger in crossing the open square. And this may be the fault of
my subliminal self, whose business it is to keep the ideas which I need
for common life easily within my reach, and which has failed to do this,
owing to some enfeeblement of its grasp of my organism.

If we imagine these obscure operations under some such form as this, we
get the advantage of being able to connect these insistent ideas in a
coherent sequence with the more advanced phenomena of hysteria. We have
seen that the presence of insistent ideas implies an instability of the
conscious threshold; and this, in its turn, indicates a disorderly or
diseased condition of the hypnotic stratum,--of that region of the
personality which, as we shall see, is best known to us through the fact
that it is reached by hypnotic suggestion.

Now we shall find, I think, that all the phenomena of hysteria are
reducible to the same general conception. To understand their many
puzzles we have to keep our eyes fixed upon just these psychological
notions--upon a threshold of ordinary consciousness above which certain
perceptions and faculties ought to be, but are not always, maintained,
and upon a "hypnotic stratum" or region of the personality to which
hypnotic suggestion appeals; and which includes faculty and perception
which surpass the supraliminal, but whose operation is capricious and
dreamlike, inasmuch as they lie, so to say, in a debateable region
between two rules--the known rule of the supraliminal self, adapted to
this life's experience and uses, and the conjectured rule of a fuller
and profounder self, rarely reached by any artifice which our present
skill suggests. Some of these conscious groupings have got separated
from the ordinary stream of consciousness. These may still be unified in
the subliminal, but they need to be unified in the supraliminal also.
The normal relation between the supraliminal and the subliminal may be
disturbed by the action of _either_.

Let us now see how far this view, which I suggested in the S.P.R.
_Proceedings_ as far back as 1892,[10] fits in with those modern
observations of hysteria, in Paris and Vienna especially, which are
transforming all that group of troubles from the mere opprobrium of
medicine into one of the most fertile sources of new knowledge of body
and mind.

First, then, let us briefly consider what is the general type of
hysterical troubles. Speaking broadly, we may say that the symptoms of
hysteria form, in the first place, a series of phantom copies of real
maladies of the nervous system; and, in the second place, a series of
fantasies played upon that system--of unreal, dreamlike ailments, often
such as no physiological mechanism can be shown to have determined.
These latter cases are often due, as we shall see, not to purely
physiological, but rather to intellectual causes; they represent, not a
particular pattern in which the nervous system tends of itself to
disintegrate, but a particular pattern which has been imposed upon it by
some intellectual process;--in short, by some form of self-suggestion.

Let us briefly review some common types of hysterical
disability,--taking as our first guide Dr. Pierre Janet's admirable
work, _L'Etat Mental des Hystériques_ (Paris, 1893).

What, then, to begin with, is Dr. Janet's general conception of the
psychological states of the advanced hysteric? "In the expression _I
feel_," he says (_L'Etat Mental_, p. 39), "we have two elements: a small
new psychological fact, 'feel,' and an enormous mass of thoughts already
formed into a system 'I.' These two things mix and combine, and to say
_I feel_ is to say that the personality, already enormous, has seized
and absorbed this small new sensation; ... as though the _I_ were an
amœba which sent out a prolongation to suck in this little sensation
which has come into existence beside it." Now it is in the assimilation
of these elementary sensations or affective states with the _perception
personnelle_, as Janet terms it, that the advanced hysteric fails. His
field of consciousness is so far narrowed that it can only take in the
minimum of sensations necessary for the support of life. "One must needs
have consciousness of what one sees and hears, and so the patient
neglects to perceive the tactile and muscular sensations with which he
thinks that he can manage to dispense. At first he could perhaps turn
his attention to them, and recover them at least momentarily within the
field of personal perception. But the occasion does not present itself,
and the _psychological bad habit_ is formed.... One day the patient--for
he is now veritably a patient--is examined by the doctor. His left arm
is pinched, and he is asked whether he feels the pinch. To his surprise
the patient realises that he can no longer feel consciously, can no
longer bring back into his personal perception sensations which he has
neglected too long--he has become anæsthetic.... Hysterical anæsthesia
is thus a fixed and perpetual distraction, which renders its subjects
incapable of attaching certain sensations to their personality; it is a
restriction of the conscious field."

The proof of these assertions depends on a number of observations, all
of which point in the same direction, and show that hysterical
anæsthesia does not descend so deep into the personality, so to say, as
true anæsthesia caused by nervous decay, or by the section of a nerve.

Thus the hysteric is often _unconscious_ of the anæsthesia, which is
only discovered by the physician. There is none of the distress caused
by true anæsthesia, as, for instance, by the "tabetic mask," or
insensibility of part of the face, which sometimes occurs in _tabes
dorsalis_.

An incident reported by Dr. Jules Janet illustrates this peculiarity. A
young woman cut her right hand severely with broken glass, and
complained of insensibility in the palm. The physician who examined her
found that the sensibility of the right palm was, in fact, diminished
by the section of certain nerves. But he discovered at the same time
that the girl was hysterically anæsthetic over the whole left side of
her body. She had never even found out this disability, and the doctor
twitted her with complaining of the small patch of anæsthesia, while she
said nothing of that which covered half her body. But, as Dr. Pierre
Janet remarks, she might well have retorted that these were the facts,
and that it was for the man of science to say why the small patch
annoyed her while the large one gave her no trouble at all.

Of similar import is the ingenious observation that hysterical
anæsthesia rarely leads to any accident to the limb;--differing in this
respect, for instance, from the true and profound anæsthesia of
syringomyelitis, in which burns and bruises frequently result from the
patient's forgetfulness of the part affected. There is usually, in fact,
a supervision--a _subliminal_ supervision--exercised over the hysteric's
limbs. Part of her personality is still alive to the danger, and
modifies her movements, unknown to her supraliminal self.

This curious point, I may remark in passing, well illustrates the kind
of action which I attribute to the subliminal self in many phases of
life. Thus it is that the hypnotised subject is prevented (as I hold)
from committing a real as opposed to a fictitious crime; thus it is that
fresh ideas are suggested to the man of genius; thus it is--I will even
say--that in some cases monitory hallucinations are generated, which
save the supraliminal self from some sudden danger.

I pass on to another peculiarity of hysterical anæsthesiæ;--also in my
eyes of deep significance. The anæsthetic belts or patches do not
always, or even generally, correspond with true anatomical areas, such
as would be affected by the actual lesion of any given nerve. They
follow arbitrary arrangements;--sometimes corresponding to rough popular
notions of divisions of the body,--sometimes seeming to reflect a merely
childish caprice.

In these cases what is only a silly fancy seems to produce an effect
which is not merely fanciful;--which is objective, measurable, and
capable of causing long and serious disablement. This result, however,
is quite accordant with my view of what I have termed the _hypnotic
stratum_ of the personality. I hold, as our coming discussion of
hypnotism will more fully explain, that the region into which the
hypnotic suggestion gives us access is one of strangely mingled strength
and weakness;--of a faculty at once more potent and less coherent than
that of waking hours. I think that in these cases we get at the
subliminal self only somewhat in the same sense as we get at the
supraliminal self when the "highest-level centres" are for the time
inoperative (as in a dream) and only "middle-level centres" are left to
follow their own devices without inhibition or co-ordination. I hold
that this is the explanation of the strange contrasts which hypnosis
makes familiar to us--the combination of profound power over the
organism with childish readiness to obey the merest whims of the
hypnotiser. The intelligence which thus responds is in my view only a
fragmentary intelligence; it is a dreamlike scrap of the subliminal
self, functioning apart from that self's central and profounder control.

What happens in hypnotism in obedience to the hypnotiser's caprice
happens in hysteria in obedience to the caprice of the hypnotic stratum
itself. Some middle-level centre of the subliminal self (to express a
difficult idea by the nearest phrase I can find) gets the notion that
there is an "anæsthetic bracelet," say, round the left wrist;--and lo,
this straight-way is so; and the hysteric loses supraliminal sensation
in this fantastic belt. That the notion does not originate in the
hysteric's supraliminal self is proved by the fact that the patient is
generally unaware of the existence of the bracelet until the physician
discovers it. Nor is it a chance combination;--even were there such a
thing as chance. It is a dream of the hypnotic stratum;--an incoherent
self-suggestion starting from and affecting a region below the reach of
conscious will. Such cases are most instructive; for they begin to show
us divisions of the human body based not upon local innervation but upon
ideation (however incoherent);--upon intellectual conceptions like "a
bracelet," "a cross,"--applied though these conceptions may be with
dreamlike futility.

In this view, then, we regard the fragments of perceptive power over
which the hysteric has lost control as being by no means really
extinguished, but rather as existing immediately beneath the threshold,
in the custody, so to say, of a dreamlike or hypnotic stratum of the
subliminal self, which has selected them for reasons sometimes
explicable as the result of past suggestions, sometimes to us
inexplicable. If this be so, we may expect that the same kind of
suggestions which originally cut off these perceptions from the main
body of perception may stimulate them again to action either below or
above the conscious threshold.

We have already, indeed, seen reason to suppose that the submerged
perceptions are still at work, when Dr. Janet pointed out how rare a
thing it was that any accident or injury followed upon hysterical loss
of feeling in the limbs. A still more curious illustration is afforded
by the condition of the field of vision in a hysteric. It often happens
that the field of vision is much reduced, so that the hysteric, when
tested with the perimeter, can discern only objects almost directly in
front of the eye. But if an object which happens to be particularly
exciting to the hypnotic stratum--for instance the hypnotiser's finger,
used often as a signal for trance--is advanced into that part of the
hysteric's normal visual field of which she has apparently lost all
consciousness, there will often be an instant subliminal
perception,--shown by the fact that the subject promptly falls into
trance.

In such cases the action of the submerged perceptions, while provoked by
very shallow artifices, continues definitely _subliminal_. The patient
_herself_, as we say, does not know why she does not burn her anæsthetic
limbs, or why she suddenly falls into a trance while being subjected to
optical tests.

But it is equally easy to devise experiments which shall call these
submerged sensations up again into supraliminal consciousness. A
hysteric has lost sensation in one arm: Dr. Janet tells her that there
is a caterpillar on that arm, and the reinforcement of attention thus
generated brings back the sensibility.

These hysterical anæsthesiæ, it may be added here, may be not only very
definite but very profound. Just as the reality,--though also the
impermanence,--of the hysterical retrenchment of field of vision of
which I have been speaking can be shown by optical experiments beyond
the patient's comprehension, so the reality of some profound organic
hysterical insensibilities is sometimes shown by the progress of
independent disease. A certain patient feels no hunger or thirst: this
indifference might be simulated for a time, but her ignorance of severe
inflammation of the bladder is easily recognisable as real. Throw her
into hypnosis and her sensibilities return. The disease is for the first
time felt, and the patient screams with pain. This result well
illustrates one main effect of hypnosis, viz., to bring the organism
into a more normal state. The deep organic anæsthesia of this patient
was dangerously abnormal; the missing sensibility had first to be
restored, although it might be desirable afterwards to remove the
painful elements in that sensibility again, under, so to say, a wiser
and deeper control.

What has been said of hysterical defects of sensation might be repeated
for motor defects. There, too, the powers of which the supraliminal self
has lost control continue to act in obedience to subliminal promptings.
The hysteric who squeezes the dynamometer like a weak child can exert
great muscular force under the influence of emotion.

Very numerous are the cases which might be cited to give a notion of
dissolutive hysterical processes, as now observed with closer insight
than formerly, in certain great hospitals. But, nevertheless, these
hospital observations do not exhaust what has recently been learnt of
hysteria. Dealing almost exclusively with a certain class of patients,
they leave almost untouched another group, smaller, indeed, but equally
instructive for our study.

Hysteria is no doubt a disease, but it is by no means on that account an
indication of initial weakness of mind, any more than an Arctic
explorer's frost-bite is an indication of bad circulation. Disease is a
function of two variables: power of resistance and strength of injurious
stimulus. In the case of hysteria, as in the case of frost-bite, the
inborn power of resistance may be unusually great, and yet the stimulus
may be so excessive that that power may be overcome. Arctic explorers
have generally, of course, been among the most robust of men. And with
some hysterics there is an even closer connection between initial
strength and destructive malady. For it has often happened that the very
feelings which we regard as characteristically civilised,
characteristically honourable, have reached a pitch of vividness and
delicacy which exposes their owners to shocks such as the selfish clown
can never know. It would be a great mistake to suppose that all
psychical upsets are due to vanity, to anger, to terror, to sexual
passion. The instincts of personal cleanliness and of feminine modesty
are responsible for many a breakdown of a sensitive, but not a
relatively _feeble_ organisation. The love of one's fellow-creatures and
the love of God are responsible for many more. And why should it not be
so? There exist for many men and women stimuli far stronger than
self-esteem or bodily desires. Human life rests more and more upon ideas
and emotions whose relation to the conservation of the race or of the
individual is indirect and obscure. Feelings which may once have been
utilitarian have developed wholly out of proportion to any advantage
which they can gain for their possessor in the struggle for life. The
dangers which are now most shudderingly felt are often no real risks to
life or fortune. The aims most ardently pursued are often worse than
useless for man regarded as a mere over-runner of the earth.

There is thus real psychological danger in fixing our conception of
human character too low. Some essential lessons of a complex
perturbation of personality are apt to be missed if we begin with the
conviction that there is nothing before us but a study of decay. As I
have more than once found need to maintain, it is his steady advance,
and not his occasional regression, which makes the chief concern of man.

To this side of the study of hysteria Drs. Breuer and Freud have made
valuable contribution. Drawing their patients not from hospital wards,
but from private practice, they have had the good fortune to encounter,
and the penetration to understand, some remarkable cases where unselfish
but powerful passions have proved too much for the equilibrium of minds
previously well-fortified both by principle and by education.[11]

"Wax to receive and marble to retain"; such, as we all have felt, is the
human mind in moments of excitement which transcend its resistant
powers. This may be for good or for evil, may tend to that radical
change in ethical standpoint which is called _conversion_, or to the
mere setting-up of some hysterical disability. Who shall say how far we
desire to be susceptible to stimulus? Most rash would it be to assign
any fixed limit, or to class as inferior those whose main difference
from ourselves may be that they feel sincerely and passionately what we
feel torpidly, or perhaps only affect to feel. "The term degenerate,"
says Dr. Milne Bramwell, "is applied so freely and widely by some modern
authors that one cannot help concluding that they rank as such all who
do not conform to some primitive, savage type, possessing an imperfectly
developed nervous system." Our "degenerates" may sometimes be in truth
_progenerate_; and their perturbation may mask an evolution which we or
our children needs must traverse when they have shown the way.

Let us pause for a moment and consider what is here implied. We are
getting here among the _hystériques qui mènent le monde_. We have
advanced, that is to say, from the region of _idées fixes_ of a paltry
or morbid type to the region of _idées fixes_ which in themselves are
reasonable and honourable, and which become morbid only on account of
their relative intensity. Here is the debateable ground between hysteria
and genius. The kind of genius which we approach here is not, indeed,
the purely intellectual form. Rather it is the "moral genius," the
"genius of sanctity," or that "possession" by some altruistic idea which
lies at the root of so many heroic lives.

The hagiology of all religions offers endless examples of this type.
That man would hardly be regarded as a great saint whose conduct seemed
completely reasonable to the mass of mankind. The saint in consequence
is apt to be set unduly apart, whether for veneration or for ridicule.
He is regarded either as inspired or as morbid; when in reality all that
his mode of life shows is that certain _idées fixes_, in themselves of
no unworthy kind, have obtained such dominance that their impulsive
action may take and retake, as accident wills, the step between the
sublime and the ridiculous.

Martyrs, missionaries, crusaders, nihilists,--enthusiasts of any kind
who are swayed by impulses largely below the threshold of ordinary
consciousness,--these men bring to bear on human affairs a force more
concentrated and at higher tension than deliberate reason can generate.
They are virtually carrying out self-suggestions which have acquired the
permanence of _idées fixes_. Their fixed ideas, however, are not so
isolated, so encysted as those of true hysterics. Although more deeply
and immutably rooted than their ideas on other matters, these subliminal
convictions are worked in with the products of supraliminal reason, and
of course can only thus be made effective over other minds. A deep
subliminal horror, generated, say, by the sight of some loathsome
cruelty, must not only prompt hallucinations,--as it might do in the
hysteric and has often done in the reformer as well,--it must also, if
it is to work out its mission of reform, be held clearly before the
supraliminal reason, and must learn to express itself in writing or
speech adapted to influence ordinary minds.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may now pass from the first to the second of the categories of
disintegration of personality suggested at the beginning of this
chapter. The cases which I have thus far discussed have been mainly
cases of _isolation_ of elements of personality. We have not dealt as
yet with _secondary personalities_ as such. There is, however, a close
connection between these two classes. There are cases, for example,
where a kind of secondary state at times intervenes--a sort of
bewilderment arising from confluent _idées fixes_ and overrunning the
whole personality. This new state is often preceded or accompanied by
something of somnambulic change. It is this new feature of which we have
here a first hint which seems to me of sufficient importance for the
diagnosis of my second class of psychical disintegrations. This second
class starts from sleep-wakings of all kinds, and includes all stages of
alternation of personality, from brief somnambulisms up to those
permanent and thorough changes which deserve the name of dimorphisms.

We are making here a transition somewhat resembling the transition from
isolated bodily injuries to those subtler changes of diathesis which
change of climate or of nutrition may induce. Something has happened
which makes the organism react to all stimuli in a new way. Our best
starting-point for the study of these secondary states lies among the
phenomena of _dream_.

We shall in a later chapter discuss certain rare characteristics of
dreams; occasional manifestations in sleep of waking faculty heightened,
or of faculty altogether new. We have now to consider ordinary dreams
in their aspect as indications of the structure of our personality, and
as agencies which tend to its modification.

In the first place, it should be borne in mind that the dreaming state,
though I will not call it the normal form of mentation, is nevertheless
the form which our mentation most readily and habitually assumes. Dreams
of a kind are probably going on within us both by night and by day,
unchecked by any degree of tension of waking thought. This
view--theoretically probable--seems to me to be supported by one's own
actual experience in momentary dozes or even momentary lapses of
attention. The condition of which one then becomes conscious is that of
swarming fragments of thought or imagery, which have apparently been
going on continuously, though one may become aware of them and then
unaware at momentary intervals;--while one tries, for instance, to
listen to a speech or to read a book aloud between sleep and waking.

This, then, is the kind of mentation from which our clearer and more
coherent states may be supposed to develop. Waking life implies a
fixation of attention on one thread of thought running through a tangled
skein. In hysterical patients we see some cases where no such fixation
is possible, and other cases where the fixation is involuntary, or
follows a thread which it is not desirable to pursue.

There is, moreover, another peculiarity of dreams which has hardly
attracted sufficient notice from psychologists, but which it is
essential to review when we are dealing with fractionations of
personality.[12] I allude to their _dramatic_ character. In dream, to
begin with, we have an environment, a surrounding scene which we have
not wittingly invented, but which we find, as it were, awaiting our
entry. And in many cases our dream contains a _conversation_ in which we
await with eagerness and hear with surprise the remarks of our
interlocutor, who must, of course, all the time represent only another
segment or stratum of ourselves. This duplication may become either
painful or pleasant. A feverish dream may simulate the confusions of
insanity--cases where the patient believes himself to be two persons at
once, and the like. [See R. L. Stevenson's dream, given in Appendix II.
A] These complications rarely cause the dreamer any surprise. One may
even say that with the first touch of sleep the superficial unity of
consciousness disappears, and that the dream world gives a truer
representation than the waking world of the real fractionation or
multiplicity existing beneath that delusive simplicity which the glare
of waking consciousness imposes upon the mental field of view.

Bearing these analogies in mind, we shall see that the development of
somnambulism out of ordinary dream is no isolated oddity. It is parallel
to the development of a secondary state from _idées fixes_ when these
have passed a certain pitch of intensity. The sleep-waking states which
develop from sleep have the characteristics which we should expect from
their largely subliminal origin. They are less coherent than waking
secondary personalities, but richer in supernormal faculty. It is in
connection with displays of such faculty--hyperæsthesia or
telæsthesia--that they have been mainly observed, and that I shall, in a
future chapter, have most need to deal with them. But there is also
great interest simply in observing what fraction of the sleep-waker's
personality is able to hold intercourse with other minds. A trivial
instance of such intercourse reduced to its lowest point has often
recurred to me. When I was a boy another boy sleeping in the same room
began to talk in his sleep. To some slight extent he could answer me;
and the names and other words uttered--_Harry, the boat_, etc.--were
appropriate to the day's incidents, and would have been enough to prove
to me, had I not otherwise known, who the boy was. But his few coherent
remarks represented not facts but dreaming fancies--_the boat is
waiting_, and so forth. This trivial jumble, I say, has since recurred
to me as precisely parallel to many communications professing to come
from disembodied spirits. There are other explanations, no doubt, but
one explanation of such incoherent utterances would be that the spirit
was speaking under conditions resembling those in which this sleeping
boy spoke.

There are, of course, many stages above this. Spontaneous somnambulistic
states become longer in duration, more coherent in content, and may
gradually merge, as in the well-known case of Félida X. (see Appendix
II. C) into a continuous or dimorphic new personality.

The transition which has now to be made is a very decided one. We have
been dealing with a class of secondary personalities consisting of
elements _emotionally selected_ from the total or primary personality.
We have seen some special group of feelings grow to morbid intensity,
until at last it dominates the sufferer's mental being, either fitfully
or continuously, but to such an extent that he is "a changed person,"
not precisely insane, but quite other than he was when in normal mental
health. In such cases the new personality is of course dyed in the
morbid emotion. It is a kind of dramatic impersonation, say, of
jealousy, or of fear, like the case of "demoniacal possession," quoted
from Dr. Janet in Appendix II. B. In other respects the severance
between the new and the old self is not very profound. Dissociations of
memory, for instance, are seldom beyond the reach of hypnotic
suggestion. The cleavage has not gone down to the depths of the
psychical being.

We must now go on to cases where the origin of the cleavage seems to us
quite arbitrary, but where the cleavage itself seems even for that very
reason to be more profound. It is no longer a question of some one
morbidly exaggerated emotion, but rather of a scrap of the personality
taken at random and developing apart from the rest.

The commonest mode of origin for such secondary personalities is from
some access of sleep-waking, which, instead of merging into sleep again,
repeats and consolidates itself, until it acquires a chain of memories
of its own, alternating with the primary chain.[13]

And now, as an illustration of a secondary condition purely
degenerative, I may first mention _post-epileptic_ states, although they
belong too definitely to pathology for full discussion here.
Post-epileptic conditions may run parallel to almost all the secondary
phases which we have described. They may to all outward semblance
closely resemble normality,--differing mainly by a lack of rational
_purpose_, and perhaps by a recurrence to the habits and ideas of some
earlier moment in the patient's history. Such a condition resembles some
hypnotic trances, and some factitious personalities as developed by
automatic writing. Or, again, the post-epileptic state may resemble a
suddenly developed _idée fixe_ triumphing over all restraint, and may
prompt to serious crime, abhorrent to the normal, but premeditated in
the morbid state. There could not, in fact, be a better example of the
unchecked rule of middle-level centres;--no longer secretly controlled,
as in hypnotic trance, by the higher-level centres,--which centres in
the epileptic are in a state not merely of psychological abeyance, but
of physiological exhaustion.[14]

The case of Ansel Bourne is interesting in this connection.[15] Subject
from childhood to fits of deep depression, and presenting in later life
symptoms suggestive of epilepsy, Ansel Bourne was struck down in his
thirty-first year by what was supposed to be a severe sunstroke.
Connected with this event were circumstances which led to a profound
religious conversion. At sixty-one years of age, being at that time an
itinerant preacher, and living in the small town of Greene, in the State
of Rhode Island, Ansel Bourne disappeared one morning, whilst apparently
in his usual state of health, and remained undiscovered for a period of
two months. At the end of this time he turned up at Norristown,
Pennsylvania, where for the previous six weeks he had been keeping a
small variety store under the name of A. J. Brown, appearing to his
neighbours and customers as an ordinary normal person, but being, as it
would seem, in a somnambulistic condition all the while. When he
regained his ordinary waking consciousness, Ansel Bourne lost all memory
of his actions while in his secondary state. In the year 1890, however,
having been hypnotised by Professor James, he was able while in the
trance state to give an account of his doings during the eight weeks
that the Brown personality lasted.

In this case it is perhaps safest to regard the change of personality as
_post-epileptic_, although I know of no recorded parallel to the length
of time during which the influence of the attack must have continued.
The effect on mind and character would suit well enough with this
hypothesis. The "Brown" personality showed the narrowness of interests
and the uninquiring indifference which is common in such states. But on
this theory the case shows one striking novelty, namely, the recall by
the aid of hypnotism of the memory of the post-epileptic state. It is
doubtful, I think, whether any definite post-epileptic memory had ever
previously been recovered. On the other hand, it is doubtful whether
serious recourse had ever been had at such times to hypnotic methods,
whose increasing employment certainly differentiates the latter from the
earlier cases of split personality in a very favourable way. And this
application of hypnotism to post-epileptic states affords us possibly
our best chance--I do not say of directly checking epilepsy, but of
getting down to the obscure conditions which predispose to each attack.

Next we may mention two cases reported by Dr. Proust and M. Boeteau. Dr.
Proust's patient,[16] Emile X., aged thirty-three, was a barrister in
Paris. Although of good ability and education in classical studies, both
as a boy and at the university he was always nervous and over sensitive,
showing signs, in fact, of _la grande hystérie_. During his attacks he
apparently underwent no loss of consciousness, but would lose the
memory of all his past life during a few minutes or a few days, and in
this condition of secondary consciousness would lead an active and
apparently normal life. From such a state he woke suddenly, and was
entirely without memory of what had happened to him in this secondary
state. This memory was, however, restored by hypnotism.

M. Boeteau's patient, Marie M.,[17] had been subject to hysterical
attacks since she was twelve years old. She became an out-patient at the
Hôpital Andral for these attacks: and on April 24, 1891, being then
twenty-two years old, the house physician there advised her to enter the
surgical ward at the Hôtel-Dieu, as she would probably need an operation
for an internal trouble. Greatly shocked by this news, she left the
hospital at ten A.M., and lost consciousness. When she recovered
consciousness she found herself in quite another hospital--that of Ste.
Anne--at six A.M. on April 27. She had been found wandering in the
streets of Paris, in the evening of the day on which she left the
Hôpital Andral. On returning to herself, she could recollect absolutely
nothing of what had passed in the interval. While she was thus perplexed
at her unexplained fatigue and footsoreness, and at the gap in her
memory, M. Boeteau hypnotised her. She passed with ease into the
hypnotic state, and at once remembered the events which filled at least
the earlier part of the gap in her primary consciousness.

These two cases belong to the same general type as Ansel Bourne's. There
does not seem, however, to be any definite evidence that the secondary
state was connected with epileptic attacks. It was referred rather by
the physicians who witnessed it to a functional derangement analogous to
hysteria, though it must be remembered that there are various forms of
epilepsy which are not completely understood, and some of which may be
overlooked by persons who are not familiar with the symptoms.

Another remarkable case is that of the Rev. Thomas C. Hanna,[18] in whom
complete amnesia followed an accident. By means of a method which Dr.
Sidis (who studied the case) calls "hypnoidisation," he was able to
prove that the patient had all his lost memories stored in his
subliminal consciousness, and could temporarily recall them to the
supraliminal. By degrees the two personalities which had developed
since the accident were thus fused into one and the patient was
completely cured.

For another case of the ambulatory type, like Ansel Bourne's, but
remarkable in that it was associated with a definite physical lesion--an
abscess in the ear--the cure of which was followed by the rapid return
of the patient to his normal condition, see Dr. Drewry's article in the
_Medico-Legal Journal_ for June 1896 [228 A].

Again, in a case reported by Dr. David Skae,[19] the secondary state
seems to owe its origin to a kind of tidal exhaustion of vitality, as
though the repose of sleep were not enough to sustain the weakened
personality, which lapsed on alternate days into exhaustion and
incoherence.

The secondary personalities thus far dealt with have been the
spontaneous results of some form of _misère psychologique_, of defective
integration of the psychical being. But there are also cases where, the
cohesion being thus released, a slight touch from without can effect
dissociations which, however shallow and almost playful in their first
inception, may stiffen by repetition into phases as marked and definite
as those secondary states which spring up of themselves, that is to say,
from self-suggestions which we cannot trace. In Professor Janet's
_L'Automatisme Psychologique_ the reader will find some instructive
examples of these fictitious secondary personalities [230 A and B].

Up to this point the secondary states which we have considered; however
startling to old-fashioned ideas of personality, may, at any rate, be
regarded as forms of mental derangement or decay--varieties on a theme
already known. Now, however, we approach a group of cases to which it is
difficult to make any such definition apply. They are cases where the
secondary state is _not_ obviously a degeneration;--where it may even
appear to be in some ways an _improvement_ on the primary; so that one
is left wondering how it came about that the man either originally was
what he was, or--being what he was--suddenly became something so very
different. There has been a shake given to the kaleidoscope, and no one
can say why either arrangement of the component pieces should have had
the priority.

In the classical case of Félida X. the second state is, as regards
health and happiness, markedly superior to the first. (See Appendix II.
C.)

The old case of Mary Reynolds[20] is again remarkable in respect of the
change of character involved. The deliverance from gloomy
preoccupations--the childish insouciance of the secondary state--again
illustrates the difference between these _allotropic_ changes or
reconstructions of personality and that mere predominance of a morbid
factor which marked the cases of _idée fixe_ and hysteria. Observe,
also, in Mary Reynolds's case the tendency of the two states gradually
to _coalesce_ apparently in a third phase likely to be preferable to
either of the two already known.

We now come to spontaneous cases of multiple personality, of which Louis
Vivé's is one of the best known. Louis Vivé exhibited an extraordinary
number and variety of phases of personality, affording an extreme
example of dissociations dependent on _time-relations_, on the special
epoch of life in which the subject was ordered to find himself.[21]
Among various conditions of his organism--all but one of them implying,
or at least simulating, some grave central lesion--any given condition
could be revived in a moment, and the whole gamut of changes rung on his
nervous system as easily as if one were setting back or forward a
continuous cinematograph. It is hard to frame a theory of memory which
shall admit of these sudden reversions,--of playing fast and loose in
this manner with the accumulated impressions of years.

Yet if Louis Vivé's case thus strangely intensifies the already puzzling
notion of _ecmnesia_--as though the whole organism could be tricked into
forgetting the events which had most deeply stamped it--what are we to
say to Dr. Morton Prince's case of "Sally Beauchamp,"[22] with its
grotesque exaggeration of a subliminal self--a kind of hostile bedfellow
which knows everything and remembers everything--which mocks the
emotions and thwarts the projects of the ordinary reasonable self which
can be seen and known? The case must be studied in full as it stands;
its later developments may help to unravel the mysteries which its
earlier stages have already woven.[23]

I quote in full in the text the next case, reported by Dr. R. Osgood
Mason (in a paper entitled "Duplex Personality: its Relation to
Hypnotism and to Lucidity," in the _Journal of the American Medical
Association_, November 30th, 1895). Dr. Mason writes:--

     Alma Z. was an unusually healthy and intellectual girl, a strong
     and attractive character, a leading spirit in whatever she
     undertook, whether in study, sport, or society. From overwork in
     school, and overtaxed strength in a case of sickness at home, her
     health was completely broken down, and after two years of great
     suffering suddenly a second personality appeared. In a peculiar
     child-like and Indian-like dialect she announced herself as
     "Twoey," and that she had come to help "Number One" in her
     suffering. The condition of "Number One" was at this time most
     deplorable; there was great pain, extreme debility, frequent
     attacks of syncope, insomnia, and a mercurial stomatitis which had
     been kept up for months by way of medical treatment and which
     rendered it nearly impossible to take nourishment in any form.
     "Twoey" was vivacious and cheerful, full of quaint and witty talk,
     never lost consciousness, and could take abundant nourishment,
     which she declared she _must_ do for the sake of "Number One." Her
     talk was most quaint and fascinating, but without a trace of the
     acquired knowledge of the primary personality. She gave frequent
     evidence of supranormal intelligence regarding events transpiring
     in the neighbourhood. It was at this time that the case came under
     my observation, and has remained so for the past ten years. Four
     years later, under depressing circumstances, a third personality
     made its appearance and announced itself as "The Boy." This
     personality was entirely distinct and different from either of the
     others. It remained the chief alternating personality for four
     years, when "Twoey" again returned.

     All these personalities, though absolutely different and
     characteristic, were delightful each in its own way, and "Twoey"
     especially was, and still is, the delight of the friends who are
     permitted to know her, whenever she makes her appearance; and this
     is always at times of unusual fatigue, mental excitement, or
     prostration; then she comes and remains days at a time. The
     original self retains her superiority when she is present, and the
     others are always perfectly devoted to her interest and comfort.
     "Number One" has no personal knowledge of either of the other
     personalities, but she knows them well, and especially "Twoey,"
     from the report of others and from characteristic letters which are
     often received from her; and "Number One" greatly enjoys the spicy,
     witty, and often useful messages which come to her through these
     letters and the report of friends.

Dr. Mason goes on to say:--

     Here are three cases [the one just given, that of another patient
     of his own, and that of Félida X.] in which a second
     personality--perfectly sane, thoroughly practical, and perfectly in
     touch and harmony with its surroundings--came to the surface, so to
     speak, and assumed absolute control of the physical organisation
     for long periods of time together. During the stay of the second
     personality the primary or original self was entirely blotted out,
     and the time so occupied was a blank. In neither of the cases
     described had the primary self any knowledge of the second
     personality, except from the report of others or letters from the
     second self, left where they could be found on the return of the
     primary self to consciousness. The second personality, on the other
     hand, in each case, knew of the primary self, but only as another
     person--never as forming a part of, or in any way belonging to
     their own personalities. In the case of both Félida X. and Alma Z.,
     there was always immediate and marked improvement in the physical
     condition when the second personality made its appearance.

The case of Mollie Fancher,[24] which, had it been observed and recorded
with scientific accuracy, might have been one of the most instructive of
all, seems to stand midway between the transformations of Louis
Vivé--each of them frankly himself at a different epoch of life--and the
"pseudo-possessions" of imaginary spirits with which we shall in a later
chapter have to deal.

The case of Anna Winsor[25] goes so far further in its suggestion of
interference from without that it presents to us, at any rate, a
contrast and even conflict between positive insanity on the part of the
organism generally with wise and watchful sanity on the part of a single
limb, with which that organism professes to have no longer any concern.

The last case[26] that I shall mention is that of Miss Mary Lurancy
Vennum, the "Watseka Wonder."

The case briefly is one of alleged "possession," or "spirit-control."
The subject of the account, a girl nearly fourteen years old, living at
Watseka, Illinois, became apparently controlled by the spirit of Mary
Roff, a neighbour's daughter, who had died at the age of eighteen years
and nine months, when Lurancy Vennum was a child of about fifteen months
old. The most extraordinary feature in the case was that the control by
Mary Roff lasted almost continuously for a period of four months.

For the present we must consider this case as a duplication of
personality--a pseudo-possession, if you will--determined in a
hysterical child by the suggestion of friends, but at a later stage, and
when some other wonders have become more familiar than now, we may find
that this singular narrative has further lessons to teach us.

We have now briefly surveyed a series of disintegrations of personality
ranging from the most trifling _idée fixe_ to actual alternations or
permanent changes of the whole type of character. All these form a kind
of continuous series, and illustrate the structure of the personality in
concordant ways. There do exist, it must be added, other forms of
modified personality with which I shall not at present deal. Those are
cases where some telepathic influence from outside has been at work, so
that there is not merely dissociation of existing elements, but apparent
introduction of a novel element. Such cases also pass through a long
series, from small phenomena of motor automatism up to trance and
so-called possession. But all this group I mention here merely in order
to defer their discussion to later chapters.

The brief review already made will suffice to indicate the complex and
separable nature of the elements of human personality. Of course a far
fuller list might have been given; many phenomena of actual insanity
would need to be cited in any complete conspectus. But hysteria is in
some ways a better dissecting agent than any other where delicate
psychical dissociations are concerned. Just as the microscopist stains a
particular tissue for observation, so does hysteria stain with
definiteness, as it were, particular synergies--definite complexes of
thought and action--more manifestly than any grosser lesion, any more
profound or persistent injury could do. Hysterical mutism, for instance
(the observation is Charcot's[27]), supplies almost the only cases where
the faculty of vocal utterance is attacked in a quite isolated way. In
aphasia dependent upon organic injury we generally find other
word-memories attacked also,--elements of agraphy, of word-blindness, of
word-deafness appear. In the hysteric the incapacity to speak may be the
single symptom. So with anæsthesiæ; we find in hysteria a separation of
sensibility to heat and to pain, possibly even a separate subsistence of
electrical sensibility. It is worth remarking here that it was during
the hypnotic trance, which in delicacy of discriminating power resembles
hysteria, that (so far as I can make out) the distinctness of the
temperature-sense from the pain-sense was first observed. Esdaile, when
removing tumours under mesmerism in Calcutta, noticed that patients, who
were actually undergoing capital operations without a murmur, complained
if a draught blew in upon them from an open window.

Nor is it only as a dissecting agent that hysteria can aid our research.
There are in hysteria frequent _acquisitions_ as well as _losses_ of
faculty. It is not unusual to find great hyperæsthesia in certain
special directions--of touch, hearing, perception of light,
etc.--combined with hysterical loss of sensation of other kinds. This
subject will be more conveniently treated along with the hyperæsthesia
of the hypnotic trance. But I may note here that just such occasional
quickenings of faculty were, in my view, almost certain to accompany
that instability of psychical threshold which is the distinguishing
characteristic of hysteria, since I hold that subliminal faculty
habitually overpasses supraliminal. These also are a kind of capricious
_idées fixes_; only the caprice in such cases raises what was previously
submerged instead of exaggerating what was previously emergent.

And from this point it is that our inquiries must now take their fresh
departure. We in this work are concerned with changes which are the
_converse_ of hysterical changes. We are looking for integrations in
lieu of disintegrations; for intensifications of control, widenings of
faculty, instead of relaxation, scattering, or decay.

Suppose, then, that in a case of instability of the psychical
threshold,--ready _permeability_, if you will, of the psychical
diaphragm separating the supraliminal from the subliminal self,--the
elements of emergence tend to increase and the elements of submergence
to diminish. Suppose that the permeability depends upon the force of the
uprushes from below the diaphragm rather than on the tendency to sink
downwards from above it. We shall then reach the point where the vague
name of _hysteria_ must give place to the vague name of _genius_. The
uprushes from the subliminal self will now be the important feature; the
down-draught from the supraliminal, if it still exists, will be trivial
in comparison. The content of the uprush will be congruous with the
train of voluntary thought; and the man of genius will be a man more
capable than others of utilising for his waking purposes the subliminal
region of his being.

Next in order to the uprushes of genius will come the uprushes of dream.
All men pass normally and healthily into a second phase of personality,
alternating with the first. That is _sleep_, and sleep is characterised
by those incoherent forms of subliminal uprush which we know as dreams.
It is here that our evidence for telepathy and telæsthesia will first
present itself for discussion. Sleep will indicate the existence of
submerged faculty of a rarer type than even that to which genius has
already testified.

There are, moreover, other states, both spontaneous and induced,
analogous to sleep, and these will form the subject of the fifth
chapter, that on Hypnotism. Hypnotism, however, does not mean trance or
somnambulism only. It is a name, if not for the whole _ensemble_, yet
for a large group of those artifices which we have as yet discovered for
the purpose of eliciting and utilising subliminal faculty. The results
of hypnotic suggestion will be found to imitate sometimes the subliminal
uprushes of genius, and sometimes the visions of spontaneous
somnambulism; while they also open to us fresh and characteristic
accesses into subliminal knowledge and power.

Further than this point our immediate forecast need not go. But when we
have completed the survey here indicated, we shall see, I think, how
significant are the phenomena of hysteria in any psychological scheme
which aims at including the hidden powers of man. For much as the
hysteric stands in comparison to us ordinary men, so perhaps do we
ordinary men stand in comparison with a not impossible ideal of faculty
and of self-control.

But apart from these broader speculations, it has become evident that
disturbances of personality are not mere empty marvels, but
psycho-pathological problems of the utmost interest:--no one of them
exactly like another, and no one of them without some possible _aperçu_
into the intimate structure of man.

The purpose of this book, of course, is not primarily practical. It aims
rather at the satisfaction of scientific curiosity as to man's psychical
structure; esteeming _that_ as a form of experimental research which the
more urgent needs of therapeutics have kept in the background too long.
Yet it may not have been amiss to realise thus, on the threshold of our
discussion, that already even the most delicate speculations in this
line have found their justification in helpful act; that strange
bewilderments, paralysing perturbations, which no treatment could
alleviate, no drug control, have been soothed and stablished into sanity
by some appropriate and sagacious mode of appeal to a _natura
medicatrix_ deep-hidden in the labouring breast.




