CHAPTER VIII


VIII. A. Some early experiments in thought-transference through
table-tilting were published by Professor Richet in the _Revue
Philosophique_ for December 1884. A critical discussion of these by
Gurney appeared in the _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 239-64, and a
briefer report in _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. pp. 72-81. I quote
from the latter a description of the method used:--

     The place of a planchette was taken by a table, and M. Richet
     prefaces his account by a succinct statement of the orthodox view
     as to "table-turning." Rejecting altogether the three theories
     which attribute the phenomena to wholesale fraud, to spirits, and
     to an unknown force, he regards the gyrations and oscillations of
     séance-tables as due wholly to the unconscious muscular
     contractions of the sitters. It thus occurred to him to employ a
     table as an indicator of the movements that might be produced by
     "mental suggestion." The plan of the experiments was as follows.
     Three persons (C, D, and E) took their seats in a semi-circle, at a
     little table on which their hands rested. One of these three was
     always a "medium"--a term used by M. Richet to denote a person
     liable to exhibit intelligent movements in which consciousness and
     will apparently take no part. Attached to the table was a simple
     electrical apparatus, the effect of which was to ring a bell
     whenever the current was broken by the tilting of the table. Behind
     the backs of the sitters at the table was another table, on which
     was a large alphabet, completely screened from the view of C, D,
     and E, even had they turned round and endeavoured to see it. In
     front of this alphabet sat A, whose duty was to follow the letters
     slowly and steadily with a pen, returning at once to the beginning
     as soon as he arrived at the end. At A's side sat B, with a
     note-book; his duty was to write down the letter at which A's pen
     happened to be pointing whenever the bell rang. This happened
     whenever one of the sitters at the table made the simple movement
     necessary to tilt it. Under these conditions, A and B are
     apparently mere automata. C, D, and E are little more, being
     unconscious of tilting the table, which appears to them to tilt
     itself; but even if they tilted it consciously, and with a
     conscious desire to dictate words, they have no means of
     ascertaining at what letter A's pen is pointing at any particular
     moment; and they might tilt for ever without producing more than
     an endless series of incoherent letters. Things being arranged
     thus, a sixth operator, F, stationed himself apart both from the
     tilting table and from the alphabet, and concentrated his thought
     on some word of his own choosing, which he had not communicated to
     the others. The three sitters at the first table engaged in
     conversation, sang, or told stories; but at intervals the table
     tilted, the bell rang, and B wrote down the letter which A's pen
     was opposite to at that moment. Now, to the astonishment of all
     concerned, these letters, when arranged in a series, turned out to
     produce a more or less close approximation to the word of which F
     was thinking.


VIII. B. The correspondent, Mr. G. E. Long, was known to Dr. Hodgson.

From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 65.


JERSEY CITY, N. J., _October 22nd, 1888_.

...I think I wrote you once that about two years ago I had received
     what was said to be a most convincing test of spirit-return,
     convincing to all except myself. A young lady, a Spiritualist and
     medium, though not a professional, nor one that ever received one
     cent in pay, by means of a lettered board and toy chair, she
     holding one leg of the chair and I another, while a third leg of
     the chair served as a pointer, gave the following by means of the
     chair:--

     First the chair spelt out my name and showed a disposition to get
     in my lap; then it spelled out "CARY," and when I asked for the
     name of the "spirit" it spelt out "George (my name), you ought to
     know me as I am Jim." But I didn't, and said so. Then, without my
     looking at the board, it spelt out "Long Island, Jim Rowe," and
     "Don't you remember I used to carry you when you were a little
     fellow," or words to that effect. I had to acknowledge the truth of
     it and also to say that as he was an ignorant man he possibly
     intended "Cary" for carry. I must own I was puzzled for the moment.
     To make sure of his power I asked that he count the pickets in the
     fence outside of the house and I would go out and confirm his
     statement. Somehow he couldn't agree to this, and even the medium
     objected. As a last resort I asked how long he had been in the
     spirit land and the answer came, between thirteen and fourteen
     years.

     Now to the sequel. First it occurred to me a day or two after, that
     while all the incidents given were correct, the name should have
     been given as ROE instead of ROWE. Second, I was upon Long Island
     this summer, and the matter coming to my mind I inquired how long
     Jim Roe had been dead, and was informed he died last winter; so
     when I received this test so convincing to the believers _the man
     was not dead_.

     Yours truly,

GEO. E. LONG.

On October 26th, 1888, Mr. Long adds:--

     I do not think that the medium was fraudulent. Her family consists
     of Mr. S. and three daughters, she being the youngest. I have found
     all to be hypnotic subjects, with the exception of the eldest
     daughter. They are all believers in Spiritualism, the youngest
     having been the medium. They do not sit now, as it is claimed that
     the sittings, while rich in spiritualistic satisfaction, were
     productive of a state of poor health in the medium.

     As I myself have obtained information supposed to have been
     impossible for me to have reached, I cannot say for certainty that
     she had not obtained information about Jim, but I don't believe she
     had. As the name Rowe was being spelled I sat with my eyes turned
     from the board and had in mind the name Scudder, and mentally
     followed the taps of the chair to S C U D--when the medium said,
     "The name Rowe is given," etc. This would seem to leave out any
     involuntary muscular action. Why Rowe should have been given
     instead of Roe is still another phase. I wonder whether, if any
     question of the Roe family had arisen, I would have had in mind the
     name of Rowe? If so, then she produced that which I had long while
     before been conscious of, but was at the time unconscious of, and
     had it coupled with an error in spelling that I might have been
     guilty of had I myself been called upon at that moment to spell it.
     Had she been fraudulent the probability is she would have spelt it
     correctly.

     It seems to me that the basis of Spiritualism rests mainly upon
     this phenomenon which men and women in a supernormal condition
     produce, without understanding it, and credit it to spiritual
     agencies.

     [A general corroboration of Mr. Long's memory of the incident is
     added from a lady present at the time, who does not now recall the
     details.]


VIII. C. The following case, received from Dr. Liébeault, is quoted from
_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 293:--


NANCY, _September 4th, 1885_.

     I hasten to write to you as to that case of thought-transference of
     which I spoke to you when you were present at my hypnotic séances
     at Nancy. The incident occurred in a French family from New
     Orleans, who had come to stay for some time at Nancy for business
     reasons. I had become acquainted with this family from the fact
     that M. G., its head, had brought to me his niece, Mlle. B., to be
     treated by hypnotism. She suffered from slight anæmia and from a
     nervous cough, contracted at Coblentz, in a High School where she
     was a teacher. I easily induced somnambulism, and she was cured in
     two sittings. The production of this hypnotic state suggested to
     the G. family (Mrs. G. was a spirit medium) and to Mlle. B. herself
     that she might easily become a medium. She set herself to the
     evocation of spirits (in which she firmly believed) by the aid of
     her pen, and at the end of two months she had become a remarkable
     writing medium. I have myself seen her rapidly writing page after
     page of what she called "messages,"--all in well-chosen language
     and with no erasures,--while at the same time she maintained
     conversation with the people near her. An odd thing was that she
     had no knowledge whatever of what she was writing. "It must be a
     spirit," she would say, "which guides my hand; it is certainly not
     I."

     One day,--it was, I think, February 7th, 1868, about 8 A.M., when
     just about to seat herself at table for breakfast, she felt a kind
     of need, an impulse which prompted her to write;--it was what she
     called a _trance_,--and she rushed off at once to her large
     note-book, where she wrote in pencil, with feverish haste, certain
     undecipherable words. She wrote the same words again and again on
     the pages which followed, and at last, as her agitation diminished,
     it was possible to read that a person called Marguérite was thus
     announcing her death. The family at once assumed that a young lady
     of that name, a friend of Mlle. B.'s and her companion and
     colleague in the Coblentz High School, must have just expired. They
     all came immediately to me, Mlle. B. among them, and we decided to
     verify the announcement of death that very day. Mlle. B. wrote to a
     young English lady who was also a teacher in that same school. She
     gave some other reason for writing;--taking care not to reveal the
     true motive of the letter. By return of post we received an answer
     in English, of which they copied for me the essential part. I found
     this answer in a portfolio hardly a fortnight ago, and have mislaid
     it again. It expressed the surprise of the English lady at the
     receipt of Mlle. B.'s unexpected and apparently motiveless letter.
     But at the same time the English correspondent made haste to
     announce to Mlle. B. that their common friend, Marguérite, had died
     on February 7th, at about 8 A.M. Moreover, the letter contained a
     little square piece of printed paper;--the announcement of death
     sent round to friends.

     I need not say that I examined the envelope, and that the letter
     appeared to me to have veritably come from Coblentz. Yet I have
     since felt a certain regret. In the interests of science I ought to
     have asked the G. family to allow me to go with them to the
     telegraph office to inquire whether they had received a telegram
     early on February 7th. Science should feel no shame; truth does not
     dread exposure. My proof of the fact is ultimately a moral one: the
     honour of the G. family,--which has always appeared to me to be
     absolutely above suspicion.

A. A. LIÉBEAULT.

Upon these last sentences Gurney remarks that, apart from the
improbability that the whole family would join in a conspiracy to
deceive their friend, the nature of the answer received from Coblentz
shows that the writer of it cannot have been aware that any telegraphic
announcement had been sent. And it is in itself unlikely that the
authorities of the school would have felt it necessary instantly to
communicate the news to Mdlle. B.


VIII. D. From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 349-53. The narrative
is a translation from an article in _Psychische Studien_, December 1889,
pp. 572-77, by the Editor, the Hon. Alexander Aksakoff.

     The case belongs not to the category of _facts which are known only
     to the deceased_, but to the category of those which _could only be
     imparted by the deceased_, for it relates to a political secret
     concerning a living person, which was revealed by an intimate
     friend of that living person for the purpose of saving him. I
     shall set forth this case in all possible detail, because I
     consider it a most convincing one in support of the Spiritualistic
     hypothesis. I will even express myself still more strongly. I
     consider that it affords as absolute a proof of identity as it is
     possible for evidence of this kind to present.

     My readers are already acquainted with my sister-in-law, Mrs. A.
     von Wiesler, from the part she took in the family séances held with
     me in the years 1880-1883, after the decease of my wife. She has an
     only daughter, Sophie, who at the time of those séances was
     completing her studies. She had taken no part, either at our
     séances or at any others, and she had not read anything about
     Spiritualism. Her mother also had not joined in any séances except
     our own. One evening in October 1884, during the visit of a distant
     relative, the conversation turned upon Spiritualism, and in order
     to please him a trial with the table was arranged. This séance,
     however, gave no satisfactory result. It only showed that the two
     ladies were able to get something. On Tuesday evening, January 1st,
     1885, Mrs. von Wiesler being alone with her daughter, in order to
     divert her mind from some matters which made her anxious, proposed
     to hold a little séance. An alphabet was written out on a sheet of
     paper, a saucer with a black line as pointer served as a
     planchette, and, behold, the name Andreas was indicated. This was
     quite natural, for Andreas was the name of Sophie's father, the
     deceased husband of Mrs. von Wiesler. The communication presented
     nothing remarkable, but it was nevertheless resolved to continue
     the séances once a week, on every Tuesday. For three weeks the
     character of the communications remained unchanged. The name
     Andreas was continually repeated.

     But on the fourth Tuesday--January 22nd--in place of the customary
     name, Andreas, the name "Schura" was spelt out, to the great
     astonishment of both sitters. Then, by quick and precise movements
     of the pointer, these words were added:--

     "It is given to thee to save Nikolaus."

     "What does this mean?" asked the astonished ladies.

     "He is compromised as Michael was, and will like him go to ruin. A
     band of good-for-nothing fellows are leading him astray."

     "What can be done to counteract it?"

     "Thou must go to the Technological Institute before three o'clock,
     let Nikolaus be called out, and make an appointment with him at his
     house."

     This being all addressed to the young lady, Sophie, she replied
     that it would be difficult for her to carry out these directions on
     account of the slight acquaintanceship which existed between her
     and Nikolaus's family.

     "Absurd ideas of propriety!" was "Schura's" indignant reply.

     "But in what way shall I be able to influence him?" asked Sophie.

     "Thou wilt speak to him in my name."

     "Then your convictions no longer remain the same?"

     "Revolting error!" was the reply.

     I must now explain the meaning of this mysterious communication.
     "Schura" is the Russian pet name for Alexandrine. Nikolaus and
     Michael were her cousins. Michael, quite a young man, had
     unfortunately allowed himself to become entangled by the
     revolutionary ideas of our Anarchists or Socialists. He was
     arrested, tried, and condemned to imprisonment at a distance from
     St. Petersburg, where he lost his life in an attempt to escape.
     "Schura" loved him dearly, and fully sympathised with his political
     convictions, making no secret of it. After his death, which
     occurred in September 1884, she was discouraged in her
     revolutionary aspirations, and ended her life by poison, at the age
     of seventeen, on the 15th of January 1885, just one week before the
     séance above described. Nikolaus, Michael's brother, was then a
     student at the Technological Institute.

     Mrs. von Wiesler and her daughter were aware of these
     circumstances, for they had long been acquainted with "Schura's"
     parents, and with those of her cousins, who belong to the best
     society of St. Petersburg. It will be obvious that I cannot publish
     the names of these families. I have also changed those of the young
     people. The acquaintanceship was, however, far from being ultimate.
     They saw each other occasionally, but nothing more. Later I will
     give further details. We will now continue our narrative.

     Naturally, neither Mrs. von Wiesler nor her daughter knew anything
     as to the views or secret conduct of Nikolaus. The communication
     was just as unexpected as it was important. It involved a great
     responsibility. Sophie's position was a very difficult one. The
     literal carrying out of "Schura's" demands was, for a young lady,
     simply impossible, merely from considerations of social propriety.
     What right could she have, on the ground of simple
     acquaintanceship, to interfere in family affairs of so delicate a
     character? Besides, it might not be true; or, quite simply and most
     probably, Nikolaus might deny it. What position would she then find
     herself in? Mrs. von Wiesler knew only too well, from the séances
     she had taken part in with me, how little dependence can be placed
     on Spiritualistic communications. She counselled her daughter, in
     the first place, to convince herself of "Schura's" identity. This
     advice was followed without any hesitation as one way out of the
     difficulty.

     On the following Tuesday "Schura" manifested at once, and Sophie
     asked for a proof of her identity, to which "Schura" forthwith
     replied:--

     "Invite Nikolaus, arrange a séance, and I will come."

     It will be seen from this reply that "Schura," who during her life
     had learnt to despise the conventionalities of society, as is the
     custom among the Socialists, remained true to her character, and
     again demanded what was an impossibility. Nikolaus had never been
     in Mrs. von Wiesler's house. Sophie then asked for another proof of
     her identity, without Nikolaus being brought in at all, and
     requested that it might be a convincing one.

     "I will appear to thee," was the reply.

     "How?"

     "Thou wilt see."

     A few days later Sophie was returning home from a soirée; it was
     nearly 4 A.M. She was just retiring, and was at the door between
     her bedroom and the dining-room, there being no lights in the
     latter, when she saw on the wall of the dining-room, in sight of
     the door at which she stood, a luminous round spot, with, as it
     were, shoulders. This lasted for two or three seconds, and
     disappeared, ascending towards the ceiling. Sophie immediately
     assured herself that it was not the reflection of any light coming
     from the street.

     At the séance on the following Tuesday, an explanation of this
     appearance being asked for, "Schura" replied:--

     "It was the outline of a head with shoulders. I cannot appear more
     distinctly. I am still weak."

     Many other details, which I have passed over, tended to convince
     Sophie of the reality of "Schura's" identity, yet she could not
     bring herself to carry out that which "Schura" desired her to do.
     She therefore proposed as a suitable compromise that she should
     acquaint Nikolaus's parents with what had occurred.

     This proposal aroused "Schura's" strongest displeasure, expressed
     by violent movements of the saucer, and by the sentence:--

     "That will lead to nothing";--after which disparaging epithets
     followed, impossible to repeat here, especially applicable to
     persons of weak and irresolute character, with whom the energetic
     and decisive "Schura" had no patience--epithets which are not found
     in dictionaries, but which were expressions used by "Schura" in her
     lifetime, and characteristic of her. This was confirmed in the
     sequel.

     Nevertheless Sophie continued to hesitate, and at each successive
     séance "Schura" insisted more and more imperatively that Sophie
     must act at once. This is very important to notice, as we shall see
     later. This want of resolution on the part of Sophie was ascribed
     by "Schura" to the influence of Mrs. von Wiesler. From the
     beginning "Schura" had seemed to bear a grudge against Mrs. von
     Wiesler. From the first séance she addressed Sophie only. She never
     permitted Mrs. von Wiesler to ask a question. Whenever she
     attempted to do so, she met with a--"Be silent--be silent!" Whereas
     in addressing Sophie she overwhelmed her with the tenderest
     expressions.

     How great was the astonishment and consternation of the ladies,
     when at the séance on the 26th of February the first words were:--

     "It is too late. Thou wilt repent it bitterly. The pangs of remorse
     will follow thee. Expect his arrest!"

     These were "Schura's" last words. From this time she was silent. A
     séance was attempted on the following Tuesday, but there was no
     result. The séances of Mrs. von Wiesler and her daughter were from
     that time entirely given up.

     While these séances were being held, Mrs. von Wiesler naturally
     kept me informed of what transpired, and consulted with me as to
     what was to be done in view of the extraordinary character of
     "Schura's" requests. Some time after they had ceased, Mrs. von
     Wiesler, to satisfy her own conscience and to comfort her daughter,
     resolved to communicate the whole episode to the parents of
     Nikolaus. They paid no attention to it. Nothing was elicited that
     any fault could be found with. The family were quite satisfied in
     regard to Nikolaus's conduct. But it is important to bear in mind
     the fact that these Spiritualistic communications were made known
     to the parents before the final issue. When during the remainder of
     the year everything went on happily, Sophie became fully convinced
     that all the communications were only lies, and formed a resolution
     that she would never again occupy herself with Spiritualistic
     séances.

     Another year passed without any special event. But on the 9th of
     March, 1887, the secret police suddenly searched Nikolaus's rooms.
     He was arrested in his own house, and within twenty-four hours was
     exiled from St. Petersburg. It came out later that his crime was
     taking part in anarchical assemblies--assemblies which were held in
     the months of January and February 1885, exactly corresponding with
     the time when "Schura" was insisting that steps should _then_ be
     taken to dissuade Nikolaus from taking part in such meetings. Only
     now were the communications of "Schura" estimated at their true
     value. The notes which Mrs. von Wiesler had made were read again
     and again by the families both of "Schura" and of Nikolaus.
     "Schura's" identity in all those manifestations was recognised as
     incontestably demonstrated, in the first place, by the main fact in
     relation to Nikolaus, by other intimate particulars, and also by
     the totality of the features which characterised her personality.
     This mournful occurrence fell like a fresh thunderclap on
     Nikolaus's family, and they had only to thank God that the errors
     of the young man were not followed by more fatal results.

     In order to estimate this incident aright, it is of great
     importance to establish the relations which existed between the two
     young ladies. I have requested Madame and Mdlle. von Wiesler to
     give me on this, as on the previous points, a written memorandum in
     full detail; and from that memorandum I extract what follows
     [somewhat abridged here]:--

     In December 1880 Madame von Wiesler and her daughter paid a
     Christmas visit to "Schura's" grandfather, Senator N., where Sophie
     saw "Schura" for the first time. Sophie was then about thirteen
     years old, and "Schura" even younger. Sophie was astonished to see
     "Schura's" writing-table covered with books [and had a talk with
     her about favourite authors]. The two girls often saw each other at
     a distance in the recreation-room of their school during the
     winter, but "Schura" was soon transferred to another school. [They
     met once at a country-house without exchanging a word, and saw each
     other once across a theatre. Sophie, in fact, had had one childish
     talk with "Schura"; Madame von Wiesler had never had any real talk
     with her.] Hence it is clear that the relations of these ladies
     with "Schura" were of the most distant kind, and that they could
     not know anything of her political secrets.


VIII. E. From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 248-51.[230]

The following letters were received from the principal witness, Mrs.
Finney:--


ROCKLAND, MASS., _April 19th, 1891_.

     MR. HODGSON,--DEAR SIR,--Some weeks ago I received from you a few
     lines asking me to give you an account of the communication
     received from Cousin Benja in spirit-life, some twenty-five years
     ago.

     For weeks and months before my brother left the form we conversed
     freely on the subject of spirit communion and such matters, and one
     morning he requested me to bring him a small piece of brick, also
     pen and ink; he then made two marks on one side, and one on the
     other with the ink, then breaking the brick in two, gave me one
     piece, telling me at the time to take care of it, and some day he
     would hide the other piece away where no one but himself would
     know, and after leaving the form, if possible, would return in some
     way and tell me where it was. I could then compare them together,
     and it would be a test that he could return and communicate, and
     _my mind_ could not have any influence over it, as I did not know
     where he put it.

     After he left the form our anxiety was _very great_ to hear and
     learn all we could of communicating with spirits, and for months we
     got nothing satisfactory.

     We then commenced sitting at the table at home (mother and myself),
     which we did for some little time; at last it commenced tipping,
     and by calling the alphabet spelled out where we could find the
     piece of brick that he put away,--that was the way we got the test.
     To us that was truth that spirits can and do communicate with us,
     and nothing but the influence and power of Benja could tell us that
     test.--Truly yours,

MRS. WM. A. FINNEY.

ROCKLAND, _May 3rd, 1891_.

     MR. R. HODGSON,--DEAR SIR,--Yours of April 21st received, and I
     will add a few more lines as to statement of brother Benja's
     communication.

     By calling the alphabet we spelled out:--

     "You will find that piece of brick in the cabinet under the
     tomahawk.--BENJA."

     I went to that room and took the key, unlocked the cabinet, which
     had not been touched by any one after he locked it and put away the
     key. There I found that piece of brick just as it had spelled out,
     and it corresponded with the piece I had retained, fitting on
     exactly where he broke it off the piece I had. It was wrapped in a
     bit of paper and tucked into a shell, and placed in the bottom of
     the cabinet _exactly under_ the tomahawk, as was spelled out by the
     alphabet.

     This is truth, and no power but Benja's could tell that.

     Mother is not living; I am the only one of the family that is
     living.--Yours respectfully,

MRS. WM. A. FINNEY.

ROCKLAND, _May 11th, 1891_.

     MR. R. HODGSON,--DEAR SIR,--Yours of 6th received. I will continue
     to say, in answer to your questions, that the piece of brick was
     entirely concealed in the shell, so that it could not be seen from
     outside of cabinet. It was wrapped in a piece of paper stuck
     together with mucilage and tucked into the end of the shell, then a
     piece of paper gummed over that, so that nothing was visible from
     the shell. The shell was on the lower shelf of the cabinet, and
     only the top of the shell was visible outside the cabinet.

     One more little incident I will mention, for to me it is as
     valuable as the other. He wrote me a letter (about the time he gave
     me the piece of brick) and sealed it, saying at the time it was not
     to be answered, but the contents of the letter to be told. I got
     that in the same way I did the other, by calling the alphabet and
     the table tipping. It was these words:--

     "Julia! do right and be happy.--BENJA."

     That was correct. Just the contents of my letter. I have no
     particular objection as to giving my name, for I have stated
     nothing but the truth.

     At my home in Kingston I have that little shell with the piece of
     brick, and if you would like them I will send them to you. Will
     place the brick into the shell as it was when I found it. Of
     course, the paper that was around it then is worn out years ago.
     The cabinet is disposed of.

JULIA A. FINNEY.

Mrs. Finney further writes:--


ROCKLAND, _June 26th, 1891_.

     I send you by express a box containing the letter and shell with
     the piece of brick. I have placed one piece in the shell just as it
     was when I found it, so you can see how nicely it was concealed in
     the shell. The papers that were around it then are worn out. You
     can retain them if you like, as I do not care for them now.

     To me it is a positive truth that he did communicate to us, and our
     minds could have nothing to do with it.

J. A. FINNEY.

ROCKLAND, _July 19th, 1891_.

...The shell was placed on the same shelf with the tomahawk, and no
     other shells on that shelf. It was placed with the open side down,
     and the tomahawk stood directly over it. I cannot say why he did
     not tell us to look inside of the shell. We started to look as soon
     as he told us. It was in the cabinet under the tomahawk. We did not
     wait for any more to be said.

     I am not intimately acquainted with many public people. As to my
     integrity, will refer you to Rev. C. Y. de Normandie, of Kingston.

J. A. FINNEY.

Dr. Hodgson writes:--

     The shell is a large Triton, about ten inches long. The piece of
     brick was wrapped in folds of soft paper and tucked deeply into the
     recess. Another piece of paper was then gummed around the sides of
     the shell in the interior, so as absolutely to prevent the piece of
     brick from falling out. When I received the shell from Mrs. Finney
     and looked into the interior and shook the shell violently, there
     was nothing to indicate that the shell contained anything but the
     piece of gummed paper.

     The piece of brick in the shell weighs one and a half ounces, and
     the piece of brick retained by Mrs. Finney weighs about two and a
     quarter ounces. The shell with the piece of brick and paper
     wrapping weighs about eleven and a half ounces.

     Mrs. Finney also forwarded me the letter written by her brother.
     The shell and the pieces of brick and the letter are now all in my
     possession.

R. HODGSON.

     We have a letter (in original) from the Rev. C. Y. de Normandie, of
     Kingston, Canada, to Mrs. Finney. "I expressed then," he says,
     speaking of a former note to Dr. Hodgson, which accidentally went
     astray, "that to the best knowledge I had of you and to my firm
     belief your word could be implicitly relied on. I felt confident
     that you would state a matter as you understood it, as you regarded
     it, without reference to the consequences; and that you would not
     be any more likely to be misled and deceived about a matter of that
     kind than others similarly situated."




APPENDICES

TO

