CHAPTER V

HYPNOTISM

εἱλετο ἑ ῥἁβδον, τὑ τ' ἁνδρὡν δμματα θελγει,
ὁν ἑθἑλει, τοὑς δ' αὑτε κἱ ὑπνὡοτας ἑγεἱρι.

    --HOMER.


In the last chapter we were led on to adopt a conception of sleep which,
whether or not it prove ultimately in any form acceptable by science, is
at any rate in deep congruity with the evidence brought forward in this
work. Our human life, in this view, exists and energises, at the present
moment, both in the material and in the spiritual world. Human
personality, as it has developed from lowly ancestors, has become
differentiated into two phases; one of them mainly adapted to material
or planetary, the other to spiritual or cosmic operation. The subliminal
self, mainly directing the sleeping phase, is able either to rejuvenate
the organism by energy drawn in from the spiritual world;--or, on the
other hand, temporarily and partially to relax its connection with that
organism, in order to expatiate in the exercise of supernormal
powers;--telepathy, telesthæsia, ecstasy.

Such were the suggestions of the evidence as to dream and vision; such,
I may add, will be seen to be the suggestions of _spontaneous
somnambulism_, which has not yet fallen under our discussion. Yet claims
so large as these demand corroboration from observation and experiment
along many different lines of approach. Some such corroboration we have,
in anticipatory fashion, already acquired. Discussing in Chapter II. the
various forms of disintegration of personality, we had frequent glimpses
of beneficent subliminal powers. We saw the deepest stratum of the self
intervening from time to time with a therapeutic object, or we caught it
in the act of exercising, even if aimlessly or sporadically, some
faculty beyond supraliminal reach. And we observed, moreover, that the
agency by which these subliminal powers were invoked was generally the
_hypnotic trance_. Of the nature of that trance I then said nothing; it
was manifest only that here was some kind of induced or artificial
somnambulism, which seemed to systematise that beneficial control of
the organism which spontaneous sleep-waking states had exercised in a
fitful way. It must plainly be our business to understand _ab initio_
these hypnotic phenomena; to push as far as may be what seems like an
experimental evolution of the sleeping phase of personality.

Let us suppose, then, that we are standing at our present point, but
with no more knowledge of hypnotic phenomena than existed in the boyhood
of Mesmer. We shall know well enough what, as experimental
psychologists, we desire to do; but we shall have little notion of how
to set about it. We desire to summon at our will, and to subdue to our
use, these rarely emergent sleep-waking faculties. On their physical
side, we desire to develop their inhibition of pain and their
reinforcement of energy; on their intellectual side, their concentration
of attention; on their emotional side, their sense of freedom,
expansion, joy. Above all, we desire to get hold of those supernormal
faculties--telepathy and telæsthesia--of which we have caught fitful
glimpses in somnambulism and in dream.

Yet to such hopes as these the so-called "experience of ages" (generally
a very short and scrappy induction!) will seem altogether to refuse any
practical outcome. History, indeed,--with the wonted vagueness of
history,--will offer us a long series of stories of the strange sanative
suggestion or influence of man on man;--beginning, say, with David and
Saul, or with David and Abishag, and ending with Valentine
Greatrakes,--or with the Stuarts' last touch for the King's evil. But in
knowledge of how actually to set about it, we should still be just on
the level of the Seven Sages.[56]

And now let the reader note this lesson on the unexhausted possibilities
of human organisms and human life. Let him take his stand at one of the
modern centres of hypnotic practice,--in Professor Bernheim's
hospital-ward, or Dr. van Renterghem's _clinique_; let him see the
hundreds of patients thrown daily into hypnotic trance, in a few
moments, and as a matter of course; and let him then remember that this
process, which now seems as obvious and easy as giving a pill, was
absolutely unknown not only to Galen and to Celsus, but to Hunter and to
Harvey; and when at last discovered was commonly denounced as a
fraudulent fiction, almost up to the present day. Nay, if one chances to
have watched as a boy some cure effected in Dr. Elliotson's Mesmeric
Hospital, before neglect and calumny had closed that too early effort
for human good;--if one has seen popular indifference and professional
prejudice check the new healing art for a generation;--is not one likely
to have imbibed a deep distrust of all _a priori_ negations in the
matter of human faculty;--of all _obiter dicta_ of eminent men on
subjects with which they do not happen to be acquainted? Would not one,
after such an experience, rather choose (with Darwin) "the fool's
experiment" than any immemorial ignorance which has stiffened into an
unreasoning incredulity?

Mesmer's experiment was almost a "fool's experiment," and Mesmer himself
was almost a charlatan. Yet Mesmer and his successors,--working from
many different points of view, and following many divergent
theories,--have opened an ever-widening way, and have brought us now to
a position where we can fairly hope, by experiments made no longer at
random, to reproduce and systematise most of those phenomena of
spontaneous somnambulism which once seemed to lie so tantalisingly
beyond our grasp.

That promise is great indeed; yet it is well to begin by considering
precisely how far it extends. We must not suppose that we shall at once
be subduing to our experiment a central, integrated, reasonable Self.

We must be content (at first at any rate) if we can affect the
personality in the same limited way as hysteria and somnambulism have
affected it; but yet can act deliberately and usefully where these have
acted hurtfully and at random. It is enough to hope that we may inhibit
pain, as it is inhibited for the hysteric; or concentrate attention, as
it is concentrated for the somnambulist; or change the tastes and
passions, as these are changed in alternating personalities; or (best of
all) recover and fix something of that supernormal faculty of which we
have caught fugitive glimpses in vision and dream. Our proof of the
origination of any phenomenon in the deeper strata of our being must lie
in the intrinsic nature of the faculty exhibited;--not in the wisdom of
its actual direction. _That_ must often depend on the order given from
above the threshold; just as the magic mill of the fable continues
magical, although, for lack of the proper formula to stop it, it be
still grinding out superfluous salt at the bottom of the sea.

This brief introduction will, I hope, show that hypnotism is no
disconnected or extraneous insertion into experimental psychology, but
rather a summary name for a group of necessary, though empirical and
isolated, attempts to bring under control that range of submerged
faculty which has already from time to time risen into our observation.
The inquiry has been mainly the work of a few distinguished men, who
have each of them pushed some useful ideas as far as they could, but
whose work has not been adequately supported by successors.

I should much doubt whether there have been a hundred men in all
countries together, at the ordinary level of professional intelligence,
who during the century since Mesmer have treated hypnotism as the
serious study of their lives. Some few of the men who have so treated it
have been men of great force and strong convictions; and it will be
found that there has consequently been a series of sudden developments
of groups of phenomena, differing much from each other, but
corresponding with the special beliefs and desires of the person who
headed each movement in turn. I will mention some of the chief examples,
so as to show the sporadic nature of the efforts made, and the great
variety of the phenomena elicited.

The first name that must be mentioned is, of course, that of Mesmer
himself. He believed primarily in a sanative effluence, and his method
seems to have been a combination of passes, suggestion, and a supposed
"metallotherapy" or "magneto-therapy"--the celebrated _baquet_--which no
doubt was merely a form of suggestion. His results, though very
imperfectly described, seem to have been peculiar to himself. The
_crise_ which many of his patients underwent sounds like a hysterical
attack; but there can be no doubt that rapid improvement in symptoms
often followed it, or he would not have made so great an impression on
_savants_ as well as on the fashionable world of Paris. To Mesmer, then,
we owe the first conception of the therapeutic power of a sudden and
profound nervous change. To Mesmer, still more markedly, we owe the
doctrine of a nervous influence or effluence passing from man to man,--a
doctrine which, though it must assume a less exclusive importance than
he assigned to it, cannot, in my view, be altogether ignored or denied.

The leading figure among his immediate successors, the Marquis de
Puységur, seems from his writings[57] to have been one of the ablest and
most candid men who have practised mesmerism; and he was one of the very
few who have conducted experiments, other than therapeutic, on a large
scale. The somnambulic state may also be said to have been his
discovery; and he obtained clairvoyance or telæsthesia in so many
instances, and recorded them with so much of detail, that it is hard to
attribute all to mal-observation, or even to telepathy from persons
present. Other observers, as Bertrand, a physician of great promise,
followed in the same track, and this brief period was perhaps the most
fertile in disinterested experiments that our subject has yet known.
Much was then done in Germany also; and there, too, there is scattered
testimony to supernormal powers.[58]

Next came the era of Elliotson in England, and of Esdaile in his
hospital at Calcutta. Their method lay in mesmeric passes, Elliotson's
object being mostly the direct cure of maladies, Esdaile's a deep
anæsthesia, under which he performed hundreds of serious operations. His
success in this direction was absolutely unique;--was certainly (setting
aside supernormal phenomena) the most extraordinary performance in
mesmeric history. Had not his achievements been matters of official
record, the apparent impossibility of repeating them would probably by
this time have been held to have disproved them altogether.

The next great step which hypnotism made was actually regarded by
Elliotson and his group as a hostile demonstration. When Braid
discovered that hypnosis could be induced without passes, the mesmerists
felt that their theory of a sanative effluence was dangerously attacked.
And this was true; for that theory has in fact been thrown into the
shade,--too completely so, in my opinion,--first by the method used in
Braid's earlier work of the production of hypnotic phenomena by means of
the upward and inward squint, and secondly, by the much wider and more
important discovery of the efficacy of mere _suggestion_, set forth in
his later writings. Braid's hypnotic experience differed much from that
of hypnotists before and after him. His early method of the convergent
squint produced results which no one else has been able to produce; and
the state which it induced appeared in his view to arrest and dissipate
even maladies of which neither hypnotist nor patient had thought as
capable of cure. But he afterwards abandoned this method in favour of
simple verbal suggestion, as he found that what was required was merely
to influence the ideas of his patients. He showed further that all
so-called phrenological phenomena and the supposed effects of magnets,
metals, etc., could be produced equally well by suggestion.[59] He also
laid stress on the subject's power both of resisting the commands of the
operator and of inducing hypnotic effects in himself without the aid of
an operator. To my mind the most important novelty brought out by Braid
was the possibility of self-hypnotisation by concentration of will. This
inlet into human faculty, in some ways the most important of all, has
been as yet but slackly followed. But it is along with Braid's group of
ideas that I should place those of an able but much inferior
investigator, Dr. Fahnestock, although it is not clear that the latter
knew of Braid's work. His book, _Statuvolism, or Artificial
Somnambulism_ (Chicago, 1871), has received less attention than it
merits;--partly perhaps from its barbarous title, partly from the
crudities with which it is encumbered, and partly from the fact of its
publication at what was at that date a town on the outskirts of
civilisation. Fahnestock seems to have obtained by self-suggestion with
healthy persons results in some ways surpassing anything since recorded.

There is no reason to doubt these results, except the fact that they
have not yet been repeated with equal success; and my present purpose is
to show how little importance can as yet be attached in the history of
hypnotic experiment to the mere absence thus far of successful
repetition.

The next great stage was again strikingly different. It was mainly
French; the impulse was given largely by Professor Charles Richet, whose
work has proved singularly free from narrowness or misconception; but
the movement was developed in a special and a very unfortunate direction
by Charcot and his school. It is a remarkable fact that although Charcot
was perhaps the only man of eminence whose professional reputation has
ever been raised by his dealings with hypnotism, most of his work
thereon is now seen to have been mistaken and aberrant,--a mere
following of a blind alley, from which his disciples are now gradually
returning. Charcot's leading phenomena (as with several of his
predecessors above mentioned) were of a type which has seldom since been
obtained. The once celebrated "three stages" of the _grand hypnotisme_
are hardly anywhere now to be seen. But in this case the reason is not
that other hypnotists could not obtain the phenomena if they would; it
is rather (as I have already indicated) that experience has convinced
them that the sequences and symptoms on which Charcot laid stress were
merely very elaborate products of the long-continued, and, so to say,
endemic suggestions of the Salpêtrière.

We come next to the movement which is now on the whole dominant, and to
which the greatest number of cures may at present be credited. The
school of Nancy--which originated with Liébeault, and which is now
gradually merging into a general consensus of hypnotic practice--threw
aside more and more decisively the supposed "somatic signs" of
Charcot,--the phenomena of neuro-muscular irritability and the like,
which he regarded as the requisite proof of hypnosis;--until Bernheim
boldly affirmed that hypnotic trance was no more than sleep, and that
hypnotic suggestion was at once the sole cause of hypnotic
responsiveness and yet was undifferentiated from mere ordinary advisory
speech. This was unfortunately too good to be true. Not one sleep in a
million is really hypnosis; not one suggestion in a million reaches or
influences the subliminal self. If Bernheim's theories, in their extreme
form, were true, there would by this time have been no sufferers left to
heal.

What Bernheim has done is to cure a number of people without mesmeric
passes, and without any special predisposing belief on either
side,--beyond a trust in his own power. And this is a most valuable
achievement, especially as showing how much may be _dispensed with_ in
hypnotic practice--to how simple elements it may be reduced.

"Hypnotic trance," says Bernheim, in effect, "is ordinary sleep;
hypnotic suggestion is ordinary command. You tell the patient to go to
sleep, and he goes to sleep; you tell him to get well, and he gets well
immediately." Even thus (one thinks) has one heard the conjuror
explaining "how it's done,"--with little resulting hope of emulating his
brilliant performance. An ordinary command does _not_ enable an ordinary
man to get rid of his rheumatism, or to detest the previously too
acceptable taste of brandy. In suggestion, in short, there must needs be
something more than a name; a profound nervous change must needs be
started by some powerful nervous stimulus from without or from within.
Before contenting ourselves with Bernheim's formula, we must consider
yet again what change we want to effect, and whether hypnotists have
actually used any form of stimulus which was likely to effect it.

According to Bernheim we are all naturally suggestible, and what we want
to effect through suggestion is increased suggestibility. But let us get
rid for the moment of that oracular word. What it seems to mean here is
mainly a readier obedience of the organism to what we wish it to do. The
sleep or trance with which hypnotism is popularly identified is not
essential to our object, for the subliminal modifications are sometimes
attained without any trace of somnolence. Let us consider, then, whether
any known nervous stimuli, either massive or specialised, tend to
induce--not mere sleep or catalepsy--but that kind of ready
modifiability,--of _responsiveness_ both in visible gesture and in
invisible nutritive processes,--for the sake of which hypnosis is in
serious practice induced.

Now of the external stimuli which influence the whole nervous system the
most conspicuous are narcotic drugs. Opium, alcohol, chloroform,
cannabis indica, etc., affect the nerves in so many strange ways that
one might hope that they would be of use as hypnotic agents. And some
observers have found that slight chloroformisation rendered subjects
more suggestible. Janet has cited one case where suggestibility was
developed during recovery from delirium tremens. Other hypnotisers (as
Bramwell) have found chloroform fail to render patients hypnotisable;
and alcohol is generally regarded as a positive hindrance to hypnotic
susceptibility. More experiment with various narcotics is much needed;
but thus far the scantiness of proof that narcotics help towards
hypnosis goes rather against the view that hypnosis is a direct
physiological sequence from any form of external stimulus.

The apparent resemblance, indeed, between narcosis and hypnosis
diminishes on a closer analysis. A stage may occur both in narcotised
and in hypnotised subjects where there is incoherent, dream-like
mentation; but in the narcotised subject this is a step towards
inhibition of the whole nervous energy--the highest centres being
paralysed first; whereas in hypnosis the inhibition of supraliminal
faculty seems often at least to be merely a necessary preliminary to the
liberation of fresh faculty which presently manifests itself from a
profounder region of the self.

Next take another group of massive effects produced on the nervous
system by external stimuli;--those forms, namely, of trance and
cataplexy which are due to sudden shock. With human beings this
phenomenon varies from actual death from failure of heart-action, or
paralysis, or _stupor attonitus_ (a recognised form of insanity), any of
which may result from a mere alarming sight or unwelcome announcement,
down to the cataleptic immobility of a Salpêtrière patient, when she
hears a sudden stroke on the gong.

Similar phenomena in certain animals, as frogs, beetles, etc., are well
known. It is doubtful, however, whether any of these sudden disablements
should be classed as true hypnoses. It has not, I think, been shown that
in any case they have induced any real responsiveness to control, or
power of obeying suggestion; unless it be (as in some Salpêtrière cases)
a form of suggestion so obvious and habitual that the obedience thereto
may be called part of the actual cataplexy itself. Thus the "wax-like
flexibility" of the cataleptic, whose arms remain in the position where
you place them, must not be regarded as a readier obedience to control,
but rather as a state which involves not a more but a less alert and
capable responsiveness of the organism to either external or internal
stimuli.

So with regard to animals--crocodiles, frogs, and the like. I hold
theoretically that animals are probably hypnotisable and suggestible;
and the records of Rarey's horse-taming, etc., seem to point in that
direction.[60] But in the commoner experiments with frogs, where mere
passivity is produced, the resemblance seems to extend only to the
lethargic stage in human beings,[61] and what relation that lethargy
bears to suggestibility is not, I think, really known; although I shall
later on suggest some explanation on psychological grounds.

It seems plain, at any rate, that it must be from stimuli applied to men
and not to animals, and from stimuli of a special and localised rather
than of a massive kind, that we shall have to learn whatever can be
learnt as to the genesis of the true hypnotic control.

Now there exists a way of inducing hypnosis in some hysterical persons
which seems intermediate between massive and localised stimulations. It
is indeed a local stimulation; but there seems no reason beyond some
deep-seated caprice of the organism why the special tract which is thus
sensitive should have become developed in that direction.

I speak of the induction of trance in certain subjects by pressure upon
so-called _hypnogenous zones_. These zones form a curious development of
hysterical _cliniques_. Their starting-point is the well-known
phenomenon of patches of anæsthesia found upon hysterical subjects--the
"witch-marks" of our ancestors.

So far as we at present know, the situation of these "marks" is
altogether capricious. It does not apparently depend, that is to say,
upon any central lesion, in the same way as do the "referred pains,"
familiar in deep-seated organic complaints, which manifest themselves by
superficial patches of tenderness, explicable by the distribution of
nerve-trunks. The anæsthetic patches are an example of what I have
called the irrational self-suggestions of the hypnotic
stratum;--determined by dream-like fancies rather than necessitated by
purely physiological antecedents.

Quite in accordance with this view, we find that under favourable
conditions--especially in a hospital of hysterics--these anomalous
patches or zones develop and specialise themselves in various ways.
Under Dr. Pitres at Bordeaux (for example), we have _zones
hystérogènes_, _zones hypnogènes_, _zones hypnofrénatrices_, etc.; that
is to say, he finds that pressure on certain spots in certain subjects
will bring on or will check hysterical accesses, or accesses of what is
ranked as hypnotic sleep. There is no doubt that this sleep does in
certain subjects follow instantly upon the pressure of certain
spots,--constant for each subject, but different for one subject and for
another;--and this without any conscious co-operation, or even
foreknowledge, on the patient's part. Stated thus nakedly, this seems
the strongest possible instance of the induction of hypnosis by
localised stimulus. The reader, however, will at once understand that in
my view there is here no simple physiological sequence of cause and
effect. I must regard the local pressure as a mere _signal_--an appeal
to the pre-formed capacities of lawlessly acting centres in the hypnotic
stratum. A scrap of the self has decided, in dreamlike fashion, that
pressure on a certain point of the body's surface shall produce
sleep;--just as it has decided that pressure on that same point or on
some other point shall _not_ produce pain. Self-suggestion, and no mere
physiological nexus, is responsible for the sleep or the hysterical
access which follows the touch. The anæsthetic patches are here a
direct, but a capriciously chosen avenue to the subliminal being, and
the same random self-suggestiveness which is responsible for frequent
determinations that hysterical subjects shall _not_ be hypnotised has in
this case decided that they _shall_ be hypnotised, if you go about it in
exactly the right way.

Next in order among forms of localised stimulus used for inducing
hypnosis may be placed _monotonous stimulation_,--to whatever part of
the body it be applied. It was at one time the fashion to attribute
almost all hypnotic phenomena to this cause, and Edmund Gurney and I
endeavoured to point out the exaggeration.[62] Of this presently; but
first let us consider the few cases where the monotonous stimulation has
undoubtedly been of a kind to affect the organism strongly. The late Dr.
Auguste Voisin, of Paris, was perhaps more markedly successful than any
physician in producing hypnosis in extreme cases;--in maniacal persons
especially, whose attention it seemed impossible to fix. He often
accomplished this by holding their eyes open with the blepharostat, and
compelling them to gaze, sometimes for hours together, at a brilliant
electric light. Exhaustion produces tranquillity and an almost comatose
sleep--in which the physician has often managed to give suggestions of
great value. This seems practically the only class of cases where a
directly physiological antecedent for the sleep can be proved; and even
here the provable effect is rather the exhaustion of morbid excitability
than any direct induction of suggestibility. This dazzling process is
generally accompanied with vigorous verbal suggestion; and it is, of
course, quite possible that the patients might have been thrown into
hypnosis by that suggestion alone, had their minds been capable at first
of sufficient attention to receive it.

Braid's upward and inward squint has an effect of the same deadening
kind as the long gazing at a light, and helps in controlling wandering
attention; but Braid himself in later years (as mentioned above)
attributed his hypnotic successes wholly to _suggestion_.

From monotonous excitations which, whatever their part in inducing
hypnosis, are, at any rate, such as can sensibly affect the organism, I
come down to the trivial monotonies of watch-tickings, "passes," etc.,
which are still by a certain school regarded as capable of producing a
profound change in the nervous condition of the person before whose face
the hypnotiser's hands are slowly waved for ten or twenty minutes. I
regard this as a much exaggerated view. The clock's ticking, for
instance, if it is marked at all, is at least as likely to irritate as
to soothe; and the constant experience of life shows that continued
monotonous stimuli, say the throbbing of the screw at sea, soon escape
notice and produce no hypnotic effect at all. It is true, indeed, that
monotonous rocking sends some babies to sleep; but other babies are
merely irritated by the process, and such soporific effect as rocking
may possess is probably an effect on spinal centres or on the
semicircular canals. It depends less on mere monotony than on massive
movement of the whole organism.

I think, then, that there is no real ground for supposing that the
trivial degree of monotonous stimulation produced by passes often
repeated can induce in any ordinary physiological manner that "profound
nervous change" which is recognised as the prerequisite condition of any
hypnotic results. I think that passes are effectual generally as mere
suggestions, and must _primâ facie_ be regarded in that light, as they
are, in fact, regarded by many experienced hypnotisers (as Milne
Bramwell) who have employed them with good effect. Afterwards, when
reason is given for believing in a telepathic influence or impact
occasionally transmitted from the operator to the subject at a distance,
we shall consider whether passes may represent some other form of the
same influence, operating in close physical contiguity.

First, however, let us consider the point which we have now reached. We
have successively dismissed various supposed modes of physiologically
inducing hypnotic trance. We stand at present in the position of the
Nancy school;--we have found nothing but _suggestion_ which really
induces the phenomena.

But on the other hand we cannot possibly regard the word suggestion as
any real answer to the important question _how_ the hypnotic
responsiveness is induced, on _what_ conditions it depends.[63]

It must be remembered that many of the results which follow upon
suggestion are of a type which no amount of willingness to follow the
suggestion could induce, since they lie quite outside the voluntary
realm. However disposed a man may be to believe me, however anxious to
please me, one does not see how that should enable him, for instance, to
govern the morbidly-secreting cells in an eruption of erysipelas. He
already fruitlessly wishes them to stop their inflammation; the mere
fact of my expressing the same wish can hardly alter his cellular
tissue.

Here, then, we come to an important conclusion which cannot well be
denied, yet is seldom looked fully in the face. Suggestion from without
must for the most part resolve itself into suggestion from within.
Unless there be some telepathic or other supernormal influence at work
between hypnotiser and patient (which I shall presently show ground for
believing to be sometimes, though not often, the case), the hypnotiser
can plainly do nothing by his word of command beyond starting a train of
thought which the patient has in most cases started many times for
himself with no result; the difference being that now at last the
patient starts it again, and it _has_ a result. But _why_ it thus
succeeds on this particular occasion, we simply do not know. We cannot
predict when the result will occur; still less can we bring it about at
pleasure.

Nay, we do not even know whether it might not be possible to dispense
altogether with suggestion from outside in most of the cases now treated
in this way, and merely to teach the patient to make the suggestions for
himself. If there be no "mesmeric effluence" passing from hypnotiser to
patient, the hypnotiser seems little more than a mere _objet de
luxe_;--a personage provided simply to impress the imagination, who must
needs become even absurdly useless so soon as it is understood that he
has no other function or power.

Self-suggestion, whatever this may really mean, is thus in most cases,
whether avowedly or not, at the bottom of the effect produced. It has
already been used most successfully, and it will probably become much
commoner than it now is;--or, I should rather say (since every one no
doubt suggests to himself when he is in pain that he would like the pain
to cease), I anticipate that self-suggestion, by being in some way
better directed, will become more _effective_, and that the average of
voluntary power over the organism will rise to a far higher level than
it at present reaches. I believe that this is taking place even now; and
that certain _schemes of self-suggestion_, so to call them, are coming
into vogue, where patients in large masses are supplied with effective
conceptions, which they thus impress repeatedly upon themselves without
the need of a hypnotiser's attendance on each occasion. The "Miracles
of Lourdes" and the cures effected by "Christian Science" fall, in my
view, under this category. We have here suggestions given to a quantity
of more or less suitable people _en masse_, much as a platform
hypnotiser gives suggestions to a mixed audience, some of whom may then
be affected without individual attention from himself. The suggestion of
the curative power of the Lourdes water, for instance, is thus thrown
out, partly in books, partly by oral addresses; and a certain percentage
of persons succeed in so persuading themselves of that curative efficacy
that when they bathe in the water they are actually cured.

These _schemes of self-suggestion_, as I have termed them, constitute
one of the most interesting parts of my subject, but space forbids that
I should enter into a discussion of them here. It is sufficient to point
out that in order to make self-suggestion operative, no strong belief or
enthusiasm, such as those schemes imply, is really necessary. No
recorded cases of self-suggestion, I think, are more instructive than
those published by Dr. Hugh Wingfield in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v.
p. 279. (The paper was printed anonymously.) Dr. Wingfield was a
Demonstrator in Physiology in the University of Cambridge, and his
subjects were mainly candidates for the Natural Sciences Tripos. In
these cases there was no excitement of any kind, and no previous belief.
The phenomena occurred incidentally during a series of experiments on
other points, and were a surprise to every one concerned. The results
achieved were partly automatic writing and partly phenomena of
neuro-muscular excitability;--stiffening of the arms, and so forth. "It
seems probable," says Dr. Wingfield, "that all phenomena capable of
being produced by the suggestion of the hypnotiser can also be produced
by self-suggestion in a self-suggestive subject."

Experiments like these--confirming with modern care the conclusions
reached by Fahnestock and others at various points in hypnotic
history--seem to me to open a new inlet into human faculty, as
surprising in its way as those first wild experiments of Mesmer himself.
Who would have supposed that a healthy undergraduate could "by an effort
of mind" throw his whole body into a state of cataleptic rigidity, so
that he could rest with his heels on one chair and his head on another?
or that other healthy young men could "close their own eyes so that they
were unable to open them," and the like? The trivial character of these
laboratory experiments makes them physiologically the more remarkable.
There is the very minimum of predisposing conditions, of excited
expectation, or of external motive prompting to extraordinary effort.
And the results are not subjective merely--relief of pain and so
on--but are definite neuro-muscular changes, capable (as in the case of
the head and heels on separate chairs) of unmistakable test.

Yet, important though these and similar experiments in self-suggestion
may be, they do not solve our problem as to the ultimate origin and
distribution of the faculty thus displayed. We know no better with
self-suggestion than with suggestion from outside _why_ it is that one
man succeeds where others fail, or why a man who succeeds once fails in
his next attempt. Within the ordinary range of physiological
explanations nothing (I repeat) has as yet been discovered which can
guide us to the true nature or exciting causes of this characteristic
responsiveness of hypnosis. If we are to find any light, it must be in
some direction which has as yet been little explored.

The hint which I have to offer here involves, I hope, something more
than a mere change of appellation. I define suggestion as "successful
appeal to the subliminal self";--not necessarily to that self in its
most central, most unitary aspect; but to some one at least of those
strata of subliminal faculty which I have in an earlier chapter
described. I do not indeed pretend that my explanation can enable us to
reduce hypnotic success to a certainty. I cannot say why the process
should be so irregular and capricious; but I can show that this puzzle
is part and parcel of a wider mystery;--of the obscure relationships and
interdependencies of the supraliminal and the subliminal self. In split
personalities, in genius, in dreams, in sensory and motor automatisms,
we find the same fitfulness, the same apparent caprice.

Leaving perforce this problem for the present unsolved, let us consider
the various ways in which this conception of subliminal operation may
throw light on the actual phenomena of hypnotism;--phenomena at present
scattered in bewildering confusion.

The word _hypnotism_ itself implies that some kind of _sleep_ or trance
is regarded as its leading characteristic. And although so-called
hypnotic suggestions do often take effect in the waking state,[64] our
usual test of the hypnotiser's success lies in the slumber--light or
deep--into which his subject is thrown. It is, indeed, a slumber which
admits at times of strange wakings and activities; but it is also
manifestly profounder than the sleep which we habitually enjoy.

If sleep, then, be the phase of personality specially consecrated to
subliminal operation, it follows that any successful appeal to the
subliminal self will be likely to induce some form of sleep. And
further, if that form of sleep be in fact not an inevitable result of
physiological needs, but a response to a psychological appeal, it seems
not unlikely that we should be able to communicate with it without
interrupting it;--and should thus be able to guide or supplement
subliminal operations, just as in genius the subliminal self guided or
supplemented supraliminal operations.

Now I hold that in all the varied trances, lethargies, sleep-waking
states, to which hypnotism introduces us, we see the subliminal self
coming to the surface in ways already familiar, and displacing just so
much of the supraliminal as may from time to time be needful for the
performance of its own work. That work, I say, will be of a character
which we know already; the difference is that what we have seen done
spontaneously we now see done in response to our appeal.

Armed with this simplifying conception,--simplifying in spite of its
frank admission of an underlying mystery,--we shall find no added
difficulty in several points which have been the subjects of eager
controversy. The _sequence_ of hypnotic phenomena, the question of the
_stages_ of hypnotism, is one of these. I have already briefly described
how Charcot propounded his three stages--lethargy, catalepsy,
somnambulism--as though they formed the inevitable development of a
physiological law;--and how completely this claim has now had to be
withdrawn. Other schemes have been drawn out, by Liébeault, etc., but
none of them seems to do more than reflect the experience of some one
hypnotist's practice. The simplest arrangement is that of Edmund Gurney,
who spoke only of an "alert stage" and a "deep stage" of hypnosis; and
even here we cannot say that either stage invariably precedes the other.
The alert stage, which often came first with Gurney's subjects, comes
last in Charcot's scheme; and it is hardly safe to say more than that
hypnotism is apt to show a series of changes from sleep-waking to
lethargy and back again, and that the advanced stages show more of
subliminal faculty than the earlier ones. There is much significance in
an experiment of Dr. Jules Janet, who, by continued "passes," carried on
Wittman, Charcot's leading subject, beyond her usual somnambulic state
into a new lethargic state, and out again from thence into a new
sleep-waking state markedly superior to the old.

Gurney held the view that the main distinction of kind between his
"alert" and his "deep" stage of hypnosis was to be found in the domain
of memory, while memory also afforded the means for distinguishing the
hypnotic state as a whole from the normal one. As a general rule (though
with numerous exceptions), the events of ordinary life are remembered
in the trance, while the trance events are forgotten on waking, but tend
to recur to the memory on rehypnotisation. But the most interesting part
of his observations consisted in showing alternations of memory in the
alert and deep stages of the trance itself;--the ideas impressed in the
one sort of state being almost always forgotten in the other, and as
invariably again remembered when the former state recurs. (_Proceedings_
S.P.R. vol. ii., pp. 61 _et seq._ [523 A].) On experimenting further, he
met with a stage in which there was a distinct third train of memory,
independent of the others;--and this, of course, suggests a further
doubt as to there being any fixed number of stages in the trance. The
later experiments of Mrs. Sidgwick [523 B] on the same subject, in which
eight or nine distinct trains of memory were found--each recurring when
the corresponding stage of depth of the trance was reached--seem to show
conclusively that the number, may vary almost indefinitely. We have
already seen that in cases of alternating personalities the number of
personalities similarly varies, and the student who now follows or
repeats Gurney's experiments, with the increased knowledge of split
personalities which recent years have brought, cannot fail to be struck
with the analogies between Gurney's artificial light and deep
states,--with their separate chains of memory,--and those morbid
alternating personalities, with their complex mnemonic cleavages and
lacunæ, with which we dealt in Chapter II. The hypnotic stages are in
fact secondary or alternating personalities of very shallow type, but
for that very reason all the better adapted for teaching us from what
kinds of subliminal disaggregation the more serious splits in
personality take their rise.

And beneath and between these awakenings into limited, partial alertness
lies that profound hypnotic trance which one can best describe as a
scientific or purposive rearrangement of the elements of sleep;--a
rearrangement in which what is helpful is intensified, what is merely
hindering or isolating is removed or reduced. A man's ordinary sleep is
at once unstable and irresponsive. You can wake him with a pin-prick,
but if you talk to him he will not hear or answer you, until you rouse
him with the mere noise. That is sleep as the needs of our timorous
ancestors determined that it should be.

Hypnotic sleep, on the contrary, is at once stable and responsive;
strong in its resistance to such stimuli as it chooses to ignore; ready
in its accessibility to such appeals as it chooses to answer.

Prick or pinch the hypnotised subject, and although some stratum of his
personality may be aware, in some fashion, of your act, the sleep will
generally remain unbroken. But if you speak to him,--or even speak
before him,--then, however profound his apparent lethargy, there is
something in him which will hear.[65]

All this is true even of earlier stages of trance. Deeper still lies the
stage of highest interest;--that sleep-waking in which the subliminal
self is at last set free,--is at last able not only to receive but to
respond: when it begins to tell us the secrets of the sleeping phase of
personality, beginning with directions as to the conduct of the trance
or of the cure, and going on to who knows what insight into who knows
what world afar?

Without, then, entering into more detail as to the varying forms which
hypnosis at different stages may assume, I have here traced its central
characteristic;--the development, namely, of the sleeping phase of
personality in such fashion as to allow of some supraliminal guidance of
the subliminal self.

We have here a definition of much wider purview than any which has been
habitually applied to the process of hypnotisation or to the state of
hypnosis. To test its validity, to explain its scope, we need a survey
of hypnotic results much wider in range than any enumeration of the kind
at present usual in text-books. Regarding hypnotic achievements mainly
in their _mental_ aspects, I must seek for some broad principle of
classification which on the one hand may not be so exclusively moral as
to be physiologically untranslatable,--like the distinction between vice
and virtue;--or on the other hand so exclusively physiological as to be
morally untranslatable,--like the distinction between cerebral anæmia
and hyperæmia.

Perhaps the broadest contrast which is expressible in both moral and
physiological terms is the contrast between check and stimulus,--between
_inhibition_ and _dynamogeny_. Not, indeed, that such terms as _check_
and _stimulus_ can be pressed in detail. The central power,--the ruling
agency within the man which gives the command,--is no doubt the same in
both cases. But the common contrast between negative and positive
exhortations,--"this you shall _not_ do," "this you _shall_ do,"--will
help to give clearness to our review of the influences of hypnotism in
its bearings on intelligence and character,--its psychological efficacy.

The most rudimentary form of restraint or inhibition lies in our effort
to preserve the infant or young child from acquiring what we call "bad
tricks." These morbid affections of motor centres, trifling in their
inception, will sometimes grow until they are incurable by any régime or
medicament;--nay, till an action so insignificant as sucking the thumb
may work the ruin of a life.

In no direction, perhaps, do the results of suggestion appear more
inexplicable than here. Nowhere have we a more conspicuous touching of a
spring;--a more complete achievement, almost in a single moment, of the
deliverance which years of painful effort have failed to effect.[66]

These cases stand midway between ordinary therapeutics and moral
suasion. No one can here doubt the importance of finding the shortest
and swiftest path to cure. Nor is there any reason to think that cures
thus obtained are less complete or permanent than if they had been
achieved by gradual moral effort. These facts should be borne in mind
throughout the whole series of the higher hypnotic effects, and should
serve to dispel any anxiety as to the possible loss of moral training
when cure is thus magically swift. Each of these effects consists, as we
must suppose, in the modification of some group of nervous centres; and,
so far as we can tell, that is just the same result which moral effort
made above the conscious threshold more slowly and painfully attains.
This difference, in fact, is like the difference between results
achieved by diligence and results achieved by genius. Something valuable
in the way of training,--some exercise in patience and resolve,--no
doubt may be missed by the man who is "suggested" into sobriety;--in the
same way as it was missed by the schoolboy Gauss,--writing down the
answers to problems as soon as set, instead of spending on them a
diligent hour. But moral progress is in its essence as limitless as
mathematical; and the man who is thus carried over rudimentary struggles
may still find plenty of moral effort in life to train his character and
tax his resolution.

Among these morbid tricks _kleptomania_ has an interest of its own, on
account of the frequent doubt whether it is not put forward as a mere
excuse for pilfering. It may thus happen that the cure is the best proof
of the existence of the disease; and certain cures indicate that the
impulse has veritably involved a morbid excitability of motor centres,
acted on by special stimuli,--an _idée fixe_ with an immediate outcome
in act.[67]

Many words and acts of _violence_ fall under the same category, in cases
where the impulse to swear or to strike has acquired the unreasoning
automatic promptness of a _tic_, and yet may be at once inhibited by
suggestion. Many undesirable impulses in the realm of _sex_ are also
capable of being thus corrected or removed.

The stimulants and narcotics, to which our review next leads us, form a
standing menace to human virtue. By some strange accident of our
development, the impulse of our organisms towards certain
drugs--alcohol, opium, and the like--is strong enough to overpower, in a
large proportion of mankind, not only the late-acquired altruistic
impulses, but even the primary impulses of self-regard and
self-preservation. We are brought back, one may almost say, to the
"chimiotaxy" of the lowest organisms, which arrange themselves
inevitably in specific relation to oxygen, malic acid, or whatever the
stimulus may be. We thus experience in ourselves a strange conflict
between moral responsibility and molecular affinities;--the central will
overborne by dumb unnumbered elements of our being. With this condition
of things hypnotic suggestion deals often in a curious way. The
suggestion is not generally felt as a strengthening of the central will.
It resembles rather a molecular redisposition; it leaves the patient
indifferent to the stimulus, or even disgusted with it. The man for whom
alcohol has combined the extremes of delight and terror now lives as
though in a world in which alcohol did not exist at all.[68]

Even for the slave of morphia the same sudden freedom is sometimes
achieved. It has been said of victims to morphia-injection that a cure
means death;--so often has suicide followed on the distress caused by
giving up the drug. But in certain cases cured by suggestion it seems
that no craving whatsoever has persisted after the sudden disuse of the
drug. There is something here which is in one sense profounder than
moral reform. There is something which suggests a spirit within us less
injured than we might have feared by the body's degradation. The
morphinomaniac _character_--the lowest type of subjection to a ruling
vice--disappears from the personality in proportion as the drug is
eliminated from the system. The shrinking outcast turns at once into the
respectable man.[69]

But apart from troubles consequent on any intelligible instinct, any
discoverable stimulus of pleasure, there are a multitude of impulses,
fears, imaginations, one or more of which may take possession of persons
not otherwise apparently unhealthy or hysterical, sometimes to an extent
so distressing as to impel to suicide.

Some of these "phobies" have been often described of late years,--as,
for instance, _agoraphobia_, which makes a man dread to cross an open
space; and its converse _claustrophobia_, which makes him shrink from
sitting in a room with closed doors; or the still more distressing
_mysophobia_, which makes him constantly uneasy lest he should have
become dirty or defiled.

All these disorders involve a kind of displacement or cramp of the
attention; and for all of them, one may broadly say, hypnotic suggestion
is the best and often the only cure. Suggestion seems to stimulate
antagonistic centres; to open clogged channels; to produce, in short,
however we imagine the process, a rapid disappearance of the insistent
notion.

I have spoken of this effect as though it were mainly to be valued
intellectually, as a readjustment of the dislocated attention. But I
must note also that the moral results may be as important here as in the
cases of inhibition of dipsomania and the like, already mentioned. These
morbid fears which suggestion relieves may be ruinously degrading to a
man's character. The ingredients of antipathy, of jealousy, which they
sometimes contain, may make him dangerous to his fellows as well as
loathsome to himself. One or two cases of the cure of morbid jealousy
are to my mind among the best records which hypnotism has to show.[70]

But this is not all. The treasure of memory is mixed with rubbish; the
caution which experience has taught has often been taught too well;
philosophic calm has often frozen into apathy. Plato would have the old
men in his republic plied well with wine on festal days, that their
tongues might be unloosed to communicate their wisdom without reserve.
"Accumulated experience," it has been said with much truth in more
modern language,[71] "hampers action, disturbs the logical reaction of
the individual to his environment. The want of control which marks the
decadence of mental power is [sometimes] itself undue control, a
preponderance of the secondary over the primary influences."

Now the removal of shyness, or _mauvaise honte_, which hypnotic
suggestion can effect, is in fact a _purgation of memory_,--inhibiting
the recollection of previous failures, and setting free whatever group
of aptitudes is for the moment required. Thus, for the boy called on to
make an oration in a platform exhibition, hypnotisation sets free the
_primary_ instinct of garrulity without the restraining fear of
ridicule. For the musical executant, on the other hand, a similar
suggestion will set free the _secondary_ instinct which the fingers have
acquired, without the interference of the learner's puzzled, hesitating
thoughts.

I may remark here (following Gurney and Bramwell) how misleading a term
is _mono-ideism_ for almost any hypnotic state. There is a _selection_
of ideas to which the hypnotic subject will attend, and there is a
_concentration_ upon the idea thus selected; but those ideas themselves
may be both complex and constantly shifting, and indeed this is just one
of the ways in which the hypnotic trance differs from the
somnambulic--in which it may happen that only a relatively small group
of brain-centres are awake enough to act. The somnambulic servant-girl,
for instance, may persist in laying the tea-table, whatever you say to
her, and this may fairly be called mono-ideism; but the hypnotic subject
(as Bramwell has justly insisted) can be made to obey simultaneously a
greater number of separate commands than he could possibly attend to in
waking life.

From these inhibitions of memory,--of attention as directed to the
experiences of the past,--we pass on to attention as directed to the
experiences of the present. And here we are reaching a central point; we
are affecting the _macula lutea_ (as it has been well called) of the
mental field. Many of the most important of hypnotic results will be
best described as modifications of _attention_.

Any modification of attention is of course likely to be at once a check
and a stimulus;--a check to certain thoughts and emotions, a stimulus to
others. And in many cases it will be the _dynamogenic_ aspect of the
change--the new vigour supplied in needed directions--which will be for
us of greatest interest. Yet from the _inhibitive_ side also we have
already had important achievements to record. All these arrests and
destructions of _idées fixes_, of which so much has been said, were
powerful modifications of attention, although the limited field which
they covered made it simpler to introduce them under a separate heading.

And even now it may not be without surprise that the reader finds
described under the heading of _inhibition of attention_ a phenomenon so
considerable and so apparently independent as _hypnotic suppression of
pain_. This induced _analgesia_ has from the first been one of the main
triumphs of mesmerism or hypnotism. All have heard that mesmerism will
stop headaches;--that you can have a tooth out "under mesmerism" without
feeling it. The rivalry between mesmerism and ether, as anæsthetic
agents in capital operations, was a conspicuous fact in the medical
history of early Victorian times. But the ordinary talk, at any rate of
that day, seemed to assume that if mesmerism produced an effect at all
it was an effect _resembling_ that produced by narcotics--a modification
of the intimate structure of the nerve or of the brain which rendered
them for the time incapable of transmitting or of feeling painful
sensations. The state of a man's nervous system, in fact, when he is
poisoned by chloroform, or stunned by a blow, or almost frozen to death,
or nearly drowned, etc., is such that a great part of it is no longer
fit for its usual work,--is no longer capable of those prolongations of
neurons, or whatever they be, which constitute its specific nervous
activity. We thus get rid of pain by getting rid for the time of a great
deal of other nervous action as well; and we have to take care lest by
pushing the experiment too far we get rid of life into the bargain. But
on the other hand, a man's nervous system, when hypnotic suggestion has
rendered him incapable of pain, is quite as active and vigorous as
ever,--quite as capable of transmitting and feeling pain,--although
capable also of inhibiting it altogether. In a word, the hypnotic
subject is _above_ instead of _below_ pain.

To understand this apparent paradox we must remind ourselves that pain
probably originated as a warning of danger,--a warning which, while
useful to active creatures with miscellaneous risks, has become only a
mixed advantage to beings of more advanced intelligence and
sensitivity. There are many occasions when, knowing it to be useless, we
wish to shut off pain, to rise as definitely _above_ it as our earliest
ancestors were _below_ it, or as the drunken or narcotised man is below
it. This is just what hypnotic suggestion enables us to do.

Hypnotism attacks the real _origo mali_;--not, indeed, the pressure on
the tooth-nerve, which can only be removed by extraction, but the
representative power of the central sensorium which converts that
pressure for us into pain. It _diverts attention_ from the pain, as the
excitement of battle might do; but diverts it without any competing
excitement whatever. To this topic of _influence on attention_ we shall
have to recur again and again. For the present it may suffice if I refer
the reader to a few cases--chosen from among some thousands where
hypnotic practice has removed or obviated the distress or anguish till
now unmistakably associated with various bodily incidents--from the
extraction of a tooth to the great pain and peril of childbirth.[72]

This suppression of pain has naturally been treated from the therapeutic
point of view, as an end in itself; and neither physician nor patient
has been inclined to inquire exactly _what_ has occurred;--what
physiological or psychological condition has underlain this great
subjective relief. Yet in the eye of experimental psychology the matter
is far from a simple one. We are bound to ask _what_ has been altered.
Has there been a total _ablation_, or some mere _translation_ of pain?
What objective change on the bodily side has occurred in nerve or
tissue? and, on the mental side, how far does the change in
consciousness extend? How deep does it go? Does any subliminal knowledge
of the pain persist?

The very imperfect answers which can at present be given to these
questions may, at any rate, suggest directions for further inquiry.

(1) In the first place, it seems clear that when pain is inhibited in
any but the most simple cases, a certain group of changes is produced
whose _nexus_ is psychological rather than physiological. That is to
say, one suggestion seems to relieve at once all the symptoms which form
one idea of pain or distress in the patient's mind; while another
suggestion is often needed to remove some remaining symptom, which the
patient regards as a different trouble altogether. The suggestion thus
differs both from a specific remedy, which might relieve a specific
symptom, and from a general narcotisation, which would relieve all
symptoms equally. In making suggestions, moreover, the hypnotiser finds
that he has to consider and meet the patient's own subjective feelings,
describing the intended relief as the patient wishes it to be described,
and not attempting technical language which the patient could not
follow. In a word, it is plain that in this class, as in other classes
of suggestion, we are addressing ourselves to a _mind_, an
_intelligence_, which can of itself select and combine, and not merely
to a tissue or a gland responsive in a merely automatic way.

(2) It will not then surprise us if,--pain being thus treated as a
psychological entity,--there shall prove to be a certain psychological
complexity in the response to analgesic suggestion.

By this I mean that there are occasional indications that some memory of
the pain, say, of an operation has persisted in some stratum of the
personality;--thus apparently indicating that there was somewhere an
actual consciousness of the pain when the operation was performed.[73]
We find accounts of the revival of pain in dreams after operations
performed under chloroform.[74]

(3) Such experiences, if more frequent, might tempt us to suppose that
the pain is not wholly abrogated, but merely translated to some stratum
of consciousness whose experiences do not enter into our habitual chain
of memories. Yet we possess (strangely enough) what seems direct
evidence that the profoundest organic substratum of our being is by
suggestion wholly freed from pain. It had long been observed that
recoveries from operations performed in hypnotic trance were unusually
benign;--there being less tendency to inflammation than when the patient
had felt the knife. The same observation--perhaps in a less marked
degree--has since been made as to operations under chemical anæsthesia.
The shock to the system, and the irritation to the special parts
affected, are greatly diminished by chloroform. And more recently
Professor Delbœuf, by an experiment of great delicacy on two
symmetrical wounds, of which one was rendered painless by suggestion,
has distinctly demonstrated that pain tends to induce and keep up
inflammation.[75]

Thus it seems that pain is abrogated at once on the highest and on the
lowest level of consciousness; yet possibly in some cases (though not
usually[76]) persists obscurely in some stratum of our personality into
which we gain only occasional and indirect glimpses. And if indeed this
be so, it need in no way surprise us. We need to remember at every point
that we have no reason whatever to suppose that we are cognisant of all
the trains of consciousness, or chains of memory, which are weaving
themselves within us. I shall never attain on earth--perhaps I never
shall in any world attain--to any complete conspectus of the variously
interwoven streams of vitality which are, in fact, obscurely present in
my conception of myself.

It is to hypnotism in the first place that we may look for an increased
power of analysis of these intercurrent streams, these irregularly
super-posed strata of our psychical being. In the meantime, this power
of _inhibiting_ almost any fraction of our habitual consciousness at
pleasure gives for the first time to the ordinary man--if only he be a
suggestible subject--a power of concentration, of _choice_ in the
exercise of faculty, such as up till now only the most powerful
spirits--a Newton or an Archimedes--have been able to exert.

The man who sits down in his study to write or read,--in perfect safety
and intent on his work,--continues nevertheless to be involuntarily and
inevitably armed with all that alertness to external sights and sounds,
and all that sensibility to pain, which protected his lowly ancestors at
different stages of even pre-human development. It is much as though he
were forced to carry about with him all the external defences which his
forefathers have invented for their defence;--to sit at his
writing-table clad in chain-mail and a respirator, and grasping an
umbrella and a boomerang. Let him learn, if he can, inwardly as well as
outwardly, to get rid of all that, to keep at his command only the half
of his faculties which for his purpose is worth more than the whole.
Dissociation and choice;--dissociation between elements which have
always hitherto seemed inextricably knit;--choice between faculties
which till now we have had to use all together or not at all;--such is
the promise, such is the incipient performance of hypnotic plasticity in
its aspect of _inhibitive suggestion_.

I come now to the division of hypnotic achievement with which I next
proposed to deal, namely, the _dynamogenic_ results of hypnotic
suggestion. These I shall arrange in an order resembling that which we
try to follow in education:--proceeding from external senses to internal
sensory and other central operations; and thence again to attention and
will, and so to character which is a kind of resultant of all these.

I will begin, then, with what seems the most external and measurable of
these different influences--the influence, namely, of suggestion upon
man's _perceptive_ faculties;--its power to educate his external organs
of sense.

This wide subject is almost untouched as yet; and there is no direction
in which one could be more confident of interesting results from further
experiment.

The exposition falls naturally into three parts, as suggestion effects
one or other of the three following objects:

    (1) Restoration of ordinary senses from some deficient condition.
    (2) Verification of ordinary senses;--hyperæsthesiæ.
    (3) Development of new senses;--heteræsthesiæ.

(1) The first of these three headings seems at first sight to belong to
therapeutics rather than to psychology. It is, however, indispensable as
a preliminary to the other two heads; since by learning how and to what
extent suggestion can repair _defective_ senses we have the best chance
of guessing at its _modus operandi_ when it seems to excite the
_healthy_ senses to a point beyond their normal powers.[77]

Two points may be mentioned here. Improvement of _vision_ seems
sometimes to result from relaxation of an involuntary ciliary spasm,
which habitually over-corrects some defect of the lens. This is
interesting, from the analogy thus shown in quite healthy persons to the
fixed ideas, the subliminal errors and fancies characteristics of
hysteria. The stratum of self whose business it is to correct the
mechanical defect of the eye has in these instances done so amiss, and
cannot set itself right. The corrected form of vision is as defective as
the form of vision which it replaced. But if the state of trance be
induced, or if it occur spontaneously, it sometimes happens that the
error is suddenly righted; the patient lays aside spectacles; and since
we must assume that the original defect of mechanism remains, it seems
that that defect is now perfectly instead of imperfectly met. This shows
a subliminal adjusting power operating during trance more intelligently
than the supraliminal intelligence had been able to operate during
waking life.

Another point of interest lies in the effect of increased attention, as
stimulated by suggestion, upon the power of hearing. Dr. Liébeault[78]
records two cases which are among the most significant that I know. If
such susceptibility to self-suggestion could be reached by patients
generally, there might be, with no miracle at all, a removal of perhaps
half the annoyance which deafness inflicts on mankind.

I pass on to cases of the production by suggestion or self-suggestion of
hyperæsthesia,--of a degree of sensory delicacy which overpasses the
ordinary level, and the previous level of the subject himself.

The rudimentary state of our study of hypnotism is somewhat strangely
illustrated by the fact that most of the experiments which show
hyperæsthesia most delicately have been undertaken with a view of
proving something else--namely, mesmeric _rapport_, or the mesmerisation
of objects, or telepathy. In these cases the proof of _rapport_,
telepathy, etc., generally just falls short,--because one cannot say
that the action of the ordinary senses might not have reached the point
necessary for the achievement, though there is often good reason to
believe that the subject was supraliminally ignorant of the way in which
he was, in fact, attaining the knowledge in question.

In these extreme cases, indeed, the explanation by hyperæsthesia is not
always proved. There _may_ have been telepathy, although one has not the
right to assume telepathy, in view of certain slighter, but still
remarkable, hyperæsthetic achievements, which are common subjects of
demonstration. The ready recognition of _points de repère_, on the back
of a card or the like, which are hardly perceptible to ordinary eyes, is
one of the most usual of these performances.

In this connection the question arises as to the existence of
physiological limits to the exercise of the ordinary senses. In the case
of the eye a _minimum visibile_ is generally assumed; and there is
special interest in a case of clairvoyance versus cornea-reading, where,
if the words were read (as appears most probable) from their reflection
upon the cornea of the hypnotiser, the common view as to the _minimum
visibile_ is greatly stretched.[79]

With regard to the other senses, whose mechanism is less capable of
minute dissection, one meets problems of a rather different kind. What
are the definitions of smell and touch? Touch is already split up into
various factors--tactile, algesic, thermal; and thermal touch is itself
a duplicate sense, depending apparently on one set of nerve-terminations
adapted to perceive heat, and another set adapted to perceive cold.
Taste is similarly split up; and we do not call anything taste which is
not definitely referred to the mouth and adjacent regions. Smell is
vaguer; and there are cognate sensations (like that of the presence of a
cat) which are not referred by their subject to the nose. The study of
hyperæsthesia does in this sense prepare the way for what I have termed
heteræsthesia; in that it leaves us more cautious in definition as to
what the senses are, it accustoms us to the notion that people become
aware of things in many ways which they cannot definitely realise.

Let us now consider the evidence for heteræsthesia;--for the existence,
that is to say, under hypnotic suggestion, of any form of sensibility
decidedly different from those with which we are familiar. It would
sound more accurate if one could say "demanding some end-organ different
from those which we know that we possess." But we know too little of the
range of perceptivity of these end-organs in the skin which we are
gradually learning to distinguish--of the heat-feeling spots,
cold-feeling spots, and the like--to be able to say for what purposes a
new organ would be needed. For certain heteræsthetic sensations, indeed,
as the perception of a magnetic field, one can hardly assume that any
end-organ would be necessary. It is better, therefore, to speak only of
modes of sensibility.

Looking at the matter from the evolutionary point of view, the question
among sensations was one of the development of the fittest; that is to
say that, as the organism became more complex and needed sensations more
definite than sufficed for the protozoon, certain sensibilities got
themselves defined and stereotyped upon the organism by the evolution of
end-organs.[80] Others failed to get thus externalised; but may, for
aught we know, persist nevertheless in the central organs;--say, for
instance, in what for man are the optic or olfactory tracts of the
brain. There will then be no apparent reason why these latent powers
should not from time to time receive sufficient stimulus, either from
within or from without, to make them perceptible to the waking
intelligence, or perceptible at least in states (like trance) of narrow
concentration.

As the result of these considerations, I approach alleged heteræsthesiæ
of various kinds with no presumption whatever against their real
occurrence. Yet on the other hand, my belief in the extent of possible
_hyperæsthesia_ continually suggests to me that the apparently new
perceptions may only consist of a mixture of familiar forms of
perception, pushed to a new extreme, and centrally interpreted with a
new acumen, while there is no doubt that many experiments supposed to
furnish evidence of such new perceptions merely illustrate the effect of
suggestion or self-suggestion.

Without, however, presuming to criticise past evidence wholesale, I yet
hope that the experience now attained may lead to a much greater number
of well-guarded experiments in the near future. In Appendix V.A, I very
briefly present the actual state of this inquiry. In default of any
logical principle, I shall there divide these alleged forms of
sensibility according as they are excited by inorganic objects on the
one hand, or by organisms (dead or living) on the other.

In the meantime I pass on to that group of the dynamogenic effects of
suggestion which affect the more central vital operations--either the
vaso-motor system, or the neuro-muscular system, or the central sensory
tracts. The effects of suggestion on character--induced changes to which
we can hardly guess the nervous concomitant--will remain to be dealt
with later.

First, then, as to the effects of suggestion on the vaso-motor system.
Simple effects of this type form the commonest of "platform
experiments." The mesmerist holds ammonia under his subject's nose, and
tells him it is rose-water. The subject smells it eagerly, and his eyes
do not water. The suggestion, that is to say, that the stinging vapour
is inert has inhibited the vaso-motor reflexes which would ordinarily
follow, and which no ordinary effort of will could restrain. _Vice
versâ_, when the subject smells rose-water, described as ammonia, he
sneezes and his eyes water. These results, which his own will could not
produce, follow on the mesmerist's word. No one who sees these simple
tests applied can doubt the genuineness of the influence at work. We
find then, as might be expected, that action on glands and secretions
constitutes a large element in hypnotic therapeutics. The literature of
suggestion is full of instances where a suppressed secretion has been
restored at a previously arranged moment, almost with "astronomical
punctuality." And yet to what memory is that command retained? by what
signal is it announced? or by what agency obeyed?

In spite of this underlying obscurity, common to every branch of
suggestion, these vaso-motor phenomena are by this time so familiar that
no further description of them is necessary.

This delicate responsiveness of the vaso-motor system has given rise to
some curious spontaneous phenomena, and has suggested some experiments,
which are probably as yet in their infancy. The main point of interest
is that at this point spontaneous self-suggestion, and subsequently
suggestion from without, have made a kind of first attempt at the
modification of the human organism in what may be called fancy
directions,--at the production of a change which has no therapeutic aim,
and so to say, no physiological unity; but which is guided by an
intellectual caprice along lines with which the organism is not
previously familiar. I speak of the phenomenon commonly known as
"stigmatisation," from the fact that its earliest spontaneous
manifestations were suggested by imaginations brooding on the stigmata
of Christ's passion;--the marks of wounds in hands and feet and side.
This phenomenon, which was long treated both by _savants_ and by
devotees as though it must be either fraudulent or miraculous,--_ou
supercherie, ou miracle_,--is now found (like a good many other
phenomena previously deemed subject to that dilemma) to enter readily
within the widening circuit of natural law. Stigmatisation is, in fact,
a form of vesication; and suggested vesication--with the quasi-burns and
real blisters which obediently appear in any place and pattern that is
ordered--is a high development of that same vaso-motor plasticity of
which the ammonia-rose-water experiment was an early example.[81]

The group of suggestive effects which we reach next in order is a wide
and important one. The education of the _central sensory faculties_,--of
our power of inwardly representing to ourselves sights and sounds,
etc.,--is not less important than the education of the external senses.
The powers of construction and combination which our central organs
possess differ more widely in degree in different healthy individuals
than the degrees of external perception itself. And the stimulating
influence of hypnotism on _imagination_ is perhaps the most conspicuous
phenomenon which the whole subject offers; yet it has been little dwelt
upon, save from one quite superficial point of view.

Every one knows that a hypnotised subject is easily hallucinated;--that
if he is told to see a non-existent dog, he sees a dog,--that if he is
told _not_ to see Mr. A., he sees everything in the room, Mr. A.
excepted. Common and conspicuous, I say, as this experiment is, even the
scientific observer has too often dealt with it with the shallowness of
the platform lecturer. The lecturer represents this induced
hallucinability simply as an odd illustration of his own power over the
subject. "I tell him to forget his name, and he forgets his name; I tell
him that he has a baby on his lap, and he sees and feels and dandles
it." At the best, such a hallucination is quoted as an instance of
"mono-ideism." But the real kernel of the phenomenon is not the
inhibition but the dynamogeny;--not the abstraction of attention or
imagination from other topics, but the increased power which imagination
gains under suggestion;--the development of faculty, useless, if you
will, in that special form of imagining the baby, but faculty mentally
of a high order--faculty in one shape or another essential to the
production of almost all the most admired forms of human achievement.

On this theme I shall have much to say; yet here again it will be
convenient to defer fuller discussion until I review what I have termed
"sensory automatism" in a more general way. We shall then see that this
quickened imaginative faculty is not educed by hypnosis alone; that it
is a part of the equipment of the subliminal self, and will be better
treated at length in connection with other spontaneous manifestations.
Enough here to have pointed out the main fact; for when pointed out it
can hardly be disputed, although its significance for the true
comprehension of hypnotic phenomena has been too often overlooked.

Yet here, and in direct connection with hypnotism, certain special
features of hallucinations need to be insisted upon, both as partly
explaining certain more advanced hypnotic phenomena, and also as
suggesting lines of important experiment. The first point is this.

Post-hypnotic hallucinations can be _postponed_ at will. That is to say,
a constant watchfulness is exercised by the subject, so that if, for
example, the hypnotiser tells him that he will (when awakened) poke the
fire when the hypnotiser has coughed three times, the awakened subject,
although knowing nothing of the order in his waking state, will be on
the look-out for the coughs, amid all other disturbances, and will poke
the fire at the fore-ordained signal.[82] Moreover, when the
post-hypnotic suggestion is executed there will often be a slight
momentary relapse into the hypnotic state, and the subject will not
afterwards be aware that he _has_ (for instance) poked the fire at all.
This means that the suggested act belongs properly to the hypnotic, not
to the normal chain of memory; so that its performance involves a brief
reappearance of the subliminal self which received the order.

Another characteristic of these suggested hallucinations tells in
exactly the same direction. It is possible to suggest no mere isolated
picture,--a black cat on the table, or the like,--but a whole complex
series of responses to circumstances not at the time predictable. This
point is well illustrated by what are called "negative hallucinations"
or "systematised anæsthesiæ." Suppose, for instance, that I tell a
hypnotised subject that when he awakes there will be no one in the room
with him but myself. He awakes and remembers nothing of this order, but
sees me alone in the room. Other persons present endeavour to attract
his attention in various ways. Sometimes he will be quite unconscious of
their noises and movements; sometimes he will perceive them, but will
explain them away, as due to other causes, in the same irrational manner
as one might do in a dream. Or he may perceive them, be unable to
explain them, and feel considerable terror until the "negative
hallucination" is dissolved by a fresh word of command. It is plain, in
fact, throughout, that some element in him is at work all the time in
obedience to the suggestion given,--is keeping him by ever fresh
modifications of his illusion from discovering its unreality. Nothing
could be more characteristic of what I have called a "middle-level
centre" of the subliminal self--of some element in his nature which is
potent and persistent without being completely intelligent;--a kind of
dream-producer, ready at any moment to vary and defend the dream.

Another indication of the subliminal power at work to produce these
hallucinations is their remarkable _range_--a range as wide, perhaps, as
that over which therapeutic effects are obtainable by suggestion. The
post-hypnotic hallucination may affect not sight and hearing alone (to
which spontaneous hallucinations are in most cases confined), but all
kinds of vaso-motor responses and organic sensations--cardiac,
stomachic, and the like--which no artifice can affect in a waking
person. The legendary flow of perspiration with which the flatterer
sympathises with his patron's complaint of heat--_si dixeris "Æstuo,"
sudat_--is no exaggeration if applied to the hypnotic subject, who will
often sweat and shiver at your bidding as you transplant him from the
Equator to frosty Caucasus.

Well, then, given this strength and vigour of hallucination, one sees a
possible extension of knowledge in more than one direction. To begin
with, by suggestion to the subject that he is feeling or doing something
which is beyond his normal range of faculties, we may perhaps enable him
to perceive or to act as thus suggested.

What we need is to address to a sensitive subject a series of strong
suggestions of the increase of his sensory range and power. We must
needs begin by suggesting hallucinatory sensations:--the subject should
be told that he perceives some stimulus which is, in fact, too feeble
for ordinary perception. If you can make him _think_ that he perceives
it, he probably will after a time perceive it; the direction given to
his attention heightening either peripheral or central sensory faculty.
You may then be able to attack the question as to how far his
specialised end-organs are really concerned in the perception;--and it
may then be possible to deal in a more fruitful way with those alleged
cases of _transposition of senses_ which have so great a theoretical
interest as being apparently intermediate between hyperæsthesia and
telæsthesia or clairvoyance. If we once admit (as I, of course, admit)
the reality of telæsthesia, it is just in some such way as this that we
should expect to find it beginning.

I start from the thesis that the perceptive power within us precedes and
is independent of the specialised sense-organs, which it has developed
for earthly use.

    νοὑς ὁρα καἱ νοὑς ἁκοὑει τἁλλα κωφἁ καἱ τυφλα.

I conceive further that under certain circumstances this primary
telæsthetic faculty resumes direct operations, in spite of the fleshly
barriers which are constructed so as to allow it to operate through
certain channels alone. And I conceive that in thus resuming exercise of
the wider faculty, the incarnate spirit will be influenced or hampered
by the habits or self-suggestions of the more specialised faculty; so
that there may be apparent _compromises_ of different kinds between
telæsthetic and hyperæsthetic perception,--as the specialised senses
endeavour, as it were, to retain credit for the perception which is in
reality widening beyond their scope.

In this attitude of mind, then, I approach the recorded cases of
transposition of special sense.[83]

Two main hypotheses have been put forward as a general explanation of
such cases, neither of which seems to me quite satisfactory. (1) The
common theory would be that these are merely cases of erroneous
self-suggestion;--that the subject really sees with the eye, but thinks
that he sees with the knee, or the stomach, or the finger-tips. This may
probably have been so in many, but not, I think, in all instances. (2)
Dr. Prosper Despine and others suppose that, while the accustomed
cerebral centres are still concerned in the act of sight, the finger-end
(for example) acts for the nonce as the end-organ required to carry the
visual sensation to the brain. I cannot here get over the mechanical
difficulty of the absence of a lens. However hyperæsthetic the
finger-end might be (say) to light and darkness, I can hardly imagine
its acting as an organ of definite sight.

My own suggestion (which, for aught I know, may have been made before)
is that the finger-end is no more a true organ of sight than the
arbitrary "hypnogenous zone" is a true organ for inducing trance. I
think it possible that there may be actual telæsthesia,--not necessarily
involving any perception by the bodily organism;--and that the spirit
which thus perceives in wholly supernormal fashion may be under the
impression that it is perceiving through some bizarre corporeal
channel--as the knee or the stomach. I think, therefore, that the
perception may not be _optical_ sight at all, but rather some
generalised telæsthetic perception represented as visual, but
_incoherently_ so represented; so that it may be referred to the knee
instead of the retina. And here again, as at several previous points in
my argument, I must refer the reader to what will be said in my chapter
on _Possession_ by external spirits (Chapter IX.) to illustrate the
operation even of the subject's own spirit acting without external aid.

And now I come to the third main type of the dynamogenic efficacy of
suggestion: its influence, namely, on _attention_, on _will_, and on
_character_--character, indeed, being largely a resultant of the
direction and persistence of voluntary attention.

It will be remembered that for convenience' sake I have discussed the
dynamogenic effect of suggestion first upon the external senses, then
upon the internal sensibility,--the mind's eye, the mind's ear, and the
imagination generally;--and now I am turning to similar effects
exercised upon that central power which reasons upon the ideas and
images which external and internal senses supply, which chooses between
them, and which reacts according to its choice. These are "highest-level
centres," which I began by saying that the hypnotist could rarely hope
to reach;--since those spontaneous somnambulisms which the hypnotic
trance imitates and develops do so seldom reach them. We have, however,
already found a good deal of intelligence of a certain kind in hypnotic
phenomena; what we do here is to pass from one stage to another and
higher stage of consciousness of intelligent action.

To explain this statement, let us dwell for a moment upon the degree of
intelligence which is sometimes displayed in those modifications of the
organism which suggestion effects. Take, for instance, the formation of
a cruciform blister, as recorded by Dr. Biggs, of Lima.[84] In this
experiment the hypnotised subject was told that a red cross would appear
on her chest every Friday during a period of four months. For the
carrying out of this suggestion an unusual combination of capacities was
needed;--the capacity of directing physiological changes in a new way,
and also, and combined therewith, the capacity of recognising and
imitating an abstract, arbitrary, non-physiological idea, such as that
of _cruciformity_.

All this, in my view, is the expression of _subliminal_ control over the
organism--more potent and profound than _supraliminal_, and exercised
neither blindly nor wisely, but with intelligent caprice.

Bearing this in mind as we go on to suggestions more directly affecting
central faculty, in which _highest-level_ centres begin to be involved,
we need not be surprised to find an intermediate stage in which high
faculties are used in obedience to suggestion, for purely capricious
ends.

I speak of _calculations_ subliminally performed in the carrying out of
post-hypnotic suggestions.

These suggestions _à échéance_--commands, given in the trance, to do
something under certain contingent circumstances, or after a certain
time has elapsed--form a very convenient mode of testing the amount of
mentation which can be started and carried out without the intervention
of the supraliminal consciousness. Experiments have been made in this
direction by three men especially who have in recent times done some of
the best work on the psychological side of hypnotism, namely, Edmund
Gurney, Delbœuf, and Milne Bramwell.

Dr. Milne Bramwell's experiments[85] (to mention these as a sample of
the rest) were post-hypnotic suggestions involving arithmetical
calculations; the entranced subject, for instance, being told to make a
cross when 20,180 minutes had elapsed from the moment of the order.
Their primary importance lay in showing that a subliminal or hypnotic
memory persisted across the intervening gulf of time,--days and nights
of ordinary life,--and prompted obedience to the order when at last it
fell due. But incidentally, as I say, it became clear that the subject,
whose arithmetical capacity in common life was small, worked out these
sums subliminally a good deal better than she could work them out by her
normal waking intelligence.

Of course, all that was needed for such simple calculations was close
attention to easy rules; but this was just what the waking mind was
unable to give, at least without the help of pencil and paper. If we lay
this long and careful experiment side by side with the accounts already
given of the solution of problems in somnambulic states, it seems clear
that there is yet much to be done in the education of subliminal memory
and acumen as a help to supraliminal work.

Important in this connection is Dr. Dufay's account of help given to an
actress in the representation of her _rôles_ by hypnotisation.[86] It
seems obvious that stage-fright is just the kind of nervous annoyance
from which hypnotisation should give relief. Somewhat similarly I
believe some persons can secure a cheap substitute for genius on stage
or platform, evoking by suggestion or self-suggestion a helpful
subliminal uprush. Here again, the hypnotisation is a kind of extension
of "secondary automatism,"--of the familiar lapse from ordinary
consciousness of movements (walking, pianoforte-playing, etc.), which
have been very frequently performed. The possibilities thus opened up
are very great: no less than the combination by mankind of the stability
of instinct with the plasticity of reason. There seems no reason why
man's range of automatism should not thus be largely increased in two
main ways: many things now unpleasant to do might be done with
indifference, and many things now difficult to do might be done with
ease.

And now let us pass on from these specialised influences of suggestion
on certain kinds of attention to its influence on attention generally,
as needed, for instance, in education. If we can arrest the shifting of
the mental focus to undesired ideational centres in at all the same way
as we can arrest the choreic or fidgety shiftings of motor impulse to
undesired motor centres, we shall have done perhaps as much for the
world's ordinary work as if we had raised the average man's actual
intelligence a step higher in the scale. We shall have checked waste,
although we may not have improved quality. The well-known case of Dr.
Forel's warders,[87] who were enabled by hypnotic suggestion to sleep
soundly by the side of the patients they had to watch, and wake only
when the patients required to be restrained, shows us how by this means
the attention may be concentrated on selected impressions and waste of
energy be avoided in a way that could hardly be compassed by any
ordinary exercise of the will.

How far, indeed, we can go in actually _heightening_ intelligence by
suggestion we have yet to learn. We must not expect to add a cubit to
intellectual any more than to physical stature. Limitations at birth
must prevent our developing the common man into a Newton; but there
seems no reason why we should not bring up his practical achievements
much nearer than at present to the maximum of his innate capacity.[88]

In passing on from the influence of suggestion on _attention_ to its
influence on _will_, I am not meaning to draw any but the most every-day
distinction between these two forms of inward concentration. The point,
in fact, which I wish now to notice is rather a matter of common
observation than a provable and measurable phenomenon. I speak of the
energy and resolution with which a hypnotic suggestion is carried
out;--the _ferocity_, even, with which the entranced subject pushes
aside the opposition of much more powerful men. I do not, indeed, assert
that he would thus risk very serious injury; for I believe (with
Bramwell and others) that there does exist somewhere within him a
knowledge that the whole proceeding is a mere experiment. But,
nevertheless, he actually risks something; he behaves, in short, as a
confident, resolute man would behave, and this however timid and
unaggressive his habitual character may be. I believe that much
advantage may yet be drawn from this confident temper. We can thus
inhibit the acquired self-distrust and shyness of the supraliminal self,
and get the subliminal self concentrated upon some task which may be as
difficult as we please;--which may, if we can adjust it rightly, draw
out to the uttermost the innate powers of man.

It has been supposed that the mere fact of being hypnotised tended to
weaken the will; that the hypnotised person fell inevitably more and
more under the control of the hypnotiser, and even that he could at last
be induced to commit crimes by suggestion. In his article "What is
Hypnotism?"[89] Dr. Milne Bramwell shows on how small a foundation of
fact these fanciful theories have been erected. It may suffice to say
here that nothing is easier, either for subject or for hypnotiser, than
to _avert_ undue influence. A trusted friend has only to suggest to the
hypnotised subject that _no one else_ will be able to affect him, and
the thing is done. As to the crimes supposed to be committed by
hypnotised persons under the influence of suggestion, the evidence for
such crimes, in spite of great efforts made to collect it and set it
forth, remains, I think, practically _nil_.

This fact, I must add, is quite in harmony with the views expressed in
the present chapter. For it implies that the higher subliminal centres
(so to term them) never really abdicate their rule; that they may indeed
remain passive while the middle centres obey the experimenter's caprice,
but are still ready to resume their control if such experiment should
become really dangerous to the individual. And this runs parallel with
common experience in the spontaneous somnambulisms. The sleeper may
perform apparently rash exploits; but yet, unless he be suddenly
awakened, serious accidents are very rare. Nevertheless, both in
spontaneous and in induced somnambulism, accidents _may_ occur; nor
should any experiment be undertaken in a careless or jesting spirit.

But the rôle of the hypnotiser, as our command over hypnotic artifice
increases, is likely to become continually smaller in proportion to the
rôle played by the subject himself. Especially must this be so where the
object is to strengthen the subject's own power of will. All that can be
done from _without_ in such a case is to imbue the man's spirit with the
sense of its unexhausted prerogatives,--the strength which he may then
employ, not only to avert pain or anxiety, but in any active direction
which his original nature itself admits.

These last words may naturally lead us on to our next topic: the
influence of suggestion on _character_,--on that function of combined
attention and will, which is, of course, also ultimately a function of
the possibilities latent in the individual germ.

First of all, then, and going back to the evidence already given as to
the cure of the victims of morphia, we may say with truth that _there_
we have seen as tremendous a moral _lift_--as sudden an elevation from
utter baseness to at least normal living--as can be anywhere presented
to us.

Here, then, the question arises as to the possible range of such sudden
reformations. Did we succeed with the morphinomaniac only because his
was a _functional_, and not an _organic_, degradation?

And may it not be a much harder task to create honesty, purity,
unselfishness in a brain whose very conformation must keep the spirit
that thinks through it nearly on the level of the brute? The question is
of the highest psychological interest; the answer, though as yet
rudimentary, is unexpectedly encouraging. The examples given in Appendix
V. B show that if the subject is hypnotisable, and if hypnotic
suggestion be applied with sufficient persistency and skill, no depth of
previous baseness and foulness need prevent the man or woman whom we
charge with "moral insanity," or stamp as a "criminal-born," from rising
into a state where he or she can work steadily, and render services
useful to the community.[90]

I purposely limit my assertion to these words. We must still work within
the bounds of natural capacity. Just as we cannot improvise a genius, we
cannot improvise a saint. But what experience seems to show is that we
can _select_ from the lowest and poorest range of feelings and faculties
enough of sound feeling, enough of helpful faculty, to keep the man in a
position of moral stability, and capable of falling in with the common
labours of his kind.

And here we approach a point of much interest. Hypnotic suggestion or
self-suggestion is not an agency which stands wholly alone. It melts
into the suasion of ordinary life. Ministers of religion as well as
physicians have always wielded with authority the suasive power. From
the crude animistic dances and ceremonies of the savage up to the
"missions" and "revivals" in English and American churches and chapels,
we find sudden and exciting impressions on mind and sense called into
play for the purpose of producing religious and moral change.[91] Among
the lower races especially these exciting reunions often involve both
hysterical and hypnotic phenomena. There are sometimes convulsive
accesses and there is sometimes the milder phenomenon of a deep
restorative sleep. The influence exerted upon the convert is
intermediate between hypnotic artifice, dependent on trance-states for
access to subliminal plasticity, and ordinary moral suasion, addressed
primarily to ordinary waking reason.

Let us pause here to consider the point which we have already reached.
We began by defining hypnotism as the empirical development of the
sleeping phase of man's personality. In that sleeping phase the most
conspicuous element--the most obvious function of the subliminal
self--is the repair of wasted tissues, the physical, and therefore also
largely the moral, refreshment and rejuvenation of the tired organism.

But we found reason to believe that the subliminal self has other
functions to fulfil during sleep. Those other functions are concerned in
some unknown way with the spiritual world; and the indication of their
exercise is given by the sporadic occurrence, in the sleeping phase, of
supernormal phenomena. Such phenomena, as we shall presently see, occur
also at various points in hypnotic practice. To them we must now turn,
if our account of the phenomena of induced somnambulism is to be
complete.

Yet here, in order to give completeness to our intended review, we shall
need a certain apparent extension of the scope of this chapter. We shall
need to consider a group of cases which might have been introduced at
various points in our scheme, but which are perhaps richest in their
illustrations of the supernormal phenomena of hypnotism.

_Spontaneous somnambulisms_,--those crude uprushes of incoherent
subliminal faculty which sometimes break through the surface of
sleep,--seem to occupy a kind of midway position among the various
phenomena through which our inquiry has thus far carried us.

The somnambulism often _starts_ as an exaggerated dream; it _develops_
into a kind of secondary personality. The thoughts and impulses which
the upheaval raises into manifestations--the psychical output--resemble
sometimes the inspirations of genius, sometimes the follies of hysteria.
And, finally, the spontaneous sleep-waking state itself is manifestly
akin to hypnosis,--is sometimes actually interchangeable with the
induced somnambulisms of the hypnotic trance. The _chain of memory_
which repeated spontaneous somnambulisms gradually form,--while lying
quite outside the primary or waking memory,--will often be found to form
a part of the _hypnotic_ memory, which gradually accretes in similar
fashion from repeated hypnosis.

For one form of sleep-waking capacity we are already prepared by what
has been said in Chapter IV. of the solution of problems in sleep. This
is one of the ways in which we can watch the gradual merging of a vivid
dream into a definite somnambulic act. The solution of a problem (as we
have seen) may present itself merely as a sentence or a diagram,
constructed in dream and remembered on waking. Or the sleeper (as in
various cases familiar in text-books) may rise from bed and _write out_
the chain of reasoning, or the sermon, or whatever it may be. Or again,
in rarer cases the somnambulic output may take the form of oratory, and
edifying discourses may be delivered by a preacher whom no amount of
shaking or pinching will silence or, generally, even interrupt. This, so
to speak, is genius with a vengeance; this is a too persistent uprush of
subliminal zeal, co-operating even out of season with the hortatory
instincts of the waking self.

The group of sleep-waking cases which we may next discuss illustrates a
natural evolution of the faculty of the sleeping phase of personality.
The subliminal self, exercising in sleep a profounder _influence_ over
the organism than the supraliminal can exert, may also be presumed to
possess a profounder _knowledge_ of the organism--of its present, and
therefore of its future--than the supraliminal self enjoys.

There are cases[92] in which the somnambulic personality is discerned
throughout as a wiser self--advising a treatment, or at least foreseeing
future developments of the disease with great particularity. Of course,
in such a case prediction is often simply a form of suggestion; the
symptom occurs simply because it has been ordained beforehand. In the
case of cures of long-standing disease the sagacity which foresees
probably co-operates with the control which directs the changes in the
organism.

The next stage is a very important one. We come to the manifestation in
spontaneous sleep-waking states of manifestly supernormal
powers,--sometimes of telepathy, but more commonly of clairvoyance or
telæsthesia. Unfortunately, these cases have been, as a rule, very
insufficiently observed. Still, it appears that in spontaneous
somnambulism there is frequently some indication of supernormal powers,
though the observers--even if competent in other ways--have generally
neglected to take account of the hyperæsthesia and heightening of memory
and of general intelligence that often accompany the state.

Before leaving this subject of spontaneous sleep-waking states I ought
briefly to mention a form of trance with which we shall have to deal
more at length in a later chapter. I speak of trance ascribed to
_spirit-possession_. As will be seen, I myself fully adopt this
explanation in a small number of the cases where it is put forward. Yet
I do not think that spirit-agency is necessarily present in all the
trances even of a true subject of possession. With all the leading
sensitives--with D. D. Home, with Stainton Moses, with Mrs. Piper and
with others--I think that the depth of the trance has varied greatly on
different occasions, and that sometimes the subliminal self of the
sensitive is vaguely simulating, probably in an unconscious dream-like
way, an external intelligence. This hypothesis suggested itself to
several observers in the case especially of D. D. Home, with whom the
moments of strong characterisation of a departed personality, though far
from rare, were yet scattered among tracts of dreamy improvisation which
suggested only the utterance of Home's subliminal self. However we
choose to interpret these trances, they should be mentioned in
comparison with all the other sleep-waking states. They probably form
the best transition between those shallow somnambulisms, on the one
hand, which are little more than a vivid dream, and those profound
trances, on the other hand, in which the native spirit quits, as nearly
as may be, the sensitive's organism, and is for the time replaced, as
nearly as may be, by an invading spirit from that unseen world.

This brief review of non-hypnotic somnambulisms has not been without its
lessons. It has shown us that the supernormal powers which we have
traced in each of the preceding chapters in turn do also show
themselves, in much the same fashion, in spontaneous sleep-waking states
of various types. We must now inquire how far they occur in sleep-waking
states experimentally induced.

And here the very fact of _induction_ suggests to us a question
specially applicable to the hypnotic state itself. Is hypnosis ever
supernormally induced? Can any one, that is to say, be thrown into
hypnotic trance by a telepathic impact? or, to phrase it more generally,
by any influence, inexplicable by existing science, which may pass from
man to man?

In the first place one may say that of the anti-mesmeric schools of
opinion, the "purely physiological" school has on the whole failed, the
"purely suggestive" school has triumphantly succeeded. The school of
Nancy, reinforced by hypnotists all over Europe, has abundantly proved
that "pure suggestion" (whatever that be) is the determining cause of a
very large proportion of hypnotic phenomena. That is beyond dispute; and
the two other schools, the "pure physiologists" and the "mesmerists"
alike, must now manage to prove as best they can that their favourite
methods play any real part in the induction of any case of hypnosis. For
to the pure suggestionist, monotonous stimulation and mesmeric passes
are alike in themselves inert, are alike mere facilitations of
suggestion, acting not directly on the patient's organism, but rather
on his state of mental expectation.

I reply that there is absolutely no need to go as far as this. In
admitting suggestion as a _vera causa_ of hypnosis, we are recognising a
cause which, if we really try to grasp it, resolves itself into
_subliminal operation, brought about we know not how_. So far,
therefore, from negativing and excluding any obscure and perhaps
supernormal agency, the suggestion theory leaves the way for any such
agency broadly open. Some unknown cause or other must determine whether
each suggestion is to "take" or no; and that unknown cause must
presumably act somehow upon the subliminal self. We should have
something like a real explanation of suggestion, if we could show that a
suggestion's success or failure was linked with some telepathic impact
from the suggester's mind, or with some mesmeric effluence from his
person.

I know well that in many cases we can establish no link of this kind. In
Bernheim's rapid hospital practice there seems no opportunity to bring
the hypnotist's will, or the hypnotiser's organism, into any effective
_rapport_ with the subject. Rather, the subject seems to do all that is
wanted for himself almost instantaneously. He often falls into the
suggested slumber almost before the word "_Dormez!_" has left the
physician's mouth. But on the other hand, this is by no means the only
type of hypnotic success. Just as in the mesmeric days, so also now
there are continual instances where much more than the mere command has
been needed for effective hypnotisation. Persistence, proximity,
passes--all these prove needful still in the practice even of physicians
who place no faith at all in the old mesmeric theory.

The fact is, that since the days of those old controversies between
mesmerists proper and hypnotists proper, the conditions of the
controversy have greatly changed. The supposed mesmeric effluence was
then treated as an entirely isolated, yet an entirely physiological
phenomenon. There was supposed to be a kind of radiation or infection
passing from one nervous system to another. It was of this that Cuvier
(for instance) was convinced; it was this theory which Elliotson
defended in the _Zoist_ with a wealth of illustration and argument to
which little justice has even yet been done. Yet it was hard to prove
_effluence_ as opposed to _suggestion_, because where there was
proximity enough for effluence to be effective there was also proximity
enough for suggestion to be possible. Only in some few
circumstances,--such as Esdaile's mesmerisation of a blind man over a
wall,[93]--was it possible to claim that the mesmeric trance had been
induced without any suspicion whatever on the subject's part that the
mesmerist was trying to entrance him.

Since those days, however, the evidence for _telepathy_--for psychical
influence from a distance--has grown to goodly proportions. A new form
of experiment has been found possible, from which the influence of
suggestion can be entirely excluded. It has now, as I shall presently
try to show, been actually proved that the hypnotic trance can be
induced from a distance so great, and with precautions so complete, that
telepathy or some similar supernormal influence is the only efficient
cause which can be conceived.

I subjoin one of a series of experiments in this "telepathic hypnotism."
(See Appendix V. C.) These experiments are not easy to manage, since it
is essential at once to prevent the subject from suspecting that the
experiment is being tried, and also to provide for his safety in the
event of its success. In Dr. Gibert's experiment, for instance, it was a
responsible matter to bring this elderly woman in her dream-like state
through the streets of Havre. It was needful to provide her with an
unnoticed escort; and, in fact, several persons had to devote themselves
for some hours to a single experiment.

I have cited first this experiment at a distance, without attempting to
analyse the nature of the suggestion given or power employed by the
hypnotist. Of course it is plain that if one can thus influence
unexpectant persons from a distance there must be sometimes some kind of
power actually exercised by the hypnotiser;--something beyond the mere
tact and impressiveness of address, which is all that Bernheim and his
followers admit or claim. Evidence of this has been afforded by the
occasional production of organic and other effects in hypnotised
subjects by the unuttered will of the operator when near them. The
ingenious experiments of Gurney[94] in the production of local rigidity
and anæsthesia were undertaken to test whether the agency employed were
more in the nature of an effort of will or,--as the early mesmerists
claimed,--of an emission of actual "mesmeric fluid" or physical
effluence of some sort. Gurney was inclined to think that his results
could not be explained solely by mental suggestion or telepathy, because
the physical proximity of the operator's hand seemed necessary to
produce them, and he thought it probable that they were due to a direct
nervous influence, exercised through the hand of the operator, but not
perceptible through the ordinary sensory channels. Mrs. Sidgwick's
experiments[95] of the same kind, however, in which success was obtained
when the operator was standing with folded arms several feet away from
the subject, removed Gurney's main objection to the telepathic
explanation. The fact that a thick sheet of glass over the subject's
hands did not interfere with the results also afforded some presumption
against the hypothesis of a physical influence; and Mrs. Sidgwick
pointed out that the delicate discrimination involved in the specific
limitations of the effects is much more easily attributable to mental
suggestion, through the action of the operator's mind on that of the
subject, than to any direct physical influence on the latter's nerves.

It is, however, in my view, by no means improbable that effluences, as
yet unknown to science, but perceptible by sensitive persons as the
telepathic impulse is perceptible, should radiate from living human
organisms. I see no reason to assume that the varied and concordant
statements made by patients in the _Zoist_ and early mesmeric works
merely reflect subjective fancies. I have myself performed and witnessed
experiments on intelligent persons expressly designed to test whether or
no the sensation following the hand was a mere fancy. It seems to me
hardly likely that persons who have never experienced other purely
subjective sensations, and who are expressly alive to the question here
at issue, should nevertheless again and again feel the classical
tingling, etc., along the track of the hypnotiser's passes without any
real external cause. To assume that all which they feel is a mere result
of suggestion, may be a premature attempt at simplifying modes of
supernormal communication which, in fact, are probably not simpler but
more complex than any idea which we have as yet formed of them.

And here at last we arrive at what is in reality the most interesting
group of inquiries connected with the hypnotic trance.

We have just seen that the subliminal state of the hypnotised subject
may be approached by ways subtler than mere verbal suggestion--by
telepathic impacts and perhaps by some effluence of kindred supernormal
type. We have now to trace the supernormal elements in the hypnotic
_response_. Whether those elements are most readily excited by a
directly subliminal appeal, or whether they depend mainly on the special
powers innate in the hypnotised person, we can as yet but imperfectly
guess. We can be pretty sure, at any rate, that they are not often
evoked in answer to any rapid and, so to say, perfunctory hypnotic
suggestion; they do not spring up in miscellaneous hospital practice;
they need an education and a development which is hardly bestowed on
one hypnotised subject in a hundred. The first stage of this response
lies in a subliminal relation established between the subject and his
hypnotiser, and manifesting itself in what is called _rapport_, or in
_community of sensation_. The earlier stages of _rapport_--conditions
when the subject apparently bears or feels the hypnotiser only, and so
forth--arise probably from mere self-suggestion or from the suggestions
of the operator, causing the conscious attention of the subject to be
exclusively directed to him. Indications of the possible development of
a real link between the two persons may rather be found in the cases
where there is provable community of sensation,--the hypnotised subject
tasting or feeling what the hypnotiser (unknown to the subject) does
actually at that moment taste or feel.

We have thus brought the hypnotised subject up to the point of knowing
supernormally, at any rate, the superficial sensations of his
hypnotiser. From that starting-point,--or, at any rate, from some
supernormal perception of narrow range,--his cognition widens and
deepens. He may seem to discern some picture of the past, and may
retrace the history of some object which he holds in his hand, or he may
seem to wander in spirit over the habitable globe, and to bring back
knowledge of present facts discernible by no other means. Perhaps he
seems to behold the future, predicting oftenest the organic history of
some person near him; but sometimes discerning, as it were pictorially,
scattered events to which we can guess at no attainable due. For all
this there is already more of positive evidence than is generally
realised; nor (I must repeat) is there any _negative_ evidence which
might lead us to doubt that further care in developing hypnotic subjects
may not at any moment be rewarded in the same way. We have here, in
fact, a successful branch of investigation which has of late years been
practically dropped from mere inattention to what has been done
already,--mere diversion of effort to the easier and more practical
triumphs of suggestive therapeutics.[96]

The next group of cases to which I pass relate chiefly to knowledge of
present facts. I may first refer to some experiments in
thought-transference with hypnotised persons[97] analogous to the
experiments with persons in a normal condition recorded in my next
chapter. Here the subject seems simply to become aware telepathically
of the thoughts of his hypnotiser, the hypnotic condition perhaps
facilitating the transfer of the impression. Next come the cases of what
used to be called "travelling clairvoyance" in the hypnotic state. These
are more like the partially retrocognitive cases in that they cannot be
traced with certainty to the contemporary thoughts of any particular
person. In travelling clairvoyance we seem to have a development of
"invasive dreams,"--of those visions of the night in which the sleeper
seems to visit distant scenes and to bring back intelligence otherwise
unattainable. These distant hypnotic visions seem to develop out of
thought-transference; thus the subject may discern an imaginary picture
as it is conceived in the hypnotiser's mind. Thence he may pass on and
discern a true contemporaneous scene,[98] unknown to any one present,
and in some few cases there is an element of apparent prevision in the
impression.[99]

Our survey of that important, though inchoate, appeal to the subliminal
self which passes under the name of hypnotism is now nearly as
complete--in its brief sketchy form--as the present state of knowledge
permits.

I have attempted to trace the inevitable _rise_ of hypnotism--its
necessary development out of the spontaneous phenomena which preceded
and which might so naturally have suggested it. I have shown,
nevertheless, its almost accidental initiation, and then its rapid
development in ways which no single experimenter has ever been able to
correlate or to foresee. I am bound to say something further as to its
prospect in the future. A systematic appeal to the deeper powers in
man--conceived with the generality with which I have here conceived
it--cannot remain a mere appanage of medical practice. It must be fitted
on in some way to the whole serious life of man; it must present itself
to him as a development of faiths and instincts which lie already deep
in his heart. In other words, there must needs be some _scheme of
self-suggestion_,--some general theory which can give the individual a
basis for his appeal, whether he regards that appeal as directed to an
intelligence outside himself or to his own inherent faculties and
informing soul. These helps to the power of generalisation--to the
feeling of confidence--we must consider now.

The schemes of self-suggestion which have actually been found effective
have covered, not unnaturally, a range as wide as all the superstition
and all the religion of men. That is to say that each form of
supernatural belief in turn has been utilised as a means of securing
that urgently-needed temporal blessing--relief from physical pain. We
see the same tendency running through fetichistic, polytheistic,
monotheistic forms of belief. Beginning with fetichistic peoples, we
observe that _charms_ of various kinds,--inert objects, arbitrary
gestures, meaningless words,--have probably been actually the most
general means which our race has employed for the cure of disease. We
know how long some forms of primitive belief persisted in medicine,--as,
for example, the doctrine of _likenesses_, or the cure of a disease by
some object supposed to resemble its leading symptom. What is, however,
even more remarkable is the efficacy which charms still continue in some
cases to possess, even when they are worn merely as an experiment in
self-suggestion by a person who is perfectly well aware of their
intrinsic futility. Experiments on this subject seem to show that the
mere continual contact of some small unfamiliar object will often act as
a reminder to the subliminal self, and keep, at any rate, some nervous
disturbances in check. Until one reads these modern examples, one can
hardly realise how veritably potent for good may have been the savage
amulet, the savage incantation.

The transition from fetichistic to polytheistic conceptions of cure is,
of course, a gradual one. It may be said to begin when curative
properties are ascribed to objects not arbitrarily, nor on account of
the _look_ of the objects themselves, but on account of their having
been blessed or handled by some divine or semi-divine personage, or
having formed part of his body or surroundings during some incarnation.
Thus Lourdes water, bottled and exported, is still held to possess
curative virtue on account of the Virgin's original blessing bestowed
upon the Lourdes spring. But generally the influence of the divine or
divinised being is more directly exercised, as in oracles, dreams,
invisible touches, or actual _theophanies_, or appearances of the gods
to the adoring patient. It will be seen as we proceed how amply the
tradition of Lourdes has incorporated these ancient aids to faith.

But at this point our modern experience suggests to us a remarkable
interpolation in the antique chain of ideas. It is now alleged that
departed persons need not exert influence through their dead bones
alone, nor yet only by their supposed intermediacy with higher powers.
There intervenes, in fact, the whole topic of _spirit-healing_,--which
cannot, however, be treated fully here.

Next in the ascending scale from polytheism to monotheism we come to the
"Miracles of Lourdes," to which I have just alluded, where the supposed
healer is the Virgin Mary, reverenced as semi-divine. This form of
belief, however, retains (as has been said) some affinity with
fetichism, since the actual _water_ from the Lourdes spring, supposed to
have been blessed by the Virgin, is an important factor in the
cures.[100]

Much further removed from primitive belief is the appeal made by
Christian scientists to the aid of Jesus Christ;--either as directly
answering prayer, or as enabling the worshippers to comprehend the
infinite love on which the universe is based, and in face of which pain
and sickness become a vain imagination or even a sheer nonentity. To the
readers of this chapter, however, there will be nothing surprising in my
own inclination to include all these efforts at health under the general
category of schemes of self-suggestion.

In my view they are but crude attempts at a practical realisation of the
essential truth that it is possible by a right disposition of our own
minds to draw energy from an environing world of spiritual life.

It seems, at least, that no real explanation of hypnotic vitalisation
can, in fact, be given except upon the general theory supported in this
work--the theory that a world of spiritual life exists, an environment
profounder than those environments of matter and ether which in a sense
we know. Let us look at this hypothesis a little more closely. When we
say that an organism exists in a certain environment, we mean that its
energy, or some part thereof, forms an element in a certain system of
cosmic forces, which represents some special modification of the
ultimate energy. The life of the organism consists in its power of
interchanging energy with its environment,--of appropriating by its own
action some fragment of that pre-existent and limitless Power. We human
beings exist in the first place in a world of matter, whence we draw the
obvious sustenance of our bodily functions.

We exist also in a world of ether;--that is to say, we are constructed
to respond to a system of laws,--ultimately continuous, no doubt, with
the laws of matter, but affording a new, a generalised, a profounder
conception of the Cosmos. So widely different, indeed, is this new
aspect of things from the old, that it is common to speak of the ether
as a newly-known environment. On this environment our organic existence
depends as absolutely as on the material environment, although less
obviously. In ways which we cannot fathom, the ether is at the
foundation of our physical being. Perceiving heat, light, electricity,
we do but recognise in certain conspicuous ways,--as in perceiving the
"X rays" we recognise in a way less conspicuous,--the pervading
influence of etherial vibrations which in range and variety far
transcend our capacity of response.

Within, beyond, the world of ether,--as a still profounder, still more
generalised aspect of the Cosmos,--must lie, as I believe, the world of
spiritual life. That the world of spiritual life does not depend upon
the existence of the material world I hold as now proved by actual
evidence. That it is in some way continuous with the world of ether I
can well suppose. But for our minds there must needs be a "critical
point" in any such imagined continuity; so that the world where life and
thought are carried on apart from matter, must certainly rank again as a
new, a _metetherial_ environment. In giving it this name I expressly
imply only that from our human point of view it lies after or beyond the
ether, as metaphysic lies after or beyond physics. I say only that what
does not originate in matter or in ether originates _there_; but I well
believe that beyond the ether there must be not one stage only, but
countless stages in the infinity of things.

On this hypothesis there will be an essential concordance between all
views--spiritual or materialistic--which ascribe to any direction of
attention or will any practical effect upon the human organism. "The
prayer of faith shall save the sick," says St. James. "There is nothing
in hypnotism but suggestion," says Bernheim. In my clumsier language
these two statements (setting aside a possible telepathic element in St.
James' words) will be expressible in identical terms. "There will be
effective therapeutical or ethical self-suggestion whenever by any
artifice subliminal attention to a bodily function or to a moral purpose
is carried to some unknown pitch of intensity which draws energy from
the metetherial world."

A great practical question remains, to which St. James' words supply a
direct, though perhaps an inadequate answer, while Bernheim's words
supply no answer at all.

What is this saving faith to be, and how is it to be attained? Can we
find any sure way of touching the spring which moves us so potently, at
once from without and from within? Can we propose any form of
self-suggestion effective for all the human race? any controlling
thought on which all alike can fix that long-sought mountain-moving
faith?

Assuredly no man can extemporise such a faith as this. Whatever form it
may ultimately take, it must begin as the purification, the
intensification, of the purest, the intensest beliefs to which human
minds have yet attained. It must invoke the whole strength of all
philosophies, of all religions;--not indeed the special arguments or
evidence adduced for each, which lie outside my present theme, but all
the spiritual energy by which in truth they live. And so far as this
purpose goes, of drawing strength from the unseen, if one faith is true,
all faiths are true; in so far at least as human mind can grasp or human
prayer appropriate the unknown metetherial energy, the inscrutable Grace
of God.




