CHAPTER VI


VI. A. This case is taken from _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p.
94, having been contributed by Colonel Bigge, of 2 Morpeth Terrace,
S.W., who took the account out of a sealed envelope, in Gurney's
presence, for the first time since it was written on the day of the
occurrence.

     An account of a circumstance which occurred to me when quartered at
     Templemore, Co. Tipperary, on 20th February 1847.

     This afternoon, about 3 o'clock P.M., I was walking from my
     quarters towards the mess-room to put some letters into the
     letter-box, when I distinctly saw Lieut.-Colonel Reed, 70th
     Regiment, walking from the corner of the range of buildings
     occupied by the officers towards the mess-room door; and I saw him
     go into the passage. He was dressed in a brown shooting-jacket,
     with grey summer regulation tweed trousers, and had a fishing-rod
     and a landing-net in his hand. Although at the time I saw him he
     was about 15 or 20 yards from me, and although anxious to speak to
     him at the moment, I did not do so, but followed him into the
     passage and turned into the ante-room on the left-hand side, where
     I expected to find him. On opening the door, to my great surprise,
     he was not there; the only person in the room was Quartermaster
     Nolan, 70th Regiment, and I immediately asked him if he had seen
     the colonel, and he replied he had not; upon which I said, "I
     suppose he has gone upstairs," and I immediately left the room.
     Thinking he might have gone upstairs to one of the officers' rooms,
     I listened at the bottom of the stairs and then went up to the
     first landing-place; but not hearing anything I went downstairs
     again and tried to open the bedroom door, which is opposite to the
     ante-room, thinking he might have gone there; but I found the door
     locked, as it usually is in the middle of the day. I was very much
     surprised at not finding the colonel, and I walked into the
     barrack-yard and joined Lieutenant Caulfield, 66th Regiment, who
     was walking there; and I told the story to him, and particularly
     described the dress in which I had seen the colonel. We walked up
     and down the barrack-yard talking about it for about ten minutes,
     when, to my great surprise, never having kept my eye from the door
     leading to the mess-room (there is only one outlet from it), I saw
     the colonel walk into the barracks through the gate--which is in
     the opposite direction--accompanied by Ensign Willington, 70th
     Regiment, in precisely the same dress in which I had seen him, and
     with a fishing-rod and a landing-net in his hand. Lieutenant
     Caulfield and I immediately walked to them, and we were joined by
     Lieut.-Colonel Goldie, 66th Regiment, and Captain Hartford, and I
     asked Colonel Reed if he had not gone into the mess-room about ten
     minutes before. He replied that he certainly had not, for that he
     had been out fishing for more than two hours at some ponds about a
     mile from the barracks, and that he had not been near the mess-room
     at all since the morning.

     At the time I saw Colonel Reed going into the mess-room I was not
     aware that he had gone out fishing--a very unusual thing to do at
     this time of the year; neither had I seen him before in the dress I
     have described during that day. I had seen him in uniform in the
     morning at parade, but not afterwards at all until 3
     o'clock--having been engaged in my room writing letters, and upon
     other business. My eyesight being very good, and the colonel's
     figure and general appearance somewhat remarkable, it is morally
     impossible that I could have mistaken any other person in the world
     for him. That I _did_ see him I shall continue to believe until the
     last day of my existence.

WILLIAM MATTHEW BIGGE,
Major, 70th Regiment.

     [On July 17th, 1885, after Colonel Bigge had described the
     occurrence but before the account was taken from the envelope and
     read, he dictated the following remarks to Gurney:--]

     When Colonel R. got off the car about a couple of hours afterwards,
     Colonel Goldie and other officers said to me, "Why, that's the very
     dress you described." They had not known where he was or how he was
     engaged. The month, February, was a most unlikely one to be fishing
     in. Colonel Reed was much alarmed when told what I had seen.

     The quartermaster, sitting at the window, would have been bound to
     see a real figure; he denied having seen anything.

     I have never had the slightest hallucination of the senses on any
     other occasion.

     [It will be seen that these recent remarks exhibit two slips of
     memory. It is quite unimportant whether Colonel Reed was seen
     walking in at the gate or getting off a car. But in making the
     interval between the vision and the return two hours instead of ten
     minutes, the later account unduly diminishes the force of the case.
     If there is any justification at all for the provisional hypothesis
     that the sense of impending arrival is a condition favourable for
     the emission of a telepathic influence, it is of importance that,
     at the time when the phantasmal form was seen, Colonel Reed was not
     busy with his fishing, but was rapidly approaching his destination;
     for thus the incident, at any rate, gets the benefit of analogy
     with other cases.]


VI. B. From the _Journal_ S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 129. The case is recorded
by the Misses H. M. and L. Bourne.

Additional evidence of the hallucinatory character of the figure seen is
afforded by the details having been more clearly discernible than those
of a real figure at the same distance would have been, and also by the
second appearance, where the percipient had the impression of being
transported to a different scene.

Miss L. Bourne writes:--

     On February 5th, 1887, my father, sister, and I went out hunting.
     About the middle of the day my sister and I decided to return home
     with the coachman, while my father went on. Somebody came and spoke
     to us, and delayed us for a few moments. As we were turning to go
     home, we distinctly saw my father, waving his hat to us and signing
     us to follow him. He was on the side of a small hill, and there was
     a dip between him and us. My sister, the coachman, and myself all
     recognised my father, and also the horse. The horse looked so dirty
     and shaken that the coachman remarked he thought there had been a
     nasty accident. As my father waved his hat I clearly saw the
     Lincoln and Bennett mark inside, though from the distance we were
     apart it ought to have been utterly impossible for me to have seen
     it. At the time I mentioned seeing the mark in the hat, though the
     strangeness of seeing it did not strike me till afterwards.

     Fearing an accident, we hurried down the hill. From the nature of
     the ground we had to lose sight of my father, but it took us very
     few seconds to reach the place where we had seen him. When we got
     there, there was no sign of him anywhere, nor could we see anyone
     in sight at all. We rode about for some time looking for him, but
     could not see or hear anything of him. We all reached home within a
     quarter of an hour of each other. My father then told us he had
     never been in the field, nor near the field, in which we thought we
     saw him, the whole of that day. He had never waved to us, and had
     met with no accident.

     My father was riding the only white horse that was out that day.

LOUISA BOURNE.
H. M. Bourne.

The second signature was added later, with the words: "This was written
by my sister and me together."

Miss H. M. Bourne enclosed the above in the following letter to Mrs.
Dent, to whom we are indebted for the case:--


WESTON SUBEDGE, BROADWAY, WORCESTERSHIRE, _May 21st, 1891_.

     MY DEAR MRS. DENT,--Louisa has asked me send you the enclosed
     account of the impression she, the coachman, and I had of seeing
     papa on Paddy in the hunting-field. It was on the 5th February 1887
     it happened, and in March the same year, when I was out walking
     alone, I thought I saw papa and Paddy stop at a little plantation
     of his close to, and look at the wall, which had fallen in [in] one
     part. He then appeared to ride a few yards towards me, but
     afterwards turned round and went back past the plantation and out
     of sight. When I went in I asked him if he had not seen me, and why
     he turned back, when it transpired he had not been past that
     plantation all day, but had ridden home another way. He said it
     must have been some one else on a white horse, and asked where I
     was when I saw him, and then, not before, it dawned on me that it
     was utterly impossible to see either plantation or wall from where
     I was. Since then I have often been along the same road, and stood,
     and looked, and wondered how it was I so distinctly saw the broken
     wall and papa on the white horse; a turn in the road makes my
     having really done so quite impossible. I am sorry I cannot give
     you the exact date of this: I know it was in March 1887, but cannot
     remember the day, except that it was _not_ on the 5th. The other
     "experience" is, I always think, far more interesting, as having
     been seen by three, and also from the fact that Paddy was the only
     white or grey horse in the hunting-field that day; so that
     unbelievers could not say it was some one else on a white horse
     that we had mistaken....

NINA M. BOURNE.

Mrs. Sidgwick writes:--


_February 25th, 1892._

     I saw Miss H. Bourne and her father this afternoon. Miss Bourne
     told me the stories of her seeing her father, first with her
     sister, and later by herself, and signed the account which she and
     her sister had, she says, made out together about it. The groom who
     saw the figure at the same time has since been dismissed, and
     cannot be asked for his evidence. Canon Bourne remembers hearing of
     the matter the day it happened. The groom rode up to the ladies as
     they were looking, and said: "The Canon is beckoning, Miss, and I
     think you had better go to him; his horse looks as if he had had a
     fall" (that is, muddy). The figure was beckoning to them with their
     father's usual (and peculiar) gesture. He is a heavy man, and his
     white horse, adapted to carry weight, was quite unlike any other
     horse in the neighbourhood. Every one agrees as to the
     impossibility of mistaking the horse. The horses of the
     neighbourhood were well known to the neighbourhood in general and
     to the Miss Bournes in particular, as they were at that time
     constantly out with the hounds. The incident seems quite
     unaccountable.


VI. C. From _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 214. We received the
first account of this case--the percipient's evidence--through the
kindness of Mrs. Martin, of Ham Court, Upton-on-Severn, Worcester.


ANTONY, TORPOINT, _December 14th, 1882_.

     Helen Alexander (maid to Lady Waldegrave) was lying here very ill
     with typhoid fever, and was attended by me. I was standing at the
     table by her bedside, pouring out her medicine, at about 4 o'clock
     in the morning of the 4th October 1880. I heard the call-bell ring
     (this had been heard twice before during the night in that same
     week), and was attracted by the door of the room opening, and by
     seeing a person entering the room whom I instantly felt to be the
     mother of the sick woman. She had a brass candlestick in her hand,
     a red shawl over her shoulders, and a flannel petticoat on which
     had a hole in the front. I looked at her as much as to say, "I am
     glad you have come," but the woman looked at me sternly, as much as
     to say, "Why wasn't I sent for before?" I gave the medicine to
     Helen Alexander, and then turned round to speak to the vision, but
     no one was there. She had gone. She was a short, dark person, and
     very stout. At about 6 o'clock that morning Helen Alexander died.
     Two days after her parents and a sister came to Antony, and arrived
     between 1 and 2 o'clock in the morning; I and another maid let them
     in, and it gave me a great turn when I saw the living likeness of
     the vision I had seen two nights before. I told the sister about
     the vision, and she said that the description of the dress exactly
     answered to her mother's, and that they had brass candlesticks at
     home exactly like the one described. There was not the slightest
     resemblance between the mother and daughter.

FRANCES REDDELL.

This at first sight might be taken for a mere delusion of an excitable
or over-tired servant, modified and exaggerated by the subsequent sight
of the real mother. If such a case is to have evidential force, we must
ascertain beyond doubt that the description of the experience was given
in detail before any knowledge of the reality can have affected the
percipient's memory or imagination. This necessary corroboration has
been kindly supplied by Mrs. Pole-Carew, of Antony, Torpoint, Devonport.


_December 31st, 1883._

     In October, 1880, Lord and Lady Waldegrave came with their Scotch
     maid, Helen Alexander, to stay with us. [The account then describes
     how Helen was discovered to have caught typhoid fever.] She did not
     seem to be very ill in spite of it, and as there seemed no fear of
     danger, and Lord and Lady Waldegrave had to go a long journey the
     following day (Thursday), they decided to leave her, as they were
     advised to do, under their friend's care.

     The illness ran its usual course, and she seemed to be going on
     perfectly well till the Sunday week following, when the doctor told
     me that the fever had left her, but the state of weakness which had
     supervened was such as to make him extremely anxious. I immediately
     engaged a regular nurse, greatly against the wish of Reddell, my
     maid, who had been her chief nurse all through the illness, and who
     was quite devoted to her. However, as the nurse could not
     conveniently come till the following day, I allowed Reddell to sit
     up with Helen again that night, to give her the medicine and food,
     which were to be taken constantly.

     At about 4.30 that night, or rather Monday morning, Reddell looked
     at her watch, poured out the medicine, and was bending over the bed
     to give it to Helen, when the call-bell in the passage rang. She
     said to herself, "There's that tiresome bell with the wire caught
     again." (It seems it did occasionally ring of itself in this
     manner.) At that moment, however, she heard the door open and,
     looking round, saw a very stout old woman walk in. She was dressed
     in a night-gown and red flannel petticoat, and carried an
     old-fashioned brass candlestick in her hand. The petticoat had a
     hole rubbed in it. She walked into the room, and appeared to be
     going towards the dressing-table to put her candle down. She was a
     perfect stranger to Reddell, who, however, merely thought, "This is
     her mother come to see after her," and she felt quite glad it was
     so, accepting the idea without reasoning upon it, as one would in a
     dream. She thought the mother looked annoyed, possibly at not
     having been sent for before. She then gave Helen the medicine, and
     turning round, found that the apparition had disappeared, and that
     the door was shut. A great change, meanwhile, had taken place in
     Helen, and Reddell fetched me, who sent off for the doctor, and
     meanwhile applied hot poultices, etc., but Helen died a little
     before the doctor came. She was quite conscious up to about half an
     hour before she died, when she seemed to be going to sleep.

     During the early days of her illness, Helen had written to a
     sister, mentioning her being unwell, but making nothing of it, and
     as she never mentioned any one but this sister, it was supposed by
     the household, to whom she was a perfect stranger, that she had no
     other relation alive. Reddell was always offering to write for her,
     but she always declined, saying there was no need, she would write
     herself in a day or two. No one at home, therefore, knew anything
     of her being so ill, and it is, therefore, remarkable, that her
     mother, a far from nervous person, should have said that evening
     going up to bed, "I am sure Helen is very ill."

     Reddell told me and my daughter of the apparition, about an hour
     after Helen's death, prefacing with, "I am not superstitious, or
     nervous, and I wasn't the least frightened, but her mother came
     last night," and she then told the story, giving a careful
     description of the figure she had seen. The relations were asked to
     come to the funeral, and the father, mother, and sister came, and
     in the mother Reddell recognised the apparition, as I did also, for
     Reddell's description had been most accurate, even to the
     expression, which she had ascribed to annoyance, but which was due
     to deafness. It was judged best not to speak about it to the
     mother, but Reddell told the sister, who said the description of
     the figure corresponded exactly with the probable appearance of her
     mother if roused in the night; that they had exactly such a
     candlestick at home, and that there was a hole in her mother's
     petticoat produced by the way she always wore it. It seems curious
     that neither Helen nor her mother appeared to be aware of the
     visit. Neither of them, at any rate, ever spoke of having seen the
     other, nor even of having dreamt of having done so.

F. A. POLE-CAREW.

     [Frances Reddell states that she has never had any hallucination,
     or any odd experience of any kind, except on this one occasion. The
     Hon. Mrs. Lyttelton, formerly of Selwyn College, Cambridge, who
     knows her, tells us that "she appears to be a most matter-of-fact
     person, and was apparently most impressed by the fact that she saw
     a hole in the mother's flannel petticoat, made by the busk of her
     stays, reproduced in the apparition."]

Now what I imagine to have happened here is this. The mother, anxious
about her daughter, paid her a psychical visit during the sleep of both.
In so doing she actually modified a certain portion of space, not
materially nor optically, but in such a manner that persons perceptive
in a certain fashion would discern in that part of space an image
approximately corresponding to the conception of her own aspect latent
in the invading mother's mind. A person thus susceptible happened to be
in the room, and thus, as a bystander, witnessed a psychical invasion
whose memory the invader apparently did not retain, while the invaded
person--the due percipient--may or may not have perceived it in a dream,
but died and left no sign of having done so.


VI. D. From the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations," _Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. x. p. 332. The account is given by Mrs. McAlpine.


GARSCADDEN, BEARDSDEN, GLASGOW, _April 20th, 1892_.

     I remember in the June of 1889, I drove to Castleblaney, a little
     town in the county Monaghan, to meet my sister, who was coming by
     train from Longford. I expected her at three o'clock, but as she
     did not come with that train, I got the horse put up, and went for
     a walk in the demesne. The day was very warm and bright, and I
     wandered on under the shade of the trees to the side of a lake,
     which is in the demesne. Being at length tired, I sat down to rest
     upon a rock, at the edge of the water. My attention was quite taken
     up with the extreme beauty of the scene before me. There was not a
     sound or movement, except the soft ripple of the water on the sand
     at my feet. Presently I felt a cold chill creep through me, and a
     curious stiffness of my limbs, as if I _could_ not move, though
     wishing to do so. I felt frightened, yet chained to the spot, and
     as if impelled to stare at the water straight in front of me.
     Gradually a black cloud seemed to rise, and in the midst of it I
     saw a tall man, in a suit of tweed, jump into the water and sink.

     In a moment the darkness was gone, and I again became sensible of
     the heat and sunshine, but I was awed and felt "eerie"--it was then
     about four o'clock or so--I cannot remember either the exact time
     or date. On my sister's arrival I told her of the occurrence; she
     was surprised, but inclined to laugh at it. When we got home I told
     my brother; he treated the subject much in the same manner.
     However, about a week afterwards, Mr. Espie, a bank clerk (unknown
     to me), committed suicide by drowning in that very spot. He left a
     letter for his wife, indicating that he had for some time
     contemplated his death. My sister's memory of the event is the only
     evidence I can give. I did not see the account of the inquest at
     the time, and did not mention my strange experience to any one,
     saving my sister and brother.

F. C. MCALPINE.

Mrs. McAlpine's sister writes:--


ROXBORO', _February 15th, 1892_.

     I remember perfectly you meeting me in Castleblaney, on my way home
     from Longford, and telling me of the strange thing which happened
     in the demesne. You know you were always hearing or seeing
     something and I paid little attention; but I remember it
     distinctly--your troubled expression more than the story. You said
     a tall gentleman, dressed in tweed, walked past you, and went into
     a little inlet or creek. I think, but am not sure, that you said he
     had a beard. You were troubled about it, or looked so; and I talked
     of other things. You told me while we were driving home. I think,
     but I am not sure, that it was about the 25th or 27th of June 1889
     that I left Longford. I am sure of that being the day, but cannot
     remember the date. _It was in June_, and on the 3rd of July, 1889,
     a Mr. Espie, a bank clerk, drowned himself in the lake in the
     demesne in 'Blaney. I have no doubt that the day I came home you
     saw Mr. Espie's "fetch."

The following account is taken from a local paper, the _Northern
Standard_, Saturday, July 6th, 1889:--

     _Sad Case of Suicide._--The town of Castleblaney was put into a
     fearful state of excitement when it became known on Wednesday last
     that Mr. Espy had committed suicide by drowning himself in the lake
     in the demesne. Latterly, he was noticed to be rather dull and low
     in spirits, but no serious notice was taken of his conduct, nor had
     any one the most remote idea that he contemplated suicide. On
     Wednesday morning he seemed in his usual health, and, as was
     customary with him, walked down to get his newspaper on the arrival
     of the 9.45 train from Dublin. He met Mr. Fox (in whose office he
     has been for years) at the station, and having procured his paper
     walked up to the office, wrote a note in which he stated what he
     was going to do, and indicating where his body would be found. This
     seemed to concern him a good deal, for he seemed very anxious that
     his body should be recovered without any delay. He had
     fishing-tackle in his pocket, and having tied one end of a
     pike-line to a tree, and the other end round one of his legs, he
     threw himself into about three feet deep of water, where he was
     found shortly afterwards quite dead, and before the note that he
     had left in the office had been opened.

It would be possible, no doubt, to explain this appearance as simply
precognitive--as a picture from the future impressed in some unknown way
upon the percipient's inner vision. There are certain cases which
strongly suggest this extreme hypothesis. But it seems here simpler to
assume that the unhappy man was already imagining his plunge into the
lake when Mrs. McAlpine visited the shore, and that his intense thought
effected a self-projection, conscious or unconscious, of some element of
his being.


VI. E. From _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p. 239. Mrs. Elgee, of
18 Woburn Road, Bedford, gave the following account:--


_March 1st, 1885._

     In the month of November 1864, being detained in Cairo, on my way
     out to India, the following curious circumstance occurred to me:--

     Owing to an unusual influx of travellers, I, with the young lady
     under my charge (whom we will call D.) and some other passengers of
     the outward-bound mail to India, had to take up our abode in a
     somewhat unfrequented hotel. The room shared by Miss D. and myself
     was large, lofty, and gloomy; the furniture of the scantiest,
     consisting of two small beds, placed nearly in the middle of the
     room and not touching the walls at all, two or three rush-bottomed
     chairs, a very small washing stand, and a large old-fashioned sofa
     of the settee sort, which was placed against one half of the large
     folding doors which gave entrance to the room. This settee was far
     too heavy to be removed, unless by two or three people. The other
     half of the door was used for entrance, and faced the two beds.
     Feeling rather desolate and strange, and Miss D. being a nervous
     person, I locked the door, and, taking out the key, put it under my
     pillow; but on Miss D. remarking that there might be a duplicate
     which could open the door from outside, I put a chair against the
     door, with my travelling bag on it, so arranged that, on any
     pressure outside, one or both must fall on the bare floor, and make
     noise enough to rouse me. We then proceeded to retire to bed, the
     one I had chosen being near the only window in the room, which
     opened with two glazed doors, almost to the floor. These doors, on
     account of the heat, I left open, first assuring myself that no
     communication from the outside could be obtained. The window led on
     to a small balcony, which was isolated, and was three stories above
     the ground.

     I suddenly woke from a sound sleep with the impression that
     somebody had called me, and, sitting up in bed, to my unbounded
     astonishment, by the clear light of early dawn coming in through
     the large window before mentioned, I beheld the figure of an old
     and very valued friend whom I knew to be in England. He appeared as
     if most eager to speak to me, and I addressed him with, "Good
     gracious! how did you come here?" So clear was the figure, that I
     noted every detail of his dress, even to three onyx shirt-studs
     which he always wore. He seemed to come a step nearer to me, when
     he suddenly pointed across the room, and on my looking round, I saw
     Miss D. sitting up in her bed, gazing at the figure with every
     expression of terror. On looking back, my friend seemed to shake
     his head, and retreated step by step, slowly, till he seemed to
     sink through that portion of the door where the settee stood. I
     never knew what happened to me after this; but my next remembrance
     is of bright sunshine pouring through the window. Gradually the
     remembrance of what had happened came back to me, and the question
     arose in my mind, had I been dreaming, or had I seen a visitant
     from another world?--the bodily presence of my friend being utterly
     impossible. Remembering that Miss D. had seemed aware of the figure
     as well as myself, I determined to allow the test of my dream or
     vision to be whatever she said to me upon the subject, I intending
     to say nothing to her unless she spoke to me. As she seemed still
     asleep, I got out of bed, examined the door carefully, and found
     the chair and my bag untouched, and the key under my pillow; the
     settee had not been touched nor had that portion of the door
     against which it was placed any appearance of being opened for
     years.

     Presently, on Miss D. waking up, she looked about the room, and,
     noticing the chair and bag, made some remark as to their not having
     been much use. I said, "What do you mean?" and then she said, "Why,
     that man who was in the room this morning must have got in
     somehow." She then proceeded to describe to me exactly what I
     myself had seen. Without giving any satisfactory answer as to what
     I had seen, I made her rather angry by affecting to treat the
     matter as a fancy on her part, and showed her the key still under
     my pillow, and the chair and bag untouched. I then asked her, if
     she was so sure that she had seen somebody in the room, did not she
     know who it was? "No," said she, "I have never seen him before, nor
     any one like him." I said, "Have you ever seen a photograph of
     him?" She said, "No." This lady never was told what I saw, and yet
     described exactly to a third person what we both had seen.

     Of course, I was under the impression my friend was dead. Such,
     however, was not the case; and I met him some four years later,
     when, without telling him anything of my experience in Cairo, I
     asked him, in a joking way, could he remember what he was doing on
     a certain night in November 1864. "Well," he said, "you require me
     to have a good memory;" but after a little reflection he replied,
     "Why, that was the time I was so harassed with trying to decide for
     or against the appointment which was offered me, and I so much
     wished you could have been with me to talk the matter over. I sat
     over the fire quite late, trying to think what you would have
     advised me to do." A little cross-questioning and comparing of
     dates brought out the curious fact that, allowing for the
     difference of time between England and Cairo, his meditations over
     the fire and my experience were simultaneous. Having told him the
     circumstances above narrated, I asked him had he been aware of any
     peculiar or unusual sensation. He said none, only that he had
     wanted to see me very much.

E. H. ELGEE.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Elgee says:--

     I fear it is quite impossible to get any information from Miss D.
     She married soon after we reached India, and I never met her since,
     nor do I know where she is, if alive. I quite understand the value
     of her corroboration; and at the time she told the whole
     circumstance to a fellow-traveller, who repeated it to me, and her
     story and mine agreed in every particular, save that to her the
     visitant was a complete stranger; and her tale was quite unbiassed
     by mine, as I always treated hers as a fancy, and _never_
     acknowledged I had been aware of anything unusual having taken
     place in our room at Cairo. I never have seen, or fancied I saw,
     any one before or since.

     My visitant, also, is dead, or he would, I know, have added his
     testimony, small as it was, to mine. He was a very calm, quiet,
     clever, scientific man, not given to vain fancies on any subject,
     and certainly was not aware of any desire of appearing to me.

The publication of _Phantasms of the Living_ led fortunately to our
obtaining the testimony of the second percipient, now Mrs. Ramsay, of
Clevelands, Bassett, Southampton, whose account follows:--


_July 1891._

     I have been asked by a leading member of the Psychical Society to
     write down what I can remember of a strange experience that
     occurred no less than twenty-seven years ago. I now do so as simply
     as I can, and to the best of my recollection.

     In October 1864, I was travelling to India, going to rejoin my
     parents, from whom I had been separated twelve years, a kind
     friend--a Mrs. E.--having undertaken to chaperon me as far as
     Calcutta. She was going out to join her husband, Major E., of the
     23rd Royal Welsh Fusiliers. We started by a P. & O steamer--the
     _Ceylon_--from Southampton, and travelled by the overland route,
     _via_ Alexandria and Cairo, to Suez.

     We landed at Alexandria, and went by rail across the desert to
     Cairo. There all passengers had to sleep the night before
     proceeding on to Suez. Shepherd's Hotel was the best hotel then,
     and there was consequently a great rush to try and get rooms in it;
     but Mrs. E. and I, finding we could get no corner, decided, with
     two or three other passengers, to get accommodation in the Hôtel de
     l'Europe. We felt somewhat nervous at the swarthy visages of the
     Arabs all round us, and for this reason selected our quarters on
     the very highest storey, thinking we should be more out of reach of
     robbers and thieves than if we were on the ground floor. This is an
     important point to remember, as no one could have effected an
     entrance into our room from outside. It was a bright moonlight
     night when we went to bed, and I can recollect as if it were
     yesterday this fact, that the shadow of a "pepul" tree was
     reflected on the wall opposite our beds--the leaves of the tree
     were trembling and shaking, as the leaves of a "pepul" always do,
     making the shadows dance about the wall.

     Before we finally retired to rest we made the grandest arrangements
     for personal security! The window looking out on to the street
     below was much too high up to be at all unsafe. So we left that
     open (I think) but we closed our door very firmly indeed! It was a
     large folding door, and opened _inwards_. We locked it carefully,
     leaving the key in the lock; pushed an arm-chair against the middle
     of the door; and, to crown all, we balanced a hand-bag on one of
     the arms, with a bunch of keys in the lock thereof! so that if any
     intruder should venture to open that door, we should _know_ of it
     at any rate!! (But no one did venture, and we found everything in
     the morning exactly as we had left it.) I remember that Mrs. E. was
     very careful about tucking her mosquito curtains all round, but I
     disliked the feeling of suffocation they gave, and put mine up; not
     realising, of course, in my inexperience, what the consequences
     would be for myself; for these small plagues of Egypt (!) soon
     descended upon me, nearly eating me up, and absolutely prevented
     sleep. This is another important fact to remember, for had I slept
     I might have dreamed, but, as it happened, I was wide awake. I was
     looking at the shadows of the tree shaking on the wall when
     gradually they seemed to merge into a form, which form took the
     shape of a man, not of an Arab, but of an English gentleman. Then
     this form glided into the room, advancing towards my chaperon,
     stretching out his hands as if in blessing, turned round, looked at
     me, sadly and sorrowfully (so I thought), and then vanished again
     into the shadows as it came. I do not remember feeling terrified,
     only awed--the face was so kind and human, only the moonlight made
     it look very white. I did not wake Mrs. E., as she appeared to me
     to be asleep. I felt sure I had seen a vision, and something that
     had to do with her.

     The next morning, while we were dressing, she remarked how odd I
     looked, and quite apart from the mosquito bites, I know I did. We
     had a good laugh over my comical appearance, for I had not scrupled
     to scratch the bites, until my forehead and face resembled a plum
     bun! I believe I then told her it was not strange that I should
     look odd, for I "had seen a ghost." She started violently, and
     asked me to tell her what I saw. I described it as best I could,
     and _she said she had seen "it" too_, and that she knew it to be
     the form and face of a valued friend. She was much disturbed about
     it--as, indeed, so was I, for I had never indulged in
     "hallucinations" and was not given to seeing visions.

     We proceeded next day to join our ship at Suez, and when on board,
     it was a great relief to us to be able to tell it to a kind
     fellow-passenger. He was an absolute sceptic in all matters
     relating to the invisible world, but he was obliged to admit that
     it was the most extraordinary thing he had ever heard.... I should
     like to add that I have never, before or since, had any kind of
     vision.

     Our experience at Cairo had this sequel, that Mrs. E.'s
     spirit-friend happened to be, at that very time, in great
     perplexity of mind--most anxious about some very important event in
     his life. He was sitting in his room one night in the month of
     October 1864, and a most intense yearning came over him for her
     advice and assistance--so great was it, that he felt as if an
     invisible power had drawn him into some spirit-state, in which he
     could and did see her.[224]

For a somewhat similar case, that of the apparition of General Frémont
(too lengthy to quote here), I may refer the reader to the _Journal_
S.P.R., vol. v. p. 54. The crisis there is the removal of long and
wearing anxiety; the self-projection into the home-scene which now at
last the General felt assured of being able to reach alive.


VI. F. From _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. pp. 104-109. The
following case was especially remarkable in that there were two
percipients. The narrative was copied by Gurney from a MS. book of Mr.
S. H. B.'s, to which he transferred it from an almanac diary, since
lost.

     On a certain Sunday evening in November 1881, having been reading
     of the great power which the human will is capable of exercising, I
     determined with the whole force of my being, that I would be
     present in spirit in the front bed-room on the second floor of a
     house situated at 22 Hogarth Road, Kensington, in which room slept
     two ladies of my acquaintance, viz., Miss L. S. V. and Miss E. C.
     V., aged respectively 25 and 11 years. I was living at this time at
     23 Kildare Gardens, a distance of about three miles from Hogarth
     Road, and I had not mentioned in any way my intention of trying
     this experiment to either of the above ladies, for the simple
     reason that it was only on retiring to rest upon this Sunday night
     that I made up my mind to do so. The time at which I determined I
     would be there was 1 o'clock in the morning, and I also had a
     strong intention of making my presence perceptible.

     On the following Thursday I went to see the ladies in question, and
     in the course of conversation (without any allusion to the subject
     on my part) the elder one told me, that on the previous Sunday
     night she had been much terrified by perceiving me standing by her
     bedside, and that she screamed when the apparition advanced towards
     her, and awoke her little sister, who saw me also.

     I asked her if she was awake at the time, and she replied most
     decidedly in the affirmative, and upon my inquiring the time of the
     occurrence, she replied, about 1 o'clock in the morning.

     This lady, at my request, wrote down a statement of the event and
     signed it.

     This was the first occasion upon which I tried an experiment of
     this kind, and its complete success startled me very much.

     Besides exercising my power of volition very strongly, I put forth
     an effort which I cannot find words to describe. I was conscious of
     a mysterious influence of some sort permeating in my body, and had
     a distinct impression that I was exercising some force with which I
     had been hitherto unacquainted, but which I can now at certain
     times set in motion at will.

S. H. B.

Of the original entry in the almanac diary, Mr. B. says: "I recollect
having made it within a week or so of the occurrence of the experiment,
and whilst it was perfectly fresh in my memory."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Verity's account is as follows:--


_January 18th, 1883._

     On a certain Sunday evening, about twelve months since, at our
     house in Hogarth Road, Kensington, I distinctly saw Mr. B. in my
     room, about 1 o'clock. I was perfectly awake and was much
     terrified. I awoke my sister by screaming, and she saw the
     apparition herself. Three days after, when I saw Mr. B., I told him
     what had happened, but it was some time before I could recover from
     the shock I had received; and the remembrance is too vivid to be
     ever erased from my memory.

L. S. VERITY.

In answer to inquiries, Miss Verity adds: "I had never had any
hallucination of the senses of any sort whatever."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss E. C. Verity says:--

     I remember the occurrence of the event described by my sister in
     the annexed paragraph, and her description is quite correct. I saw
     the apparition which she saw, at the same time and under the same
     circumstances.

E. C. VERITY.

Miss A. S. Verity says:--

     I remember quite clearly the evening my eldest sister awoke me by
     calling to me from an adjoining room; and upon my going to her
     bedside, where she slept with my youngest sister, they both told me
     they had seen S. H. B. standing in the room. The time was about 1
     o'clock. S. H. B. was in evening dress, they told me.

A. S. VERITY.

Mr. B. does not remember how he was dressed on the night of the
occurrence.

Miss E. C. Verity was asleep when her sister caught sight of the figure,
and was awoke by her sister's exclaiming, "There is S." The name had
therefore met her ear before she herself saw the figure; and the
hallucination on her part might thus be attributed to suggestion. But it
is against this view that she has never had any other hallucination, and
cannot therefore be considered as predisposed to such experiences. The
sisters are both equally certain that the figure was in evening dress,
and that it stood in one particular spot in the room. The gas was
burning low, and the phantasmal figure was seen with far more clearness
than a real figure would have been.

"The witnesses" (says Gurney) "have been very carefully cross-examined
by the present writer. There is not the slightest doubt that their
mention of the occurrence to S. H. B. was spontaneous. They had not at
first intended to mention it; but when they saw him, their sense of its
oddness overcame their resolution. Miss Verity is a perfectly
sober-minded and sensible witness, with no love of marvels, and with a
considerable dread and dislike of this particular form of marvel."

[I omit here for want of space the next case, in which Mr. S. H. B.
attempted to appear in Miss Verity's house at two different hours on the
same evening, and was seen there, at both the times fixed, by a married
sister who was visiting in the house.]

Gurney requested Mr. B. to send him a note on the night that he intended
to make his next experiment of the kind, and received the following note
by the first post on Monday, March 24th, 1884.


_March 22nd, 1884._

     DEAR MR. GURNEY,--I am going to try the experiment to-night of
     making my presence perceptible at 44 Norland Square, at 12 P.M. I
     will let you know the result in a few days.--Yours very sincerely,

S. H. B.

The next letter was received in the course of the following week:--


_April 3rd, 1884._

     DEAR MR. GURNEY,--I have a strange statement to show you,
     respecting my experiment, which was tried at your suggestion, and
     under the test conditions which you imposed.

     Having quite forgotten which night it was on which I attempted the
     projection, I cannot say whether the result is a brilliant success,
     or only a slight one, until I see the letter which I posted you on
     the evening of the experiment.

     Having sent you that letter, I did not deem it necessary to make a
     note in my diary, and consequently have let the exact date slip my
     memory.

     If the dates correspond, the success is complete in every detail,
     and I have an account signed and witnessed to show you.

     I saw the lady (who was the subject) for the first time last night,
     since the experiment, and she made a voluntary statement to me,
     which I wrote down at her dictation, and to which she has attached
     her signature. The date and time of the apparition are specified in
     this statement, and it will be for you to decide whether they are
     identical with those given in my letter to you. I have completely
     forgotten, but yet I fancy that they are the same.

S. H. B.

This is the statement:--


44 NORLAND SQUARE, W.

     On Saturday night, March 22nd, 1884, at about midnight, I had a
     distinct impression that Mr. S. H. B. was present in my room, and I
     distinctly saw him whilst I was quite widely awake. He came towards
     me, and stroked my hair. I _voluntarily_ gave him this information,
     when he called to see me on Wednesday, April 2nd, telling him the
     time and the circumstances of the apparition, without any
     suggestion on his part. The appearance in my room was most vivid,
     and quite unmistakable.

L. S. VERITY.

Miss A. S. Verity corroborates as follows:--

     I remember my sister telling me that she had seen S. H. B., and
     that he had touched her hair, _before_ he came to see us on April
     2nd.

A. S. V.

Mr. B.'s own account is as follows:--

     On Saturday, March 22nd, I determined to make my presence
     perceptible to Miss V., at 44 Norland Square, Notting Hill, at 12
     midnight, and as I had previously arranged with Mr. Gurney that I
     should post him a letter on the evening on which I tried my next
     experiment (stating the time and other particulars), I sent a note
     to acquaint him with the above facts.

     About ten days afterwards I called upon Miss V., and she
     voluntarily told me, that on March 22nd, at 12 o'clock midnight,
     she had seen me so vividly in her room (whilst widely awake) that
     her nerves had been much shaken, and she had been obliged to send
     for a doctor in the morning.

S. H. B.

Unfortunately Mr. B.'s intention to produce the impression of touching
the percipient's hair is not included in his written account. On August
21st, 1885, he wrote to Gurney, "I remember that I had this intention";
and Gurney remembered that, very soon after the occurrence, he mentioned
this as one of the points which made the success "complete in every
detail"; and that he recommended him in any future trial to endeavour
instead to produce the impression of some spoken phrase.

On this case, Gurney observes:--

     It will be observed that in all these instances the conditions were
     the same--the agent concentrating his thoughts on the object in
     view before going to sleep. Mr. B. has never succeeded in producing
     a similar effect when he has been awake. And this restriction as to
     time has made it difficult to devise a plan by which the phenomenon
     could be tested by independent observers, one of whom might arrange
     to be in the company of the agent at a given time, and the other in
     that of the percipient. Nor is it easy to press for repetitions of
     the experiment, which is not an agreeable one to the percipient,
     and is followed by a considerable amount of nervous prostration.
     Moreover, if trials were frequently made with the same percipient,
     the value of success would diminish; for any latent expectation on
     the percipient's part might be argued to be itself productive of
     the delusion, and the coincidence with the agent's resolve might be
     explained as accidental. We have, of course, requested Mr. B. to
     try to produce the effect on ourselves; but though he has more than
     once made the attempt, it has not succeeded.




APPENDICES

TO

