Chapter IX., there is apparently something more besides. We see, in
short, that any empirical inlet into the metetherial world is apt to
show us those powers, which we try to distinguish, coexisting in some
synthesis by us incomprehensible. Here, therefore, just as with the
crystal-visions, we have artificially to separate out the special class
of phenomena with which we wish first to deal.

In these experiments, then, there seems to be an independent power of
visiting almost any desired place, its position having been perhaps
first explained by reference to some landmark already known. The
clairvoyante (I use the female word, but in several cases a man or boy
has shown this power) will frequently miss her way, and describe houses
or scenes adjacent to those desired. Then if she--almost literally--gets
on the scent,--if she finds some place which the man whom she is sent
to seek has some time traversed,--she follows up his track with greater
ease, apparently recognising past events in his life as well as present
circumstances.

In these prolonged experimental cases there is thus time enough to allow
of the clairvoyante's traversing certain places, such as empty rooms,
factories, and the like, whither no assignable link from any living
person could draw her. The evidence to prove telæsthesia, unmixed with
telepathy, has thus generally come _incidentally_ in the course of some
experiment mainly telepathic in character.

These long clairvoyant wanderings are more nearly paralleled by _dreams_
than by waking hallucinations.

In a case which I will here quote a physician is impressed, probably in
dream, with a picture of a special place in a street, where something is
happening, which, though in itself unemotional--merely that a man is
standing and talking in the street--is of moment to the physician, who
wants to get unobtrusively into the man's house.

From _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 267. The case is there
described as coming "from a Fellow of the College of Physicians, who
fears professional injury if he were 'supposed to defend opinions at
variance with general scientific belief,' and does not therefore allow
his name to appear."


_May 20th, 1884._

     Twenty years ago [abroad] I had a patient, wife of a parson. She
     had a peculiar kind of delirium which did not belong to her
     disease, and perplexed me. The house in which she lived was closed
     at midnight, that is--the outer door had no bell. One night I saw
     her at nine. When I came home I said to my wife, "I don't
     understand that case; I wish I could get into the house late." We
     went to bed rather early. At about one o'clock I got up. She said,
     "What are you about? are you not well?" I said, "Perfectly so."
     "Then why get up?" "Because I can get into that house." "How, if it
     is shut up?" "I see the proprietor standing under the lamp-post
     this side of the bridge, with another man." "You have been
     dreaming." "No, I have been wide awake; but dreaming or waking, I
     mean to try." I started with the firm conviction that I should find
     the individual in question. Sure enough there he was under the
     lamp-post, talking to a friend. I asked him if he was going home.
     (I knew him very well.) He said he was, so I told him I was going
     to see a patient, and would accompany him. I was positively ashamed
     to explain matters; it seemed so absurd that I knew he would not
     believe me. On arriving at the house I said, "Now I am here, I will
     drop in and see my patient." On entering the room I found the maid
     giving her a tumbler of strong grog. The case was clear; it was as
     I suspected--delirium from drink. The next day I delicately spoke
     to the husband about it. He denied it, and in the afternoon I
     received a note requesting me not to repeat the visits. Three weeks
     ago I was recounting the story and mentioned the name. A lady
     present said: "That is the name of the clergyman in my parish, at
     B., and his wife is in a lunatic asylum from drink!"

In conversation with Gurney, the narrator explained that the
vision--though giving an impression of externality and seen, as he
believes, with open eyes--was not definably located in space. He had
never encountered the proprietor in the spot where he saw him, and it
was not a likely thing that he should be standing talking in the streets
at so late an hour.

In this case we cannot consider either the drunken patient or the
indifferent proprietor as in any sense the _agent_. Somehow or other the
physician's own persistent wish to get some such opportunity induced a
collaboration of his subliminal with his supraliminal self, akin to the
inspirations of genius. Genius, however, operates within ordinary
sensory limits; while in this physician's case the subliminal self
exercised its farthest-reaching supernormal powers.

With this again may be compared a case in _Phantasms of the Living_
(vol. ii. p. 368), where a dreamer seems to himself to be present in the
Thames Tunnel during a fatal accident, which did in fact occur during
that night. Here again the drowned workman--who was quite unknown to the
distant dreamer--can hardly be called an _agent_; yet it may have been
the excitement surrounding his death which attracted the dreamer's
spirit to that scene, as a conflagration might attract a waking
night-wanderer.

There are, on the other hand, a good many cases where a scene thus
discerned in a flash is one of special interest to the percipient,
although no one in the scene may have actually wished to transfer it to
him.

A case again of a somewhat different type is the sudden waking vision of
Mr. Gottschalk,[118] who sees in a circle of light the chalked hands and
ruffled wrists of Mr. Courtenay Thorpe--a well-known actor--who was
opening a letter of Mr. Gottschalk's in that costume at the time.
Trivial in itself, this incident illustrates an interesting class of
cases, where a picture very much like a crystal-vision suddenly appears
on a wall or even in the air with no apparent background.

I know one or two persons who have had in their lives one single round
or oval hallucinatory picture of this kind, of which no interpretation
was apparent,--a curious indication of some subliminal predisposition
towards this somewhat elaborate form of message.

Somewhat like Mr. Gottschalk's projection of his picture upon a
background of dark air is the experience of Mrs. Taunton.[119] In this
case the phantasm was perfectly external; yet it certainly did not hold
to the real objects around the same relation as a figure of flesh and
blood would have held; it was in a peculiar way transparent. Gurney
regards this transparency as indicating _imperfect externalisation_ of
the hallucinatory image.

My own phrase, "imperfect _co-ordination_ of inner with outward vision,"
comes to much the same thing, and seems specially applicable to Mrs.
Taunton's words: "The appearance was not transparent or filmy, but
perfectly solid-looking; _and yet I could somehow see the orchestra, not
through, but behind it_." There are a few cases where the percipient
seems to see a hallucinatory figure _behind_ him, out of the range of
optical vision.[120] There is of course no reason why this should not be
so,--even if a part of space external to the percipient's brain should
be actually affected.

Mr. Searle's case also is very interesting.[121] Here Mrs. Searle faints
when visiting a house a few miles from Mr. Searle's chambers in the
Temple. At or about the same time, he sees as though in a looking-glass,
upon a window opposite him, his wife's head and face, white and
bloodless.

Gurney suggests that this was a transference from Mrs. Searle's mind
simply of "the _idea_ of fainting," which then worked itself out into
perception in an appropriate fashion.

Was it thus? Or did Mr. Searle in the Temple see with inner vision his
wife's head as she lay back faint and pallid in Gloucester Gardens? Our
nearest analogy here is plainly crystal-vision; and crystal-visions, as
we have observed, point both ways. Sometimes the picture in the crystal
is conspicuously symbolical; sometimes it seems a transcript of an
actual distant scene.

There are two further problems which occur as we deal with each class of
cases in turn,--the problem of time-relations and the problem of
spirit-agency. Can an incident be said to be seen clairvoyantly if it is
seen some hours after it occurred? Ought we to say that a scene is
clairvoyantly visited, or that it is spiritually shown, if it represents
a still chamber of death,[122] where no emotion is any longer stirring;
but to which the freed spirit might desire to attract the friend's
attention and sympathy?

Such problems cannot at present be solved; nor, as I have said, can any
one class of these psychical interchanges be clearly demarcated from
other classes. Recognising this, we must explain the central
characteristics of each group in turn, and show at what points that
group appears to merge into the next.

And now we come to that class of cases where B invades A, and A
perceives the invasion; but B retains no memory of it in supraliminal
life. From one point of view, as will be seen, this is just the reverse
of the class last discussed--where the invader remembered an invasion
which the invaded person (when there was one) did not perceive.

We have already discussed some cases of this sort which seemed to be
_psychorrhagic_--to have occurred without will or purpose on the part of
the invader. What we must now do is to collect cases where there may
probably have been some real projection of will or desire on the
invader's part, leading to the projection of his phantasm in a manner
recognisable by the distant friend whom he thus invades--yet without
subsequent memory of his own. These cases will be intermediate between
the _psychorrhagic_ cases already described and the _experimental_ cases
on which we shall presently enter.

In the case of Canon Warburton--in Chapter IV.--the person undergoing
the accident did recollect having had a vivid thought of his brother at
the moment;--while his brother on the other hand was startled from a
slight doze by the vision of the scene of danger as then taking
place;--the steep stairs and the falling figure. This is an acute
crisis, much resembling impending death by drowning, etc.; and the
apparition may be construed either way--either as a scene clairvoyantly
discerned by Canon Warburton, owing, as I say, to a spasmodic tightening
of his psychical link with his brother, or as a sudden _invasion_ on
that brother's part, whose very rapidity perhaps helped to prevent his
remembering it.

The case given in Appendix VI. E is interesting, both evidentially and
from its intrinsic character. The narrative, printed in _Phantasms of
the Living_, on the authority of one only of the witnesses concerned,
led to the discovery of the _second_ witness--whom we had no other means
of finding--and has been amply corroborated by her independent account.

The case stands about midway between psychorrhagic cases and intentional
self-projections, and is clearly of the nature of an _invasion_, since
the phantasm was seen by a stranger as well as by the friend, and seemed
to both to be moving about the room. The figure, that is to say, was
adapted to the percipient's environment.

Cases of this general character, both visual and auditory, occupy a
great part of _Phantasms of the Living_, and others have been frequently
quoted in the S.P.R. _Journal_ during recent years.[123]

Of still greater interest is the class which comes next in order in my
ascending scale of apparent _intensity_; the cases, namely, where there
is recollection on both sides, so that the experience is
_reciprocal_.[124] These deserve study, for it is by noting under what
circumstances these spontaneously reciprocal cases occur that we have
the best chance of learning how to produce them experimentally. It will
be seen that there have been various degrees of tension of thought on
the agent's part.

And here comes in a small but important group--the group of what I may
call death-compacts prematurely fulfilled. We shall see in the next
chapter that the exchange of a solemn promise between two friends to
appear to one another, if possible, after death is far from being a
useless piece of sentiment. Such posthumous appearances, it is true, may
be in most cases impossible, but nevertheless there is real ground to
believe that the previous tension of the will in that direction makes it
more likely that the longed-for meeting shall be accomplished. If so,
this is a kind of _experiment_, and an experiment which all can make.

Now we have two or three cases where this compact has been made, and
where an apparition has followed--but before and not after the agent's
death--at the moment, that is to say, of some dangerous accident, when
the sufferer was perhaps all but drowned, or was stunned, or otherwise
insensible.[125]

Lastly, the lessons of these spontaneous apparitions have been confirmed
and widened by actual experiment. It is plain that just as we are not
confined to noting small spontaneous telepathic transferences when they
occur, but can also endeavour to reproduce them by experiment, so also
we can endeavour to reproduce experimentally these more advanced
telepathic phenomena of the invasion of the presence of the percipient
by the agent. It is to be hoped, indeed, that such experiment may become
one of the most important features of our inquiry. The type of the
experiment is somewhat as follows. The intending agent endeavours by an
effort at self-concentration, made either in waking hours or just before
sleep, to render himself perceptible to a given person at a distance,
who, of course, must have no reason to expect a phantasmal visit at that
hour. Independent records must be made on each side, of all attempts
made, and of all phantoms seen. The evidential point is, of course, the
coincidence between the _attempt_ and the _phantom_, whether or not the
agent can afterwards remember his own success.[126]

Now the _experimental_ element here is obviously very incomplete. It
consists in little more than in a concentrated desire to produce an
effect which one can never explain, and seldom fully remember. I have
seen no evidence to show that any one can claim to be an adept in such
matters--has learned a method of thus appearing at will.[127] We are
acting in the dark. Yet nevertheless the mere fact that on some few
occasions this strong desire has actually been followed by a result of
this extremely interesting kind is one of the most encouraging phenomena
in our whole research. The successes indeed have borne a higher
proportion to the failures than I should have ventured to hope. But
nowhere is there more need of persistent and careful
experimentation;--nowhere, I may add, have emotions quite alien from
Science--mere groundless fears of seeing anything unusual--interfered
with more disastrous effect. Such fears, one hopes, will pass away, and
the friend's visible image will be recognised as a welcome proof of the
link that binds the two spirits together.

The case which I quote in Appendix VI. F illustrates both the essential
harmlessness--nay, naturalness--of such an experiment, and the causeless
fear which it may engender even in rational and serious minds.

In these experimental apparitions, which form, as it were, the _spolia
opima_ of the collector, we naturally wish to know all that we can about
each detail in the experience. Two important points are the _amount of
effort_ made by the experimenter, and the degree of his _consciousness
of success_. The amount of effort in Mr. S. H. B.'s case (for instance)
seems to have been great; and this is encouraging, since what we want is
to be assured that the tension of will has really some power. It seems
to act in much the same way as a therapeutic suggestion from the
conscious self; one can never make sure that any given self-suggestion
will "take"; but, on the whole, the stronger the self-suggestions, the
better the result. It is therefore quite in accordance with analogy that
a suggestion from without, given to a hypnotised person, should be the
most promising way of inducing these self-projections. It should be
strongly impressed on hypnotised subjects that they can and must
temporarily "leave the body," as they call it, and manifest themselves
to distant persons--the consent, of course, of both parties to the
experiment having been previously secured.

Of this type were Dr. Backman's experiments with his subject
"Alma,"[128] and although that series of efforts was prematurely broken
off, it was full of promise. There were some slight indications that
Alma's clairvoyant excursions were sometimes perceptible to persons in
the scenes psychically invaded; and there was considerable and growing
evidence to her own retention in subsequent memory of some details of
those distant scenes.

By all analogy, indeed, that subsequent memory should be an eminently
_educable_ thing. The carrying over of recollections from one stratum of
personality into another--as hypnotic experiment shows us--is largely a
matter of patient suggestion. It would be very desirable to hypnotise
the person who had succeeded in producing an experimental apparition, of
Mr. S. H. B.'s type, and to see if he could then recall the psychical
excursion. Hypnotic states should be far more carefully utilised in
connection with all these forms of self-projection.

In these self-projections we have before us, I do not say the most
useful, but the most extraordinary achievement of the human will. What
can lie further outside any known capacity than the power to cause a
semblance of oneself to appear at a distance? What can be a more
_central_ action--more manifestly the outcome of whatsoever is deepest
and most unitary in man's whole being? Here, indeed, begins the
justification of the conception expressed at the beginning of this
chapter;--that we should now see the subliminal self no longer as a mere
chain of eddies or backwaters, in some way secluded from the main stream
of man's being, but rather as itself the central and potent current, the
most truly identifiable with the man himself. Other achievements have
their manifest limit; where is the limit here? The spirit has shown
itself in part dissociated from the organism; to what point may its
dissociation go? It has shown some independence, some intelligence, some
permanence. To what degree of intelligence, independence, permanence,
may it conceivably attain? Of all vital phenomena, I say, this is the
most significant; this self-projection is the one definite act which it
seems as though a man might perform equally well before and after bodily
death.




