CHAPTER VI

SENSORY AUTOMATISM

    Βλἑπομεν γἁρ ἁρτι δἱ'ἑσὑπτρου ἑν ἁινἱγματι.


Each of the several lines of inquiry pursued in the foregoing chapters
has brought indications of something transcending sensory experience in
the reserves of human faculty; and we have come to a point where we need
some further colligating generalisation--some conception under which
these scattered phenomena may be gathered in their true kinship.

Some steps at least towards such a generalisation the evidence to be
presented in these next chapters may allow us to take. Considering
together, under the heading of sensory and motor _automatism_, the whole
range of that subliminal action of which we have as yet discussed
fragments only, we shall gradually come to see that its distinctive
faculty of telepathy or telæsthesia is in fact an introduction into a
realm where the limitations of organic life can no longer be assumed to
persist. Considering, again, the evidence which shows that that portion
of the personality which exercises these powers during our earthly
existence does actually continue to exercise them after our bodily
decay, _we shall recognise a relation--obscure but indisputable--between
the subliminal and the surviving self_.

I begin, then, with my definition of _automatism_, as the widest term
under which to include the range of subliminal emergences into ordinary
life. The turbulent uprush and downdraught of hysteria; the helpful
uprushes of genius, co-operating with supraliminal thought; the profound
and recuperative changes which follow on hypnotic suggestion; these have
been described under their separate headings. But the main mass of
subliminal manifestations remains undescribed. I have dealt little with
veridical hallucinations, not at all with automatic writing, nor with
the utterances of spontaneous trance. The products of inner vision or
inner audition externalised into quasi-percepts,--these form what I term
_sensory automatisms_. The messages conveyed by movement of limbs or
hand or tongue, initiated by an inner motor impulse beyond the
conscious will--these are what I term _motor automatisms_. And I claim
that when all these are surveyed together their essential analogy will
be recognised beneath much diversity of form. They will be seen to be
_messages_ from the subliminal to the supraliminal self;
endeavours--conscious or unconscious--of submerged tracts of our
personality to present to ordinary waking thought fragments of a
knowledge which no ordinary waking thought could attain.

I regard supraliminal life merely as a _privileged case_ of personality;
a special phase of our personality, which is easiest for us to study,
because it is simplified for us by our ready consciousness of what is
going on in it; yet which is by no means necessarily either central or
prepotent, could we see our whole being in comprehensive view.

Now if we thus regard the whole supraliminal personality as a special
case of something much more extensive, it follows that we must similarly
regard all human faculty, and each sense severally, as mere special or
privileged cases of some more general power.

All human terrene faculty will be in this view simply a selection from
faculty existing in the metetherial world; such part of that antecedent,
even if not individualised, faculty as may be expressible through each
several human organism.

Each of our special senses, therefore, may be conceived as straining
towards development of a wider kind than earthly experience has as yet
allowed. And each special sense is both an internal and an external
sense; involves a tract of the brain, of unknown capacity, as well as an
end-organ, whose capacity is more nearly measurable. The relation of
this internal, mental, mind's-eye vision to non-sensory psychological
perception on the one hand, and to ocular vision on the other hand, is
exactly one of the points on which some profounder observation will be
seen to be necessary. One must at least speak of "mind's eye" perception
in these sensory terms, if one is to discuss it at all.

But ordinary experience at any rate assumes that the end-organ alone can
acquire fresh information, and that the central tract can but combine
this new information already sent in to it. This must plainly be the
case, for instance, with optical or acoustic knowledge;--with such
knowledge as is borne on waves of ether or of air, and is caught by a
terminal apparatus, evolved for the purpose. But observe that it is by
no means necessary that all seeing and all hearing should be through eye
or ear.

The vision of our dreams--to keep to vision alone for greater
simplicity--is non-optical vision. It is usually generated in the
central brain, not sent up thither from an excited retina. Optical laws
can only by a stretch of terms be said to apply to it at all.

Let us attempt some rough conspectus, which may show something of the
relation in which central and peripheral vision stand to each other.

We start from a region below the specialisation of visual faculty. The
study of the successive dermal and nervous modifications which have led
up to that faculty belongs to Biology, and all that our argument needs
here is to point out that the very fact that this faculty has been
developed in a germ, animated by metetherial life, indicates that some
perceptivity from which sight could take its origin pre-existed in the
originating, the unseen world. We know vaguely how vision differentiated
itself peripherally, with the growing sensibility of the pigment-spot to
light and shadow. But there must have been a cerebral differentiation
also, and also a psychological differentiation, namely, a gradual
shaping of a distinct feeling from obscure feelings, whose history we
cannot recover.

Yet I believe that we have still persistent in our brain-structure some
dim vestige of the transition from that early undifferentiated
continuous sensitivity to our existing specialisation of sense. Probably
in all of us, though in some men much more distinctly than in others,
there exist certain _synæsthesiæ_ or concomitances of sense-impression,
which are at any rate not dependent on any recognisable link of
association.[101] My present point is that such synæsthesiæ stand on the
dividing line between percepts externally and internally originated.
These irradiations of sensitivity, sometimes apparently congenital,
cannot, on the one hand, be called a purely mental phenomenon. Nor again
can they be definitely classed under external vision; since they do
sometimes follow upon a mental process of association. It seems safer to
term them _entencephalic_, on the analogy of _entoptic_, since they seem
to be due to something in brain-structure, much as entoptic percepts are
due to something in the structure of the eye.

I will, then, start with the synæsthesiæ as the most generalised form of
inward perception, and will pass on to other classes which approach more
nearly to ordinary external vision.

From these entencephalic photisms we seem to proceed by an easy
transition to the most inward form of unmistakable entoptic
vision--which is therefore the most inward form of all external
vision--the flash of light consequent on electrisation of the optic
nerve. Next on our outward road we may place the phosphenes caused by
pressure on the optic nerve or irritation of the retina. Next Purkinje's
figures, or shadows cast by the blood-vessels of the middle layer upon
the bacillary layer of the retina. Then _muscæ volitantes_, or shadows
cast by motes in the vitreous humour upon the fibrous layer of the
retina.

Midway, again, between entoptic and ordinary external vision we may
place _after-images_; which, although themselves perceptible with shut
eyes, presuppose a previous retinal stimulation from without;--forming,
in fact, the entoptic sequelæ of ordinary external vision.

Next comes our ordinary vision of the external world--and this, again,
is pushed to its highest degree of externality by the employment of
artificial aids to sight. He who gazes through a telescope at the stars
has mechanically improved his end-organs to the furthest point now
possible to man.

And now, standing once more upon our watershed of entencephalic vision,
let us trace the advancing capacities of internal vision. The forms of
vision now to be considered are virtually independent of the eye; they
can persist, that is to say, after the destruction of the eye, if only
the eye has worked for a few years, so as to give visual education to
the brain. We do not, in fact, fully know the limits of this
independence, which can only be learnt by a fuller examination of
intelligent blind persons than has yet been made. Nor can we say with
certainty how far in a seeing person the eye is in its turn influenced
by the brain. I shall avoid postulating any "retropulsive current" from
brain to retina, just as I have avoided any expression more specific
than "the brain" to indicate the primary seat of sight. The arrangement
here presented, as already explained, is a psychological one, and can
be set forth without trespassing on controverted physiological ground.

We may take _memory-images_ as the simplest type of internal vision.
These images, as commonly understood, introduce us to no fresh
knowledge; they preserve the knowledge gained by conscious gaze upon the
outer world. In their simplest spontaneous form they are the _cerebral_
sequelæ of external vision, just as after-images are its _entoptic_
sequelæ. These two classes of vision have been sometimes confounded,
although the distinction is a marked one. Into the cerebral storage of
impressions one element habitually enters which is totally absent from
the mere retinal storage, namely, a psychical element--a rearrangement
or generalisation of the impressions retinally received.

Next we come to a common class of memory-images, in which the subliminal
rearrangement is particularly marked. I speak of _dreams_--which lead us
on in two directions from memory-images; in the direction of
_imagination-images_, and in the direction of _hallucinations_. Certain
individual dreams, indeed, of rare types point also in other directions
which later on we shall have to follow. But dreams as a class consist of
confused memory-images, reaching a kind of low hallucinatory intensity,
a glow, so to say, sufficient to be perceptible in darkness.

I will give the name of _imagination-images_ to those conscious
recombinations of our store of visual imagery which we compose either
for our mere enjoyment, as "waking dreams," or as artifices to help us
to the better understanding of facts of nature confusedly discerned.
Such, for instance, are imagined geometrical diagrams; and Watt, lying
in bed in a dark room and conceiving the steam-engine, illustrates the
utmost limit to which voluntary internal visualisation can go.

Here at any rate the commonly admitted category of stages of inward
vision will close. Thus far and no farther the brain's capacity for
presenting visual images can be pushed on under the guidance of the
conscious will of man. It is now my business to show, on the contrary,
that we have here reached a mere intermediate point in the development
of _internal_ vision. These imagination-images, valuable as they are,
are merely attempts to control supraliminally a form of vision which--as
spontaneous memory-images have already shown us--is predominantly
subliminal. The memory-images welled up from a just-submerged stratum;
we must now consider what other images also well upward from the same
hidden source.

To begin with, it is by no means certain that some of Watt's images of
steam-engines did not well up from that source,--did not emerge
ready-made into the supraliminal mind while it rested in that merely
_expectant_ state which forms generally a great part of invention. We
have seen in Chapter III. that there is reason to believe in such a
conveyance in the much inferior mental processes of calculating boys,
etc., and also in the mental processes of the painter. In short, without
pretending to judge of the proportion of voluntary to involuntary
imagery in each several creative mind, we must undoubtedly rank the
spontaneously emergent visual images of genius as a further stage of
internal vision.

And now we have reached, by a triple road, the verge of a most important
development of inward vision--namely, that vast range of phenomena which
we call _hallucination_. Each of our last three classes had led up to
hallucination in a different way. _Dreams_ actually _are_
hallucinations; but they are usually hallucinations of low intensity;
and are only rarely capable of maintaining themselves for a few seconds
(as hypnopompic illusions) when the dreamer wakes to the stimuli of the
material world. _Imagination-images_ may be carried to a hallucinatory
pitch by good visualisers.[102] And the _inspirations of
genius_--Raphael's San Sisto is the classical instance--may present
themselves in hallucinatory vividness to the astonished artist.

A hallucination, one may say boldly, is in fact a _hyperæsthesia_; and
generally a _central_ hyperæsthesia. That is to say, the hallucination
is in some cases due indirectly to peripheral stimulation; but often
also it is the result of a stimulus to "mind's-eye vision," which sweeps
the idea onwards into visual form, regardless of ordinary checks.

Here, then, is a comprehensive and reasonable way of regarding these
multifarious hallucinations or sensory automatisms. They are phenomena
which must neither be feared nor ignored, but rather controlled and
interpreted. Nor will that interpretation be an easy matter. The
interpretation of the symbols by which the retina represents the
external world has been, whether for the race or for the individual, no
short or simple process. Yet ocular vision is in my view a simple, easy,
privileged case of vision generally; and the symbols which represent our
internal percepts of an immaterial world are likely to be far more
complex than any impressions from the material world on the retina.

All inward visions are like symbols abridged from a picture-alphabet. In
order to understand any one class of hallucinations we ought to have all
classes before us. At the lower limit of the series, indeed, the
analysis of the physician should precede that of the psychologist. We
already know to some extent, and may hope soon to know more accurately,
what sensory disturbance corresponds to what nervous lesion. Yet these
violent disturbances of inward perception--the snakes of the drunkard,
the scarlet fire of the epileptic, the jeering voices of the
paranoiac--these are perhaps of too gross a kind to afford more than a
kind of neurological introduction to the subtler points which arise when
hallucination is unaccompanied by any observable defect or malady.

It is, indeed, obvious enough that the more idiognomonic the
hallucination is, the more isolated from any other disturbance of
normality, the greater will be its psychological interest. _An
apparently spontaneous modification of central percepts_--what
phenomenon could promise to take us deeper into the mystery of the mind?

Yet until quite recently--until, in short, Edmund Gurney took up the
inquiry in 1882--this wide, important subject was treated, even in
serious text-books, in a superficial and perfunctory way. Few statistics
were collected; hardly anything was really known; rather there was a
facile assumption that all hallucinations or sensory automatisms _must_
somehow be due to physical malady, even when there was no evidence
whatever for such a connection. I must refer my readers to Gurney's
résumé in his chapter on "Hallucinations" in _Phantasms of the Living_,
if they would realise the gradual confused fashion in which men's minds
had been prepared for the wider view soon to be opened, largely by
Gurney's own statistical and analytical work. The wide collection of
first-hand experiences of sensory automatisms of every kind which he
initiated, and which the S.P.R. "Census of Hallucinations" continued
after his death, has for the first time made it possible to treat these
phenomena with some surety of hand.[103]

The results of these inquiries show that a great number of sensory
automatisms occur among sane and healthy persons, and that for many of
these we can at present offer no explanation whatever. For some of them,
however, we can offer a kind of explanation, or at least an indication
of a probable determining cause, whose mode of working remains wholly
obscure.

Thus, in some few instances, although there is no disturbance of health,
there seems to be a predisposition to the externalisation of figures or
sounds. Since this in no way interferes with comfort, we must simply
class it as an idiosyncratic central hyperæsthesia--much like the
tendency to extremely vivid dreams, which by no means always implies a
poor quality of sleep.

In a few instances, again, we can trace moral predisposing
causes--expectation, grief, anxiety.

These causes, however, turn out to be much less often effective than
might have been expected from the popular readiness to invoke them. In
two ways especially the weakness of this predisposing cause is impressed
upon us. In the first place, the bulk of our percipients experience
their hallucinations at ordinary unexciting moments; traversing their
more anxious crises without any such phenomenon. In the second place,
those of our percipients whose hallucination is in fact more or less
coincident with some distressing external event, seldom seem to have
been predisposed to the hallucination by a knowledge of the event. For
the event was generally unknown to them when the corresponding
hallucination occurred.

This last remark, it will be seen, introduces us to the most interesting
and important group of percipients and of percepts; the percipients
whose gift constitutes a fresh faculty rather than a degeneration; the
percepts which are _veridical_--which are (as we shall see cause to
infer) in some way generated by some event outside the percipient's
mind, so that their correspondence with that event conveys some new
fact, in however obscure a form. It is this group, of course, which
gives high importance to the whole inquiry; which makes the study of
inward vision no mere curiosity, but rather the opening of an inlet into
forms of knowledge to which we can assign no bound.

Now these telepathic hallucinations will introduce us to very varying
forms of inward vision. It will be well to begin their study by
recalling and somewhat expanding the thesis already advanced: that man's
_ocular_ vision is but a special or privileged case of visual power, of
which power his _inner_ vision affords a more extensive example.

Ocular vision is the perception of material objects, in accordance with
optical laws, from a definite point in space. Our review of
hallucinations has already removed two of these limitations. If I see a
hallucinatory figure--and figures seen in _dreams_ come under this
category--I see something which is not a material object, and I see it
in a manner not determined by optical laws. A dream-figure may indeed
seem to _conform_ to optical laws; but that will be the result of
self-suggestion, or of organised memories, and will vary according to
the dreamer's visualising power. While a portrait-painter may see a face
in dream which he can paint from memory when he wakes, the ordinary
man's dream-percept will be vague, shifting, and unrememberable.

Similarly, if I see a subjective hallucinatory figure "out in the room,"
its aspect is not _determined_ by optical laws (it may even seem to
stand _behind_ the observer, or otherwise _outside_ his visual field),
but it will more or less _conform_--by my mere self-suggestion, if by
nothing else--to optical laws; and, moreover, it will still seem to be
seen from a fixed point in space, namely, from the stationary observer's
eyes or brain.

All this seems fairly plain, so long as we are admittedly dealing with
hallucinatory figures whose origin must be in the percipient's own mind.
But so soon as we come to quasi-percepts which we believe to exist or to
originate somewhere outside the percipient's mind, our difficulties come
thick and fast.

If there be some external origin for our inward vision (which thereby
becomes _veridical_) we must not any longer assume that all veridical
inward vision starts or is exercised from the same point. If it gets
hold of _facts_ (veridical impressions or pictures, not mere subjective
fancies), we cannot be sure _a priori_ whether it somehow goes to find
the facts, or the facts come to find it. Again, we cannot any longer
take for granted that it will be cognisant only of phantasmal or
immaterial percepts. If it can get at phantasmal percepts outside the
organism, may it not get at _material_ percepts also? May it not see
distant houses, as well as the images of distant souls?

Hazardous as these speculations may seem, they nevertheless represent an
attempt to get our notions of supersensory things as near down to our
notions of sensory things as we fairly can. Whatever may be our ultimate
conception of an ideal world, we must not for the present attempt to
start from any standpoint too far removed from the temporal and spatial
existence which alone we know.

As telepathy is a conception intermediate between the apparent isolation
of minds here communicating only as a rule through material organs, and
the ultimate conception of the unity of all mind, so the conception
which I am about to propose, of a recognition of space without our
concomitant subjection to laws of matter, is strictly intermediate
between man's incarnate condition and the condition which we may imagine
him ultimately to attain. We cannot possibly infer _a priori_ that all
recognition of space must needs disappear with the disappearance of the
particular bodily sensations by means of which our conception of space
has been developed. But we can imagine that a spirit should be
essentially _independent_ of space, and yet capable of recognising it.

Provisionally admitting this view, let us consider what range we are now
led to assign to inner vision, when it is no longer merely subjective
but veridical; bringing news to the percipient of actual fact outside
his own organism.

We infer that it may represent to us (1) material objects; or (2)
symbols of immaterial things; (3) in ways not necessarily accordant with
optical laws; and (4) from a point of view not necessarily located
within the organism, by means of what I have called a _psychical
excursion_. I will take an illustration from a case which is recorded in
detail in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 41 [666 C].

A Mrs. Wilmot has a vision of her husband in a cabin in a distant
steamer. Besides her husband, she sees in the cabin a stranger (who was
in fact present there), with certain material details. Now here I should
say that Mrs. Wilmot's inner vision discerned material objects, from a
point of view outside her own organism. But, on the other hand, although
the perception came to her in visual terms, I do not suppose that it was
really _optical_, that it came through the eye.

Mrs. Wilmot might believe, say, that her husband's head concealed from
her some part of the berth in which he lay; but this would not mean a
real optical concealment, but only a special direction of her attention,
guided by preconceived notions of what would be optically visible from a
given point.

As we proceed further we shall see, I think, in many ways how needful is
this _excursive_ theory to explain _many_ telepathic and _all_
telæsthetic experiences; _many_, I mean, of the cases where two minds
are in communication, and _all_ the cases where the percipient learns
material facts (as words in a closed book, etc.) with which no other
known mind is concerned.

Another most important corollary of this excursive theory must just be
mentioned here. If there be spiritual excursion to a particular point of
space, it is conceivable that this should involve not only the migrant
spirit's perception _from_ that point, but also perception of that point
by persons materially present near it. That point may become a
_phantasmogenetic centre_, as well as a centre of outlook. In plain
words, if A has spiritually invaded B's room, and there sees B, B on his
part may see A symbolically standing there; and C and D if present may
see A as well.

This hint, here thrown out as an additional argument for the excursive
theory, will fall to be developed later on. For the present we must
confine our attention to our immediate subject: the range of man's inner
vision, and the means which he must take to understand, to foster, and
to control it.

The first and simplest step in the control of inner vision is the
repression by hypnotic suggestion of degenerative hallucinations. It is
a noteworthy fact that such of these as are at all curable are much more
often curable by hypnotism than in any other way.

The next step is one to which, as the reader of my chapter on hypnotism
already knows, I attribute an importance much greater than is generally
accorded to it. I refer to the hypnotiser's power not only of
controlling but of _inducing_ hallucinations in his subject.

As I have already said, the evocation of hallucinations is commonly
spoken of as a mere example of the subject's _obedience_ to the
hypnotiser. "I tell my subject to raise his arm, and he raises it; I
tell him to see a tiger in the room, and he sees one accordingly." But
manifestly these two incidents are not on the same level, and only
appear to be so through a certain laxity of language. The usage of
speech allows me to say, "I will make my subject lift his arm," although
I am of course unable to affect the motor centres in his brain which
start that motion. But it is so easy for a man to lift his arm that my
speech takes that familiar power for granted, and notes, only his
readiness to lift it when I tell him--the hypnotic complaisance which
prompts him to obey me if I suggest this trivial action. But when I say,
"I will make him see a tiger," I take for granted a power on his part
which is _not_ familiar, which I have no longer a right to assume. For
under ordinary circumstances my subject simply _cannot_ see a tiger at
will; nor can I affect the visual centres which might enable him to do
so. All that I can ask him to do, therefore, is to choose this
particular way of indicating that in his hypnotic condition he has
become able to stimulate his central sensory tracts more powerfully than
ever before.

And not only this. His hallucinations are in most cases elaborate
products--complex images which must have needed intelligence to fashion
them--although the process of their fashioning is hidden from our view.
In this respect they resemble the inspirations of genius. For here we
find again just what we found in those inspirations--the uprush of a
complex intellectual product, performed beneath the threshold, and
projected ready-made into ordinary consciousness. The uprushing stream
of intelligence, indeed, in the man of genius flowed habitually in
conformity with the superficial stream. Only rarely does the great
conception intrude itself upon him with such vigour and such
untimeliness as to bring confusion and incoherence into his ordinary
life. But in the case of these induced hallucinations the incongruity
between the two streams of intelligence is much more marked. When a
subject, for instance, is trying to keep down some post-hypnotic
hallucinatory suggestion, one can watch the smooth surface of the
supraliminal river disturbed by that suggestion as though by jets of
steam from below, which sometimes merely break in bubbles, but sometimes
force themselves up bodily through the superficial film.

It is by considering hallucinations in this generalised manner and among
these analogies, that we can best realise their absence of necessary
connection with any bodily degeneration or disease. Often, of course,
they accompany disease; but that is only to say that the central sensory
tracts, like any other part of the organism, are capable of morbid as
well as of healthful stimulus. Taken in itself, the mere fact of the
quasi-externalisation of a centrally initiated image indicates strong
central stimulation, and absolutely nothing more. There is no
physiological law whatever which can tell us what degree of vividness
our central pictures may assume consistently with health--short of the
point where they get to be so indistinguishable from external
preceptions that, as in madness, they interfere with the rational
conduct of life. That point no well-attested case of veridical
hallucinations, so far as my knowledge goes, has yet approached.

It was, of course, natural that in the study of these phantasms, as
elsewhere, the therapeutic interest should have preceded the
psychological, but in the newer practical study of _eugenics_--the study
which aims at improving the human organism, instead of merely conserving
it--experimental psychology is indispensable, and one branch of this is
the experimental study of mental visions.

Let us consider whether, apart from such a rare and startling incident
as an actual hallucination, there is any previous indication of a habit
of receiving, or a power of summoning, pictures from a subliminal
store-house? Any self-suggestion, conscious or unconscious, which places
before the supraliminal intelligence visual images apparently matured
elsewhere?

Such indications have not been wanting. In the chapter on Genius, and in
the chapter on Sleep, we have traced the existence of many classes of
these pictures; all of them ready, as it would seem, to manifest
themselves on slight inducement. _Dream-figures_ will rise in any
momentary blur of consciousness; _inspirations_ will respond to the
concentrated desire or the mere passing emotion of the man of genius;
_after-images_ will recur, under unknown conditions, long after the
original stimulus has been withdrawn; _memory-images_ will surge up into
our minds with even unwished-for vividness; the brilliant exactness of
_illusions hypnagogiques_ will astonish us in the revealing transition
from waking to sleep.

All is prepared, so to say, for some empirical short-cut to a fuller
control of these subjacent pictures; just as before Mesmer and Puységur
all was prepared for an empirical short-cut to trance, somnambulism,
suggestibility.

All that we want is to hit on some simple empirical way of bringing out
the correlation between all these types of subjacent vision, just as
mesmerism was a simple empirical way of bringing out the correlation
between various trances and sleep-waking states.

_Crystal-vision_, then, like hypnotic trance, might have been gradually
evolved by a series of reasoned experiments, along an unexceptionable
scientific road.

In reality, of course, this prehistoric practice must have been reached
in some quite different way. It does not fall within the scope of this
book to trace the various streams of divination which converge into Dr.
Dee's magic, and "the attracting of spirits into the ball." But it is
really to the Elizabethan Dr. Dee--one of the leading _savants_ of his
time--that the credit must be given of the first systematic attempt to
describe, analyse, and utilise these externalised pictures.[104]

I will describe briefly the general type of the experiment, and we shall
see how near we can get to a psychological explanation.

Let the observer gaze, steadily but not fatiguingly, into some speculum,
or clear depth, so arranged as to return as little reflection as
possible. A good example of what is meant will be a glass ball enveloped
in a black shawl, or placed in the back part of a half-opened drawer; so
arranged, in short, that the observer can gaze into it with as little
distraction as may be from the reflection of his own face or of
surrounding objects. After he has tried (say) three or four times, for
ten minutes or so at a time--preferably in solitude, and in a state of
mental passivity--he will perhaps begin to see the glass ball or crystal
_clouding_, or to see some figure or picture apparently _in_ the ball.
Perhaps one man or woman in twenty will have some slight occasional
experience of this kind; and perhaps one in twenty of these seers (the
percentages must as yet be mainly guess-work) will be able by practice
to develop this faculty of inward vision up to a point where it will
sometimes convey to him information not attainable by ordinary means.

How comes it, in the first place, that he sees any figure in the crystal
at all? Common hypnotic experiments supply two obvious answers, each of
which no doubt explains some part of the phenomena.

In the first place, we know that the hypnotic trance is often induced by
gazing at some small bright object. This may or may not be a mere effect
of suggestion; but it certainly sometimes occurs, and the "scryer"
consequently may be partially hypnotised, and in a state which
facilitates hallucinations.

In the second place, a hypnotised subject--hypnotised but in a fully
alert state--can often be caused by suggestion to see (say) a portrait
upon a blank card; and will continue to see that portrait on that card,
after the card has been shuffled with others; thus showing that he
discerns with unusual acuteness such _points de repère_, or little
guiding marks, as may exist on the surface of even an apparently blank
card.

Correspondently with the _first_ of these observations, we find that
crystal-vision is sometimes accompanied by a state of partial
hypnotisation, perhaps merging into trance. This has been the case with
various French hysterical subjects; and not only with them but with that
exceptionally sound and vigorous observer, Mr. J. G. Keulemans. His
evidence (in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 516-521) is just what
one would have expected _a priori_ on such a matter.

Correspondently with the _second_ of the above observations, we find
that _points de repère_ do occasionally seem to determine crystal
visions.

This, again, has been noticed among the French hysterical subjects; and
not only with them, but with another among our best observers, Mrs.
Verrall.

These things being so--both these causes being apparently operative
along the whole series of "scryers," or crystal-gazers, from the most
unstable to the most scientific--one might be tempted to assume that
these two clues, if we could follow them far enough, would explain the
whole group of phenomena. Persons who have not _seen_ the phenomena,
indeed, can hardly be persuaded to the contrary. But the real fact is,
as even those who have seen much less of crystal-gazing than I have will
very well know, that these explanations cannot be stretched to cover a
quarter--perhaps not even a tenth--of the phenomena which actually
occur.

Judging both from the testimony of scryers themselves, and from the
observations of Dr. Hodgson and others (myself included), who have had
many opportunities of watching them, it is very seldom that the gaze
into the glass ball induces any hypnotic symptoms whatever. It does not
induce such symptoms with successful scryers any more than with
unsuccessful. Furthermore, there is no proof that the gift of
crystal-vision goes along with hypnotic sensibility. The most that one
can say is that the gift often goes along with _telepathic_ sensibility;
but although telepathic sensibility may sometimes be quickened by
hypnotism, we have no proof that those two forms of sensitiveness
habitually go together.

The ordinary attitude of the scryer, I repeat, is one of complete
detachment; an interested and often puzzled scrutiny and analysis of the
figures which display themselves in swift or slow succession in the
crystal ball.

This last sentence applies to the theory of _points de repère_ as well.
As a general rule, the crystal vision, however meaningless and
fantastic, is a thing which changes and develops somewhat as a dream
does; following, it may be, some trivial chain of associations, but not
maintaining, any more than a dream maintains, any continuous scheme of
line or colour. At the most, the scraps of reflection in the crystal
could only _start_ such a series of pictures as this. And the start, the
initiation of one of these series, is often accompanied by an odd
phenomenon mentioned above--a _milky clouding_ of the crystal, which
obscures any fragments of reflected images, and from out of which the
images of the vision gradually grow clear. I cannot explain this
clouding. It occurs too often and too independently to be a mere effect
of suggestion. It does not seem to depend on any optical condition--to
be, for instance, a result of change of focus of the eye, or of
prolonged gazing. It is a picture like other pictures; it may come when
the eyes are quite fresh (nor ought they ever to be strained); and it
may persist for some time, so that the scryer looks away and back again,
and sees it still. It comes at the beginning of a first series of
pictures, or as a kind of drop scene between one series of pictures and
another. Its closest parallel, perhaps, is the mist or cloud out of
which phantasmal figures, "out in the room," sometimes seem to form
themselves.

Moreover, the connection, if one can so call it, between the crystal and
the vision is a very variable one. Sometimes the figures seem clearly
defined within the crystal and limited thereby; sometimes all perception
of the crystal or other speculum disappears, and the scryer seems
clairvoyantly introduced into some group of life-sized figures. Nay,
further, when the habit of gazing is fully acquired, some scryers can
dispense with any speculum whatever, and can see pictures in mere
blackness; thus approximating to the seers of "faces in the dark," or of
_illusions hypnagogiques_.

On the whole it seems safest to attempt at present no further
explanation of crystal-gazing than to say that it is an empirical method
of developing internal vision; of externalising pictures which are
associated with changes in the sensorial tracts of the brain, due partly
to internal stimuli, and partly to stimuli which may come from minds
external to the scryer's own. The hallucinations thus induced appear to
be absolutely harmless. I at least know of no kind of injury resulting
from them; and I have probably heard of most of the experiments made in
England, with any scientific aim or care, during the somewhat limited
revival of crystal-gazing which has proceeded for the last few years.

The crystal picture is what we must call (for want of knowledge of
determining causes) a _random_ glimpse into inner vision, a reflection
caught at some odd angle from the universe as it shines through the
perturbing medium of that special soul. Normal and supernormal knowledge
and imaginings are blended in strangely mingled rays. Memory, dream,
telepathy, telæsthesia, retrocognition, precognition, all are there.
Nay, there are indications of spiritual communications and of a kind of
ecstasy.[105]

We cannot pursue all these phenomena at once. In turning, as we must now
turn, to the _spontaneous_ cases of sensory automatism--of every type of
which the _induced_ visions of the crystal afford us a foretaste--we
must needs single out first some fundamental phenomenon, illustrating
some principle from which the rarer or more complex phenomena may be in
part at least derived. Nor will there be difficulty in such a choice.
Theory and actual experience point here in the same direction. If this
inward vision, this inward audition, on whose importance I have been
insisting, are to have any such importance--if they are to have any
validity at all--if their contents are to represent anything more than
dream or meditation--they must receive knowledge from other minds or
from distant objects;--knowledge which is _not_ received by the external
organs of sense. Communication must exist from the subliminal to the
subliminal as well as from the supraliminal to the supraliminal parts of
the being of different individual men. Telepathy, in short, must be the
prerequisite of all these supernormal phenomena.

Actual experience, as we shall presently see, confirms this view of the
place of telepathy. For when we pass from the induced to the spontaneous
phenomena we shall find that these illustrate before all else this
transmission of thought and emotion directly from mind to mind.

Now as to telepathy, there is in the first place this to be said, that
such a faculty must absolutely exist somewhere in the universe, if the
universe contains any unembodied intelligences at all. If there be any
life less rooted in flesh than ours--any life more spiritual (as men
have supposed that a higher life would be), then either it must not be
_social_ life--there can be no exchange of thought in it at all--or else
there must exist some method of exchanging thought which does not
depend upon either tongue or brain.

Thus much, one may say, has been evident since man first speculated on
such subjects at all. But the advance of knowledge has added a new
presumption--it can be no more than a presumption--to all such cosmic
speculations. I mean the presumption of _continuity_. Learning how close
a tie in reality unites man with inferior lives,--once treated as
something wholly alien, impassably separated from the human race--we are
led to conceive that a close tie may unite him also with superior
lives,--that the series may be fundamentally unbroken, the essential
qualities of life the same throughout. It used to be asked whether man
was akin to the ape or to the angel. I reply that the very fact of his
kinship with the ape is proof presumptive of his kinship with the angel.

It is natural enough that man's instinctive feeling should have
anticipated any argument of this speculative type. Men have in most ages
believed, and do still widely believe, in the reality of prayer; that
is, in the possibility of telepathic communication between our human
minds and minds above our own, which are supposed not only to understand
our wish or aspiration, but to impress or influence us inwardly in
return.

So widely spread has been this belief in prayer that it is somewhat
strange that men should not have more commonly made what seems the
natural deduction--namely, that if our spirits can communicate with
higher spirits in a way transcending sense, they may also perhaps be
able in like manner to communicate with each other. The idea, indeed,
has been thrown out at intervals by leading thinkers--from Augustine to
Bacon, from Bacon to Goethe, from Goethe to Tennyson.

Isolated experiments from time to time indicated its practical truth.
Yet it is only within the last few years that the vague and floating
notion has been developed into definite theory by systematic experiment.

To make such experiment possible has indeed been no easy matter. It has
been needful to elicit and to isolate from the complex emotions and
interactions of common life a certain psychical element of whose nature
and working we have beforehand but a very obscure idea.

If indeed we possessed any certain method of detecting the action of
telepathy,--of distinguishing it from chance coincidence or from
unconscious suggestion,--we should probably find that its action was
widely diffused and mingled with other more commonplace causes in many
incidents of life. We should find telepathy, perhaps, at the base of
many sympathies and antipathies, of many wide communities of feeling;
operating, it may be, in cases as different as the quasi-recognition of
some friend in a stranger seen at a distance just before the friend
himself unexpectedly appears, and the _Phêmê_ or Rumour which in
Hindostan or in ancient Greece is said to have often spread far an
inexplicable knowledge of victory or disaster.

But we are obliged, for the sake of clearness of evidence, to set aside,
when dealing with experimentation, all these mixed emotional cases, and
to start from telepathic communications intentionally planned to be so
trivial, so devoid of associations or emotions, that it shall be
impossible to refer them to any common memory or sympathy; to anything
save a direct transmission of idea, or impulse, or sensation, or image,
from one to another mind.

The reader who has studied the evidence originally set forth in Chapters
II. and III. of _Phantasms of the Living_ will, I trust, carry away a
pretty clear notion of what can at present actually be done in the way
of experimental transferences of small definite ideas or pictures from
one or more persons--the "agent" or "agents"--to one or more
persons--the "percipient" or "percipients."[106] In these experiments
actual _contact_ has been forbidden, to avoid the risk of unconscious
indications by pressure. It is at present still doubtful how far close
proximity really operates in aid of telepathy, or how far its advantage
is a mere effect of self-suggestion--on the part either of agent or of
percipient. Some few pairs of experimenters have obtained results of
just the same type at distances of half a mile or more.[107] Similarly,
in the case of induction of hypnotic trance, Dr. Gibert attained at the
distance of nearly a mile results which are usually supposed to require
close and actual presence. [See Appendix V. C.]

We must clearly realise that in telepathic experiment we encounter just
the same difficulty which makes our results in hypnotic therapeutics so
unpredictable and irregular. We do not know how to get our suggestions
to _take hold_ of the subliminal self. They are liable to fail for two
main reasons. Either they somehow never _reach_ the subliminal centres
which we wish to affect, or they find those centres preoccupied with
some self-suggestion hostile to our behest. This source of uncertainty
can only be removed by a far greater number of experiments than have yet
been made--experiments repeated until we have oftener struck upon the
happy veins which make up for an immense amount of sterile exploration.
Meantime we must record, but can hardly interpret. Yet there is one
provisional interpretation of telepathic experiment which must be
noticed thus early in our discussion, because, if true, it may
conceivably connect our groping work with more advanced departments of
science, while, if seen to be inadequate, it may bid us turn our inquiry
in some other direction. I refer to the suggestion that telepathy is
propagated by "brain-waves"; or, as Sir W. Crookes has more exactly
expressed it, by ether-waves of even smaller amplitude and greater
frequency than those which carry the X rays. These waves are conceived
as passing from one brain to another, and arousing in the _second_ brain
an excitation or image similar to the excitation or image from which
they start in the _first_. The hypothesis is an attractive one; because
it fits an agency which certainly exists, but whose effect is unknown,
to an effect which certainly exists, but whose agency is unknown.

In this world of vibrations it may seem at first the simplest plan to
invoke a vibration the more. It would be rash, indeed, to affirm that
any phenomenon perceptible by men may not be expressible, in part at
least, in terms of ethereal undulations. But in the case of telepathy
the analogy which suggests this explanation, the obvious likeness
between the picture emitted (so to say) by the agent and the picture
received by the percipient--as when I fix my mind on the two of
diamonds, and he sees a mental picture of that card--goes but a very
short way. One has very soon to begin assuming that the percipient's
mind _modifies_ the picture despatched from the agent: until the
likeness between the two pictures becomes a quite symbolical affair. We
have seen that there is a continuous transition from experimental to
spontaneous telepathy; from our transferred pictures of cards to
monitions of a friend's death at a distance. These monitions may indeed
be pictures of the dying friend, but they are seldom such pictures as
the decedent's brain seems likely to project in the form in which they
reach the percipient. Mr. L.--to take a well-known case in our
collection (_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 210)--dies of heart
disease when in the act of lying down undressed, in bed. At or about
the same moment Mr. N. J. S. sees Mr. L. standing beside him with a
cheerful air, dressed for walking and with a cane in his hand. One does
not see how a system of undulations could have transmuted the physical
facts in this way.

A still greater difficulty for the vibration-theory is presented by
_collective_ telepathic hallucinations. It is hard to understand how A
can emit a pattern of vibrations which, radiating equally in all
directions, shall affect not only his distant friend B, but also the
strangers C and D, who happen to be standing near B;--and affect no
other persons, so far as we know, in the world.

The above points have been fair matter of argument almost since our
research began. But as our evidence has developed, our conception of
telepathy has needed to be more and more generalised in other and new
directions,--still less compatible with the vibration theory. Three such
directions may be briefly specified here--namely, the relation of
telepathy (_a_) to telæsthesia or clairvoyance, (_b_) to time, and (_c_)
to disembodied spirits. (_a_) It is increasingly hard to refer all the
scenes of which percipients become aware to the action of any given mind
which is perceiving those distant scenes. This is especially noticeable
in crystal-gazing experiments. (_b_) And these crystal visions also show
what, from the strict telepathic point of view, we should call a great
laxity of time relations. The scryer chooses his own time to look in the
ball;--and though sometimes he sees events which are taking place at the
moment, he may also see past events,--and even, as it seems, future
events. I at least cannot deny _precognition_, nor can I draw a definite
line amid these complex visions which may separate precognition from
telepathy (see _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 408-593). (_c_)
Precognition itself may be explained, if you will, as telepathy from
disembodied spirits;--and this would at any rate bring it under a class
of phenomena which I think all students of our subject must before long
admit. Admitting here, for argument's sake, that we do receive
communications from the dead which we should term telepathic if we
received them from the living, it is of course open to us to conjecture
that these messages also are conveyed on ether-waves. But since those
waves do not at any rate emanate from material brains, we shall by this
time have got so far from the original brain-wave hypothesis that few
will care still to defend it.

I doubt, indeed, whether we can safely say of telepathy anything more
definite than this: _Life has the power of manifesting itself to life._
The laws of life, as we have thus far known them, have been only laws of
life when already associated with matter. Thus limited, we have learnt
little as to Life's true nature. We know not even whether Life be only
a directive Force, or, on the other hand, an effective Energy. We know
not in what way it operates on matter. We can in no way define the
connection between our own consciousness and our organisms. Just here it
is, I should say, that telepathic observations ought to supply us with
some hint. From the mode in which some element of one individual
life,--apart from material impact,--gets hold of another organism, we
may in time learn something of the way in which our own life gets hold
of our own organism,--and maintains, intermits, or abandons its organic
sway.[108]

The hypothesis which I suggested in _Phantasms of the Living_ itself, in
my "Note on a possible mode of psychical interaction," seems to me to
have been rendered increasingly plausible by evidence of many kinds
since received; evidence of which the larger part falls outside the
limits of this present work. I still believe--and more confidently than
in 1886--that a "psychical invasion" does take place; that a
"phantasmogenetic centre" is actually established in the percipient's
surroundings; that some movement bearing some relation to space as we
know it is actually accomplished; and some presence is transferred, and
may or may not be discerned by the invaded person; some perception of
the distant scene in itself is acquired, and may or may not be
remembered by the invader.

But the words which I am here beginning to use carry with them
associations from which the scientific reader may well shrink. Fully
realising the offence which such expressions may give, I see no better
line of excuse than simply to recount the way in which the gradual
accretion of evidence has obliged me, for the mere sake of covering all
the phenomena, to use phrases and assumptions which go far beyond those
which Edmund Gurney and I employed in our first papers on this inquiry
in 1883.

When in 1882 our small group began the collection of evidence bearing
upon "veridical hallucinations"--or apparitions which coincided with
other events in such a way as to suggest a causal connection--we found
scattered among the cases from the first certain types which were with
difficulty reducible under the conception of telepathy pure and
simple--even if such a conception could be distinctly formed. Sometimes
the apparition was seen by more than one percipient at once--a result
which we could hardly have expected if all that had passed were the
transference of an impression from the agent's mind to another mind,
which then bodied forth that impression in externalised shape according
to laws of its own structure. There were instances, too, where the
percipient seemed to be the agent also--in so far that it was he who had
an impression of having somehow visited and noted a distant scene, whose
occupant was not necessarily conscious of any immediate relation with
him. Or sometimes this "telepathic clairvoyance" developed into
"reciprocity," and each of the two persons concerned was conscious of
the other;--the _scene_ of their encounter being the same in the vision
of each, or at least the experience being in some way common to both.
These and cognate difficulties were present to my mind from the first;
and in the above-mentioned "Note on a suggested mode of psychical
interaction," included in vol. ii of _Phantasms of the Living_, I
indicated briefly the extension of the telepathic theory to which they
seemed to me to point.

Meantime cases of certain other definite types continued to come
steadily to hand, although in lesser numbers than the cases of
apparition at death. To mention two important types only--there were
apparitions of the so-called _dead_, and there were cases of
_precognition_. With regard to each of these classes, it seemed
reasonable to defer belief until time should have shown whether the
influx of first-hand cases was likely to be permanent; whether
independent witnesses continued to testify to incidents which could be
better explained on these hypotheses than on any other. Before Edmund
Gurney's death in 1888 our cases of apparitions and other manifestations
of the dead had reached a degree of weight and consistency which, as his
last paper showed, was beginning to convince him of their veridical
character; and since that date these have been much further increased;
and especially have drawn from Mrs. Piper's and other trance-phenomena
an unexpected enlargement and corroboration. The evidence for
communication from the departed is now in my personal estimate quite as
strong as that for telepathic communication between the living; and it
is moreover evidence which inevitably alters and widens our conception
of telepathy between living men.

The evidence for precognition, again, was from the first scantier, and
has advanced at a slower rate. It has increased steadily enough to lead
me to feel confident that it will have to be seriously reckoned with;
but I cannot yet say--as I do say with reference to the evidence for
messages from the departed--that almost every one who accepts our
evidence for telepathy at all, must ultimately accept this evidence
also. It must run on at any rate for some years longer before it shall
have accreted a convincing weight.

But at whatever point one or another inquirer may happen at present to
stand, I urge that this is the reasonable course for conviction to
follow. First analyse the miscellaneous stream of evidence into definite
types; then observe the frequency with which these types recur, and let
your sense of their importance gradually grow, if the evidence grows
also.

Now this mode of procedure evidently excludes all definite _a priori_
views, and compels one's conceptions to be little more than the mere
grouping to which the facts thus far known have to be subjected in order
that they may be realised in their _ensemble_.

"What definite reason do I know why this should _not_ be true?"--this is
the question which needs to be pushed home again and again if one is to
realise--and not in the ordinary paths of scientific speculation
alone--how profound our ignorance of the Universe really is.

My own ignorance, at any rate, I recognise to be such that my notions of
the probable or improbable in the Universe are not of weight enough to
lead me to set aside any facts which seem to me well attested, and which
are not shown by experts actually to conflict with any
better-established facts or generalisations. Wide though the range of
established science may be, it represents, as its most far-sighted
prophets are the first to admit, a narrow glance only into the unknown
and infinite realm of law.

The evidence, then, leading me thus unresisting along, has led me to
this main difference from our early treatment of veridical phantasms.
Instead of starting from a root-conception of a telepathic impulse
merely passing from mind to mind, I now start from a root-conception of
the dissociability of the self, of the possibility that different
fractions of the personality can act so far independently of each other
that the one is not conscious of the other's action.

Naturally the two conceptions coincide over much of the ground. Where
experimental thought-transference is concerned--even where the commoner
types of coincidental phantasms are concerned--the second formula seems
a needless and unprovable variation on the first. But as soon as we get
among the difficult types--reciprocal cases, clairvoyant cases,
collective cases, above all, manifestations of the dead--we find that
the conception of a telepathic impulse as a message despatched and then
left alone, as it were, to effect its purpose needs more and more of
straining, of manipulation, to fit it to the evidence. On the other
hand, it is just in those difficult regions that the analogies of other
splits of personality recur, and that phantasmal or automatic behaviour
recalls to us the behaviour of segments of personality detached from
primary personality, but operating through the organism which is common
to both.

The innovation which we are here called upon to make is to suppose that
segments of the personality can operate in apparent separation from the
organism. Such a supposition, of course, could not have been started
without proof of telepathy, and could with difficulty be sustained
without proof of survival of death. But, given telepathy, we have _some_
psychical agency connected with man operating apart from his organism.
Given survival, we have an element of his personality--to say the least
of it--operating when his organism is destroyed. There is therefore no
very great additional burden in supposing that an element of his
personality may operate apart from his organism, while that organism
still exists.

_Ce n'est que le premier pas qui coûte._ If we have once got a man's
_thought_ operating apart from his body--if my fixation of attention on
the two of diamonds does somehow so modify another man's brain a few
yards off that he seems to see the two of diamonds floating before
him--there is no obvious halting-place on _his_ side till we come to
"possession" by a departed spirit, and there is no obvious halting-place
on _my_ side till we come to "travelling clairvoyance," with a
corresponding visibility of my own phantasm to other persons in the
scenes which I spiritually visit. No obvious halting-place, I say; for
the point which at first seems abruptly transitional has been already
shown to be only the critical point of a continuous curve. I mean, of
course, the point where consciousness is duplicated--where each segment
of the personality begins to possess a separate and definite, but
contemporaneous stream of memory and perception. That these can exist
concurrently in the same organism our study of hypnotism has already
shown, and our study of motor automatisms will still further prove to
us.

_Dissociation of personality, combined with activity in the metetherial
environment_; such, in the phraseology used in this book, will be the
formula which will most easily cover those actually observed facts of
veridical apparition on which we must now enter at considerable length.
And after this preliminary explanation I shall ask leave to use for
clearness in my argument such words as are simplest and shortest,
however vague or disputable their connotation may be. I must needs, for
instance, use the word "spirit," when I speak of that unknown fraction
of a man's personality--not the supraliminal fraction--which we discern
as operating before or after death in the metetherial environment. For
this conception I can find no other term, but by the word _spirit_ I
wish to imply nothing more definite than this. Of the spirit's relation
to space, or (which is a part of the same problem) to its own spatial
manifestation in definite form, something has already been said, and
there will be more to say hereafter. And similarly those terms,
_invader_ or _invaded_, from whose strangeness and barbarity our
immediate discussion began, will depend for their meaning upon
conceptions which the evidence itself must gradually supply.

That evidence, as it now lies before us, is perplexingly various both in
content and quality. For some of the canons needed in its analysis I
have already referred the reader to extracts from Edmund Gurney's
writings. Certain points must still be mentioned here before the
narrative begins.

It must be remembered, in the first place, that all these veridical or
coincidental cases stand out together as a single group from a
background of hallucinations which involve no coincidence, which have no
claim to veridicality. If purely subjective hallucinations of the senses
affected insane or disordered brains alone,--as was pretty generally the
assumption, even in scientific circles, when our inquiry began,--our
task would have been much easier than it is. But while there can be no
question as to the sound and healthy condition of the great majority of
our percipients, Edmund Gurney's "Census of Hallucinations" of 1884,
confirmed and extended by the wider inquiry of 1889-1892, showed a
frequency, previously unsuspected, of scattered hallucinations among
sane and healthy persons, the experience being often unique in a
lifetime, and in no apparent connection with any other circumstance
whatever.[109]

Since casual hallucinations of the sane, then, are thus _frequent_, we
can hardly venture to assume that they are all _veridical_. And the
existence of all these perhaps merely subjective hallucinations greatly
complicates our investigation of veridical hallucinations. It prevents
the mere existence of the hallucinations, however strangely interposed
in ordinary life, from having any evidential value, and throws us upon
evidence afforded by external coincidence;--on the mere fact, to put
such a coincidence in its simplest form, that I see a phantom of my
friend Smith at the moment when Smith is unexpectedly dying at a
distance. A coincidence of this general type, if it occurs, need not be
difficult to substantiate, and we have in fact substantiated it with
more or less completeness in several hundred cases.

The _primâ facie_ conclusion will obviously be that there is a causal
connection between the death and the apparition. To overcome this
presumption it would be necessary either to impugn the accuracy of the
informant's testimony, or to show that chance alone might have brought
about the observed coincidences.

On both of these questions there have been full and repeated discussions
elsewhere. I need not re-argue them at length here, but will refer the
reader to the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations," _Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. x., where every source of error as yet discovered has been
pretty fully considered.

To that volume also I must refer him for a thorough discussion of the
arguments for and against chance-coincidence. The conclusion to which
the Committee unanimously came is expressed in the closing words:
"Between deaths and apparitions of the dying person a connection exists
which is not due to chance alone."

We have a right, I think, to say that only by another census of
hallucinations, equally careful, more extensive, and yielding absolutely
different results, could this conclusion be overthrown.

In forming this conclusion, apparitions at death are of course selected,
because, death being an unique event in man's earthly existence, the
coincidences between death and apparitions afford a favourable case for
statistical treatment. But the coincidences between apparitions and
crises other than death, although not susceptible of the same
arithmetical precision of estimate, are, as will be seen, quite equally
convincing. To this great mass of spontaneous cases we must now turn.

The arrangement of these cases is not easy; nor are they capable of
being presented in one logically consequent series.

But the conception of _psychical invasion or excursion_ on which I have
already dwelt has at any rate this advantage, that it is sufficiently
fundamental to allow of our arrangement of all our recorded
cases--perhaps of all possible cases of apparition--in accordance with
its own lines.

Our scheme will include all observable telepathic action, from the faint
currents which we may imagine to be continually passing between man and
man, up to the point--reserved for the following chapter--where one of
the parties to the telepathic intercourse has definitely quitted the
flesh. The _first_ term in our series must be conveniently vague: the
_last_ must lead us to the threshold of the spiritual world.

I must begin with cases where the action of the excursive fragment of
the personality is of the weakest kind--the least capable of affecting
other observers, or of being recalled into the agent's own waking
memory.

Such cases, naturally enough, will be hard to bring up to evidential
level. It must depend on mere chance whether these weak and aimless
psychical excursions are observed at all; or are observed in such a way
as to lead us to attribute them to anything more than the subjective
fancy of the observers.

How can a casual vision--say, of a lady sitting in her
drawing-room,--of a man returning home at six o'clock--be distinguished
from memory-images on the one hand and from what I may term
"expectation-images" on the other? The picture of the lady may be a
slightly modified and externalised reminiscence; the picture of the man
walking up to the door may be a mere projection of what the observer was
hoping to see.

I have assumed that these phantoms coincided with no marked event. The
lady may have been thinking of going to her drawing-room; the man may
have been in the act of walking home;--but these are trivial
circumstances which might be repeated any day.

Yet, however trivial, almost any set of human circumstances are
sufficiently complex to leave room for coincidence. If the sitter in the
drawing-room is wearing a distinctive article of dress, never seen by
the percipient until it is seen in the hallucination;--if the phantasmal
homeward traveller is carrying a parcel of unusual shape, which the real
man does afterwards unexpectedly bring home with him;--there may be
reason to think that there is a causal connection between the apparent
agent's condition at the moment, and the apparition.

In Appendix VI. A, I quote one of these "arrival-cases," so to term
them, where the peculiarity of dress was such as to make the coincidence
between vision and reality well worth attention. The case is interesting
also as one of our earliest examples of a psychical incident carefully
recorded at the time; so that after the lapse of nearly forty years it
was possible to correct the percipient's surviving recollection by his
contemporary written statement.

In these _arrival_ cases, there is, I say, a certain likelihood that the
man's mind may be fixed on his return home, so that his phantasm is seen
in what might seem both to himself and to others the most probable
place.[110] But there are other cases where a man's phantasm is seen, in
a place where there is no special reason for his appearing, although
these places seem always to lie within the beat and circuit of his
habitual thought.

In such cases there are still possible circumstances which may give
reason to think that the apparition is causally connected with the
apparent agent. The phantasm of a given person may be seen _repeatedly_
by different percipients, or it may be seen _collectively_ by several
persons at a time; or it may combine both these evidential
characteristics, and may be seen several times and by several persons
together.

Now considering the rarity of phantasmal appearances, considering that
not one person in (say) five thousand is ever phantasmally seen at all;
the mere fact that a given person's phantasm is seen even _twice_, by
different percipients (for we cannot count a second appearance to the
_same_ percipient as of equal value), is in itself a remarkable fact;
while if this happens _three or four times_ (as in the case of Mrs.
Hawkins)[111] we can hardly ascribe such a sequence of rare occurrences
to chance alone.

Again, impressive as is the _repetition_ of the apparition in these
cases, it is yet less so to my mind than the _collective_ character of
some of the perceptions. In Mrs. Hawkins's first case there were two
simultaneous percipients, and in Canon Bourne's first case (given in
Appendix VI. B) there were three.

And we now come to other cases, where the percipience has been
collective, although it has not been repeated. There is a case[112]
where two persons at one moment--a moment of no stress or excitement
whatever--see the phantasm of a third; that third person being perhaps
occupied with some supraliminal or subliminal thought of the scene in
the midst of which she is phantasmally discerned. Both the percipients
supposed at the moment that it was their actual sister whom they saw;
and one can hardly fancy that a mere act of tranquil recognition of the
figure by one percipient would communicate to the other percipient a
telepathic shock such as would make _her_ see the same figure as well.

The question of the true import of collectivity of percipience renews in
another form that problem of _invasion_ to which our evidence so often
brings us back. When two or three persons see what seems to be the same
phantom in the same place and at the same time, does that mean that that
special part of space is somehow modified? or does it mean that a mental
impression, conveyed by the distant agent--the phantom-begetter--to one
of the percipients is reflected telepathically from that percipient's
mind to the minds of the other--as it were secondary--percipients? The
reader already knows that I prefer the former of these views. And I
observe--as telling against that other view, of psychical
contagion--that in certain collective cases we discern no probable link
between any one of the percipient minds and the distant agent.

In some of that group of collective cases which we are at this moment
considering, this absence of link is noticeable in a special way. There
is nothing to show that any thought or emotion was passing from agent to
percipients at the moment of the apparition. On the contrary, the
indication is that there is no necessary connection whatever between the
agent's condition of mind at the moment and the fact that such and such
persons observed his phantasm. The projection of the phantasm, if I may
so term it, seems a matter wholly automatic on the agent's part, as
automatic and meaningless as a dream.

Assuming, then, that this is so--that these _bilocations_ or
self-projections to a point apparently remote from one's body do occur
without any appreciable stimulus from without, and in moments of
apparent calm and indifference--in what way will this fact tend to
modify previous conceptions?

It suggests that the continuous dream-life which we must suppose to run
concurrently with our waking life is potent enough to effect from time
to time enough of dissociation to enable some element of the personality
to be perceived at a distance from the organism. How much of
consciousness, if any, may be felt at the point where the excursive
phantasm is seen, we cannot say. But the notion that a mere incoherent
quasi-dream should thus become perceptible to others is fully in
accordance with the theories suggested in this work. For I regard
subliminal operation as _continuously_ going on, and I hold that the
degree of dissociation which can generate a perceptible phantasm is not
necessarily a profound change, since that perceptibility depends so
largely upon idiosyncrasies of agent and percipient as yet wholly
unexplained.

That special idiosyncracy on the part of the agent which tends to make
his phantasm easily visible has never yet, so far as I know, received a
name, although for convenience' sake it certainly needs one. I propose
to use the Greek word φυχορραγὡ, which means strictly "to let the soul
break loose," and from which I form the words _psychorrhagy_ and
_psychorrhagic_, on obvious analogies. When I say that the agents in
these cases were born with the _psychorrhagic diathesis_, I express what
I believe to be an important fact, physiological as well as
psychological, in terms which seem pedantic, but which are the only ones
which mean exactly what the facts oblige me to say. That which "breaks
loose" on my hypothesis is not (as in the Greek use of the word) the
whole principle of life in the organism; rather it is some psychical
element probably of very varying character, and definable mainly by its
power of producing a phantasm, perceptible by one or more persons, in
some portion or other of space. I hold that this phantasmogenetic effect
may be produced either on the mind, and consequently on the brain of
another person--in which case he may discern the phantasm somewhere in
his vicinity, according to his own mental habit or prepossession--or
else directly on a portion of space, "out in the open," in which case
several persons may simultaneously discern the phantasm in that actual
spot.

Let us apply this view to one of our most bizarre and puzzling
cases--that of Canon Bourne (see Appendix VI. B). Here I conceive that
Canon Bourne, while riding in the hunting-field, was also subliminally
dreaming of himself (imagining himself with some part of his submerged
consciousness) as having had a fall, and as beckoning to his
daughters--an incoherent dream indeed, but of a quite ordinary type. I
go on to suppose that, Canon Bourne being born with the psychorrhagic
diathesis, a certain psychical element so far detached itself from his
organism as to affect a certain portion of space--near the daughters of
whom he was thinking--to effect it, I say, not materially nor even
optically, but yet in such a manner that to a certain kind of immaterial
and non-optical sensitivity a phantasm of himself and his horse became
discernible. His horse was of course as purely a part of the phantasmal
picture as his hat. The non-optical distinctness with which the words
printed inside his hat were seen indicates that it was some inner
non-retinal vision which received the impression from the
phantasmogenetic centre. The other phantasmal appearance of Canon Bourne
chanced to affect only one percipient, but was of precisely the same
character; and of course adds, so far as it goes, to the plausibility of
the above explanation.

That explanation, indeed, suffers from the complexity and apparent
absurdity inevitable in dealing with phenomena which greatly transcend
known laws; but on the other hand it does in its way colligate Canon
Bourne's case with a good many others of odd and varying types. Thus
appearances such as Canon Bourne's are in my view exactly parallel to
the _hauntings_ ascribed to departed spirits. There also we find a
psychorrhagic diathesis--a habit or capacity on the part of certain
spirits of detaching some psychical element in such a manner as to form
a phantasmal picture, which represents the spirit as going through some
dream-like action in a given place.

The phantasmogenetic centre may thus, in my view, be equally well
produced by an incarnate or by a discarnate spirit.

Again, my hypothesis of a real modification of a part of space,
transforming it into a phantasmogenetic centre, applies to a phantasmal
voice just as well as to a phantasmal figure. The voice is not heard
acoustically any more than the figure is seen optically. Yet a
phantasmal voice may in a true sense "come from" a given spot.

These psychorrhagic cases are, I think, important as showing us the
earliest or feeblest stages of self-projection--where the dissociation
belongs to the dream-stratum--implicating neither the supraliminal will
nor the profounder subliminal strata.

And now let us pass on from these, which hardly concern anybody beyond
the phantom-begetter himself--and do not even add anything to his own
knowledge--to cases where there is some sort of communication from one
mind to another, or some knowledge gained by the excursive spirit.

It is impossible to arrange these groups in one continuous logical
series. But, roughly speaking, the degree in which the psychical
collision is _recollected_ on either side may in some degree indicate
its _intensity_, and may serve as a guide to our provisional
arrangement.

Following this scheme I shall begin with a group of cases which seem to
promise but little information,--cases, namely, where A, the agent, in
some way impresses or invades P, the percipient,--but nevertheless
neither A nor P retains in supraliminal memory any knowledge of what has
occurred.

Now to begin with we shall have no difficulty in admitting that cases of
this type are likely often to occur. The psychical _rapprochement_ of
telepathy takes place, _ex hypothesi_, in a region which is subliminal
for both agent and percipient, and from whence but few and scattered
impressions rise for either of them above the conscious threshold.
Telepathy will thus probably operate far more continuously than our
scattered glimpses would in themselves suggest.

But how can we outside inquirers know anything of telepathic incidents
which the principals themselves fail altogether to remember?

In ordinary life we may sometimes learn from bystanders incidents which
we cannot learn from the principals themselves. Can there be bystanders
who look on at a psychical invasion?

The question is of much theoretical import. On my view that there is a
real transference of something from the agent, involving an alteration
of some kind in a particular part of space, there might theoretically be
some bystander who might discern that alteration in space more clearly
than the person for whose benefit, so to say, the alteration was made.
If, on the other hand, what has happened is merely a transference of
some impulse "from mind to mind";--then one can hardly understand how
any mind except the mind aimed at could perceive the telepathic
impression. Yet, in _collective_ cases, persons in whom the agent feels
no interest, nay, of whose presence along with the intended percipient
he is not aware, do in fact receive the impression in just the same way
as that intended percipient himself. This was explained by Gurney as
probably due to a fresh telepathic transmission,--this time from the
due or original percipient's mind to the minds of his neighbours of the
moment.

Such a supposition, however, in itself a difficult one, becomes much
more difficult when the telepathic impulse has never, so far as we know,
penetrated into the due or intended percipient's mind at all. If in such
a case a bystander perceives the invading figure, I must think that he
perceives it merely as a bystander,--not as a person telepathically
influenced by the intended percipient, who does not in fact perceive
anything whatsoever. I quote in illustration a bizarre but well-attested
case (see Appendix VI. C) which this explanation seems to fit better
than any other.

In a somewhat similar case[113] there is strong attestation that a
sailor, watching by a dying comrade, saw figures around his hammock,
apparently representing the dying man's family, in mourning garb. The
family, although they had no ordinary knowledge of the sailor's illness,
had been alarmed by noises, etc., which rightly or wrongly they took as
indications of some danger to him. I conceive, then, that the wife paid
a psychical visit to her husband; and I take the mourning garb and the
accompanying children's figures to be symbolical accompaniments,
representing her thought, "My children will be orphans." I think this
more likely than that the sailor's children also should have possessed
this rare peculiarity of becoming perceptible at a distant point in
space. And secondary figures, as we shall see later on, are not uncommon
in such telepathic presentations. One may picture oneself as though
holding a child by the hand, or even driving in a carriage and pair, as
vividly as though carrying an umbrella or walking across a room; and one
may be thus pictured to others.

And here I note a gradual transition to the next large class of cases on
which I am about to enter. I am about to deal with _telæsthesia_;--with
cases where an agent-percipient--for he is both in one--makes a
clairvoyant excursion (of a more serious type than the mere
psychorrhagies already described), and brings back some memory of the
scene which he has psychically visited. Now, of course, it may happen
that he fails to bring back any such memory, or that if he _does_ bring
it back, he tells no one about it. In such cases, just as in the
telepathic cases of which I have just spoken, the excursive phantom may
possibly be observed by a bystander, and the circumstances may be such
as to involve some coincidence which negatives the supposition of the
bystander's mere subjective fancy. Such, I think, is the case which I
give in Appendix VI. D.

There is a similar case in _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p. 541,
where a girl, who is corporeally present in a certain drawing-room, is
seen phantasmally in a neighbouring grove, whither she herself presently
goes and hangs herself.

Ponderings on projected suicide form perhaps the strongest instance of
mental preoccupation with a particular spot. But of course, in our
ignorance of the precise quality of thought or emotion needed to prompt
a psychical excursion, we need not be surprised to find such an
excursion observed on some occasions as trivial as the "arrival-case" of
Col. Reed, with which I prefaced the mere psychorrhagic cases.

Again, there is a strange case,[114] which comes to us on good
authority, where we must suppose one man's subliminal impulse to have
created a picture of himself, his wife, a carriage and a horse,
persistent enough to have been watched for some seconds at least by
three observers in one place, and by a fourth and independent observer
at another point in the moving picture's career. The only alternative,
if the narrative be accepted as substantially true, will be the
hypothesis before alluded to of the flashing of an impending scene, as
in crystal-vision, from some source external to any of the human minds
concerned. I need hardly at this point repeat that in my view the wife
and the horse will be as purely a part of the man's conception of his
own aspect or environment as the coat on his back.

And here, for purposes of comparison, I must refer to one of the most
bizarre cases in our collection.[115] Four credible persons, to some
extent independently, see a carriage and pair, with two men on the box
and an inside occupant, under circumstances which make it impossible
that the carriage was real. Now this vision cannot have been
_precognitive_; nothing of the kind occurred for years after it, nor
well _could_ occur; and I am forced to regard it as the externalisation
of some dream, whether of an incarnate or of a discarnate mind. The
parallel between this case and the one mentioned above tends therefore
to show that the first, in spite of the paraphernalia of wife, horse,
and dog-cart, may have been the outcome of a single waking dream;--of
the phantasmogenetic dissociation of elements of one sole personality.

In the cases which I have just been discussing there has been a
psychical excursion, with its possibilities of clairvoyance; but the
excursive element has not brought home any assignable knowledge to the
supraliminal personality. I go on now to cases where such knowledge
_has_ thus been garnered. But here there is need of some further pause,
to consider a little in how many ways we can imagine that knowledge to
be reached.

Firstly, the distant knowledge may, it would seem, be reached through
hyperæsthesia,--an extended power of the ordinary senses. Secondly, it
sometimes seems to come through crystal-gazing or its correlative
shell-hearing,--artifices which seem to utilise the ordinary senses in a
new way. And besides these two avenues to distant knowledge there is a
_third_, the telepathic avenue, which, as we have already surmised,
sometimes shades off into the purely telæsthetic; when no distant
_mind_, but only the distant _scene_, seems to be attracting the
excursive spirit. And in the _fourth_ place we must remember that it is
mainly in the form of _dream or vision_ that the most striking instances
of telæsthesia which I have as yet recorded have come. Can we in any way
harmonise these various modes of perception? Can we discover any
condition of the percipient which is common to all?

To a certain limited extent such co-ordination is possible. In each
approach to telæsthesia in turn we find a tendency to something like a
dream-excursion. Hyperæsthesia, in the first place, although it exists
sometimes in persons wide awake, is characteristically an attribute of
sleep-waking states.

We have seen in discussing hypnotic experiments that it is sometimes
possible to extend the subject's perceptive faculty by gradual
suggestion, so far as to transform a hyperæsthesia which can still be
referred to the action of the sense-organs into a telæsthesia which
cannot be so referred. It is observable that percipients in such cases
sometimes describe their sensation as that of receiving an impression,
or seeing a picture placed before them; sometimes as that of
_travelling_ and visiting the distant scene or person. Or the feeling
may oscillate between these two sensations, just as the sense of
_time-relation_ in the picture shown may oscillate between past,
present, and future.

To all these complex sensations the phenomena of crystal-gazing offer
close analogies. I have already remarked on the curious fact that the
simple artifice of gazing into a speculum should prove the avenue to
phenomena of such various types. There may be very different origins
even for pictures which in the crystal present very similar aspects; and
certain sensations do also accompany these pictures; sensations not
merely of _gazing_ but sometimes (though rarely) of partial _trance_;
and oftener of _bilocation_;--of psychical _presence_ among the scenes
which the crystal has indeed initiated, but no longer seems to limit or
to contain.

The idea of psychical excursion thus suggested must, however, be
somehow reconciled with the frequently _symbolic_ character of these
visions. The features of a crystal-vision seem often to be no mere
transcription of material facts, but an abbreviated selection from such
facts, or even a bold modification of such facts with a view of telling
some story more quickly and clearly. We are familiar with the same kind
of succession of symbolical scenes in dream, or in waking reverie. And
of course if an intelligence outside the crystal-gazer's mind is
endeavouring to impress him, this might well be the chosen way.

And moreover through all telæsthetic vision some element of similar
character is wont to run--some indication that _mind_ has been at work
upon the picture--that the scene has not been presented, so to say, in
crude objectivity, but that there has been some _choice_ as to the
details discerned; and some _symbolism_ in the way in which they are
presented.

Let us consider how these characteristics affect different theories of
the mechanism of clairvoyance. Let us suppose first that there is some
kind of transition from hyperæsthesia to telæsthesia, so that when
peripheral sensation is no longer possible, central perception may be
still operating across obstacles otherwise insurmountable.

If this be the case, it seems likely that central perception will shape
itself on the types of perception to which the central tracts of the
brain are accustomed; and that the _connaissance supérieure_, the
telæsthetic knowledge, however it may really be acquired, will present
itself mainly as clairvoyance or clairaudience--as some form of sight or
sound. Yet these telæsthetic sights and sounds may be expected to show
some trace of their unusual origin. They may, for instance, be
_imperfectly co-ordinated_ with sights and sounds arriving through
external channels; and, since they must in some way be a translation of
supernormal impressions into sensory terms, they are likely to show
something _symbolic_ in character.

This tendency to subliminal symbolism, indeed, meets us at each point of
our inquiry. As an instance of it in its simplest form, I may mention a
case where a botanical student passing inattentively in front of the
glass door of a restaurant thought that he had seen _Verbascum Thapsus_
printed thereon. The real word was _Bouillon_; and that happens to be
the trivial name in French for the plant Verbascum Thapsus. The actual
optical perception had thus been subliminally transformed; the words
Verbascum Thapsus were the report to the inattentive supraliminal self
by a subliminal self more interested in botany than in dinner.

Nay, we know that our own optical perception is in its own way highly
symbolic. The scene which the baby sees instinctively,--which the
impressionist painter manages to see by a sort of deliberate
self-simplification,--is very different from the highly elaborate
interpretation and selection of blotches of colour by which the ordinary
adult figures to himself the visible world.

Now we adults stand towards this subliminal symbolism in much the same
attitude as the baby stands towards our educated optical symbolism. Just
as the baby fails to grasp the third dimension, so may we still be
failing to grasp a fourth;--or whatever be the law of that higher
cognisance which begins to report fragmentarily to man that which his
ordinary senses cannot discern.

Assuredly then we must not take the fact that any knowledge comes to us
symbolically as a proof that it comes to us from a mind outside our own.
The symbolism may be the inevitable language in which one stratum of our
personality makes its report to another. The symbolism, in short, may be
either the easiest, or the only possible psychical record of actual
objective fact; whether that fact be in the first instance discerned by
our deeper selves, or be conveyed to us from other minds in this
form;--elaborated for our mind's digestion, as animal food has been
elaborated for our body's digestion, from a primitive crudity of things.

But again one must question, on general idealistic principles, whether
there be in such cases any real distinction between symbolism and
reality,--between subjective and objective as we commonly use those
terms. The resisting matter which we see and touch has "solid" reality
for minds so constituted as to have the same subjective feeling awakened
by it. But to other minds, endowed with other forms of
sensibility--minds possibly both higher and more numerous than our
own--this solid matter may seem disputable and unreal, while thought and
emotion, perceived in ways unknown to us, may be the only reality.

This material world constitutes, in fact, a "privileged case"--a
simplified example--among all discernible worlds, so far as the
perception of incarnate spirits is concerned. For discarnate spirits it
is no longer a privileged case; to _them_ it is apparently easier to
discern thoughts and emotions by non-material signs.[116] But they need
not therefore be wholly cut off from discerning material things, any
more than incarnate spirits are wholly cut off from discerning
immaterial things--thoughts and emotions symbolised in phantasmal form.
"The ghost in man, the ghost that once was man," to use Tennyson's
words, have each of them to overcome by empirical artifices certain
difficulties which are of different type for each, but are not
insurmountable by either.

These reflections, applicable at various points in our argument, have
seemed specially needed when we had first to attack the meaning of the
so-called "travelling clairvoyance," of which instances were given in
the chapter on hypnotism. It was needful to consider how far there was a
continuous transition between these excursions and directer
transferences between mind and mind,--between telæsthesia and telepathy.
It now seems to me that such a continuous transition may well exist, and
that there is no absolute gulf between the supernormal perception of
ideas as existing in other minds, and the supernormal perception of what
we know as matter. All matter may, for aught we know, exist as an idea
in some cosmic mind, with which mind each individual spirit may be in
relation, as fully as with individual minds. The difference perhaps lies
rather in the fact that there may be generally a _summons_ from a
cognate mind which starts the so-called agent's mind into action; his
invasion may be in some way _invited_; while a spiritual excursion among
inanimate objects only may often lack an impulse to start it. If this be
so, it would explain the fact that such excursions have mainly succeeded
under the influence of hypnotic suggestion.

We see in travelling clairvoyance,[117] just as we see in
crystal-visions, a kind of fusion of all our forms of supernormal
faculty. There is telepathy, telæsthesia, retrocognition, precognition;
and in the cases reported by Cahagnet, which will be referred to in
