CHAPTER VII

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

    οὑκἑτι πρὁσω
    ἁβἁταν ἁλα κιὁνων ὑπἑρ Ἡρακλἑος περἁν εὑμαρἑς.
    ...θυμἑ, τἱνα πρὁς ἁλλοδαπἁν
    ἁκραν ἑμὁν πλὁον παραμειβεαι;

        --PINDAR


The course of our argument has gradually conducted us to a point of
capital importance. A profound and central question, approached in
irregular fashion from time to time in previous chapters, must now be
directly faced. From the actions and perceptions of spirits still in the
flesh, and concerned with one another, we must pass on to inquire into
the actions of spirits no longer in the flesh, and into the forms of
perception with which men still in the flesh respond to that unfamiliar
and mysterious agency.

There need, I hope, be no real break here in my previous line of
argument. The subliminal self, which we have already traced through
various phases of growing sensitivity, growing independence of organic
bonds, will now be studied as sensitive to yet remoter influences;--as
maintaining an independent existence even when the organism is
destroyed. Our subject will divide itself conveniently under three main
heads. _First_, it will be well to discuss briefly the nature of the
evidence to man's survival of death which may theoretically be
obtainable, and its possible connections with evidence set forth in
previous chapters. _Secondly_,--and this must form the bulk of the
present chapter,--we need a classified exposition of the main evidence
to survival thus far obtained;--so far, that is to say, as sensory
automatism--audition or apparition--is concerned; for motor
automatism--automatic writing and trance-utterance--must be left for
later discussion. _Thirdly_, there will be need of some consideration of
the meaning of this evidence as a whole, and of its implications alike
for the scientific and for the ethical future of mankind. Much more,
indeed, of discussion (as well as of evidence) than I can furnish will
be needed before this great conception can be realised or argued from
with the scientific thoroughness due to its position among fundamental
cosmical laws. Considering how familiar the notion--the vague shadowy
notion--of "immortality" has always been, it is strange indeed that so
little should have been done in these modern days to grasp or to
criticise it;--so little, one might almost say, since the _Phædo_ of
Plato.

Beginning, then, with the inquiry as to what kind of evidence ought to
be demanded for human survival, we are met first by the bluff statement
which is still often uttered even by intelligent men, that _no_ evidence
would convince them of such a fact; "neither would they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead."

Extravagant as such a profession sounds, it has a meaning which we shall
do well to note. These resolute antagonists mean that no new evidence
can carry conviction to them unless it be _continuous_ with old
evidence; and that they cannot conceive that evidence to a world of
spirit can possibly be continuous with evidence based upon our
experience of a world of matter. I agree with this demand for
continuity; and I agree also that the claims usually advanced for a
spiritual world have not only made no attempt at continuity with known
fact, but have even ostentatiously thrown such continuity to the winds.
The popular mind has expressly desired something startling, something
outside Law and above Nature. It has loved, if not a _Credo quia
absurdum_, at least a _Credo quia non probatum_. But the inevitable
retribution is a deep insecurity in the conviction thus attained.
Unsupported by the general fabric of knowledge, the act of faith seems
to shrink into the background as that great fabric stands and grows.

I can hardly too often repeat that my object in these pages is of a
quite opposite character. Believing that all cognisable Mind is as
continuous as all cognisable Matter, my ideal would be to attempt for
the realm of mind what the spectroscope and the law of gravitation have
effected for the realm of matter, and to carry that known cosmic
uniformity of substance and interaction upwards among the essences and
operations of an unknown spiritual world. And in order to explore these
unreachable altitudes I would not ask to stand with the theologian on
the summit of a "cloud-capt tower," but rather on plain earth at the
measured base of a trigonometrical survey.

If we would measure such a base, the jungle must be cleared to begin
with. Let us move for a while among first definitions; trying to make
clear to ourselves what kind of thing it is that we are endeavouring to
trace or discover. In popular parlance, we are looking out for _ghosts_.
What connotation, then, are we to give to the word "ghost"--a word
which has embodied so many unfounded theories and causeless fears? It
would be more satisfactory, in the present state of our knowledge,
simply to collect facts without offering speculative comment. But it
seems safer to begin by briefly pointing out the manifest errors of the
traditional view; since that tradition, if left unnoticed, would remain
lodged in the background even of many minds which have never really
accepted it.

Briefly, then, the popular view regards a "ghost" as a _deceased person
permitted by Providence to hold communication with survivors_. And this
short definition contains, I think, at least three unwarrantable
assumptions.

In the first place, such words as _permission_ and _Providence_ are
simply neither more nor less applicable to this phenomenon than to any
other. We conceive that all phenomena alike take place in accordance
with the laws of the universe, and consequently by permission of the
Supreme Power in the universe. Undoubtedly the phenomena with which we
are dealing are in this sense permitted to occur. But there is no _a
priori_ reason whatever for assuming that they are permitted in any
especial sense of their own, or that they form exceptions to law,
instead of being exemplifications of law. Nor is there any _a
posteriori_ reason for supposing any such inference to be deducible from
a study of the phenomena themselves. If we attempt to find in these
phenomena any poetical justice or manifest adaptation to human cravings,
we shall be just as much disappointed as if we endeavoured to find a
similar satisfaction in the ordinary course of terrene history.

In the second place, we have no warrant for the assumption that the
phantom seen, even though it be somehow _caused_ by a deceased person,
_is_ that deceased person, in any ordinary sense of the word. Instead of
appealing to the crude analogy of the living friend who, when he has
walked into the room, _is_ in the room, we shall find for the ghost a
much closer parallel in those hallucinatory figures or phantasms which
living persons can sometimes project at a distance.

But experience shows that when--as with these _post-mortem_
phantoms--the deceased person has gone well out of sight or reach there
is a tendency, so to say, to _anthropomorphose_ the apparition; to
suppose that, as the deceased person is not provably anywhere else, he
is probably here; and that the apparition is bound to behave
accordingly. All such assumptions must be dismissed, and the phantom
must be taken on its merits, as indicating merely a certain connection
with the deceased, the precise nature of that connection being a part of
the problem to be solved.

And in the third place, just as we must cease to say that the phantom
_is_ the deceased, so also must we cease to ascribe to the phantom the
motives by which we imagine that the deceased might be swayed. We must
therefore exclude from our definition of a ghost any words which assume
its intention to communicate with the living. It may bear such a
relation to the deceased that it can reflect or represent his presumed
wish to communicate, or it may not. If, for instance, its relation to
his _post-mortem_ life be like the relation of my dreams to my earthly
life, it may represent little that is truly his, save such vague
memories and instincts as give a dim individuality to each man's trivial
dreams.

Let us attempt, then, a truer definition. Instead of describing a
"ghost" as a dead person permitted to communicate with the living, let
us define it as _a manifestation of persistent personal energy_, or as
an indication that some kind of force is being exercised after death
which is in some way connected with a person previously known on earth.
In this definition we have eliminated, as will be seen, a great mass of
popular assumptions. Yet we must introduce a further proviso, lest our
definition still seem to imply an assumption which we have no right to
make. It is theoretically possible that this force or influence, which
after a man's death creates a phantasmal impression of him, may indicate
no continuing action on his part, but may be some residue of the force
or energy which he generated while yet alive. There may be _veridical
after-images_--such as Gurney hints at (_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. p.
417) when in his comments on the recurring figure of an old woman--seen
on the bed where she was murdered--he remarks that this figure suggests
not so much "any continuing local interest on the part of the deceased
person, as the survival of a mere image, impressed, we cannot guess how,
on we cannot guess what, by that person's physical organism, and
perceptible at times to those endowed with some cognate form of
sensitiveness."

Strange as this notion may seem, it is strongly suggested by many of the
cases of _haunting_ which do not fall within the scope of the present
chapter. We shall presently find that there is strong evidence for the
recurrence of the same hallucinatory figures in the same localities, but
weak evidence to indicate any purpose in most of these figures, or any
connection with bygone individuals, or with such tragedies as are
popularly supposed to start a ghost on its career. In some of these
cases of frequent, meaningless recurrence of a figure in a given spot,
we are driven to wonder whether it can be some deceased person's past
frequentation of that spot, rather than any fresh action of his after
death, which has generated what I have termed the veridical
after-image--veridical in the sense that it communicates information,
previously unknown to the percipient, as to a former inhabitant of the
haunted locality.

Such are some of the questions which our evidence suggests. And I may
point out that the very fact that such bizarre problems should present
themselves at every turn does in a certain sense tend to show that these
apparitions are not purely subjective things,--do not originate merely
in the percipient's imagination. For they are not like what any man
would have imagined. What man's mind does tend to fancy on such topics
may be seen in the endless crop of fictitious ghost stories, which
furnish, indeed, a curious proof of the persistence of preconceived
notions. For they go on being framed according to canons of their own,
and deal with a set of imaginary phenomena quite different from those
which actually occur. The actual phenomena, I may add, could scarcely be
made romantic. One true "ghost story" is apt to be very like another,
and most of them to be fragmentary and apparently meaningless. Their
meaning, that is to say, lies in their conformity, not to the
mythopœic instinct of mankind, which fabricates and enjoys the
fictitious tales, but to some unknown law, not based on human sentiment
or convenience at all.

And thus, absurdly enough, we sometimes hear men ridicule the phenomena
which actually do happen, simply because those phenomena do not suit
their preconceived notions of what ghostly phenomena ought to be;--not
perceiving that this very divergence, this very unexpectedness, is in
itself no slight indication of an origin _outside_ the minds which
obviously were so far from anticipating anything of the kind.

And in fact the very qualities which are most apt to raise derision are
such as the evidence set forth in the earlier chapters of this work
might reasonably lead us to expect. For I hold that now for the first
time can we form a conception of ghostly communications which shall in
any way consist or cohere with more established conceptions; which can
be presented as in any way a development of facts which are already
experimentally known. Two preliminary conceptions were
needed--conceptions in one sense ancient enough; but yet the first of
which has only in this generation found its place in science, while the
second is as yet awaiting its brevet of orthodoxy. The first conception
is that with which hypnotism and various automatisms have familiarised
us,--the conception of multiplex personality, of the potential
coexistence of many states and many memories in the same individual. The
second is the conception of telepathy; of the action of mind on mind
apart from the ordinary organs of sense; and especially of its action by
means of hallucinations; by the generation of veridical phantasms which
form, as it were, messages from men still in the flesh. And I believe
that these two conceptions are in this way connected, that the
telepathic message generally starts from, and generally impinges upon, a
subconscious or submerged stratum in both agent and percipient.[129]
Wherever there is hallucination, whether delusive or veridical, I hold
that a message of some sort is forcing its way upwards from one stratum
of personality to another,--a message which may be merely dreamlike and
incoherent, or which may symbolise a fact otherwise unreachable by the
percipient personality. And the mechanism seems much the same whether
the message's path be continued within one individual or pass between
two; whether A's own submerged self be signalling to his emergent self,
or B be telepathically stimulating the hidden fountains of perception in
A. If anything like this be true, it seems plainly needful that all that
we know of abnormal or supernormal communications between minds, or
states of the same mind, still embodied in flesh, should be searched for
analogies which may throw light on this strangest mode of intercourse
between embodied and disembodied minds.

A communication (if such a thing exists) from a departed person to a
person still on earth is, at any rate, a communication from a mind in
one state of existence to a mind in a very different state of existence.
And it is, moreover, a communication from one mind to another which
passes through some channel other than the ordinary channels of sense,
since on one side of the gulf no material sense-organs exist. It will
apparently be an extreme instance of both these classes--of
communications between state and state,[130] and of telepathic
communications; and we ought, therefore, to approach it by considering
the less advanced cases of both these types.

On what occasions do we commonly find a mind conversing with another
mind not on the same plane with itself?--with a mind inhabiting in some
sense a different world, and viewing the environment with a difference
of outlook greater than the mere difference of character of the two
personages will account for?

The first instance of this sort which will occur to us lies in
spontaneous somnambulism, or colloquy between a person asleep and a
person awake. And observe here how slight an accident allows us to
enter into converse with a state which at first sight seems a type of
incommunicable isolation. "Awake, we share our world," runs the old
saying, "but each dreamer inhabits a world of his own." Yet the dreamer,
apparently so self-enclosed, may be gently led, or will spontaneously
enter, into converse with waking men.

The somnambulist, or rather the somniloquist--for it is the talking
rather than the walking which is the gist of the matter--is thus our
first natural type of the _revenant_.

And observing the habits of somnambulists, we note that the degree in
which they can communicate with other minds varies greatly in different
cases. One sleep-waker will go about his customary avocations without
recognising the presence of any other person whatever; another will
recognise certain persons only, or will answer when addressed, but only
on certain subjects, his mind coming into contact with other minds only
on a very few points. Rarely or never will a somnambulist spontaneously
notice what other persons are doing, and adapt his own actions thereto.

Next let us turn from natural to induced sleep-waking, from idiopathic
somnambulism to the hypnotic trance. Here, too, throughout the different
stages of the trance, we find a varying and partial (or elective) power
of communication. Sometimes the entranced subject makes no sign
whatever; sometimes he seems able to hear and answer one person, or
certain persons, and not others; sometimes he will talk freely to all;
but, however freely he may talk, he is not exactly his waking self, and
as a rule he has no recollection, or a very imperfect recollection, in
waking life of what he has said or done in his trance.

Judging, then, from such analogy as communications from one living state
to another can suggest to us, we shall expect that the communication of
a disembodied or discarnate person with an incarnate, if such exist,
will be subject to narrow limitations, and very possibly will not form a
part of the main current of the supposed discarnate consciousness.

These preliminary considerations are applicable to any kind of alleged
communication from the departed--whether well or ill evidenced; whether
conveyed in sensory or in motor form.

Let us next consider what types of communication from the dead our
existing evidence of communications among the living suggests to us as
analogically possible. It appears to me that there is an important
parallelism running through each class of our experiments in automatism
and each class of our spontaneous phenomena. Roughly speaking, we may
say that our experiment and observation up to this point have comprised
five different stages of phenomena, viz., (I.) hypnotic suggestion;
(II.) telepathic experiments; (III.) spontaneous telepathy during life;
(IV.) phantasms at death; (V.) phantasms after death. And we find, I
think, that the same types of communication meet us at each stage; so
that this recurrent similarity of types raises a presumption that the
underlying mechanism of manifestation at each stage may be in some way
similar.

Again using a mere rough form of division, we shall find three main
forms of manifestation at each stage: (1) hallucinations of the senses;
(2) emotional and motor impulses; (3) definite intellectual messages.

(I.) And first let us start from a class of experiments into which
telepathy does not enter, but which exhibit in its simplest form the
mechanism of the automatic transfer of messages from one stratum to
another of the same personality. I speak, of course, of post-hypnotic
suggestions. Here the agent is a living man, operating in an ordinary
way, by direct speech. The unusual feature lies in the condition of the
percipient, who is hypnotised at the time, and is thus undergoing a kind
of dislocation of personality, or temporary upheaval of a habitually
subjacent stratum of the self. This hypnotic personality, being for the
time at the surface, receives the agent's verbal suggestion, of which
the percipient's waking self is unaware. Then afterwards, when the
waking self has resumed its usual upper position, the hypnotic self
carries out at the stated time the given suggestion,--an act whose
origin the upper stratum of consciousness does not know, but which is in
effect a message communicated to the upper stratum from the now
submerged or subconscious stratum on which the suggestion was originally
impressed.

And this message may take any one of the three leading forms mentioned
above;--say a hallucinatory image of the hypnotiser or of some other
person; or an impulse to perform some action; or a definite word or
sentence to be written automatically by the waking self, which thus
learns what order has been laid upon the hypnotic self while the waking
consciousness was in abeyance.

(II.) Now turn to our experiments in thought-transference. Here again
the agent is a living man; but he is no longer operating by ordinary
means,--by spoken words or visible gestures. He is operating on the
percipient's subconscious self by means of a telepathic impulse, which
he desires, indeed, to project from himself, and which the percipient
may desire to receive, but of whose _modus operandi_ the ordinary waking
selves of agent and percipient alike are entirely unaware.

Here again we may divide the messages sent into the same three main
classes. First come the hallucinatory figures--always or almost always
of himself--which the agent causes the percipient to see. Secondly come
impulses to act, telepathically impressed; as when the hypnotiser
desires his subject to come to him at an hour not previously notified.
And thirdly, we have a parallel to the post-hypnotic writing of definite
words or figures in our own experiments on the direct telepathic
transmission of words, figures, cards, etc., from the agent, using no
normal means of communication, to the percipient, either in the
hypnotised or in the waking state.

(III.) We come next to the spontaneous phantasms occurring during life.
Here we find the same three broad classes of messages, with this
difference, that the actual apparitions, which in our telepathic
experimentation are thus far unfortunately rare, become now the most
important class. I need not recall the instances given in Chapters IV.
and VI., etc., where an agent undergoing some sudden crisis seems in
some way to generate an apparition of himself seen by a distant
percipient. Important also in this connection are those apparitions of
the _double_, where some one agent is seen repeatedly in phantasmal form
by different percipients at times when that agent is undergoing no
special crisis.

Again, among our telepathic impressions generated (spontaneously, not
experimentally) by living agents, we have cases, which I need not here
recapitulate, of pervading sensations of distress; or impulses to return
home, which are parallel to the hypnotised subject's impulse to approach
his distant hypnotiser, at a moment when that hypnotiser is willing him
to do so.

And thirdly, among these telepathic communications from the living to
the living, we have definite sentences automatically written,
communicating facts which the distant person knows, but is not
consciously endeavouring to transmit.

(IV.) Passing on to phantasms which cluster about the moment of death,
we find our three main classes of cases still meeting us. Our readers
are familiar with the _visual_ cases, where there is an actual
apparition of the dying man, seen by one or more persons; and also with
the _emotional and motor_ cases, where the impression, although
powerful, is not definitely sensory in character. And various cases also
have been published where the message has consisted of definite words,
not always externalised as an auditory hallucination, but sometimes
automatically _uttered_ or automatically _written_ by the percipient
himself, as in the case communicated by Dr. Liébeault (see Appendix
VIII. C), where a girl writes the message announcing her friend's death
at the time when that friend is, in fact, dying in a distant city.

(V.) And now I maintain that in these post-mortem cases also we find the
same general classes persisting, and in somewhat the same proportion.
Most conspicuous are the actual _apparitions_, with which, indeed, the
following pages will mainly deal. It is very rare to find an apparition
which seems to impart any verbal message; but a case of this kind has
been given in Appendix IV. F. As a rule, however, the apparition is of
the apparently automatic, purposeless character, already so fully
described. We have also the _emotional and motor_ class of post-mortem
cases;[131] and these may, perhaps, be more numerous in proportion than
our collection would indicate; for it is obvious that impressions which
are so much less definite than a visual hallucination (although they may
be even more impressive to the percipient himself) can rarely be used as
evidence of communication with the departed.

But now I wish to point out that, besides these two classes of
post-mortem manifestations, we have our _third_ class also still
persisting; we have definite verbal messages which at least purport, and
sometimes, I think, with strong probability, to come from the departed.

I have, indeed, for the reader's convenience, postponed these motor
cases to a subsequent chapter, so that the evidence here and now
presented for survival will be very incomplete. Yet, at any rate, we are
gradually getting before us a fairly definite task. We have in this
chapter to record and analyse such sensory experiences of living men as
seem referable to the action of some human individuality persisting
after death. We have also obtained some preliminary notion as to the
kind of phenomena for which we can hope, especially as to what their
probable limitations must be, considering how great a gulf between
psychical states any communication must overpass.

Let us now press the actual evidential question somewhat closer. Let us
consider, for it is by no means evident at first sight, what conditions
a visual or auditory phantasm is bound to fulfil before it can be
regarded as indicating _primâ facie_ the influence of a discarnate mind.
The discussion may be best introduced by quoting the words in which
Edmund Gurney opened it in 1888.[132] The main evidential lines as there
laid down retain their validity, although the years which have since
passed have greatly augmented the testimony, and in so doing have
illustrated yet other tests of true post-mortem communication,--to which
we shall presently come.

     "It is evident that in alleged cases of apparitions of the dead,
     the point which we have held to distinguish certain apparitions of
     _living_ persons from purely subjective hallucinations is
     necessarily lacking. That point is _coincidence_ between the
     apparition and some critical or exceptional condition of the person
     who seems to appear; but with regard to the dead, we have no
     independent knowledge of their condition, and therefore never have
     the opportunity of observing any such coincidences.

     "There remain three, and I think only three, conditions which might
     establish a presumption that an apparition or other immediate
     manifestation of a dead person is something more than a mere
     subjective hallucination of the percipient's senses. Either (1)
     more persons than one might be independently affected by the
     phenomenon; or (2) the phantasm might convey information,
     afterwards discovered to be true, of something which the percipient
     had never known; or (3) the appearance might be that of a person
     whom the percipient himself had never seen, and of whose aspect he
     was ignorant, and yet his description of it might be sufficiently
     definite for identification. But though one or more of these
     conditions would have to be fully satisfied before we could be
     convinced that any particular apparition of the dead had some cause
     external to the percipient's own mind, there is one more general
     characteristic of the class which is sufficiently suggestive of
     such a cause to be worth considering. I mean the disproportionate
     number of cases which occur _shortly after_ the death of the person
     represented. Such a time-relation, if frequently enough
     encountered, might enable us to argue for the objective origin of
     the phenomenon in a manner analogous to that which leads us to
     conclude that many phantasms of the living have an objective (a
     telepathic) origin. For, according to the doctrines of
     probabilities, a hallucination representing a known person would
     not _by chance_ present a definite time-relation to a special
     cognate event--viz., the death of that person--in more than a
     certain percentage of the whole number of similar hallucinations
     that occur; and if that percentage is decidedly exceeded, there is
     reason to surmise that some other cause than chance--in other
     words, some objective origin for the phantasm--is present."

But on the other hand, a phantasm representing a person whose death is
recent is specially likely to arouse interest and, in cases where the
death is previously known to the percipient, his emotional state may be
considered a sufficient cause of the hallucination.

     "If, then," Gurney continues, "we are to draw any probable
     conclusion as to the objective nature of _post-mortem_ appearances
     and communications (or of some of them) from the fact of their
     special frequency soon after death, we must confine ourselves to
     cases where the fact of death has been unknown to the percipient at
     the time of his experience. Now, in these days of letters and
     telegrams, people for the most part hear of the deaths of friends
     and relatives within a very few days, sometimes within a very few
     hours, after the death occurs; so that appearances of the sort
     required would, as a rule, have to follow very closely indeed on
     the death. Have we evidence of any considerable number of such
     cases?

     "Readers of _Phantasms of the Living_ will know that we have. In a
     number of cases which were treated in that book as examples of
     telepathic transference from a dying person, the person was
     actually dead at the time that the percipient's experience
     occurred; and the inclusion of such cases under the title of
     _Phantasms of the Living_ naturally occasioned a certain amount of
     adverse criticism. Their inclusion, it will be remembered, required
     an assumption which cannot by any means be regarded as certain. We
     had to suppose that the telepathic transfer took place just before,
     or exactly at, the moment of death; but that the impression
     remained latent in the percipient's mind, and only after an
     interval emerged into his consciousness, whether as waking vision
     or as dream or in some other form. Now, as a provisional
     hypothesis, I think that this assumption was justified. For in the
     first place, the moment of death is, in time, the central point of
     a cluster of abnormal experiences occurring to percipients at a
     distance, of which some _precede_, while others follow, the death;
     it is natural, therefore, to surmise that the same explanation will
     cover the whole group, and that the motive force in each of its
     divisions lies in a state of the 'agent' prior to bodily death. In
     the second place, some of the facts of experimental
     thought-transference countenance the view that 'transferred
     impressions' may be latent for a time before the recipient becomes
     aware of them; and recent discoveries with respect to the whole
     subject of automatism and 'secondary intelligence' make it seem far
     less improbable than it would otherwise have seemed that telepathy
     may take effect first on the 'unconscious' part of the mind.[133]
     And in the third place, the period of supposed latency has in a
     good many instances been a period when the person affected was in
     activity, and when his mind and senses were being solicited by
     other things; and in such cases it is specially easy to suppose
     that the telepathic impression did not get the right conditions for
     rising into consciousness until a season of silence and
     _recueillement_ arrived.[134] But though the theory of latency has
     thus a good deal to be said for it, my colleagues and I are most
     anxious not to be supposed to be putting forward as a dogma what
     must be regarded at present merely as a working hypothesis.
     Psychical research is of all subjects the one where it is most
     important to avoid this error, and to keep the mind open for new
     interpretations of the facts. And in the present instance there are
     certain definite objections which may fairly be made to the
     hypothesis that a telepathic impression derived from a dying person
     may emerge after hours of latency. The experimental cases to which
     I have referred as analogous are few and uncertain, and, moreover,
     in them the period of latency has been measured by seconds or
     minutes, not by hours. And though, as I have said, some of the
     instances of apparent delay among the death-cases might be
     accounted for by the fact that the percipient's mind or senses
     needed to be withdrawn from other occupations before the
     manifestation could take place, there are other instances where
     this is not so, and where no ground at all appears for connecting
     the delay with the percipient's condition. On the whole, then, the
     alternative hypothesis--that the condition of the phenomenon on the
     'agent's' side (be it psychical or be it physical) is one which
     only comes into existence at a distinct interval after death, and
     that the percipient really is impressed at the moment, and not
     before the moment, when he is conscious of the impression--is one
     which must be steadily kept in view.

     "So far I have been speaking of cases where the interval between
     the death and the manifestation was so short as to make the theory
     of latency possible. The rule adopted in _Phantasms of the Living_
     was that this interval must not exceed twelve hours. But we have
     records of a few cases where this interval has been greatly
     exceeded, and yet where the fact of the death was still unknown to
     the percipient at the time of his experience. The theory of latency
     cannot reasonably be applied to cases where weeks or months divide
     the vision (or whatever it may be) from the moment of death, which
     is the latest at which an ordinary[135] telepathically transferred
     idea could have obtained access to the percipient. And the
     existence of such cases--so far as it tends to establish the
     reality of objectively-caused apparitions of the dead--diminishes
     the objection to conceiving that the appearances, etc., which have
     very shortly _followed_ death have had a different causation from
     those which have coincided with or very shortly _preceded_ it. For
     we shall not be inventing a wholly new class for the former cases,
     but only provisionally shifting them from one class to another--to
     a much smaller and much less well-evidenced class, it is true, but
     one nevertheless for which we have evidence enough to justify us in
     expecting more."

This, as I conceive, is a sound method of proceeding from ground made
secure in _Phantasms of the Living_--and traversed in my own just
previous chapter--to cases closely analogous, save for that little
difference in _time-relations_, that occurrence in the hours which
follow, instead of the hours which precede, bodily dissolution, which
counts for so much in our insight into cosmic law.[136]

The hypothesis of _latency_ which thus meets us _in limine_ in this
inquiry will soon be found inadequate to cover the facts. Yet it will be
well to dwell somewhat more fully upon its possible range.

If we examine the proportionate number of apparitions observed at
various periods before and after death, we find that they increase very
rapidly for the few hours which precede death, and decrease gradually
during the hours and days which follow, until after about a year's time
they become merely sporadic.

Yet one more point must be touched on, to avoid misconception of the
phrase cited above, that "the moment of death is the centre of a cluster
of abnormal experiences, of which some precede, while others follow, the
death." Gurney, of course, did not mean to assume that the act of death
itself was the cause of all these experiences. Those which occur before
death may be caused or conditioned, not by the death itself, but by the
abnormal state, as of coma, delirium, etc., which preceded the death.
This we say because we have many instances where veridical phantasms
have coincided with moments of _crisis_--carriage-accidents and the
like--occurring to distant agents, but not followed by death.
Accordingly we find that in almost all cases where a phantasm,
apparently veridical, has _preceded_ the agent's death, that death was
the result of disease and not of accident. To this rule there are very
few exceptions. There is a case given in _Phantasms of the Living_ (vol.
ii. p. 52), where the phantasm seems on the evidence to have preceded by
about half an hour (longitude allowed for) a sudden death by drowning.
In this case the percipient was in a Norfolk farmhouse, the drowning
man--or agent--was in a storm off the island of Tristan d'Acunha; and we
have suggested that an error of clocks or of observation may account for
the discrepancy. In another case the death was in a sense a violent one,
for it was a suicide; but the morbidly excited state of the girl a few
hours before death--when her phantasm was seen--was in itself a state
of crisis. But there are also a few recorded cases (none of which were
cited in _Phantasms of the Living_) where a phantasm or double of some
person has been observed some days previous to that person's accidental
death. The evidence obtained in the Census of Hallucinations, however,
tended to show that cases of this sort are too few to suggest even
_primâ facie_ a causal connection between the death and the apparition
(see _Proceedings_ S.P.R. vol. x. p. 331).

I now proceed briefly to review some of the cases where the interval
between death and phantasm has been measurable by minutes or hours.

It is not easy to get definite cases where the interval has been
measurable by _minutes_; for if the percipient is at a distance from the
agent we can seldom be sure that the clocks at both places have been
correct, and correctly observed; while if he is _present_ with the agent
we can rarely be sure that the phantasm observed is more than a mere
subjective hallucination. Thus we have several accounts of a rushing
sound heard by the watcher of a dying man just after his apparent death,
or of some kind of luminosity observed near his person; but this is just
the moment when we may suppose some subjective hallucination likely to
occur, and if one person's senses alone are affected we cannot allow
much evidential weight to the occurrence.[137]

There are some circumstances, however, in which, in spite of the fact
that the death is already known, a hallucination occurring shortly
afterwards may have some slight evidential value. Thus we have a case
where a lady who knew that her sister had died a few hours previously,
but who was not herself in any morbidly excited condition, seemed to see
some one enter her own dining-room, opening and shutting the door. The
percipient (who had never had any other hallucination) was much
astonished when she found no one in the dining-room; but it did not till
some time afterwards occur to her that the incident could be in any way
connected with her recent loss. This reminds us of a case (ii. p.
694[138]) where the Rev. R. M. Hill sees a tall figure rush into the
room, which alarms and surprises him, then vanishes before he has time
to recognise it. An uncle, a tall man, dies about that moment, and it is
remarked that although Mr. Hill knew his uncle to be ill, the anxiety
which he may have felt would hardly have given rise to an unrecognised
and formidable apparition.

There are cases also where a percipient who has had an apparition of a
friend shortly after that friend's known death has had _veridical_
hallucinations at other times, and has never had any hallucination of
purely subjective origin. Such a percipient may naturally suppose that
his apparition of the departed friend possessed the same veridical
character which was common to the rest, although it was not _per se_
evidential, since the fact of the death was already known.

For the present, however, it will be better to return to the cases which
are free from this important _primâ facie_ drawback--cases where the
percipient was, at any rate, unaware that the death, which the phantasm
seemed to indicate, had in fact taken place.

In the first place, there are a few cases where a percipient is informed
of a death by a veridical phantasm, and then some hours afterwards a
similar phantasm differing perhaps in detail, recurs.

Such was the case of Archdeacon Farler (i. p. 414), who _twice_ during
one night saw the dripping figure of a friend who, as it turned out, had
been drowned during the previous day. Even the first appearance was
several hours after the death, but this we might explain by the latency
of the impression till a season of quiet. The second appearance may have
been a kind of recrudescence of the first; but if the theory of latency
be discarded, so that the _first_ appearance (if more than a mere chance
coincidence) is held to depend upon some energy excited by the deceased
person after death, it would afford some ground for regarding the
_second_ appearance as also veridical. The figure in this case was once
more seen a fortnight later, and on this occasion, as Archdeacon Farler
informs me, in ordinary garb, with no special trace of accident.

A similar repetition occurs in seven other cases recorded in _Phantasms
of the Living_.[139]

Turning now to the cases where the phantasm is not repeated, but occurs
some hours after death, let us take a few narratives where the interval
of time is pretty certain, and consider how far the hypothesis of
_latency_ looks probable in each instance.

Where there is no actual hallucination, but only a feeling of unique
_malaise_ or distress following at a few hours' interval on a friend's
death at a distance, as in Archdeacon Wilson's case (i. p. 280), it is
very hard to picture to ourselves what has taken place. Some injurious
shock communicated to the percipient's brain at the moment of the
agent's death may conceivably have slowly worked itself into
consciousness. The delay may have been due, so to say, to physiological
rather than to psychical causes.

Next take a case like that of Mrs. Wheatcroft (i. p. 420), or of Mrs.
Evens (ii. p. 690), or Sister Bertha (quoted below in Appendix VII. F),
where a definite hallucination of sight or sound occurs some hours after
the death, but in the middle of the night. It is in a case of this sort
that we can most readily suppose that a "telepathic impact" received
during the day has lain dormant until other excitations were hushed, and
has externalised itself as a hallucination after the first sleep, just
as when we wake from a first sleep some subject of interest or anxiety,
which has been thrust out of our thoughts during the day, will often
well upwards into consciousness with quite a new distinctness and force.
But on the other hand, in the case (for instance) of Mrs. Teale (ii. p.
693), there is a deferment of some eight hours, and then the
hallucination occurs while the percipient is sitting wide awake in the
middle of her family. And in one of the most remarkable dream-cases in
our collection (given in Chapter IV.), Mrs. Storie's experience does not
resemble the mere emergence of a latent impression. It is long and
complex, and suggests some sort of clairvoyance; but if it be
"telepathic clairvoyance," that is, a picture transferred from the
decedent's mind, then it almost requires us to suppose that a
_post-mortem_ picture was thus transferred, a view of the accident and
its consequences _fuller_ than any which could have flashed through the
dying man's mind during his moment of sudden and violent death from "the
striking off of the top of the skull" by a railway train.

If once we assume that the deceased person's mind could continue to act
on living persons after his bodily death, then the confused horror of
the series of pictures which were presented to Mrs. Storie's
view--mixed, it should be said, with an element of _fresh departure_
which there was nothing in the accident itself to suggest--would
correspond well enough to what one can imagine a man's feelings a few
hours after such a death to be. This is trespassing, no doubt, on
hazardous ground; but if once we admit communication from the other side
of death as a working hypothesis, we must allow ourselves to imagine
something as to the attitude of the communicating mind, and the least
violent supposition will be that that mind is still in part at least
occupied with the same thoughts which last occupied it on earth. It is
possible that there may be some interpretation of this kind for some of
the cases where a funeral scene, or a dead body, is what the phantasm
presents. There is a remarkable case (i. p. 265) [§ 664] where a lady
sees the body of a well-known London physician--about ten hours after
death--lying in a bare unfurnished room (a cottage hospital abroad).
Here the description, as we have it, would certainly fit best with some
kind of telepathic clairvoyance prolonged after death--some power on the
deceased person's part to cause the percipient to share the picture
which might at that moment be occupying his own mind.

It will be seen that these phenomena are not of so simple a type as to
admit of our considering them from the point of view of _time-relations_
alone. Whatever else, indeed, a "ghost" may be, it is probably one of
the most complex phenomena in nature. It is a function of two unknown
variables--the incarnate spirit's sensitivity and the discarnate
spirit's capacity of self-manifestation. Our attempt, therefore, to
study such intercourse may begin at either end of the
communication--with the percipient or with the agent. We shall have to
ask, How does the incarnate mind receive the message? and we shall have
to ask also, How does the discarnate mind originate and convey it?

Now it is by pressing the _former_ of these two questions that we have,
I think, the best chance at present of gaining fresh light. So long as
we are considering the incarnate mind we are, to some extent at least,
on known ground; and we may hope to discern analogies in some other
among that mind's operations to that possibly most perplexing of all its
operations, which consists in taking cognisance of messages from
unembodied minds, and from an unseen world. I think, therefore, that
"the surest way, though most about," as Bacon would say, to the
comprehension of this sudden and startling phenomenon lies in the study
of other rare mental phenomena which can be observed more at leisure,
just as "the surest way, though most about," to the comprehension of
some blazing inaccessible star has lain in the patient study of the
spectra of the incandescence of terrestrial substances which lie about
our feet. I am in hopes that by the study of various forms of subliminal
consciousness, subliminal faculty, subliminal perception, we may
ultimately obtain a conception of our own total being and operation
which may show us the incarnate mind's perception of the discarnate
mind's message as no isolated anomaly, but an orderly exercise of
natural and innate powers, frequently observed in action in somewhat
similar ways.

It is, I say, from this human or terrene side that I should prefer, were
it possible, to study in the first instance all our cases. Could we not
only share but interpret the percipient's subjective feelings, could we
compare those feelings with the feelings evoked by ordinary vision or
telepathy among living men, we might get at a more intimate knowledge of
what is happening than any observation from outside of the details of an
apparition can supply. But this, of course, is not possible in any
systematic way; occasional glimpses, inferences, comparisons, are all
that we can attain to as yet. On the other hand, it is comparatively
easy to arrange the whole group of our cases in some series depending on
their observed external character and details. They can, indeed, be
arranged in more than one series of this kind--the difficulty is in
selecting the most instructive. That which I shall here select is in
some points arbitrary, but it has the advantage of bringing out the wide
range of variation in the clearness and content of these apparitional
communications, here arranged mainly in a descending series, beginning
with those cases where fullest knowledge or purpose is shown, and ending
with those where the indication of intelligence becomes feeblest, dying
away at last into vague sounds and sights without recognisable
significance.

But I shall begin by referring to a small group of cases,[140] which I
admit to be anomalous and non-evidential--for we cannot prove that they
were more than subjective experiences--yet which certainly should not be
lost, filling as they do, in all their grotesqueness, a niche in our
series otherwise as yet vacant. If man's spirit is separated at death
from his organism, there must needs be cases where that separation,
although apparently, is not really complete. There must be subjective
sensations corresponding to the objective external facts of apparent
death and subsequent resuscitation. Nor need it surprise those who may
have followed my general argument, if those subjective sensations should
prove to be dreamlike and fantastic. Here, as so often in our inquiries,
the very oddity and unexpectedness of the details--the absence of that
solemnity which one would think the dying man's own mind would have
infused into the occasion--may point to the existence of some reality
beneath the grotesque symbolism of the transitional dream.

The transitional dream, I call it, for it seems to me not
improbable--remote though such a view may be from current notions--that
the passage from one state to another may sometimes be accompanied with
some temporary lack of adjustment between experiences taking place in
such different environments--between the systems of symbolism belonging
to the one and to the other state. But the reason why I refer to the
cases in this place is that here we have perhaps our nearest possible
approach to the sensations of the spirit which is endeavouring to
manifest itself;--an inside view of a would-be apparition. The
narratives suggest, moreover, that spirits recently freed from the body
may enjoy a fuller perception of earthly scenes than it is afterwards
possible to retain, and that thus the predominance of apparitions of the
_recently_ dead may be to some extent explained.

We have, indeed, very few cases where actual apparitions give evidence
of any _continuity_ in the knowledge possessed by a spirit of friends on
earth. Such evidence is, naturally enough, more often furnished by
automatic script or utterance. But there is one case (which I give in
Appendix VII. A) where a spirit is recorded as appearing repeatedly--in
guardian-angel fashion--and especially as foreseeing and sympathising
with the survivor's future marriage.

Among repeated apparitions this case at present stands almost alone; its
parallels will be found when we come to deal with the persistent
"controls," or alleged communicating spirits, which influence
trance-utterance or automatic script. A case bearing some resemblance to
it, however, is given in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 233, the
main difference being that the repeated communications are there made in
_dream_, and in _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. p. 450, [714 A], is
recorded another case, where the deceased person seems to make repeated
efforts to impress on survivors a wish prompted by continued affection.

Less uncommon are the cases where an apparition, occurring singly and
not repeated, indicates a continued knowledge of the affairs of earth.
That knowledge, indeed, runs mainly, as we shall presently see, in two
directions. There is often knowledge of some circumstance connected with
the deceased person's own death, as the appearance of his body after
dissolution, or the place of its temporary deposit or final burial. And
there is often knowledge of the impending or actual death of some friend
of the deceased person's. On the view here taken of the gradual passage
from the one environment into the other, both these kinds of knowledge
seem probable enough. I think it likely that some part of the
consciousness after death may for some time be dreamily occupied with
the physical scene. And similarly, when some surviving friend is
gradually verging towards the same dissolution, the fact may be readily
perceptible in the spiritual world. When the friend has actually died,
the knowledge which his predecessor may have of his transition is
knowledge appertaining to events of the next world as much as of this.

But apart from this information, acquired perhaps on the borderland
between two states, apparitions do sometimes imply a perception of more
definitely terrene events, such as the moral crises (as marriage, grave
quarrels, or impending crimes) of friends left behind on earth. In
_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 25 [716 A], is a case of impressive
warning, in which the phantom was seen by two persons, one of whom had
already had a less evidential experience.

In another case of similar type,[141] the message, while felt by the
percipient to be convincing and satisfactory, was held too private to be
communicated in detail. It is plain that just in the cases where the
message is most ultimately veracious, the greatest difficulty is likely
to be felt as to making it known to strangers.

I have already given a case (Appendix VII. A) where a departed spirit
seems to show a sympathetic anticipation of a marriage some time before
it is contemplated. In another case (_Journal_ S.P.R., vol v. p. 10),
the percipient, Mrs. V., describes a vision of a mother's form
suspended, as it were, in a church where her son is undergoing the rite
of confirmation. That vision, indeed, might have been purely subjective,
as Mrs. V. was familiar with the departed mother's aspect; though value
is given to it by the fact that Mrs. V. has had other experiences which
included evidential coincidences.

From these instances of knowledge shown by the departed of events which
seem wholly terrene, I pass to knowledge of events which seem in some
sense more nearly concerned with the spirit-world. We have, as already
hinted, a considerable group of cases where a spirit seems to be aware
of the _impending death_ of a survivor.[142] In some few of those cases
the foreknowledge is entirely inexplicable by any such foresight as we
mortals can imagine, but in the case given in Appendix VII. B, though
the family did not foresee the death, a physician might, for aught we
know, have been able to anticipate it. However explained, the case is
one of the best-attested, and in itself one of the most remarkable, that
we possess.

I place next by themselves a small group of cases which have the
interest of uniting the group just recounted, where the spirit
anticipates the friend's departure, with the group next to be
considered, where the spirit welcomes the friend already departed from
earth. This class forms at the same time a natural extension of the
clairvoyance of the dying exemplified in some "reciprocal" cases (_e.g._
in the case of Miss W., where a dying aunt has a vision of her little
niece who sees an apparition of her at the same time; see _Phantasms of
the Living_, vol. ii. p. 253). Just as the approaching severance of
spirit from body there aided the spirit to project its observation among
incarnate spirits at a distance upon this earth, so here does that same
approaching severance enable the dying person to see spirits who are
already in the next world. It is not very uncommon for dying persons to
say, or to indicate when beyond speech, that they see spirit friends
apparently near them. But, of course, such vision becomes evidential
only when the dying person is unaware that the friend whose spirit he
sees has actually departed, or is just about to depart, from earth. Such
a conjuncture must plainly be rare; it is even rather surprising that
these "Peak in Darien" cases, as Miss Cobbe has termed them in a small
collection which she made some years ago, should be found at all. We can
add to Miss Cobbe's cases two of fair attestation. (_Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 93, and vol. xiv. p. 288 [718 A and B]).

From this last group, then, there is scarcely a noticeable transition to
the group where departed spirits manifest their knowledge that some
friend who survived them has now passed on into their world. That such
recognition and welcome does in fact take place, later evidence, drawn
especially from trance-utterances, will give good ground to believe.
Only rarely, however, will such welcome--taking place as it does in the
spiritual world--be reflected by apparitions in _this_. When so
reflected, it may take different forms, from an actual utterance of
sympathy, as from a known departed friend, down to a mere silent
presence, perhaps inexplicable except to those who happen to have known
some long predeceased friend of the decedent's.

I quote in Appendix VII. C one of the most complete cases of this type,
which was brought to us by the Census of Hallucinations.

There are other cases more or less analogous to this. In one[143] the
apparition of a dying mother brings the news of her own death and that
her baby is living. In another[144] a mother sees a vision of her son
being drowned and also an apparition of her own dead mother, who tells
her of the drowning. In this case, the question may be raised as to
whether the second figure seen may not have been, so to say,
_substitutive_--a symbol in which the percipient's own mind clothed a
telepathic impression of the actual decedent's passage from earth. Such
a view might perhaps be supported by some anomalous cases where news of
the death is brought by the apparition of a person still living, who,
nevertheless, is not by any normal means aware of the death. (See the
case of Mrs. T., already given in Appendix IV. E.)

But such an explanation is not always possible. In the case of Mrs.
Bacchus,[145] for instance, both the deceased person and the phantasmal
figure were previously unknown to the percipient. This case--the last
which Edmund Gurney published--comes from an excellent witness. The
psychical incident which it seems to imply, while very remote from
popular notions, would be quite in accordance with the rest of our
present series. A lady dies; her husband in the spirit-world is moved by
her arrival; and the direction thus given to his thought projects a
picture of him, clothed as in the days when he lived with her, into
visibility in the house where her body is lying. We have thus a
dream-like recurrence to earthly memories, prompted by a revival of
those memories which had taken place in the spiritual world. The case is
midway between a case of _welcome_ and a case of _haunting_.

I now come to a considerable group of cases where the departed spirit
shows a definite knowledge of some fact connected with his own
earth-life, his death, or subsequent events connected with that death.
The knowledge of subsequent events, as of the spread of the news of his
death, or as to the place of his burial, is, of course, a greater
achievement (so to term it) than a mere recollection of facts known to
him in life, and ought strictly, on the plan of this series, to be first
illustrated. But it will be seen that all these stages of knowledge
cohere together; and their connection can better be shown if I begin at
the lower stage,--of mere earth-memory. Now here again, as so often
already, we shall have to wait for automatic script and the like to
illustrate the full extent of the deceased person's possible memory.
Readers of the utterances, for instance, of "George Pelham" (see
