CHAPTER II


II. A. It is well known that a great variety of slight causes--hunger,
fatigue, slight poisoning by impure air, a small degree of fever,
etc.--are sometimes enough to produce a transient perturbation of
personality of the most violent kind. I give as an instance the
following account of a feverish experience, sent to me by the late
Robert Louis Stevenson, from Samoa, in 1892 (and published in
_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 9). In Stevenson's paper on his own
dreams, alluded to in Chapter III, we have one of the most striking
examples known to me of that helpful and productive subliminal uprush
which I have characterised as the mechanism of genius. It is therefore,
interesting to observe how, under morbid conditions, this temperament of
genius--this ready permeability of the psychical diaphragm--transforms
what might in others be a mere vague and massive discomfort into a vivid
though incoherent message from the subliminal storm and fire. The result
is a kind of supraliminal duality, the perception at the same time of
two personalities--the one rational and moral, the other belonging to
the stratum of dreams and nightmare.


VAILIMA PLANTATION, UPOHO, SAMOAN ISLANDS,
_July 14th, 1892_.

     DEAR MR. MYERS,--I am tempted to communicate to you some
     experiences of mine which seem to me (ignorant as I am) of a high
     psychological interest.

     I had infamous bad health when I was a child and suffered much from
     night fears; but from the age of about thirteen until I was past
     thirty I did not know what it was to have a high fever or to wander
     in my mind. So that these experiences, when they were renewed, came
     upon me with entire freshness; and either I am a peculiar subject,
     or I was thus enabled to observe them with unusual closeness.

     Experience A. During an illness at Nice I lay awake a whole night
     in extreme pain. From the beginning of the evening _one part of my
     mind_ became possessed of a notion so grotesque and shapeless that
     it may best be described as a form of words. I thought the pain
     was, or was connected with, a wisp or coil of some sort; I knew
     not of what it consisted nor yet where it was, and cared not; only
     I thought, if the two ends were brought together, the pain would
     cease. Now all the time, with _another part of my mind_, which I
     venture to think was _myself_, I was fully alive to the absurdity
     of this idea, knew it to be a mark of impaired sanity, and was
     engaged with _my other self_ in a perpetual conflict. _Myself_ had
     nothing more at heart than to keep from my wife, who was nursing
     me, any hint of this ridiculous hallucination; the _other_ was
     bound that she should be told of it and ordered to effect the cure.
     I believe it must have been well on in the morning before the fever
     (or _the other fellow_) triumphed, and I called my wife to my
     bedside, seized her savagely by the wrist, and looking on her with
     a face of fury, cried: "Why do you not put the two ends together
     and put me out of pain?"

     Experience B. The other day in Sydney I was seized on a Saturday
     with a high fever. Early in the afternoon I began to repeat
     mechanically the sound usually written "mhn," caught myself in the
     act, instantly stopped it, and explained to my mother, who was in
     the room, my reasons for so doing. "That is the beginning of the
     mind to wander," I said, "and has to be resisted at the outset." I
     fell asleep and woke, and for the rest of the night repeated to
     myself mentally a nonsense word which I could not recall next
     morning. I had been reading the day before the life of Swift, and
     all night long one part of my mind (_the other fellow_) kept
     informing me that I was not repeating the word myself, but was only
     reading in a book that Swift had so repeated it in his last
     sickness. The temptation to communicate this nonsense was again
     strongly felt by _myself_, but was on this occasion triumphantly
     resisted, and my watcher heard from me all night nothing of Dean
     Swift or the word, nothing but what was rational and to the point.
     So much for the two consciousnesses when I can disentangle them;
     but there is a part of my thoughts that I have more difficulty in
     attributing. One part of my mind continually bid me remark the
     transrational felicity of the word, examined all the syllables,
     showed me that not one was in itself significant, and yet the whole
     expressed to a nicety the voluminous distress of one in a high
     fever and his annoyance at and recoil from the attentions of his
     nurses. It was probably the same part (and for a guess _the other
     fellow_) who bid me compare it with the nonsense words of Lewis
     Carroll as the invention of a lunatic with those of a sane man. But
     surely it was _myself_ (and myself in a perfectly clear-headed
     state) that kept me trying all night to get the word by heart, on
     the ground that it would afterwards be useful in literature if I
     wanted to deal with mad folk. It must have been myself, I say,
     because _the other fellow_ believed (or pretended to believe) he
     was reading the passage in a book where it could always be found
     again when wanted.

     Experience C. The next night _the other fellow_ had an explanation
     ready for my sufferings, of which I can only say that it had
     something to do with the navy, that it was sheer undiluted
     nonsense, had neither end nor beginning, and was insusceptible of
     being expressed in words. _Myself_ knew this; yet I gave way, and
     my watcher was favoured with some references to the navy. Nor only
     that; _the other fellow_ was annoyed--or _I_ was annoyed--on two
     inconsistent accounts: first, because he had failed to make his
     meaning comprehensible; and second, because the nurse displayed no
     interest. _The other fellow_ would have liked to explain further;
     but _myself_ was much hurt at having been got into this false
     position, and would be led no further.

     In cases A and C the illusion was amorphous. I knew it to be so,
     and yet succumbed to the temptation of trying to communicate it. In
     case B the idea was coherent, and I managed to hold my peace. Both
     consciousnesses, in other words, were less affected in case B, and
     both more affected in cases A and C. It is perhaps not always so:
     the illusion might be coherent, even practical, and the rational
     authority of the mind quite in abeyance. Would not that be lunacy?

     In case A I had an absolute knowledge that I was out of my mind,
     and that there was no meaning in my words; these were the very
     facts that I was anxious to conceal; and yet when I succumbed to
     the temptation of speaking my face was convulsed with anger, and I
     wrung my watcher's wrist with cruelty. Here is action, unnatural
     and uncharacteristic action, flowing from an idea in which I had no
     belief, and which I had been concealing for hours as a plain mark
     of aberration. Is it not so with lunatics?

     I have called the one person _myself_, and the other _the other
     fellow_. It was myself who spoke and acted; the other fellow seemed
     to have no control of the body or the tongue; he could only act
     through myself, on whom he brought to bear a heavy strain, resisted
     in one case, triumphant in the two others. Yet I am tempted to
     think that I know the other fellow; I am tempted to think he is the
     dreamer described in my Chapter on Dreams to which you refer. Here
     at least is a dream belonging to the same period, but this time a
     pure dream, an illusion, I mean, that disappeared with the return
     of the sense of sight, not one that persevered during waking
     moments, and while I was able to speak and take my medicine. It
     occurred the day after case B and before case C.

     Case D. In the afternoon there sprang up a storm of wind with
     monstrous clouds of dust; my room looked on a steep hill of trees
     whose boughs were all blowing in the same direction; the world
     seemed to pass by my windows like a mill-race. By this turmoil and
     movement I was confused, but not distressed, and surprised not to
     be distressed; for even in good health a high wind has often a
     painful influence on my nerves. In the midst of this I dozed off
     asleep. I had just been reading Scott's "Life of Dryden," and been
     struck with the fact that Dryden had translated some of the Latin
     hymns, and had wondered that I had never remarked them in his
     works. As soon as I was asleep I dreamed a reason why the sound of
     the wind and the sight of the flying dust had not distressed me.
     There was no wind, it seemed, no dust; it was only Dryden singing
     his translated hymns in _one direction_, and all those who had
     blamed and attacked him after the Revolution singing them in
     _another_. This point of the two directions is very singular and
     insane. In part it meant that Dryden was continuously flying past
     yet never passing my window in the direction of the wind and dust,
     and all his detractors similarly flying past yet not passing
     towards the other side. But it applied, besides this, both to the
     words and to the music in a manner wholly insusceptible of
     expression.

     That was a dream; and yet how exactly it reproduces the method of
     _my other fellow_ while I was awake. Here is an explanation for a
     state of mind or body sought, and found, in a tissue of rabid,
     complicated, and inexpressible folly.--Yours very sincerely.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



II. B. A good example of the application of true scientific method to
problems which doctors of the old school did not think worth their
science is Dr. Janet's treatment of a singular problem which the
mistakes of brutal ignorance turned in old times into a veritable
scourge of our race. I speak of _demoniacal possession_, in which
affliction Dr. Janet has shown himself a better than ecclesiastical
exorcist.

I give here a typical case of pseudo-possession from _Névroses et Idées
fixes_ (vol. i. pp. 377-389): Achille, as Professor Janet calls him, was
a timid and rather morbid young man, but he was married to a good wife,
and nothing went specially wrong with him until his return from a
business journey in 1890. He then became sombre and taciturn--sometimes
even seemed unable to speak--then took to his bed and lay murmuring
incomprehensible words, and at last said farewell to his wife and
children, and stretched himself out motionless for a couple of days,
while his family waited for his last breath.

"Suddenly one morning, after two days of apparent death, Achille sat up
in bed with his eyes wide open, and burst into a terrible laugh. It was
a convulsive laugh which shook all his limbs; an exaggerated laugh which
twisted his mouth; a lugubrious, satanic laugh which went on for more
than two hours.

"From this moment everything was changed. Achille leapt from his bed and
refused all attentions. To every question he answered, 'There's nothing
to be done! let's have some champagne; it's the end of the world!' Then
he uttered piercing cries, 'They are burning me--they are cutting me to
pieces!'"

After an agitated sleep, Achille woke up with the conviction that he was
possessed with a devil. And in fact his mouth now uttered blasphemies,
his limbs were contorted, and he repeatedly made unsuccessful efforts at
suicide. Ultimately he was taken to the Salpêtrière, and placed under
Professor Janet, who recognised at once the classic signs of possession.
The poor man kept protesting against the odious outrages on religion,
which he attributed to a devil inside him, moving his tongue against
his will. "Achille could say, like a celebrated victim of possession,
Père Surin, 'It is as though I had two souls; one of which has been
dispossessed of its body and the use of its organs, and is frantic at
the sight of the other soul which has crept in.'"

It was by no means easy to get either at Achille or at his possessing
devil. Attempts to hypnotise him failed, and any remonstrance was met
with insult. But the wily psychologist was accustomed to such
difficulties, and had resort to a plan too insidious for a common devil
to suspect. He gently moved the hand of Achille in such a way as to
suggest the act of writing, and having thus succeeded in starting
automatic script, he got the devil thus to answer questions quietly put
while the raving was going on as usual. "I will not believe in your
power," said Professor Janet to the malignant intruder, "unless you give
me a proof." "What proof?" "Raise the poor man's left arm without his
knowing it." This was done--to the astonishment of poor Achille--and a
series of suggestions followed, all of which the demon triumphantly and
unsuspectingly carried out, to show his power. Then came the suggestion
to which Professor Janet had been leading up. It was like getting the
djinn into the bottle. "You cannot put Achille soundly to sleep in that
arm-chair!" "Yes, I can!" No sooner said than done, and no sooner done
than Achille was delivered from his tormentor--from his own tormenting
self.

For there in that hypnotic sleep he was gently led on to tell all his
story; and such stories, when told to a skilled and kindly auditor, are
apt to come to an end in the very act of being told.

Achille had been living in a day-dream; it was a day-dream which had
swollen to these nightmare proportions, and had, as it were, ousted his
rational being; and in the deeper self-knowledge which the somnambulic
state brings with it the dream and the interpretation thereof became
present to his bewildered mind.

The fact was that on that fateful journey when Achille's troubles began
he had committed an act of unfaithfulness to his wife. A gloomy anxiety
to conceal this action prompted him to an increasing taciturnity, and
morbid fancies as to his health grew on him until at last his day-dream
led him to imagine himself as actually dead. "His two days' lethargy was
but an episode, a chapter in the long dream."

What then was the natural next stage of the dream's development? "He
dreamt that, now that he was dead indeed, the devil rose from the abyss
and came to take him. The poor man, as in his somnambulic state he
retraced the series of his dreams, remembered the precise instant when
this lamentable event took place. It was about 11 A.M.: a dog barked in
the court at the moment, incommoded, no doubt, by the smell of
brimstone; flames filled the room; numbers of little fiends scourged the
unhappy man, or drove nails into his eyes, and through the wounds in his
body Satan entered in to take possession of head and heart."

From this point the pseudo-possession may be said to have begun. The
fixed idea developed itself into sensory and motor automatisms--visions
of devils, uncontrollable utterances, automatic script--ascribed by the
automatist to the possessing devil within.

And now came the moment when the veracity, the utility, of this new type
of psychological analysis was to be submitted to yet another test. From
the point of view of the ordinary physician Achille's condition was
almost hopeless. Physical treatment had failed, and death from
exhaustion and misery seemed near at hand. Nor could any appeal have
been effective which did not go to the hidden root of the evil, which
did not lighten the load of morbid remorse from which the whole series
of troubles had developed. Fortunately for Achille, he was in the hands
of an unsurpassed minister to minds thus diseased. Professor Janet
adopted his usual tactics--what he terms the _dissociation_ and the
gradual _substitution_ of ideas. The incidents of the miserable memory
were modified, were explained away, were slowly dissolved from the
brooding brain, and the hallucinatory image of the offended wife was
presented to the sufferer at what novelists call the psychological
moment, with pardon in her eyes. "Such stuff as dreams are made
of!"--but even by such means was Achille restored to physical and moral
health; he leads now the life of normal man; he no longer "walketh in a
vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain."


II. C. I give here the case of Dr. Azam's often quoted patient, Félida
X.[216] In this case the somnambulic life finally became the normal
life; as the "second state," which appeared at first only in short,
dreamlike accesses, gradually replaced the "first state," which finally
recurred but for a few hours at long intervals. But the point on which I
wish to dwell is this: that Félida's second state was altogether
_superior_ to the first--physically superior, since the nervous pains
which had troubled her from childhood disappeared: and mentally
superior, inasmuch as her morose, self-centred disposition was exchanged
for a cheerful activity which enabled her to attend to her children and
her shop much more effectively than when she was in the "état bête," as
she called what was once the only personality that she knew. In this
case, then, which at the time Dr. Azam wrote--1887--was of nearly thirty
years' standing, the spontaneous readjustment of nervous activities--the
second state, no memory of which remained in the first state--resulted
in an improvement profounder than could have been anticipated from any
moral or medical treatment that we know. The case shows us how often the
word "normal" means nothing more than "what happens to exist." For
Félida's _normal_ state was in fact her _morbid_ state: and the new
condition, which seemed at first a mere hysterical abnormality, brought
her at last to a life of bodily and mental sanity which made her fully
the equal of average women of her class.

A very complete account of the case, reproducing in full almost the
whole of Dr. Azam's report, is given in Dr. A. Binet's _Altérations de
la Personnalité_ (pp. 6-20), and I briefly summarise this here:--

     Félida was born at Bordeaux, in 1843, of healthy parents. Towards
     the age of thirteen years she began to exhibit symptoms of
     hysteria. When about fourteen and a half she used suddenly to feel
     a pain in her forehead, and then to fall into a profound sleep for
     some ten minutes, after which she woke spontaneously in her
     secondary condition. This lasted an hour or two; then the sleep
     came on again, and she awoke in her normal state. The change at
     first occurred every five or six days. As the hysterical symptoms
     increased, Dr. Azam was called in to attend her in 1858.

     His report of that time states that in the primary state she
     appears very intelligent and fairly well educated; of a melancholy
     disposition, talking little, very industrious; constantly thinking
     of her maladies and suffering acute pains in various parts of the
     body, especially the head--the _clou hystérique_ being very marked;
     all her actions, ideas, and words perfectly rational. Almost every
     day what she calls her _crise_ comes on spontaneously--often while
     she is sitting at her needlework--preceded by a brief interval of
     the profound sleep, from which no external stimulus can rouse her.
     On waking into the secondary state, she appears like an entirely
     different person, smiling and gay; she continues her work
     cheerfully or walks about briskly, no longer feeling all the pains
     she has just before been complaining of. She looks after her
     ordinary domestic duties, goes out, walks about the town, and pays
     calls; behaves in every way like an ordinary healthy girl.

     In this condition she remembers perfectly all that has happened on
     previous occasions when she was in the same state, and also all the
     events of her normal life; whereas during her normal life she
     forgets absolutely the occurrences of the secondary state. She
     declares constantly that whatever state she is in at the moment is
     the normal one--her _raison_--while the other one is always her
     _crise_.

     The change of character in the secondary state is strongly marked;
     she becomes gay and vivacious--almost noisy; instead of being
     indifferent to everything, her sensibilities--both imaginative and
     emotional--become excessive. All her faculties appear more
     developed and more complete. The condition, in fact, is much
     superior to her ordinary one, as shown by the disappearance of her
     physical pains, and especially by the state of her memory.

     She married early, and her _crises_ became more frequent, though
     there were occasionally long intervals when they never came at all.
     But the secondary state, which in 1858 and 1859 only occupied about
     a tenth part of her life, gradually encroached more and more on the
     primary state, till the latter began to appear only at intervals
     and for a brief space of time.

     In 1875 Dr. Azam, having for long lost sight of her, found her a
     mother of a family, keeping a shop. Now and then, but more and more
     rarely, occurred what she called her _crises_--really relapses into
     her _primary_ condition. These were excessively inconvenient, since
     she forgot in them all the events of what was now her ordinary
     life, all the arrangements of her business, etc.; for instance, in
     going to a funeral, she had a _crise_, and consequently found it
     impossible to remember who the deceased person was. She had a great
     dread of these occurrences, though, by long practice, she had
     become very skilful at concealing them from every one but her
     husband; and the transition periods in passing from one state to
     another, during which she was completely unconscious, were now so
     short as to escape general notice. A peculiar feeling of pressure
     in the head warned her that the _crise_ was coming, and she would
     then, for fear of making mistakes in her business, hastily write
     down whatever facts she most needed to keep in mind.

     While the primary state lasted, she relapsed into the extreme
     melancholy and depression that characterised her early life, these
     being, in fact, now aggravated by her troublesome amnesia. She also
     lost her affection for her husband and children, and suffered from
     many hysterical pains and other symptoms which were much less acute
     in the secondary state. By 1887, however, the primary state only
     occurred every month or two, lasting only for a few hours at a
     time.




APPENDICES

TO

