CHAPTER VIII

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

    Μηκἑτι μὁνον συπνεἱν τὡ περιἑχοντι ἁἑρι, ἁλλ' ἡδη καἱ συμφρονοιν
    τὡ περιἑχοντἱ πἁντα νοερὡ

    --MARCUS AURELIUS.


At this point, one may broadly say, we reach the end of the phenomena
whose existence is vaguely familiar to popular talk. And here, too, I
might fairly claim, the evidence for my primary thesis,--namely, that
the analysis of man's personality reveals him as a spirit, surviving
death,--has attained an amplitude which would justify the reader in
accepting that view as the provisional hypothesis which comes nearest to
a comprehensive co-ordination of the actual facts. What we have already
recounted seems, indeed, impossible to explain except by supposing that
our inner vision has widened or deepened its purview so far as to attain
some glimpses of a spiritual world in which the individualities of our
departed friends still actually subsist.

The reader, however, who has followed me thus far must be well aware
that a large class of phenomena, of high importance, is still awaiting
discussion. _Motor_ automatisms,--though less familiar to the general
public than the phantasms which I have classed as _sensory_
automatisms,--are in fact even commoner, and even more significant.

Motor automatisms, as I define them, are phenomena of very wide range.
We have encountered them already many times in this book. We met them in
the first place in a highly developed form in connection with multiplex
personality in Chapter II. Numerous instances were there given of motor
effects, initiated by secondary selves without the knowledge of the
primary selves, or sometimes in spite of their actual resistance. All
motor action of a secondary self is an automatism in this sense, in
relation to the primary self. And of course we might by analogy extend
the use of the word still further, and might call not only
post-epileptic acts, but also maniacal acts, automatic; since they are
performed without the initiation of the presumedly sane primary
personality. Those degenerative phenomena, indeed, are not to be
discussed in this chapter. Yet it will be well to pause here long enough
to make it clear to the reader just what motor automatisms I am about to
discuss as _evolutive_ phenomena, and as therefore falling within the
scope of this treatise;--and what kind of relation they bear to the
dissolutive motor phenomena which occupy so much larger a place in
popular knowledge.

In order to meet this last question, I must here give more distinct
formulation to a thesis which has already suggested itself more than
once in dealing with special groups of our phenomena.

_It may be expected that supernormal vital phenomena will manifest
themselves as far as possible through the same channels as abnormal or
morbid vital phenomena, when the same centres or the same synergies are
involved._

To illustrate the meaning of this theorem, I may refer to a remark long
ago made by Edmund Gurney and myself in dealing with "Phantasms of the
Living," or veridical hallucinations, generated (as we maintained), not
by a morbid state of the percipient's brain, but by a telepathic impact
from an agent at a distance. We observed that if a hallucination--a
subjective image--is to be excited by this distant energy, it will
probably be most readily excited in somewhat the same manner as the
morbid hallucination which follows on a cerebral injury. We urged that
this is _likely_ to be the case--we showed ground for supposing that it
_is_ the case--both as regards the mode of evolution of the phantasm in
the percipient's brain, and the mode in which it seems to present itself
to his senses.

And here I should wish to give a much wider generality to this
principle, and to argue that if there be within us a secondary self
aiming at manifestation by physiological means, it seems probable that
its readiest _path of externalisation_--its readiest outlet of visible
action--may often lie along some track which has already been shown to
be a line of low resistance by the disintegrating processes of disease.
Or, varying the metaphor, we may anticipate that the partition of the
primary and the secondary self will lie along some plane of cleavage
which the _morbid_ dissociations of our psychical synergies have already
shown themselves disposed to follow. If epilepsy, madness, etc., tend to
_split up_ our faculties in certain ways, automatism is likely to split
them up in ways somewhat resembling these.

But in what way then, it will be asked, do you distinguish the
supernormal from the merely abnormal? Why assume that in these aberrant
states there is anything besides hysteria, besides epilepsy, besides
insanity?

The answer to this question has virtually been given in previous
chapters of this book. The reader is already accustomed to the point of
view which regards all psychical as well as all physiological activities
as necessarily either developmental or degenerative, tending to
evolution or to dissolution. And now, whilst altogether waiving any
teleological speculation, I will ask him hypothetically to suppose that
an evolutionary _nisus_, something which we may represent as an effort
towards self-development, self-adaptation, self-renewal, is discernible
especially on the psychical side of at any rate the higher forms of
life. Our question, Supernormal or abnormal?--may then be phrased,
Evolutive or dissolutive? And in studying each psychical phenomenon in
turn we shall have to inquire whether it indicates a mere degeneration
of powers already acquired, or, on the other hand, the "promise and
potency," if not the actual possession, of powers as yet unrecognised or
unknown.

Thus, for instance, Telepathy is surely a step in _evolution_.[160] To
learn the thoughts of other minds without the mediation of the special
senses, manifestly indicates the possibility of a vast extension of
psychical powers. And any knowledge which we can amass as to the
conditions under which telepathic action takes place will form a
valuable starting-point for an inquiry as to the evolutive or
dissolutive character of unfamiliar psychical states.[161]

For example, we may learn from our knowledge of telepathy that the
superficial aspect of certain stages of psychical evolution, like the
superficial aspect of certain stages of physiological evolution, may
resemble mere _inhibition_, or mere _perturbation_. But the inhibition
may involve latent dynamogeny, and the perturbation may mask evolution.
The hypnotised subject may pass through a lethargic stage before he
wakes into a state in which he has gained _community of sensation_ with
the operator; somewhat as the silkworm (to use the oldest and the most
suggestive of all illustrations) passes through the apparent torpor of
the cocoon-stage before evolving into the moth. Again, the automatist's
hand (as we shall presently see) is apt to pass through a stage of
inco-ordinated movements, which might almost be taken for choreic,
before it acquires the power of ready and intelligent writing. Similarly
the development, for instance, of a tooth may be preceded by a stage of
indefinite aching, which might be ascribed to the formation of an
abscess, did not the new tooth ultimately show itself. And still more
striking cases of a _perturbation which masks evolution_ might be drawn
from the history of the human organism as it develops into its own
maturity, or prepares for the appearance of the fresh human organism
which is to succeed it.

Analogy, therefore, both physiological and psychical, warns us not to
conclude that any given psychosis is merely degenerative until we have
examined its results closely enough to satisfy ourselves whether they
tend to bring about any enlargement of human powers, to open any new
inlet to the reception of objective truth. If such there prove to be,
then, with whatever morbid activities the psychosis may have been
intertwined, it contains indications of an evolutionary _nisus_ as well.

These remarks, I hope, may have sufficiently cleared the ground to admit
of our starting afresh on the consideration of such motor automatisms as
are at any rate not morbid in their effect on the organism, and which I
now have to show to be _evolutive_ in character. I maintain that we have
no valid ground for assuming that the movements which are _not_ due to
our conscious will must be less important, and less significant, than
those that _are_. We observe, of course, that in the organic region the
movements which are _not_ due to conscious will are really the most
important of all, though the voluntary movements by which a man seeks
food and protects himself against enemies are also of great practical
importance--he must first live and multiply if he is to learn and know.
But we must guard against confusing importance for immediate practical
life with importance for science--on which even practical life
ultimately depends. As soon as the task of living and multiplying is no
longer all-engrossing, we begin to change our relative estimate of
values, and to find that it is not the broad and obvious phenomena, but
the residual and elusive phenomena, which are oftenest likely to
introduce us to new avenues of knowledge. I wish to persuade my readers
that this is quite as truly the case in psychology as in physics.

As a first step in our analysis, we may point out certain main
characters which unite in a true class all the automatisms which we are
here considering--greatly though these may differ among themselves in
external form.

In the first place, then, our automatisms are _independent_ phenomena;
they are what the physician calls _idiognomonic_. That is to say, they
are not merely symptomatic of some other affection, or incidental to
some profounder change. The mere fact, for instance, that a man writes
messages which he does not consciously originate will not, when taken
alone, prove anything beyond this fact itself as to the writer's
condition. He may be perfectly sane, in normal health, and with nothing
unusual observable about him. This characteristic--provable by actual
observation and experiment--distinguishes our automatisms from various
seemingly kindred phenomena. Thus we may have to include in our class
the occasional automatic utterance of words or sentences. But the
continuous exhausting vociferation of acute mania does not fall within
our province; for those shouts are merely _symptomatic_; nor, again,
does the _cri hydrocéphalique_ (or spontaneous meaningless noise which
sometimes accompanies water on the brain); for that, too, is no
independent phenomenon, but the direct consequence of a definite lesion.
Furthermore, we shall have to include in our class certain simple
movements of the hands, co-ordinated into the act of writing. But here,
also, our definition will lead us to exclude _choreic_ movements, which
are merely symptomatic of nervous malnutrition; or which we may, if we
choose, call _idiopathic_, as constituting an independent malady. But
our automatisms are not _idiopathic_ but _idiognomonic_; they may indeed
be associated with or facilitated by certain states of the organism, but
they are neither a symptom of any other malady, nor are they a malady in
themselves.

Agreeing, then, that our peculiar class consists of automatisms which
are idiognomonic,--whose existence does not necessarily imply the
existence of some profounder affection already known as producing
them,--we have still to look for some more positive bond of connection
between them, some quality common to all of them, and which makes them
worth our prolonged investigation.

This we shall find in the fact that they are all of them
_message-bearing_ or _nunciative_ automatisms. I do not, of course, mean
that they all of them bring messages from sources external to the
automatist's own mind. In some cases they probably do this; but as a
rule the so-called messages seem more probably to originate within the
automatist's own personality. Why, then, it may be asked, do I call them
_messages_? We do not usually speak of a man as sending a message to
himself. The answer to this question involves, as we shall presently
see, the profoundest conception of these automatisms to which we can as
yet attain. They present themselves to us as messages communicated from
one stratum to another stratum of the same personality. Originating in
some deeper zone of a man's being, they float up into superficial
consciousness, as deeds, visions, words, ready-made and full-blown,
without any accompanying perception of the elaborative process which has
made them what they are.

Can we then (we may next ask) in any way predict the possible _range_ of
these motor automatisms? Have we any limit assignable _a priori_,
outside which it would be useless to look for any externalisation of an
impulse emanating from sub-conscious strata of our being?

The answer to this must be that no such limit can be with any confidence
suggested. We have not yet learnt with any distinctness even how far the
wave from a _consciously_-perceived stimulus will spread, or what
changes its motion will assume. Still less can we predict the
limitations which the resistance of the organism will impose on the
radiation of a stimulus originated within itself. We are learning to
consider the human organism as a practically infinite complex of
interacting vibrations; and each year adds many new facts to our
knowledge of the various transformations which these vibrations may
undergo, and of the unexpected artifices by which we may learn to
cognise some stimulus which is not directly felt.

A few concrete instances will make my meaning plainer. And my first
example shall be taken from those experiments in _muscle-reading_--less
correctly termed mind-reading--with which the readers of the
_Proceedings_ of the S.P.R. are already familiar. Let us suppose that I
am to hide a pin, and that some accomplished muscle-reader is to take my
hand and find the pin by noting my muscular indications.[162] I first
hide the pin in the hearth-rug; then I change my mind and hide it in the
bookshelf. I fix my mind on the bookshelf, but resolve to make no
guiding movement. The muscle-reader takes my hand, leads me first to the
rug, then to the bookshelf, and finds the pin. Now, what has happened in
this case? What movements have I made?

Firstly, I have made no _voluntary_ movement; and secondly, I have made
no _conscious involuntary_ movement. But, thirdly, I have made an
_unconscious involuntary_ movement which directly depended on conscious
ideation. I strongly thought of the bookshelf, and when the bookshelf
was reached in our vague career about the room I made a movement--say
rather a tremor occurred--in my hand, which, although beyond both my
knowledge and my control, was enough to supply to the muscle-reader's
delicate sensibility all the indication required. All this is now
admitted, and, in a sense, understood; we formulate it by saying that my
conscious ideation contained a motor element; and that this motor
element, though inhibited from any conscious manifestation, did yet
inevitably externalise itself in a peripheral tremor.

But, fourthly, something more than this has clearly taken place. Before
the muscle-reader stopped at the bookshelf he stopped at the rug. I was
no longer consciously thinking of the rug; but the idea of the pin in
the rug must still have been reverberating, so to say, in my
sub-conscious region; and this unconscious memory, this unnoted
reverberation, revealed itself in a peripheral tremor nearly as distinct
as that which (when the bookshelf was reached) corresponded to the
strain of conscious thought.

This tremor, then, was in a certain sense a message-bearing automatism.
It was the externalisation of an idea which, once conscious, had become
unconscious, though in the slightest conceivable degree--namely, by a
mere slight escape from the field of direct attention.

Having, then, considered an instance where the automatic message passes
only between two closely-adjacent strata of consciousness, externalising
an impulse derived from an idea which has only recently sunk out of
consciousness and which could easily be summoned back again;--let us
find our next illustration in a case where the line of demarcation
between the strata of consciousness through which the automatic message
pierces is distinct and impassable by any effort of will.

Let us take a case of _post-hypnotic suggestion_;--say, for instance, an
experiment of Edmund Gurney's (see _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. iv. p.
319). The subject had been trained to write with planchette, after he
had been awakened, the statements which had been made to him when in the
hypnotic trance. He wrote the desired words, or something like them, but
while he wrote them his waking self was entirely unaware of what his
hand was writing. Thus, having been told in the trance, "It has begun
snowing again," he wrote, after waking, "It begun snowing," while he
read aloud, with waking intelligence, from a book of stories, and was
quite unconscious of what his hand (placed on a planchette behind a
screen) was at the same time writing.

Here we have an automatic message of traceable origin; a message
implanted in the hypnotic stratum of the subject's self, and cropping
up--like a fault--in the waking stratum,--externalised in automatic
movements which the waking self could neither predict nor guide.

Yet once more. In the discussion which will follow we shall have various
instances of the transformation (as I shall regard it) of psychical
shock into definite muscular energy of apparently a quite alien kind.
Such transformations of so-called psychical into physical force--of will
into motion--do of course perpetually occur within us.

For example, I take a child to a circus; he sits by me holding my hand;
there is a discharge of musketry and his grip tightens. Now in this case
we should call the child's tightened grip automatic. But suppose that,
instead of merely holding my hand, he is trying with all his might to
squeeze the dynamometer, and that the sudden excitation enables him to
squeeze it harder--are we then to describe that extra squeeze as
automatic? or as voluntary?

However phrased, it is the fact (as amply established by M. Féré and
others[163]) that excitations of almost any kind--whether sudden and
startling or agreeable and prolonged--do tend to increase the subject's
dynamometrical power. In the first place, and this is in itself an
important fact, the average of squeezing-power is found to be greater
among educated students than among robust labouring men, thus showing
that it is not so much developed muscle as active brain which renders
possible a sudden concentration of muscular force. But more than this;
M. Féré finds that with himself and his friends the mere listening to an
interesting lecture, or the mere stress of thought in solitude, or still
more the act of writing or of speech, produces a decided increase of
strength in the grip, especially of the right hand. The same effect of
dynamogeny is produced with hypnotic subjects, by musical sounds, by
coloured light, especially red light, and even by a hallucinatory
suggestion of red light. "All our sensations," says M. Féré in
conclusion, "are accompanied by a development of potential energy, which
passes into a kinetic state, and externalises itself in motor
manifestations which even so rough a method as dynamometry is able to
observe and record."

I would beg the reader to keep these words in mind. We shall presently
find that a method apparently even rougher than dynamographic tracings
may be able to interpret, with far greater delicacy, the automatic
tremors which are coursing to and fro within us. If once we can get a
spy into the citadel of our own being, his rudest signalling will tell
us more than our subtlest inferences from outside of what is being
planned and done within.

And now having to deal with what I define as messages conveyed by one
stratum in man to another stratum, I must first consider in what general
ways human messages can be conveyed. Writing and speech have become
predominant in the intercourse of civilised men, and it is to writing
and speech that we look with most interest among the communications of
the subliminal self. But it does not follow that the subliminal self
will always have such complex methods at its command. We have seen
already that it often finds it hard to manage the delicate
co-ordinations of muscular movement required for writing,--that the
attempt at automatic script ends in a thump and a scrawl.

The subliminal self like the telegraphist begins its effort with full
knowledge, indeed, of the alphabet, but with only weak and rude command
over our muscular adjustments. It is therefore _a priori_ likely that
its easiest mode of communication will be through a repetition of simple
movements, so arranged as to correspond to letters of the alphabet.

And here, I think, we have attained to a conception of the mysterious
and much-derided phenomenon of "table-tilting" which enables us to
correlate it with known phenomena, and to start at least from an
intelligible basis, and on a definite line of inquiry.

A few words are needed to explain what are the verifiable phenomena, and
the less verifiable hypotheses, connoted by such words as
"table-turning," "spirit-rapping," and the like.

If one or more persons of a special type--at present definable only by
the question-begging and barbarous term "mediumistic"--remain quietly
for some time with hands in contact with some easily movable object, and
desiring its movement, that object will sometimes begin to move. If,
further, they desire it to indicate letters of the alphabet by its
movements,--as by tilting once for _a_, twice for _b_, etc., it will
often do so, and answers unexpected by any one present will be obtained.

Thus far, whatever our interpretation, we are in the region of easily
reproducible facts, which many of my readers may confirm for themselves
if they please.

But beyond the simple movements--or table-turning--and the intelligible
responses--or table-tilting--both of which are at least _primâ facie_
physically explicable by the sitters' unconscious pressure, without
postulating any unknown physical force at all,--it is alleged by many
persons that further physical phenomena occur; namely, that the table
moves in a direction, or with a violence, which no unconscious pressure
can explain; and also that percussive sounds or "raps" occur, which no
unconscious action, or indeed no agency known to us, could produce.
These raps communicate messages like the tilts, and it is to them that
the name of "spirit-rapping" is properly given. But spiritualists
generally draw little distinction between these four phenomena--mere
table-turning, responsive table-tilting, movements of inexplicable
vehemence, and responsive raps--attributing all alike to the agency of
departed spirits of men and women, or at any rate to disembodied
intelligences of some kind or other.

I am not at present discussing the physical phenomena of Spiritualism,
and I shall therefore leave on one side all the alleged movements and
noises of this kind for which unconscious pressure will not account. I
do not prejudge the question as to their real occurrence; but assuming
that such disturbances of the physical order do occur, there is at least
no _primâ facie_ need to refer them to disembodied spirits. If a table
moves when no one is touching it; this is not obviously more likely to
have been effected by my deceased grandfather than by myself. We cannot
tell how _I_ could move it; but then we cannot tell how _he_ could move
it either. The question must be argued on its merits in each case; and
our present argument is not therefore vitiated by our postponement of
this further problem.

M. Richet[164] was, I believe, the first writer, outside the
Spiritualistic group, who so much as showed any practical knowledge of
this phenomenon, still less endeavoured to explain it. Faraday's
well-known explanation of table-turning as the result of the summation
of many unconscious movements--obviously true as it is for some of the
simplest cases of table-movement--does not touch this far more difficult
question of the origination of these intelligent messages, conveyed by
distinct and repeated movements of some object admitting of ready
displacement. The ordinary explanation--I am speaking, of course, of
cases where fraud is not in question--is that the sitter unconsciously
sets going and stops the movements so as to shape the word in accordance
with his expectation. Now that he unconsciously sets going and stops the
movements is part of my own present contention, but that the word is
thereby shaped in accordance with his expectation is often far indeed
from being the case. To those indeed who are familiar with automatic
_written_ messages, this question as to the unexpectedness of the
_tilted_ messages will present itself in a new light. If the written
messages originate in a source beyond the automatist's supraliminal
self, so too may the tilted messages;--even though we admit that the
tilts are caused by his hand's pressure of the table just as directly as
the script by his hand's manipulation of the pen.

One piece of evidence showing that _written_ messages are not always the
mere echo of expectation is a case[165] where _anagrams_ were
automatically written, which their writer was not at once able to
decipher. Following this hint, I have occasionally succeeded in getting
anagrams tilted out for myself by movements of a small table which I
alone touched.

This is a kind of experiment which might with advantage be oftener
repeated; for the extreme incoherence and silliness of the responses
thus obtained does not prevent the process itself from being in a high
degree instructive. Here, again (as in automatic writing), a man may
hold colloquy with his own dream--may note in actual juxtaposition two
separate strata of his own intelligence.

I shall not at present pursue the discussion of these tilted responses
beyond this their very lowest and most rudimentary stage. They almost
immediately suggest another problem, for which our discussion is hardly
ripe, the participation, namely, of several minds in the production of
the same automatic message. There is something of this difficulty even
in the explanation of messages given when the hands of two persons are
touching a planchette; but when the instrument of response is large, and
the method of response simple, as with table-tilting, we find this
question of the influence of more minds than one imperatively recurring.

Our immediate object, however, is rather to correlate the different
attainable modes of automatic response in some intelligible scheme than
to pursue any one of them through all its phases. We regarded the
table-tilting process as in one sense the simplest, the least
differentiated form of motor response. It is a kind of _gesture_ merely,
though a gesture implying knowledge of the alphabet. Let us see in what
directions the movement of response becomes more specialised,--as
gesture parts into pictorial art and articulate speech. We find, in
fact, that a just similar divergence of impulses takes place in
automatic response. On the one hand the motor impulse specialises itself
into _drawing_; on the other hand it specialises itself into _speech_.
Of automatic drawing I have already said something (Chapter III.).
Automatic speech will receive detailed treatment in Chapter IX. At
present I shall only briefly indicate the position of each form of
movement among cognate automatisms.

Some of my readers may have seen these so-called
"spirit-drawings,"--designs, sometimes in colour, whose author asserts
that he drew them without any plan, or even knowledge of what his hand
was going to do. This assertion may be quite true, and the person making
it may be perfectly sane.[166] The drawings so made will be found
curiously accordant with what the view which I am explaining would lead
us to expect. For they exhibit a fusion of arabesque with ideography;
that is to say, they partly resemble the forms of ornamentation into
which the artistic hand strays when, as it were, dreaming on the paper
without definite plan; and partly they afford a parallel to the early
attempts at symbolic self-expression of savages who have not yet learnt
an alphabet. Like savage writing, they pass by insensible transitions
from direct pictorial symbolism to an abbreviated ideography, mingled in
its turn with writing of a fantastic or of an ordinary kind.

And here, before we enter on the study of automatic writing, I must
refer to two great historic cases of automatism, which may serve as a
kind of prologue to what is to follow. One case, that of Socrates, is a
case of monitory _inhibition_; the other, that of Jeanne d'Arc, of
monitory _impulse_.

The Founder of Science himself--the permanent type of sanity,
shrewdness, physical robustness, and moral balance--was guided in all
the affairs of life by a monitory Voice,--by "the Dæmon of Socrates."
This is a case which can never lose its interest, a case which has been
vouched for by the most practical, and discussed by the loftiest
intellect of Greece,--both of them intimate friends of the illustrious
subject;--a case, therefore, which one who endeavours to throw new light
on hallucination and automatism is bound, even at this distance of time,
to endeavour to explain.[167] And this is the more needful, since a
treatise was actually written, a generation ago, as "a specimen of the
application of the science of psychology to the science of history,"
arguing from the records of the δαιμὁνιον in Xenophon and Plato that
Socrates was in fact insane.[168]

I believe that it is now possible to give a truer explanation; to place
these old records in juxtaposition with more instructive parallels; and
to show that the messages which Socrates received were only advanced
examples of a process which, if supernormal, is not abnormal, and which
characterises that form of intelligence which we describe as _genius_.

The story of Socrates I take as a signal example of _wise automatism_;
of the possibility that the messages which are conveyed to the
supraliminal mind from subliminal strata of the personality,--whether as
sounds, as sights, or as movements,--may sometimes come from far beneath
the realm of dream and confusion,--from some self whose monitions convey
to us a wisdom profounder than we know.

Similarly in the case of Joan of Arc, I believe that only now, with the
comprehension which we are gradually gaining of the possibility of an
impulse from the mind's deeper strata which is so far from madness that
it is wiser than our sanity itself,--only now, I repeat, can we
understand aright that familiar story.

Joan's condemnation was based on her own admissions; and the Latin
_procès-verbal_ still exists, and was published from the MS. by M.
Quicherat, 1841-9, for the French Historical Society.[169] Joan, like
Socrates, was condemned mainly on the ground, or at least on the pretext
of her monitory voices: and her Apology remarkably resembles his, in its
resolute insistence on the truth of the very phenomena which were being
used to destroy her. Her answers are clear and self-consistent, and seem
to have been little, if at all, distorted by the recorder. Few pieces of
history so remote as this can be so accurately known.

Fortunately for our purpose, her inquisitors asked her many questions as
to her voices and visions; and her answers enable us to give a pretty
full analysis of the phenomena which concern us.

I. The voices do not begin with the summons to fight for France. Joan
heard them first at thirteen years of age,--as with Socrates also the
voice began in childhood. The first command consisted of nothing more
surprising than that "she was to be a good girl, and go often to
church." After this the voice--as in the case of Socrates--intervened
frequently, and on trivial occasions.

II. The voice was accompanied at first by a light, and sometimes
afterwards by figures of saints, who appeared to speak, and whom Joan
appears to have both seen and felt as dearly as though they had been
living persons. But here there is some obscurity; and Michelet thinks
that on one occasion the Maid was tricked by the courtiers for political
ends. For she asserted (apparently without contradiction) that several
persons, including the Archbishop of Rheims, as well as herself, had
seen an angel bringing to the King a material crown.[170]

III. The voices came mainly when she was awake, but also sometimes
roused her from sleep; a phenomenon often observed in our cases of
"veridical hallucination." "Ipsa dormiebat, et vox excitabat eam."
(Quicherat, i., p. 62.)

IV. The voice was not always fully intelligible (especially if she was
half awake);--in this respect again resembling some of our recorded
cases, both visual and auditory, where, on the view taken in _Phantasms
of the Living_, the externalisation has been incomplete. "Vox dixit
aliqua, sed non omnia intellexit." (Quicherat, i., p. 62.)

V. The predictions of the voice, so far as stated, were mainly
fulfilled; viz., that the siege of Orleans would be raised; that Charles
VII. would be crowned at Rheims; that she herself would be wounded; but
the prediction that there would be a great victory over the English
within seven years was not fulfilled in any exact way, although the
English continued to lose ground. In short, about so much was fulfilled
as an ardent self-devoted mind might have anticipated; much indeed that
might have seemed irrational to ordinary observers, but nothing which
actually needed a definite prophetic power. Here, again, we are reminded
of the general character of the monitions of Socrates. And yet in Joan's
case, more probably than in the case of Socrates, there may have been
one singular exception to this general rule. She knew by monition that
there was a sword "retro altare"--somewhere behind the altar--in the
Church of St. Catherine of Fierbois. "Scivit ipsum ibi esse per
voces":--she sent for it, nothing doubting, and it was found and given
to her. This was a unique incident in her career. Her judges asked
whether she had not once found a cup, and a missing priest, by help of
similar monitions, but this she denied; and it is remarkable that no
serious attempt was made either to show that she had claimed this
clairvoyant power habitually, or, on the other hand, to invalidate the
one instance of it which she did in effect claim. It would be absurd to
cite the alleged discovery of the sword as in itself affording a proof
of clairvoyance, any more than Socrates' alleged intimation of the
approaching herd of swine.[171] But when we are considering monitions
given in more recent times it will be well to remember that it is in
this direction that some supernormal extension of knowledge seems
possibly traceable.

The cases of Socrates and of Joan of Arc, on which I have just dwelt,
might with almost equal fitness have been introduced at certain other
points of my discussion. At first sight, at any rate, they appear rather
like sensory than like motor automatisms,--like hallucinations of
hearing rather than like the motor impulses which we are now about to
study. Each case, however, approaches motor automatism in a special way.

In the case of Socrates the "sign" seems to have been not so much a
definite voice as a sense of _inhibition_. In the case of Joan of Arc
the voices were definite enough, but they were accompanied--as such
voices sometimes are, but sometimes are _not_--with an overmastering
impulse to _act_ in obedience to them. These are, I may say, palmary
cases of inhibition and of impulse: and inhibition and impulse are at
the very root of motor phenomena.

They show moreover the furthest extent of the claim that can be made for
the agency of the subliminal self, apart from any external
influence,--apart from telepathy from the living, or possession by the
departed. Each of those other hypotheses will claim its own group of
cases; but we must not invoke them until the resources of subliminal
wisdom are manifestly overtaxed.

These two famous cases, then, have launched us on our subject in the
stress of a twofold difficulty in logical arrangement. We cannot always
answer these primary questions, Is the subliminal impulse sensory or
motor? is it originated in the automatist's own mind, or in some mind
external to him?

In the first place, we must reflect that, if the subliminal self really
possesses that profound power over the organism with which I have
credited it, we may expect that its "messages" will sometimes express
themselves in the form of deep organic modifications--of changes in the
vaso-motor, the circulatory, the respiratory systems. Such phenomena are
likely to be less noted or remembered as _coincidental_, from their very
indefiniteness, as compared, for instance, with a phantasmal appearance;
but we have, nevertheless, records of various telepathic cases of deep
cœnesthetic disturbance, of a profound _malaise_ which must, one
would think, have involved some unusual condition of the viscera.[172]

In cases, too, where the telepathic impression has ultimately assumed a
definite sensory form, some organic or emotional phenomena have been
noted, being perhaps the _first_ effects of the telepathic impact,
whether from the living or from the dead.[173]

And here I may mention an experience of Lady de Vesci's, who described
to me in conversation a feeling of _malaise_, defining itself into the
urgent need of definite action--namely, the despatch of a telegram to a
friend who was in fact then dying at the other side of the world.[174]
Such an impulse had one only parallel in her experience, which also was
telepathic in a similar way.

Similar sensory disturbances are sometimes reported in connection with
an important form of motor automatism,--that of "dowsing" or discovering
water by means of the movement of a rod held in the hands of the
automatist,--already treated of in Appendix V. A.

A small group of cases may naturally be mentioned here. From two
different points of view they stand for the most part at the entrance of
our subject. I speak of motor inhibitions, prompted at first by
subliminal memory, or by subliminal hyperæsthesia, but merging into
telæsthesia or telepathy. Inhibitions--sudden arrests or incapacities of
action--(more or less of the Socratic type)--form a simple, almost
rudimentary, type of motor automatisms. And an inhibition--a sudden
check on action of this kind--will be a natural way in which a strong
but obscure impression will work itself out. Such an impression, for
instance, is that of _alarm_, suggested by some vague sound or odour
which is only subliminally perceived. And thus in this series of motor
automatisms, just as in our series of dreams, or in our series of
sensory automatisms, we find ourselves beginning with cases where the
subliminal self merely shows some slight extension of memory or of
sensory perception,--and thence pass insensibly to cases where no
"cryptomnesia" will explain the facts known in the past, and no
hyperæsthesia will explain the facts discerned in the present.

We may most of us have observed that if we perform any small action to
which there are objections, which we have once known but which have
altogether passed from our minds, we are apt to perform it in a
hesitating, inefficient way.

Similarly there are cases where some sudden muscular impulse or
inhibition has probably depended on a subliminal perception or
interpretation of a sound which had not reached the supraliminal
attention. For instance, two friends walking together along a street in
a storm just evade by sudden movements a falling mass of masonry. Each
thinks that he has received some _monition_ of the fall; each asserting
that he heard no noise whatever to warn him. Here is an instance where
subliminal perception may have been slightly quicker and more delicate
than supraliminal, and may have warned them just in time.

In the case which I now quote (from _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. xi. p.
416) there may have been some subliminal hyperæsthesia of hearing which
dimly warned Mr. Wyman of the approach of the extra train.[175]

Mr. Wm. H. Wyman writes to the Editor of the _Arena_ as follows:--


DUNKIRK, N. Y., _June 26th, 1891_.

     Some years ago my brother was employed and had charge as conductor
     and engineer of a working train on the Lake Shore and Michigan
     Southern Railway, running between Buffalo and Erie, which passes
     through this city (Dunkirk, N. Y.). I often went with him to the
     Grave Bank, where he had his headquarters, and returned on his
     train with him. On one occasion I was with him, and after the train
     of cars was loaded, we went together to the telegraph office to see
     if there were any orders, and to find out if the trains were on
     time, as he had to keep out of the way of all regular trains. After
     looking over the train reports and finding them all on time, we
     started for Buffalo. As we approached near Westfield Station,
     running about 12 miles per hour, and when within about one mile of
     a long curve in the line, my brother all of a sudden shut off the
     steam, and quickly stepping over to the fireman's side of the
     engine, he looked out of the cab window, and then to the rear of
     his train to see if there was anything the matter with either. Not
     discovering anything wrong, he stopped and put on steam, but almost
     immediately again shut it off and gave the signal for breaks and
     stopped. After inspecting the engine and train and finding nothing
     wrong, he seemed very much excited, and for a short time he acted
     as if he did not know where he was or what to do. I asked what was
     the matter. He replied that he did not know, when, after looking at
     his watch and orders, he said that he felt that there was some
     trouble on the line of the road. I suggested that he had better run
     his train to the station and find out. He then ordered his flagman
     with his flag to go ahead around the curve, which was just ahead of
     us, and he would follow with the train. The flagman started and had
     just time to flag an extra express train, with the General
     Superintendent and others on board, coming full 40 [forty] miles
     per hour. The Superintendent inquired what he was doing there, and
     if he did not receive orders to keep out of the way of the extra.
     My brother told him that he had not received orders and did not
     know of any extra train coming; that we had both examined the train
     reports before leaving the station. The train then backed to the
     station, where it was found that no orders had been given. The
     train despatcher was at once discharged from the road, and from
     that time to this both my brother and myself are unable to account
     for his stopping the train as he did. I consider it quite a
     mystery, and cannot give or find any intelligent reason for it. Can
     you suggest any?

     The above is true and correct in every particular.

In other cases again some subliminal sense of smell may be
conjectured.[176]

_Tactile sensibility_, too, must be carefully allowed for. The sense of
varying resistance in the air may reach in some seeing persons, as well
as in the blind, a high degree of acuteness.[177]

But there are cases of sudden motor inhibition where no warning can well
have been received from hyperæsthetic sensation, where we come, as it
seems, to telæsthesia or to spirit guardianship.

(From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 459.)

     Four years ago, I made arrangements with my nephew, John W.
     Parsons, to go to my office after supper to investigate a case. We
     walked along together, both fully determined to go up into the
     office, but just as I stepped upon the door sill of the drug store,
     in which my office was situated, some invisible influence stopped
     me instantly. I was much surprised, felt like I was almost dazed,
     the influence was so strong, almost like a blow, I felt like I
     could not make another step. I said to my nephew, "John, I do not
     feel like going into the office now; you go and read Flint and
     Aitken on the subject." He went, lighted the lamp, took off his
     hat, and just as he was reaching for a book the report of a large
     pistol was heard. The ball entered the window near where he was
     standing, passed near to and over his head, struck the wall and
     fell to the floor. Had I been standing where he was, I would have
     been killed, as I am much taller than he. The pistol was fired by a
     man who had an old grudge against me, and had secreted himself in a
     vacant house near by to assassinate me.

     This impression was unlike any that I ever had before. All my
     former impressions were slow in their development, grew stronger
     and stronger, until the maximum was reached. I did not feel that I
     was in any danger, and could not understand what the strong
     impression meant. The fellow was drunk, had been drinking for two
     weeks. If my system had been in a different condition--I had just
     eaten supper--I think I would have received along with the
     impression some knowledge of the character of the danger, and would
     have prevented my nephew from going into the office.

     I am fully satisfied that the invisible and unknown intelligence
     did the best that could have been done, under the circumstances, to
     save us from harm.

D. J. PARSONS, M.D., Sweet Springs, Mo.

     (The above account was received in a letter from Dr. D. J. Parsons,
     dated _December 15th, 1891_.)

     Statement of Dr. J. W. PARSONS.

     About four years ago my uncle, Dr. D. J. Parsons, and I were going
     to supper, when a man halted us and expressed a desire for medical
     advice. My uncle requested him to call the next morning, and as we
     walked along he said the case was a bad one and that we would come
     back after supper and go to the office and examine the authorities
     on the subject. After supper we returned, walked along together on
     our way to the office, but just as we reached the door of the drug
     store he very unexpectedly, to me, stopped suddenly, which caused
     me to stop too; we stood there together a few seconds, and he
     remarked to me that he did not feel like going into the office
     then, or words to that effect, and told me to go and examine Flint
     and Aitken. I went, lit the lamp, and just as I was getting a book,
     a pistol was fired into the office, the ball passing close to my
     head, struck the east wall, then the north, and fell to the floor.

     This 5th day of July, 1891.

JOHN W. PARSONS [Ladonia, Texas.]

In the next group of cases, we reach a class of massive motor impulses
which are almost entirely free from any sensory admixture.

Take for instance the case of Mr. Garrison, who left a religious meeting
in the evening, and walked eighteen miles under the strong impulse to
see his mother, and found her dead. The account is given in the
_Journal_ S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 125 [§ 825].

In another case, that of Major Kobbé (given in _Phantasms of the
Living_, vol. i. p. 288), the percipient was prompted to visit a distant
cemetery, without any conscious reason, and there found his father, who
had, in fact, for certain unexpected reasons, sent to his son, Major
Kobbé, a request (accidentally _not received_) to meet him at that place
and hour.

In a third case, Mr. Skirving (see _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p.
285 [825 A]) was irresistibly compelled to leave his work and go
home--_why_, he knew not--at the moment when his wife was in fact
calling for him in the distress of a serious accident. See also a case
given in _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p. 377, where a bricklayer
has a sudden impulse to run home, and arrives just in time to save the
life of his little boy, who had set himself on fire.

This special sensibility to the _motor_ element in an impulse recalls to
us the special susceptibilities to different forms of hallucination or
suggestion shown by different hypnotic subjects. Some can be made to
see, some to hear, some to act out the conception proposed to them. Dr.
Bérillon[178] has even shown that certain subjects who seem at first
quite refractory to hypnotisation are nevertheless at once obedient,
even in the waking state, to a motor suggestion. This was the case both
with a very strong man, with weak men and women, and with at least one
subject actually suffering from locomotor ataxy. Thus the loss of
supraliminal motor control over certain muscular combinations may
actually lead to _motor suggestibility_ as regards those combinations;
just as the loss of supraliminal sensation in some anæsthetic patch may
lead to a special subliminal sensitiveness in the very directions where
the superficial sensibility has sunk away. On the other hand, a
specially well-developed motor control may predispose in a similar
way;--as for instance, the subject who can sing already is more easily
made to sing by suggestion. We must, then, await further observations
before we can pretend to say beforehand with which automatist the
messages will take a sensory, and with which a motor form.

Still less can we explain the special predisposition of each
experimenter to one or more of the common kinds of motor automatism--as
automatic speech, automatic writing, table movements, raps, and so
forth. These forms of messages may themselves be variously combined; and
the contents of a message of any one of these kinds may be purely
dream-like and fantastic, or may be veridical in various ways.

Let us enumerate the modes of subliminal motor message as nearly as we
can in order of their increasing specialisation.

1. We may place first the massive motor impulses (like Mr. Garrison's)
which mark a kind of transition between cœnesthetic affections and
motor impulses proper. There was here no impulse to special movement of
any limb; but an impulse to reach a certain place by ordinary methods.

2. Next, perhaps, in order of specialisation come the simple subliminal
muscular impulses which give rise to table-tilting and similar
phenomena.

3. Musical execution, subliminally initiated, might theoretically be
placed next; although definite evidence of this is hard to obtain, since
the threshold of consciousness with musical performers is notoriously
apt to be shifting and indefinite. ("When in doubt, play with your
fingers, and not with your head.")

4. Next we may place automatic drawing and painting. This curious group
of messages has but seldom a telepathic content, and, as was suggested
in Chapter III., is more akin to _genius_ and similar non-telepathic
forms of subliminal faculty.[179]

5. Next comes automatic writing, on which much remains to be said in
this chapter.

6. Automatic _speech_, which would not seem to be _per se_ a more
developed form of motor message than automatic script, is often
accompanied by profound changes of memory or of personality which raise
the question of "inspiration" or "possession";--for the two words,
however different their theological import, mean much the same thing
from the standpoint of experimental psychology.

7. I must conclude my list with a class of motor phenomena which I shall
here merely record in passing, without attempting any explanation. I
allude to raps, and to those telekinetic movements of objects whose real
existence is still matter of controversy.

Comparing this list of motor automatisms with the sensory automatisms
enumerated in Chapter VI., we shall find a certain general tendency
running through each alike. The sensory automatisms began with vague
unspecialised sensations. They then passed through a phase of
definition, of specialisation on the lines of the known senses. And
finally they reached a stage beyond these habitual forms of
specialisation: beyond them, as of wider reach, and including in an
apparently unanalysable act of perception a completer truth than any of
our specialised forms of perception could by itself convey. With motor
messages, too, we begin with something of similar vagueness. They, too,
develop from modifications of the percipient's general organic
condition, or cœnesthesia; and the first dim telepathic impulse
apparently hesitates between several channels of expression. They then
pass through various definitely specialised forms; and finally, as we
shall see when automatic script is considered, they, too, merge into an
unanalysable act of cognition in which the motor element of the message
has disappeared. But these motor messages point also in another even
more perplexing direction. They lead, as I have said above, towards the
old idea of _possession_;--using the word simply as an expression for
some form of temporary manifestation of some veritably distinct and
alien personality through the physical organism of some man or woman, as
is well exemplified in many cases of automatic writing. In Europe and
America the phenomenon of automatic writing first came into notice as an
element in so-called "modern spiritualism" about the middle of the
nineteenth century; but the writings of W. Stainton Moses--about
1870-80--were perhaps the first continuous series of such messages which
could be regarded as worthy of serious attention. Mr. Moses--a man whose
statements could not be lightly set aside--claimed for them that they
were the direct utterances of departed persons, some of them lately
dead, some dead long ago. However they were really to be explained, they
strongly impressed Edmund Gurney and myself and added to our desire to
work at the subject in as many ways as we could.

It was plain that these writings could not be judged aright without a
wide analysis of similar scripts,--without an experimental inquiry into
what the human mind, in states of somnambulism or the like, could
furnish of written messages, apart from the main stream of
consciousness. By his experiments on writing obtained in different
stages of hypnotic trance, Gurney acted as the pioneer of a long series
of researches which, independently set on foot by Professor Pierre Janet
in France, have become of high psychological, and even medical,
importance. What is here of prime interest is the indubitable fact that
fresh personalities can be artificially and temporarily created, which
will write down matter quite alien from the first personality's
character, and even matter which the first personality never knew. That
matter may consist merely of reminiscences of previous periods when the
second personality has been in control. But, nevertheless, if these
writings are shown to the primary personality, he will absolutely
repudiate their authorship--alleging not only that he has no
recollection of writing them, but also that they contain allusions to
facts which he never knew. Some of these messages, indeed, although
their source is so perfectly well defined--although we know the very
moment when the secondary personality which wrote them was called into
existence--do certainly look more alien from the automatist in his
normal state than many of the messages which claim to come from spirits
of lofty type. It is noticeable, moreover, that these manufactured
personalities sometimes cling obstinately to their fictitious names, and
refuse to admit that they are in reality only aspects or portions of the
automatist himself. This must be remembered when the persistent _claim_
to some spiritual identity--say Napoleon--is urged as an argument for
attributing a series of messages to that special person.

What has now been said may suffice as regards the varieties of
mechanism--the different forms of motor automatism--which the messages
employ. I shall pass on to consider the _contents_ of the messages, and
shall endeavour to classify them according to their apparent sources.

_A._ In the first place, the message may come from the percipient's own
mind; its contents being supplied from the resources of his ordinary
memory, or of his more extensive subliminal memory; while the
_dramatisation_ of the message--its assumption of some other mind as its
source--will resemble the dramatisations of dream or of hypnotic trance.

Of course the absence of facts unknown to the writer is not in itself a
proof that the message does not come from some other mind. We cannot be
sure that other minds, if they can communicate, will always be at the
pains to fill their messages with evidential facts. But, equally of
course, a message devoid of such facts must not, on the strength of its
mere assertions, be claimed as the product of any but the writer's own
mind.

_B._ Next above the motor messages whose content the automatist's own
mental resources might supply, we may place the messages whose content
seems to be derived telepathically from the mind of some other person
still living on earth; that person being either conscious or unconscious
of transmitting the suggestion.

_C._ Next comes the possibility that the message may emanate from some
unembodied intelligence of unknown type--other, at any rate, than the
intelligence of the alleged agent. Under this heading come the views
which ascribe the messages on the one hand to "elementaries," or even
devils, and on the other hand to "guides" or "guardians" of superhuman
goodness and wisdom.

_D._ Finally we have the possibility that the message may be derived, in
a more or less direct manner, from the mind of the agent--the departed
friend--from whom the communication does actually claim to come.

My main effort has naturally been thus far directed to the proof that
there are messages which do _not_ fall into the lowest class, _A_--in
which class most psychologists would still place them all. And I
myself--while reserving a certain small portion of the messages for my
other classes--do not only admit but assert that the great majority of
such communications represent the subliminal workings of the
automatist's mind alone. It does not, however, follow that such messages
have for us no interest or novelty. On the contrary, they form an
instructive, an indispensable transition from psychological
introspection of the old-fashioned kind to the bolder methods on whose
validity I am anxious to insist. The mind's subliminal action, as thus
revealed, differs from the supraliminal in ways which no one
anticipated, and which no one can explain. There seem to be subliminal
tendencies setting steadily in certain obscure directions, and bearing
as little relation to the individual characteristics of the person to
the deeps of whose being we have somehow penetrated as profound
ocean-currents bear to waves and winds on the surface of the sea.[180]

Another point also, of fundamental importance, connected with the powers
of the subliminal self, will be better deferred until a later chapter. I
have said that a message containing only facts normally known to the
automatist must not, on the strength of its mere assertions, be regarded
as proceeding from any mind but his own. This seems evident; but the
converse proposition is not equally indisputable. We must not take for
granted that a message which _does_ contain facts not normally known to
the automatist must therefore come from some mind other than his own. If
the subliminal self can acquire supernormal knowledge at all, it may
obtain such knowledge by means other than telepathic impressions from
other minds. It may assimilate its supernormal nutriment also by a
directer process--it may devour it not only cooked but raw. Parallel
with the possibilities of reception of such knowledge from the influence
of other embodied or disembodied minds lies the possibility of its own
clairvoyant perception, or active absorption of some kind, of facts
lying indefinitely beyond its supraliminal purview.

Now, as I have said, the great majority of the nunciative or
message-bearing motor automatisms originate in the automatist's own
mind, and do not involve the exercise of telepathy or telæsthesia, or
any other supernormal faculty; but they illustrate in various ways the
coexistence of the subliminal with the supraliminal self, its wider
memory, and its independent intelligence.

I need not here multiply instances of the simpler and commoner forms of
this type, and I will merely quote in illustration one short case
recounted by Mr. H. Arthur Smith (author of _The Principles of Equity_,
and a member of the Council of the Society for Psychical Research) who
has had the patience to analyse many communications through
"Planchette."

(From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 233.)[181] Mr. Smith and his
nephew placed their hands on the Planchette, and a purely fantastic
name was given as that of the communicating agency.

     Q. "Where did you live?" A. "Wem." This name was quite unknown to
     any of us. I am sure it was to myself, and as sure of the word of
     the others as of that of any one I know.

     Q. "Is it decided who is to be Archbishop of Canterbury?" A. "Yes."

     Q. "Who?" A. "Durham." As none of us remembered his name, we asked.

     "What is his name?" A. "Lightfoot." Of course, how far the main
     statement is correct, I don't know. The curiosity at the time
     rested in the fact that the name was given which none of us could
     recall, but was found, to be right.

Now, this is just one of the cases which a less wary observer might have
brought forward as evidence of spirit agency. An identity, it would be
said, manifested itself, and gave an address which none present had ever
heard. But I venture to say that there cannot be any real proof that an
educated person has never heard of Wem. A permanent recorded fact, like
the name of a town which is to be found (for instance) in Bradshaw's
Guide, may at any moment have been presented to Mr. Smith's eye, and
have found a lodgment in his subliminal memory.

Similarly in the answers "Durham" and "Lightfoot" we are reminded of
cases where in a dream we ask a question with vivid curiosity, and are
astonished at the reply; which nevertheless proceeds from _ourselves_ as
undoubtedly as does the inquiry. The prediction in this case was wrong.

What we have been shown is an independent activity of the subliminal
self holding colloquies with the supraliminal, and nothing more. Yet we
shall find, if we go on accumulating instances of the same general type,
that traces of telæsthesia and telepathy begin insensibly to show
themselves; not at first with a distinctness or a persistence sufficient
for actual proof, but just in the same gradual way in which indications
of supernormal faculty stole in amid the disintegration of split
personalities; or in which indications of some clairvoyant outlook stole
in amid the incoherence of dream. Many of these faint indications,
valueless, as I have said, for purely evidential purposes, are
nevertheless of much theoretical interest, as showing how near is the
subliminal self to that region of supernormal knowledge which for the
supraliminal is so definitely closed.[182]

Mr. Schiller's case (see _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 216-224)
[832 A] is a good example of these obscure transitions between normal
and supernormal, and introduces us to several phenomena which we shall
afterwards find recurring again and again in independent quarters.
Dramatisation of fictitious personalities, for instance, which forms so
marked a feature in Professor Flournoy's celebrated case (to be
discussed later), begins in this series of experiments, conducted
throughout with a purely scientific aim, and with no sort of belief in
the imaginary "Irktomar" and the rest. It seems as though this
"objectivation of types" were part of a romance which some inscrutable
but childish humorist was bent on making up. The "cryptomnesia" shown in
this case through the reproduction of scraps of old French with which
the automatist had no conscious acquaintance, reached a point at which
(as again in Professor Flournoy's case) one is almost driven to suspect
that it was aided by some slight clairvoyance on the part of the
subliminal self.

Indeed as the cases become increasingly complex, one wonders to what
extent this strange manufacture of inward romances can be carried. There
is, I may say, a great deal more of it in the world than is commonly
suspected. I have myself received so many cases of these dramatised
utterances--as though a number of different spirits were writing in turn
through some automatist's hand--that I have come to recognise the
operation of some law of dreams, so to call it, as yet but obscurely
understood. The alleged personalities are for the most part not only
unidentified, but purposely unidentifiable; they give themselves
romantic or ludicrous names, and they are produced and disappear as
lightly as puppets on a mimic stage. The main curiosity of such cases
lies in their very persistence and complexity; it would be a waste of
space to quote any of the longer ones in such a way as to do them
justice. And, fortunately, there is no need for me to give any of my own
cases; since a specially good case has been specially well observed and
reported in a book with which many of my readers are probably already
acquainted,--Professor Flournoy's _Des Indes à la planète Mars: Etude
sur un cas de Somnambulisme avec Glossolalie_ (Paris and Geneva, 1900).
I shall here make some comments on that striking record, which all
students of these subjects ought to study in detail.

It happens, no doubt, to any group which pursues for many years a
somewhat unfamiliar line of inquiry, that those of their points which
are first assailed get gradually admitted, so that as they become
interested in new points they may scarcely observe what change has taken
place in the reception of the old. The reader of early volumes of the
_Proceedings_ S.P.R. will often observe this kind of progress of
opinion. And now Professor Flournoy's book indicates in a remarkable way
how things have moved in the psychology of the last twenty years. The
book--a model of fairness throughout--is indeed, for the most part,
critically _destructive_ in its treatment of the quasi-supernormal
phenomena with which it deals. But what a mass of conceptions a
competent psychologist now takes for granted in this realm, which the
official science of twenty years ago would scarcely stomach our hinting
at!

One important point may be noticed at once as decisively corroborating a
contention of my own made long ago, and at a time when it probably
seemed fantastic to many readers. Arguing for the potential _continuity_
of subliminal mentation (as against those who urged that there were only
occasional flashes of submerged thought, like scattered dreams), I said
that it would soon be found needful to press this notion of a continuous
subliminal self to the utmost, if we were not prepared to admit a
continuous spiritual guidance or possession. Now, in fact, with
Professor Flournoy's subject the whole discussion turns on this very
point. There is unquestionably a continuous and complex series of
thoughts and feelings going on beneath the threshold of consciousness of
Mlle. "Hélène Smith." Is this submerged mentation due in any degree or
in any manner to the operation of spirits other than Mlle. Smith's own?
That is the broad question; but it is complicated here by a subsidiary
question: whether, namely, any previous incarnations of Mlle.
Smith's--other phases of her own spiritual history, now involving
complex relationship with the past--have any part in the crowd of
personalities which seem struggling to express themselves through her
quite healthy organism.

Mlle. Smith, I should at once say, is not,[183] and never has been, a
paid medium. At the date of M. Flournoy's book, she occupied a leading
post on the staff of a large _maison de commerce_ at Geneva, and gave
séances to her friends simply because she enjoyed the exercise of her
mediumistic faculties, and was herself interested in their explanation.

Her organism, I repeat, is regarded, both by herself and by others, as a
quite healthy one. Mlle. Smith, says Professor Flournoy, declares
distinctly that she is perfectly sound in body and mind--in no way
lacking in equilibrium--and indignantly repudiates the idea that there
is any hurtful anomaly or the slightest danger in mediumship as she
practises it.

"It is far from being demonstrated," he continues, "that mediumship is a
pathological phenomenon. It is abnormal, no doubt, in the sense of being
_rare_, _exceptional_; but rarity is not morbidity. The few years during
which these phenomena have been seriously and scientifically studied
have not been enough to allow us to pronounce on their true nature. It
is interesting to note that in the countries where these studies have
been pushed the furthest, in England and America, the dominant view
among the _savants_ who have gone deepest into the matter is not at all
unfavourable to mediumship; and that, far from regarding it as a special
case of hysteria, they see in it a faculty superior, advantageous,
healthy, of which hysteria is a form of degenerescence, a pathological
parody, a morbid caricature."

The phenomena which this sensitive presents (Hélène Smith is Professor
Flournoy's pseudonym for her) cover a range which looks at first very
wide, although a clearer analysis shows that these varieties are more
apparent than real, and that self-suggestion will perhaps account for
all of them.

There is, to begin with, every kind of automatic irruption of subliminal
into supraliminal life. As Professor Flournoy says (p. 45): "Phenomena
of hypermnesia, divinations, mysterious findings of lost objects, happy
inspirations, exact presentiments, just intuitions, teleological
(purposive or helpful) automatisms, in short, of every kind; she
possesses in a high degree this small change of genius--which
constitutes a more than sufficient compensation for the inconvenience
resulting from those distractions and moments of absence of mind which
accompany her visions; and which, moreover, generally pass unobserved."

At séances--where the deeper change has no inconveniences--Hélène
undergoes a sort of self-hypnotisation which produces various lethargic
and somnambulistic states. And when she is alone and safe from
interruption she has spontaneous visions, during which there may be some
approach to ecstasy. At the séances she experiences positive
hallucinations, and also negative hallucinations, or systematised
anæsthesiæ, so that, for instance, she will cease to see some person
present, especially one who is to be the recipient of messages in the
course of the séance. "It seems as though a dream-like incoherence
presided over this preliminary work of disaggregation, in which the
normal perceptions are arbitrarily split up or absorbed by the
subconscious personality--eager for materials with which to compose the
hallucinations which it is preparing." Then, when the séance begins, the
main actor is Hélène's guide _Léopold_ (a pseudonym for Cagliostro) who
speaks and writes through her, and is, in fact, either her leading
spirit-control or (much more probably) her most developed form of
secondary personality.

"Leopold," says Professor Flournoy (p. 134), "certainly manifests a very
honourable and amiable side of Mlle. Smith's character, and in taking
him as her 'guide' she has followed inspirations which are doubtless
among the highest in her nature."

The high moral quality of these automatic communications, on which
Professor Flournoy thus insists, is a phenomenon worth consideration.

I do not mean that it is specially strange in the case of Mlle. Smith.
But the almost universally high moral tone of genuinely automatic
utterances has not, I think, been sufficiently noticed or adequately
explained.

In evidential messages--where there is real reason to believe that an
identified spirit is communicating--there is a marked and independent
consensus on such matters as these spirits profess themselves able to
discuss.

And again in non-evidential messages--in communications which probably
proceed from the automatist's subliminal self--I hold that there is a
remarkable and undesigned concordance in high moral tone, and also in
avoidance of certain prevalent tenets, which many of the automatists do
supraliminally hold as true. But I also insist that these subliminal
messages, even when not incoherent, are generally dream-like, and often
involve tenets which (though never in my experience base or immoral) are
unsupported by evidence, and are probably to be referred to mere
self-suggestion.

Prominent among such tenets is one which forms a large part of Mlle.
Smith's communications; namely, the doctrine of _reincarnation_, or of
successive lives spent by each soul upon this planet.

The simple fact that such was probably the opinion both of Plato and of
Virgil shows that there is nothing here which is alien to the best
reason or to the highest instincts of men. Nor, indeed, is it easy to
realise any theory of the _direct creation_ of spirits at such different
stages of advancement as those which enter upon the earth in the guise
of mortal man. There _must_, one feels, be some kind of continuity--some
form of spiritual Past. Yet for reincarnation there is at present no
valid evidence; and it must be my duty to show how its assertion in any
given instance--Mlle. Smith's included--constitutes in itself a strong
argument in favour of self-suggestion rather than extraneous inspiration
as the source of the messages in which it appears.

Whenever civilised men have received what they have regarded as a
revelation (which has generally been somewhat fragmentary in its first
delivery) they have naturally endeavoured to complete and systematise it
as well as they could. In so doing they have mostly aimed at three
objects: (1) to _understand_ as much as possible of the secrets of the
universe; (2) to _justify_ as far as possible Heaven's dealings with
men; and (3) to _appropriate_ as far as possible the favour or benefit
which the revelation may show as possibly accruing to believers. For all
these purposes the doctrine of reincarnation has proved useful in many
countries and times. But in no case could it seem more appropriate than
in this last revelation (so to term it) through automatic messages and
the like. And as a matter of history, a certain vigorous preacher of the
new faith, known under the name of Allan Kardec, took up
reincarnationist tenets, enforced them (as there is reason to believe)
by strong suggestion upon the minds of various automatic writers, and
set them forth in dogmatic works which have had much influence,
especially among Latin nations, from their clarity, symmetry, and
intrinsic reasonableness. Yet the data thus collected were absolutely
insufficient, and the _Livre des Esprits_ must simply rank as the
premature formulation of a new religion--the premature systematisation
of a nascent science.

I follow Professor Flournoy in believing that the teaching of that work
must have directly or indirectly influenced the mind of Mlle. Smith, and
is therefore responsible for her claim to these incarnations previous to
that which she now undergoes or enjoys.

On the general scheme here followed, each incarnation, if the last has
been used aright, ought to represent some advance in the scale of being.
If one earth-life has been misused, the next earth-life ought to afford
opportunity for expiation--or for further practice in the special virtue
which has been imperfectly acquired. Thus Mlle. Smith's present life in
a humble position may be thought to atone for her overmuch pride in her
last incarnation--as Marie Antoinette.

But the mention of Marie Antoinette suggests the risk which this theory
fosters--of assuming that one is the issue of a distinguished line of
spiritual progenitors; insomuch that, with whatever temporary sets-back,
one is sure in the end to find oneself in a leading position.

Pythagoras, indeed, was content with the secondary hero Euphorbus as his
bygone self. But in our days Dr. Anna Kingsford and Mr. Edward Maitland
must needs have been the Virgin Mary and St. John the Divine. And Victor
Hugo, who was naturally well to the front in these self-multiplications,
took possession of most of the leading personages of antiquity whom he
could manage to string together in chronological sequence. It is obvious
that any number of re-born souls can play at this game; but where no one
adduces any evidence it seems hardly worth while to go on. Even
Pythagoras does not appear to have adduced any evidence beyond his _ipse
dixit_ for his assertion that the alleged shield of Euphorbus had in
reality been borne by that mythical hero. Meantime the question as to
reincarnation has actually been put to a very few spirits who have given
some real evidence of their identity. So far as I know, no one of these
has claimed to know anything personally of such an incident; although
all have united in saying that their knowledge was too limited to allow
them to generalise on the matter.

Hélène's controls and previous incarnations--to return to our
subject--do perhaps suffer from the general fault of aiming too high.
She has to her credit a control from the planet Mars; one
pre-incarnation as an Indian Princess; and a second (as I have said) as
Marie Antoinette.

In each case there are certain impressive features in the impersonation;
but in each case also careful analysis negatives the idea that we can be
dealing with a personality really revived from a former epoch, or from a
distant planet;--and leaves us inclined to explain everything by
"cryptomnesia" (as Professor Flournoy calls submerged memory), and that
subliminal inventiveness of which we already know so much.

The _Martian_ control was naturally the most striking at first sight.
Its reality was supported by a Martian language, written in a Martian
alphabet, spoken with fluency, and sufficiently interpreted into French
to show that such part of it, at any rate, as could be committed to
writing was actually a grammatical and coherent form of speech.

And here I reach an appropriate point at which to remark that this book
of Professor Flournoy's is not the first account which has been
published of Mlle. Hélène. Professor Lemaître, of Geneva, printed two
papers about her in the _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_: first, a long
article in the number for March-April, 1897--then a reply to M. Lefébure
in the number for May-June, 1897. In these papers he distinctly claims
supernormal powers for Mlle. Hélène, implying a belief in her genuine
possession by spirits, and even in her previous incarnations, and in the
extra-terrene or ostensibly Martian language. I read these papers at the
time, but put them aside as inconclusive, mainly because that very
language, on which M. Lemaître seemed most to rely, appeared to me so
obviously factitious as to throw doubt on all the evidence presented by
an observer who could believe that denizens of another planet talked to
each other in a language corresponding in every particular with simple
French idioms, and including such words as _quisa_ for _quel_, _quisé_
for _quelle_, _vétèche_ for _voir_, _vèche_ for _vu_;--the fantastic
locutions of the nursery. M. Lemaître remarks, as a proof of the
consistency and reality of the extra-terrene tongue, "L'un des premiers
mots que nous ayons eus, _métiche_, signifiant _monsieur_, se retrouve
plus tard avec le sens de _homme_." That is to say, having
transmogrified _monsieur_ into _métiche_, Hélène further transmutes
_les messieurs_ into _cée métiché_;--in naïve imitation of ordinary
French usage. And this tongue is supposed to have sprung up
independently of all the influences which have shaped terrene grammar in
general or the French idiom in particular! And even after Professor
Flournoy's analysis of this absurdity I see newspapers speaking of this
Martian language as an impressive phenomenon! They seem willing to
believe that the evolution of another planet, if it has culminated in
conscious life at all, can have culminated in a conscious life into
which we could all of us enter affably, with a suitable Ollendorff's
phrase-book under our arms;--"_eni cée métiché oné qudé_,"--"ici les
hommes (messieurs) sont bons,"--"here the men are good";--and the rest
of it.

To the student of automatisms, of course, all this irresistibly suggests
the automatist's own subliminal handiwork. It is a case of "glossolaly,"
or "speaking with tongues"; and we have no modern case--no case later
than the half-mythical Miracles of the Cevennes--where such utterance
has proved to be other than gibberish. I have had various automatic
hieroglyphics shown to me, with the suggestion that they may be cursive
Japanese, or perhaps an old dialect of Northern China; but I confess
that I have grown tired of showing these fragments to the irresponsive
expert, who suggests that they may also be vague reminiscences of the
scrolls in an Oriental tea-tray.

It seems indeed to be a most difficult thing to get telepathically into
any brain even fragments of a language which it has not learnt. A few
simple Italian, and even Hawaiian, words occur in Mrs. Piper's
utterances, coming apparently from departed spirits (_Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 337 and 384 [960 A and § 961]), but these, with
some Kaffir and Chinese words given through Miss Browne (_Proceedings_
S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 124-127 [871 A]), form, I think, almost the only
instances which I know. And, speaking generally, whatever is elaborate,
finished, pretentious, is likely to be of subliminal facture; while only
things scrappy, perplexed, and tentative, have floated to us veritably
from afar.

I need not here go into the details of the Hindow preincarnation or of
the more modern and accessible characterisation of Marie Antoinette, but
will pass on to certain minor, but interesting phenomena, which
Professor Flournoy calls _teleological automatisms_. These are small
acts of helpfulness--_beneficent synergies_, as we might term them, in
contrast with the _injurious synergies_, or combined groups of _hurtful_
actions, with which hysteria has made us familiar.[184]

"One day," says Professor Flournoy (p. 35), "Miss Smith, when desiring
to lift down a large and heavy object which lay on a high shelf, was
prevented from doing so because her raised arm remained for some seconds
as though petrified in the air and incapable of movement. She took this
as a warning, and gave up the attempt. At a subsequent séance Leopold
stated that it was he who had thus fixed Hélène's arm to prevent her
from grasping this object, which was much too heavy for her and would
have caused her some accident.

"Another time, a shopman, who had been looking in vain for a certain
pattern, asked Hélène if by chance she knew what had become of it.
Hélène answered mechanically and without reflection--'Yes, it has been
sent to Mr. J.' (a client of the house). At the same time she saw before
her the number 18 in large black figures a few feet from the ground, and
added instinctively, 'It was sent eighteen days ago.' [This was in the
highest degree improbable, but was found to be absolutely correct.]
Leopold had no recollection of this, and does not seem to have been the
author of this cryptomnesic automatism."

A similar phenomenon has also been noted (p. 87) when warning is
conveyed by an actual phantasmal figure. Mlle. Smith has seen an
_apparition_ of Leopold, barring a particular road, under circumstances
which make it probable that Mlle. Smith would on that day have had cause
to regret taking that route.

This case of Professor Flournoy's, then--this classical case, as it may
already be fairly termed--may serve here as our culminant example of the
free scope and dominant activity of the unassisted subliminal self. The
telepathic element in this case, if it exists, is relatively small; what
we are watching in Mlle. Hélène Smith resembles, as I have said, a kind
of exaggeration of the submerged constructive faculty,--a hypertrophy of
genius--without the innate originality of mind which made even the
dreams of R. L. Stevenson a source of pleasure to thousands of readers.

In reference to the main purpose of this work, such cases as these,
however curious, can be only introductory to automatisms of deeper
moment. In our attempt to trace an evolutive series of phenomena
indicating ever higher human faculty, the smallest telepathic
incident,--the most trivial proof, if proof it be, of communication
received without sensory intermediation from either an incarnate or a
discarnate mind outweighs in importance the most complex ramifications
and burgeonings of the automatist's own submerged intelligence.

I pass on, then, to evidence which points, through motor automatisms, to
supernormal faculty; and I shall begin by referring the reader to
certain experiments (due to Professor Richet) in the simplest of all
forms of motor automatism, viz., table-tilting, with results which only
telepathy can explain. (See Appendix VIII. A.)

Trivial though they seem, such experiments may with a little care be
made absolutely conclusive. Had Professor Richet's friends, for example,
been willing to prolong this series, we might have had a standing
demonstration of telepathy, reproducible at will.[185]

And now I pass on to some experiments with Planchette, in which an
element of telepathy was shown. The following account from Mrs. Alfred
Moberly, Tynwald, Hythe, Kent, is corroborated, with some additional
examples, by two other ladies present at the time.

(From _Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 235.)


_May 9th, 1884._

     The operators were placed out of sight of the rest of the company,
     who selected--in silence--a photograph, one of an albumful, and
     fixed their attention on it. We--the operators--were requested to
     keep our minds a blank as far as possible and follow the first
     involuntary motion of the Planchette. In three out of five cases it
     wrote the name or initial or some word descriptive of the selected
     portrait. We also obtained the signatures to letters selected in
     the same manner. We both knew perfectly well that _we_ were
     writing--not the spirits, as the rest of the company persist to
     this day in believing--but had only the slightest idea what the
     words might prove to be.

     We have tried it since, and generally with some curious result. A
     crucial test was offered by two gentlemen in the form of a question
     to which we couldn't possibly guess the answer. "Where's Toosey?"
     The answer came, "In Vauxhall Road." "Toosey," they explained, was
     a pet terrier who had disappeared; suspicion attaching to a plumber
     living in the road mentioned, who had been working at the house and
     whose departure coincided with Toosey's.

Of course, in the case of the inquiry after the lost dog, we may suppose
that the answer given came from the questioner's own mind. Mrs. Moberly
and her friends seem to have been quite aware of this; and were little
likely to fall into the not uncommon error of asking Planchette, for
instance, what horse will win the Derby, and staking, perhaps, some
pecuniary consideration on the extremely illusory reply.[186]

And now we come to the palmary case of the late Rev. P. H. Newnham,
Vicar of Maker, Devonport, who was personally known to Edmund Gurney and
myself, and was a man in all ways worthy of high respect. The long
series of communications between Mr. Newnham and his wife, which date
back to 1871, and whose contemporaneous written record is preserved in
the archives of the S.P.R., must, I think, always retain their primacy
as early and trustworthy examples of a telepathic transference where the
percipient's automatic script answers questions penned by the agent in
such a position that the percipient could not in any normal manner
discern what those questions were. No part of our evidence seems to me
more worthy of study than this.[187]

It must be distinctly understood that Mrs. Newnham did not see or hear
the questions which Mr. Newnham wrote down.[188] The fact, therefore,
that her answers bore any relation to the questions shows that the sense
of the questions was telepathically conveyed to her. This is the leading
and important fact. The _substance_ of the replies written is also
interesting, and Mr. Newnham has some good comments thereon. But even
had the replies contained no facts which Mrs. Newnham could not have
known, this would not detract from the main value of the evidence, which
consists in the fact that _Mrs. Newnham's hand wrote replies clearly and
repeatedly answering questions which she neither heard nor saw_.

In this case we have the advantage of seeing before us the entire series
of questions and answers, and thus of satisfying ourselves that the
misses (which in that case are very few) are marked as well as the hits,
and consequently that the coincidences between question and answer are
at any rate not the result of chance. In several other cases which I
have known, where the good faith of the informants has been equally
above question, the possibility of an explanation by chance alone has
been a more important element in the problem. All our evidence has
tended to show that the telepathic power itself is a variable thing;
that it shows itself in flashes, for the most part spontaneously, and
seldom persists through a series of deliberate experiments. And if an
automatist possessing power of this uncertain kind has exercised it at
irregular moments and with no scientific aim;--and has kept, moreover,
no steady record of success and failure;--then it becomes difficult to
say that even some brilliant coincidences afford cogent proof of
telepathic action.[189]

I pass on to a small group of cases which form a curious transition from
these communications _inter vivos_ to communications which I shall class
as coming from the dead. These are cases where the message professes to
come from a deceased person, but shows internal evidence of having come,
telepathically, from the mind of some one present, or, indeed, from some
living person at a distance. (See the case given in Appendix VIII. B.)

But this, although a real risk, is by no means the only risk of
deception which such messages involve. The communication may conceivably
come from some unembodied spirit indeed, but not from the spirit who is
claimed as its author.

The reader who wishes to acquaint himself with this new range of
problems cannot do better than study the record of the varied
experiences of automatic writing which have been intermingled with Miss
A.'s crystal-visions, etc.[190]

There is no case that I have watched longer than Miss A.'s;--none where
I have more absolute assurance of the scrupulous probity of the
principal sensitive herself and of the group who share the
experiments;--but none also which leaves me more often baffled as to the
unseen source of the information given. There is a knowledge both of the
past and of the future, which seems capriciously limited, and is mingled
with mistakes, yet on the other hand is of a nature which it is
difficult to refer to any individual human mind, incarnate or
discarnate. We meet here some of the first indications of a possibility
that discarnate spirits communicating with us have occasional access to
certain sources of knowledge which even to themselves are inscrutably
remote and obscure.

The written diagnoses and prognoses given by the so-called "Semirus,"
often without Miss A.'s even seeing the patient or hearing the nature of
his malady, have become more and more remarkable. Miss A. and her
friends do not wish these private matters to be printed, and I cannot
therefore insist upon the phenomena here. Yet in view of the amount of
telæsthesia which Miss A.'s various automatisms reveal, it should first
be noted that human organisms seem especially pervious to such _vue à
distance_. "Semirus," "Gelalius," etc., are obvious pseudonyms; and
neither Semirus' prescriptions nor Gelalius' cosmogony contain enough of
indication to enable us to grasp their origin.[191]

From the communications of these remote personages I go on to certain
messages avowedly coming from persons more recently departed, and into
which something more of definite personality seems to enter. One element
of this kind is _handwriting_; there are many cases where resemblance of
handwriting is one of the evidential points alleged. Now proof of
identity from resemblance of handwriting may conceivably be very strong.
But in estimating it we must bear two points in mind. The first is that
(like the resemblances of so-called "spirit-photographs" to deceased
friends) it is often very loosely asserted. One needs, if not an
expert's opinion, at least a careful personal scrutiny of the three
scripts--the automatist's voluntary and his automatic script, and the
deceased person's script--before one can feel sure that the resemblance
is in more than some general scrawliness. This refers to the cases where
the automatist has provably never seen the deceased person's
handwriting. Where he _has_ seen that handwriting, we have to remember
(in the second place) that a hypnotised subject can frequently imitate
any known handwriting far more closely than in his waking state; and
that consequently we are bound to credit the subliminal self with a
mimetic faculty which may come out in these messages without any
supraliminal guidance whatever on the automatist's part. In
_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 549-65 [864 A], is an account of a
series of experiments by Professor Rossi-Pagnoni at Pesaro, into which
the question of handwriting enters. The account illustrates automatic
utterance as well as other forms of motor automatism, and possibly also
telekinetic phenomena. The critical discussion of the evidence by Mr.
H. Babington Smith, to whom we are indebted for the account, shows with
what complex considerations we have to deal in the questions now before
us.

I now cite a few cases where the point of central interest is the
announcement of a death unknown to the sitters.[192]

In Appendix VIII. C is given a case which we received from Dr.
Liébeault, of Nancy, and which was first published in _Phantasms of the
Living_ (vol. i. p. 293), where it was regarded as an example of a
spontaneous telepathic impulse proceeding directly from a dying person.
I now regard it as more probably due to the action of the spirit after
bodily death.

I shall next give a _résumé_ of a case of curious complexity received
from M. Aksakof;--an automatic message written by a Mdlle. Stramm,
informing her of the death of a M. Duvanel. The principal incidents may
here be disentangled as follows:--

     Duvanel dies by his own hand on January 15th, 1887, in a Swiss
     village, where he lives alone, having no relations except a brother
     living at a distance, whom Mdlle. Stramm had never seen (as the
     principal witness, M. Kaigorodoff, informs us in a letter of May
     1890).

     Mdlle. Stramm's father does not hear of Duvanel's death till two
     days later, and sends her the news in a letter dated January 18th,
     1887.

     Five hours after Duvanel's death an automatic message announcing it
     is written at the house of M. Kaigorodoff, at Wilna in Russia, by
     Mdlle. Stramm, who had certainly at that time received no news of
     the event.

     From what mind are we to suppose that this information came?

     (1) We may first attempt to account for Mdlle. Stramm's message on
     the theory of _latency_. We may suppose that the telepathic message
     came from the dying man, but did not rise into consciousness until
     an opportunity was afforded by Mdlle. Stramm's sitting down to
     write automatically.

     But to this interpretation there is an objection of a very curious
     kind. The message written by Mdlle. Stramm was not precisely
     accurate. Instead of ascribing Duvanel's death to suicide, it
     ascribed it to a stoppage of blood, "un engorgement de sang."

     And when M. Stramm, three days after the death, wrote to his
     daughter in Russia to tell her of it, he also used the same
     expression, "un engorgement de sang," thus disguising the actual
     truth in order to spare the feelings of his daughter, who had
     formerly refused to marry Duvanel, and who (as her father feared)
     might receive a painful shock if she learnt the tragic nature of
     his end. There was, therefore, a singular coincidence between the
     automatic and the normally-written message as to the death;--a
     coincidence which looks as though the same mind had been at work
     in each instance. But that mind cannot have been M. Stramm's
     ordinary mind, as he was not supraliminally aware of Duvanel's
     death at the time when the first message was written. It may,
     however, be supposed that his subliminal self had received the
     information of the death telepathically, had transmitted it in a
     deliberately modified form to his daughter, while it remained
     latent in himself, and had afterwards influenced his supraliminal
     self to modify the information in the same way when writing to her.

     (2) But we must also consider the explanation of the coincidence
     given by the intelligence which controlled the automatic writing.
     That intelligence asserted itself to be a brother of Mdlle.
     Stramm's, who died some years before. And this "Louis" further
     asserted that he had himself influenced M. Stramm to make use of
     the same euphemistic phrase, with the object of avoiding a shock to
     Mdlle. Stramm; for which purpose it was needful that the two
     messages should agree in ascribing the death to the same form of
     sudden illness.

     Now if this be true, and the message did indeed come from the
     deceased "Louis," we have an indication of continued existence, and
     continued knowledge of earthly affairs, on the part of a person
     long dead.

     But if we consider that the case, as presented to us, contains no
     proof of "Louis'" identity, so that "Louis" may be merely one of
     those arbitrary names which the automatist's subliminal
     intelligence seems so prone to assume; then we must suppose that
     Duvanel was actually operative on two occasions after death, first
     inspiring in Mdlle. Stramm the automatic message, and then
     modifying in M. Stramm the message which the father might otherwise
     have sent.

I next quote a case in Appendix VIII. D which illustrates the continued
terrene knowledge on the part of the dead of which other instances were
given in the last chapter.

And lastly, I give in Appendix VIII. E a case which in one respect
stands alone. It narrates the success of a direct experiment,--a
test-message planned before death, and communicated after death, by a
man who held that the hope of an assurance of continued existence was
worth at least a resolute effort, whatever its result might be. His
tests, indeed, were two, and both were successful. One was the revealing
of the place where, before death, he hid a piece of brick marked and
broken for special recognition, and the other was the communication of
the contents of a short letter which he wrote and sealed before death.
We may say that the information was certainly not possessed
supraliminally by any living person. There are two other cases
(_Proceedings_ S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 353-355, and _op. cit._ vol viii.
pp. 238-242 [876 A and B]) where information given through automatists
may hypothetically be explicable by telepathy from the living, although,
indeed, in my own view, it probably emanated from the deceased as
alleged. In one of these cases the place where a missing will had been
hidden was revealed to the automatist, but it is not clear whether the
will was actually discovered or not before the automatic writing was
obtained (although the automatist was unaware of its discovery), and in
any case, apparently, its whereabouts was known to some living person
who had hidden it, and may not have been known to the deceased before
death.

In the other case the whereabouts of a missing note of hand was revealed
to the automatists, and even if this could be regarded as absolutely
unknown supraliminally to any living person, it is not by any means
certain that the fact was known before death to the deceased person from
whom the message purported to come.

These cases, therefore, are not such strong evidence for personal
identity as the one to which I have referred above, and which I have
given, as recording what purports to be the successful accomplishment of
an experiment which every one may make;--which every one _ought_ to
make;--for, small as may be the chances of success, a few score of
distinct successes would establish a presumption of man's survival which
the common sense of mankind would refuse to explain away.

Here, then, let us pause and consider to what point the evidence
contained in this chapter has gradually led us. We shall perceive that
the motor phenomena have confirmed, and have also greatly extended, the
results to which the cognate sensory phenomena had already pointed. We
have already noted, in each of the two states of sleep and of waking,
the variously expanding capacities of the subliminal self. We have
watched a hyperæsthetic intensification of ordinary faculty,--leading up
to telæsthesia, and to telepathy, from the living and from the departed.
Along with these powers, which, on the hypothesis of the soul's
independent existence, are at least within our range of analogical
conception, we have noted also a precognitive capacity of a type which
no fact as yet known to science will help us to explain.

Proceeding to the study of motor automatisms, we have found a _third_
group of cases which independently confirm in each of these lines in
turn the results of our analysis of sensory automatisms both in sleep
and in waking. Evidence thus convergent will already need no ordinary
boldness of negative assumption if it is to be set aside. But motor
automatisms have taught us much more than this. At once more energetic
and more persistent than the sensory, they oblige us to face certain
problems which the lightness and fugitiveness of sensory impressions
allowed us in some measure to evade. Thus when we discussed the
mechanism (so to call it) of visual and auditory phantasms, two
competing conceptions presented themselves for our choice,--the
conception of _telepathic impact_, and the conception of _psychical
invasion_. Either (we said) there was an influence exerted by the agent
on the percipient's mind, which so stimulated the sensory tracts of his
brain that he externalised that impression as a quasi-percept, or else
the agent in some way modified an actual portion of space where (say) an
apparition was discerned, perhaps by several percipients at once.

Phrased in this manner, the telepathic impact seemed the less startling,
the less extreme hypothesis of the two,--mainly, perhaps, because the
picture which it called up was left so vague and obscure. But now
instead of a fleeting hallucination we have to deal with a strong and
lasting impulse--such, for instance, as the girl's impulse to _write_,
in Dr. Liébeault's case (Appendix VIII. C):--an impulse which seems to
come from the depths of the being, and which (like a post-hypnotic
suggestion) may override even strong disinclination, and keep the
automatist uncomfortable until it has worked itself out. We may still
call this a _telepathic impact_, if we will, but we shall find it hard
to distinguish that term from a _psychical invasion_. This strong, yet
apparently alien, motor innervation corresponds in fact as closely as
possible to our idea of an _invasion_--an invasion no longer of the room
only in which the percipient is sitting, but of his own body and his own
powers. It is an invasion which, if sufficiently prolonged, would become
a _possession_; and it both unites and intensifies those two earlier
conjectures;--of telepathic impact on the percipient's mind, and of
"phantasmogenetic presence" in the percipient's surroundings. What
seemed at first a mere impact is tending to become a persistent control;
what seemed an incursion merely into the percipient's environment has
become an incursion into his organism itself.

As has been usual in this inquiry, this slight forward step from
vagueness to comparative clearness of conception introduces us at once
to a whole series of novel problems. Yet, as we have also learnt to
expect, some of our earlier phenomena may have to be called in with
advantage to illustrate phenomena more advanced.

In cases of split personality, to begin with, we have seen just the same
phenomena occurring where certainly no personality was concerned save
the percipient's own. We have seen a section of the subliminal self
partially or temporarily dominating the organism; perhaps controlling
permanently one arm alone;[193] or perhaps controlling intermittently
the whole nervous system;--and all this with varying degrees of
displacement of the primary personality.

Similarly with post-hypnotic suggestion. We have seen the subliminal
self ordered to write (say) "It has left off raining"--and thereupon
writing the words without the conscious will of the automatist--and
again with varying degrees of displacement of the waking self. The step
hence to such a case as Mrs. Newnham's is thus not a very long one. Mrs.
Newnham's subliminal self, exercising supernormal faculty, and by some
effort of its own, acquires certain facts from Mr. Newnham's mind, and
uses her hand to write them down automatically. The great problem here
introduced is how the subliminal self acquires the facts, rather than
how it succeeds in writing them down when it has once acquired them.

But as we go further we can no longer limit the problem in this way,--to
the activities of the automatist's subliminal self. We cannot always
assume that some portion of the automatist's personality gets at the
supernormal knowledge by some effort of its own. Our evidence, as we
know, has pointed decisively to telepathic impacts or influences from
without. What, then, is the mechanism here? Are we still to suppose that
the automatist's subliminal self executes the movements--obeying somehow
the bidding of the impulse from without? or does the external agent, who
sends the telepathic message, himself execute the movements also,
directly using the automatist's arm? And if telekinetic movements
accompany the message (a subject thus far deferred, but of prime
importance), are we to suppose that these also are effected by the
percipient's subliminal self, under the guidance of some external
spirit, incarnate or discarnate? or are they effected directly by that
external spirit?

We cannot really say which of these two is the easier hypothesis.

From one point of view it may seem simpler to keep as long as we can to
that acknowledged _vera causa_, the automatist's subliminal self; and to
collect such observations as may indicate any power on its part of
producing physical effects outside the organism. Such scattered
observations occur at every stage, and even Mrs. Newnham (I may briefly
observe in passing) thought that her pencil, when writing down the
messages telepathically derived from her husband, was moved by something
other than the ordinary muscular action of the fingers which held it. On
the other hand, there seems something very forced in attributing to an
external spirit's agency impulses and impressions which seem intimately
the automatist's own, and at the same time refusing to ascribe to that
external agency phenomena which take place outside the automatist's
organism, and which present themselves to him as objective facts, as
much outside his own being as the fall of the apple to the ground.

Reflecting on such points--and once admitting this kind of interaction
between the automatist's own spirit and an external spirit, incarnate or
discarnate--we find the possible combinations presenting themselves in
perplexing variety;--a variety both of agencies on the part of the
invading spirit, and of effects on the part of the invaded spirit and
organism.

What is that which invades? and what is that which is displaced or
superseded by this invasion? In what ways may two spirits co-operate in
the possession and control of the same organism?

These last words--control and possession--remind us of the great mass of
vague tradition and belief to the effect that spirits of the departed
may exercise such possession or control over the living. To those
ancient and vague beliefs it will be our task in the next chapter to
give a form as exact and stable as we can. And observe with how entirely
novel a preparation of mind we now enter on that task. The examination
of "possession" is no longer to us, as to the ordinary civilised
inquirer, a merely antiquarian or anthropological research into forms of
superstition lying wholly apart from any valid or systematic thought. On
the contrary, it is an inquiry directly growing out of previous
evidence; directly needed for the full comprehension of known facts as
well as for the discovery of facts unknown. We need, (so to say), to
analyse the spectrum of helium, as detected in the sun, in order to
check and correct our spectrum of helium as detected in the Bath waters.
We are obliged to seek for certain definite phenomena in the spiritual
world in order to explain certain definite phenomena of the world of
matter.




