CHAPTER X

EPILOGUE

Εδὁκει τἱς μοι γυνἡ προσελθοὑσα καλἡ καἱ εὑειδἡς, λευκἁ ἱμἁτια με καἱ
ἑιπεἱν, Ὡ Σὡκρατες, Ἡυατἱ κεν τριτἁτω φθἱην ἑρἱβωλον ἱκοιο.--Πλἁτωνος
Κρἱτων.


The task which I proposed to myself at the beginning of this work is
now, after a fashion, accomplished. Following the successive steps of my
programme, I have presented,--not indeed all the evidence which I
possess, and which I would willingly present,--but enough at least to
illustrate a continuous exposition, and as much as can be compressed
into two volumes, with any hope that these volumes will be read at
all.[211] I have indicated also the principal inferences which that
evidence immediately suggests. Such wider generalisations as I may now
add must needs be dangerously speculative; they must run the risk of
alienating still further from this research many of the scientific minds
which I am most anxious to influence.

This risk, nevertheless, I feel bound to face. For two reasons,--or, I
should perhaps say, for one main reason seen under two aspects,--I
cannot leave this obscure and unfamiliar mass of observation and
experiment without some words of wider generalisation, some epilogue
which may place these new discoveries in clearer relation to the
existing schemes of civilised thought and belief.

In the first place, I feel that some such attempt at synthesis is
needful for the practical purpose of enlisting help in our long inquiry.
As has been hinted more than once, the real drag upon its progress has
been not opposition but indifference. Or if indifference be too strong a
word, at any rate the interest evoked has not been such as to inspire to
steady independent work anything like the number of coadjutors who would
have responded to a new departure in one of the sciences which all men
have learnt to respect. The inquiry falls between the two stools of
religion and science; it cannot claim support either from the "religious
world" or from the Royal Society. Yet even apart from the instinct of
pure scientific curiosity (which surely has seldom seen such a field
opening before it), the mighty issues depending on these phenomena
ought, I think, to constitute in themselves a strong, an exceptional
appeal. I desire in this book to emphasise that appeal;--not only to
produce conviction, but also to attract co-operation. And actual
converse with many persons has led me to believe that in order to
attract such help, even from scientific men, some general view of the
moral upshot of all the phenomena is needed;--speculative and uncertain
though such a general view must be.

Again,--and here the practical reason already given expands into a wider
scope,--it would be unfair to the evidence itself were I to close this
work without touching more directly than hitherto on some of the deepest
faiths of men. The influence of the evidence set forth in this book
should not be limited to the conclusions, however weighty, which that
evidence may be thought to establish. Rather these discoveries should
prompt, as nothing else could have prompted, towards the ultimate
achievement of that programme of scientific dominance which the
_Instauratio Magna_ proclaimed for mankind. Bacon foresaw the gradual
victory of observation and experiment--the triumph of actual analysed
fact--in every department of human study;--in every department save one.
The realm of "Divine things" he left to Authority and Faith. I here urge
that that great exemption need be no longer made. I claim that there now
exists an incipient method of getting at this Divine knowledge also,
with the same certainty, the same calm assurance, with which we make our
steady progress in the knowledge of terrene things. The authority of
creeds and Churches will thus be replaced by the authority of
observation and experiment. The impulse of faith will resolve itself
into a reasoned and resolute imagination, bent upon raising even higher
than now the highest ideals of man.

Most readers of the preceding pages will have been prepared for the
point of view thus frankly avowed. Yet to few readers can that point of
view at first present itself otherwise than as alien and repellent.
Philosophy and orthodoxy will alike resent it as presumptuous; nor will
science readily accept the unauthorised transfer to herself of regions
of which she has long been wont either to deny the existence, or at any
rate to disclaim the rule. Nevertheless, I think that it will appear on
reflection that some such change of standpoint as this was urgently
needed,--nay, was ultimately inevitable.

I need not here describe at length the deep disquiet of our time. Never,
perhaps, did man's spiritual satisfaction bear a smaller proportion to
his needs. The old-world sustenance, however earnestly administered, is
too unsubstantial for the modern cravings. And thus through our
civilised societies two conflicting currents run. On the one hand
health, intelligence, morality,--all such boons as the steady progress
of planetary evolution can win for man,--are being achieved in
increasing measure. On the other hand this very sanity, this very
prosperity, do but bring out in stronger relief the underlying
_Welt-Schmers_, the decline of any real belief in the dignity, the
meaning, the endlessness of life.

There are many, of course, who readily accept this limitation of view;
who are willing to let earthly activities and pleasures gradually
dissipate and obscure the larger hope. But others cannot thus be easily
satisfied. They rather resemble children who are growing too old for
their games;--whose amusement sinks into an indifference and discontent
for which the fitting remedy is an initiation into the serious work of
men.

A similar crisis has passed over Europe once before. There came a time
when the joyful naïveté, the unquestioning impulse of the early world
had passed away; when the worship of Greeks no more was beauty, nor the
religion of Romans Rome. Alexandrian decadence, Byzantine despair, found
utterance in many an epigram which might have been written to-day. Then
came a great uprush or incursion from the spiritual world, and with new
races and new ideals Europe regained its youth.

The unique effect of that great Christian impulse begins, perhaps, to
wear away. But more grace may yet be attainable from the region whence
that grace came. Our age's restlessness, as I believe, is the
restlessness not of senility but of adolescence; it resembles the
approach of puberty rather than the approach of death.

What the age needs is not an abandonment of effort, but an increase; the
time is ripe for a study of unseen things as strenuous and sincere as
that which Science has made familiar for the problems of earth. For now
the scientific instinct,--so newly developed in mankind,--seems likely
to spread until it becomes as dominant as was in time past the
religious; and if there be even the narrowest chink through which man
can look forth from his planetary cage, our descendants will not leave
that chink neglected or unwidened. The scheme of knowledge which can
commend itself to such seekers must be a scheme which, while it
_transcends_ our present knowledge, steadily _continues_ it;--a scheme
not catastrophic, but evolutionary; not promulgated and closed in a
moment, but gradually unfolding itself to progressive inquiry.

Must there not also be a continuous change, an unending advance in the
human ideal itself? so that Faith must shift her standpoint from the
brief Past to the endless Future, not so much caring to supply the
lacunæ of tradition as to intensify the conviction that there is still a
higher life to work for, a holiness which may be some day reached by
grace and effort as yet unknown.

It may be that for some generations to come the truest faith will lie in
the patient attempt to unravel from confused phenomena some trace of the
supernal world;--to find thus at last "the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen." I confess, indeed, that I have
often felt as though this present age were even unduly favoured;--as
though no future revelation and calm could equal the joy of this great
struggle from doubt into certainty;--from the materialism or agnosticism
which accompany the first advance of Science into the deeper scientific
conviction that there is a deathless soul in man. I can imagine no other
crisis of such deep delight. But after all this is but like the starving
child's inability to imagine anything sweeter than his first bite at the
crust. Give him but _that_, and he can hardly care for the moment
whether he is fated to be Prime Minister or ploughboy.

Equally transitory, equally dependent on our special place in the story
of man's upward effort, is another shade of feeling which many men have
known. They have felt that uncertainty gave scope to faith and courage
in a way which scientific assurance could never do. There has been a
stern delight in the choice of virtue,--even though virtue might bring
no reward. This joy, like the joy of Columbus sailing westward from
Hierro, can hardly recur in precisely the same form. But neither (to
descend to a humbler comparison) can we grown men again give ourselves
up to learning in the same spirit of pure faith, without prefigurement
of result, as when we learnt the alphabet at our mother's knees. Have we
therefore relaxed since then our intellectual effort? Have we felt that
there was no longer need to struggle against idleness when once we knew
that knowledge brought a sure reward?

Endless are the varieties of lofty joy. In the age of Thales, Greece
knew the delight of the first dim notion of cosmic unity and law. In the
age of Christ, Europe felt the first high authentic message from a world
beyond our own. In our own age we reach the perception that such
messages may become continuous and progressive;--that between seen and
unseen there is a channel and fairway which future generations may learn
to widen and to clarify. Our own age may seem the best to us; so will
their mightier ages seem to them.

    "'Talia saecla' suis dixerunt 'currite' fusis
      Concordes stabili Fatorum numine Parcae."

_Spiritual evolution_:--that, then, is our destiny, in this and other
worlds;--an evolution gradual with many gradations, and rising to no
assignable close. And the passion for Life is no selfish weakness, it is
a factor in the universal energy. It should keep its strength unbroken
even when our weariness longs to fold the hands in endless slumber; it
should outlast and annihilate the "pangs that conquer trust." If to the
Greeks it seemed a λιποταξἱα--a desertion of one's
post in battle--to quit by suicide the life of earth, how much more
craven were the desire to desert the Cosmos,--the despair, not of this
planet only, but of the Sum of Things!

Nay, in the infinite Universe man may now feel, for the first time, at
home. The worst fear is over; the true security is won. The worst fear
was the fear of spiritual extinction or spiritual solitude; the true
security is in the telepathic law.

Let me draw out my meaning at somewhat greater length.

As we have dwelt successively on various aspects of telepathy, we have
gradually felt the conception enlarge and deepen under our study. It
began as a quasi-mechanical transference of ideas and images from one to
another brain. Presently we found it assuming a more varied and potent
form, as though it were the veritable ingruence or invasion of a distant
mind. Again, its action was traced across a gulf greater than any space
of earth or ocean, and it bridged the interval between spirits incarnate
and discarnate, between the visible and the invisible world. There
seemed no limit to the distance of its operation, or to the intimacy of
its appeal.

    ἑν θἡρσιν ἑν βροτοἱσιν ἑν θεοις ἁνω.

This Love, then, which (as Sophocles has it) rules "beasts and men and
gods" with equal sway, is no matter of carnal impulse or of emotional
caprice. Rather it is now possible to define Love (as we have already
defined Genius) in terms which convey for us some new meaning in
connection with phenomena described in this work. Genius, as has been
already said, is a kind of exalted but undeveloped clairvoyance. The
subliminal uprush which inspires the poet or the musician presents to
him a deep, but vague perception of that world unseen, through which the
seer or the sensitive projects a narrower but an exacter gaze. Somewhat
similarly, Love is a kind of exalted but unspecialised telepathy;--the
simplest and most universal expression of that mutual gravitation or
kinship of spirits which is the foundation of the telepathic law.

This is the answer to the ancient fear; the fear lest man's fellowships
be the outward and his solitude the inward thing; the fear lest all
close linking with our fellows be the mere product of the struggle for
existence,--of the tribal need of strength and cohesion;--the fear that
if love and virtue thus arose, love and virtue may thus likewise perish.
It is an answer to the dread that separate centres of conscious life
must be always strangers, and often foes; their leagues and fellowships
interested and illusory; their love the truce of a moment amid infinite
inevitable war.

Such fears, I say, vanish when we learn that it is the soul in man which
links him with other souls; the body which dissevers even while it seems
to unite; so that "no man liveth to himself nor dieth to himself," but
in a sense which goes deeper than metaphor, "We are every one members
one of another." Like atoms, like suns, like galaxies, our spirits are
systems of forces which vibrate continually to each other's attractive
power.

All this as yet is dimly adumbrated; it is a first hint of a scheme of
thought which it may well take centuries to develop. But can we suppose
that, when once this conception of the bond between all souls has taken
root, men will turn back from it to the old exclusiveness, the old
controversy? Will they not see that this world-widening knowledge is
both old and new, that _die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen_? that
always have such revelations been given, but develop now into a mightier
meaning,--with the growth of wisdom in those who send them, and in us
who receive?

Surely we have here a conception, at once wider and exacter than ever
before, of that "religious education of the world" on which theologians
have been fain to dwell. We need assume no "supernatural interference"
no "plan of redemption." We need suppose only that the same process
which we observe to-day has been operating for ages between this world
and the next.

Let us suppose that whilst incarnate men have risen from savagery into
intelligence, discarnate men have made on their part a like advance. Let
us suppose that they have become more eager and more able to use, for
communication with earth, the standing laws of relation between the
spiritual and the material Universe.

At first, on such a hypothesis, certain automatic phenomena will occur,
but will not be purposely modified by spirit power. Already and always
there must have been points of contact where unseen things impinged upon
the seen. Always there would be "clairvoyant wanderings," where the
spirit of _shaman_ or of medicine-man discerned things distant upon
earth by the spirit's excursive power. Always there would be apparitions
at death,--conscious or unconscious effects of the shock which separated
soul from body; and always "hauntings,"--where the spirit, already
discarnate, revisited, as in a dream perceptible by others, the scenes
which once he knew.

From this groundwork of phenomena developed (to take civilised Europe
alone) the oracular religion first, the Christian later. The golden
gifts of Crœsus to Delphi attested the clairvoyance of the Pythia as
strongly, perhaps, as can be expected of any tradition which comes to us
from the morning of history.

And furthermore, do we not better understand at once the uniqueness and
the reality of the Christian revelation itself, when we regard it as a
culmination rather than an exception,--as destined not to destroy the
cosmic law, but to fulfil it? Then first in human history came from the
unseen a message such as the whole heart desired;--a message adequate in
its response to fundamental emotional needs not in that age only, but in
all ages that should follow. _Intellectually_ adequate for all coming
ages that revelation could not be;--given the laws of mind, incarnate
alike and discarnate,--the evolution, on either side of the gulf of
death, of knowledge and power.

No one at the date of that revelation suspected that uniformity, that
continuity of the Universe which long experience has now made for us
almost axiomatic. No one foresaw the day when the demand for miracle
would be merged in the demand for higher law.

This newer scientific temper is not confined, as I believe, to the
denizens of this earth alone. The spiritual world meets it, as I think
our evidence has shown, with eager and strenuous response. But that
response is made, and must be made, along the lines of our normal
evolution. It must rest upon the education, the disentanglement, of
_that_ within us mortals which exists in the Invisible, a partaker of
the undying world. And on our side and on theirs alike, the process must
be steady and continuous. We have no longer to deal with some isolated
series of events in the past,--interpretable this way or that, but in no
way renewable,--but rather with a world-wide and actual condition of
things, recognisable every year in greater clearness, and changing in
directions which we can better and better foresee. This new aspect of
things needs something of new generalisation, of new forecast,--it
points to a provisional synthesis of religious belief which may fitly
conclude the present work.

     PROVISIONAL SKETCH OF A RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS

    ὁλβιος ὁστις ἱδὡν ἑκεἱνα κοἱλαν
    εἱσιν ὑπὁ χθὁνα οἱδεν μἑν βἱου κεἱνος τελευτἁν,
    οἱδεν δε διὁσδοτον ἁρχἁν.

        --PINDAR.

I see ground for hoping that we are within sight of a religious
synthesis, which, although as yet provisional and rudimentary, may in
the end meet more adequately than any previous synthesis the reasonable
needs of men. Such a synthesis cannot, I think, be reached by a mere
predominance of any one existing creed, nor by any eclectic or syncretic
process. Its prerequisite is the actual acquisition of new knowledge
whether by discovery or by revelation--knowledge discerned from without
the veil or from within--yet so realised that the main forms of
religious thought, by harmonious expansion and development, shall find
place severally as elements in a more comprehensive whole. And enough of
such knowledge has, I think, been now attained to make it desirable to
submit to my readers the religious results which seem likely to follow.

With such a purpose, our conception of religion should be both profound
and comprehensive. I will use here the definition already adopted of
religion as the sane and normal response of the human spirit to all that
we know of cosmic law; that is, to the known phenomena of the universe,
regarded as an intelligible whole. For on the one hand I cannot confine
the term to any single definite view or tradition of things unseen. On
the other hand, I am not content to define religion as "morality tinged
with emotion," lest morality _per se_ should seem to hang in air, so
that we should be merely gilding the tortoise which supports the earth.
Yet my definition needs some further guarding if it is to correspond
with our habitual use of language. Most men's subjective response to
their environment falls below the level of true religious thought. It is
scattered into cravings, or embittered by resentment, or distorted by
superstitious fear. But of such men I do not speak; rather of men in
whom the great pageant has inspired at least some vague out-reaching
toward the Source of All; men for whom knowledge has ripened into
meditation, and has prompted high desire. I would have Science first
sublimed into Philosophy, and then kindled by Religion into a burning
flame. For, from my point of view, man cannot be too religious. I desire
that the environing, the interpenetrating universe,--its energy, its
life, its love,--should illume in us, in our low degree, that which we
ascribe to the World-Soul, saying, "God is Love," "God is Light." The
World-Soul's infinite energy of omniscient benevolence should become in
us an enthusiasm of adoring co-operation,--an eager obedience to
whatsoever with our best pains we can discern as the justly ruling
principle--τὁ ἡγεμονικὁν--without us and within.

Yet if we form so high an ideal of religion,--raising it so far above
any blind obedience or self-seeking fear that its submission is wholly
willing, and its demand is for spiritual response alone,--we are bound
to ask ourselves whether it is right and reasonable to be religious, to
regard with this full devotion a universe apparently imperfect and
irresponsive, and a Ruling Principle which so many men have doubted or
ignored.

The pessimist holds the view that sentient existence has been a
deplorable blunder in the scheme of things. The egotist at least _acts_
upon the view that the universe has no moral coherence, and that "each
for himself" is the only indisputable law. I am sanguine enough to think
that the answer to the pessimist and the egotist has by our new
knowledge been made complete. There remains, indeed, a difficulty of
subtler type, but instinctive in generous souls. "The world," such an
one may say, "is a mixed place, and I am plainly bound to do my best to
improve it. But am I bound to feel--can any bribe of personal happiness
justify me in feeling--_religious enthusiasm_ for a universe in which
even one being may have been summoned into a sentiency destined to
inescapable pain?"

The answer to this ethical scruple must be a matter largely of faith. If
indeed we knew that this earthly life was all, or (far worse) that it
was followed for any one soul by endless pain, we could not without some
moral jugglery ascribe perfection of both power and goodness to a
personal or impersonal First Cause of such a doom. But if we believe
that endless life exists for all, with infinite possibilities of human
redress and of divine justification, then it seems right to assume that
the universe is either already (in some inscrutable fashion) wholly
good, or is at least in course of becoming so; since it may be becoming
so in part through the very ardour of our own faith and hope.

I do but mention these initial difficulties; I shall not dwell on them
here. I speak to men who have determined, whether at the bidding of
instinct or of reason, that it is well to be religious; well to approach
in self-devoted reverence an infinite Power and Love. Our desire is
simply to find the least unworthy way of thinking of matters which
inevitably transcend and baffle our finite thought.

And here, for the broad purpose of our present survey, we may divide
the best religious emotion of the world in triple fashion; tracing three
main streams of thought,--streams which on the whole run parallel, and
which all rise, as I believe, from some source in the reality of things.

First, then, I place that obscure consensus of independent thinkers in
many ages and countries which, to avoid any disputable title, I will
here call simply the Religion of the Ancient Sage. Under that title
(though Lao Tz[)u] is hardly more than a name) it has been set forth to
us in brief summary by the great sage and poet of our own time; and such
words as Natural Religion, Pantheism, Platonism, Mysticism, do but
express or intensify varying aspects of its main underlying conception.
That conception is the coexistence and interpenetration of a real or
spiritual with this material or phenomenal world; a belief driven home
to many minds by experiences both more weighty and more concordant than
the percipients themselves have always known. More weighty, I say, for
they have implied the veritable nascency and operation of a "last and
largest sense"; a faculty for apprehending, not God, indeed (for what
finite faculty can apprehend the Infinite?), but at least some dim and
scattered tokens and prefigurements of a true world of Life and Love.
More _concordant_ also; and this for a reason which till recently would
have seemed a paradox. For the mutual corroboration of these signs and
messages lies not only in their fundamental agreement up to a certain
point, but in their inevitable divergence beyond it;--as they pass from
things felt into things imagined; from actual experience into dogmatic
creed.

The Religion of the Ancient Sage is of unknown antiquity. Of unknown
antiquity also are various Oriental types of religion, culminating in
historical times in the Religion of Buddha. For Buddhism all
interpenetrating universes make the steps upon man's upward way; until
deliverance from illusion leaves the spirit merged ineffably in the
impersonal All. But the teaching of Buddha has lost touch with reality;
it rests on no basis of observed or of reproducible fact.

On a basis of observed facts, on the other hand, Christianity, the
youngest of the great types of religion, does assuredly rest. Assuredly
those facts, so far as tradition has made them known to us, do tend to
prove the superhuman character of its Founder, and His triumph over
death; and thus the existence and influence of a spiritual world, where
men's true citizenship lies. These ideas, by common consent, lay at the
origin of the Faith. Since those first days, however, Christianity has
been elaborated into codes of ethic and ritual adapted to Western
civilisation;--has gained (some think) as a rule of life what it has
lost as a simplicity of spirit.

From the unfettered standpoint of the Ancient Sage the deep concordance
of these and other schemes of religious thought may well outweigh their
formal oppositions. And yet I repeat that it is not from any mere
welding of these schemes together, nor from any choice of the best
points in existing syntheses, that the new synthesis for which I hope
must be born. It must be born from new-dawning knowledge; and in that
new knowledge I believe that each great form of religious thought will
find its indispensable--I may almost say its predicted--development. Our
race from its very infancy has stumbled along a guarded way; and now the
first lessons of its early childhood reveal the root in reality of much
that it has instinctively believed.

What I think I know, therefore, I am bound to tell; I must give the
religious upshot of observation and experiment in such brief
announcement as an audience like this[212] has a right to hear, even
before our discoveries can be laid in full before the courts of science
for definite approval.

The _religious upshot_, I repeat:--for I cannot here reproduce the mass
of evidence which has been published in full elsewhere. Its general
character is by this time widely known. Observation, experiment,
inference, have led many inquirers, of whom I am one, to a belief in
direct or telepathic intercommunication, not only between the minds of
men still on earth, but between minds or spirits still on earth and
spirits departed. Such a _discovery_ opens the door also to
_revelation_. By discovery and by revelation--by observation from
without the veil, and by utterance from within--certain theses have been
provisionally established with regard to such departed souls as we have
been able to encounter. First and chiefly, I at least see ground to
believe that their state is one of endless evolution in wisdom and in
love. Their loves of earth persist; and most of all those highest loves
which seek their outlet in adoration and worship. We do not find,
indeed, that support is given by souls in bliss to any special scheme of
terrene theology. Thereon they know less than we mortal men have often
fancied that we knew. Yet from their step of vantage-ground in the
Universe, at least, they see that it is good. I do not mean that they
know either of an end or of an explanation of evil. Yet evil to them
seems less a terrible than a slavish thing. It is embodied in no mighty
Potentate; rather it forms an isolating madness from which higher
spirits strive to free the distorted soul. There needs no chastisement
of fire; self-knowledge is man's punishment and his reward;
self-knowledge, and the nearness or the aloofness of companion souls.
For in that world love is actually self-preservation; the Communion of
Saints not only adorns but constitutes the Life Everlasting. Nay, from
the law of telepathy it follows that that communion is valid for us here
and now. Even now the love of souls departed makes answer to our
invocations. Even now our loving memory--love is itself a
prayer--supports and strengthens those delivered spirits upon their
upward way. No wonder; since we are to them but as fellow-travellers
shrouded in a mist; "neither death, nor life, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature," can bar us from the hearth-fire of the universe, or
hide for more than a moment the inconceivable oneness of souls.

And is not this a fresh instalment, or a precursory adumbration, of that
Truth into which the Paraclete should lead? Has any world-scheme yet
been suggested so profoundly corroborative of the very core of the
Christian revelation? Jesus Christ "brought life and immortality to
light." By His appearance after bodily death He proved the deathlessness
of the spirit. By His character and His teaching He testified to the
Fatherhood of God. So far, then, as His unique message admitted of
evidential support, it is here supported. So far as He promised things
unprovable, that promise is here renewed.

I venture now on a bold saying; for I predict that, in consequence of
the new evidence, all reasonable men, a century hence, will believe the
Resurrection of Christ, whereas, in default of the new evidence, no
reasonable men, a century hence, would have believed it. The ground of
this forecast is plain enough. Our ever-growing recognition of the
continuity, the uniformity of cosmic law has gradually made of the
alleged _uniqueness_ of any incident its almost inevitable refutation.
Ever more clearly must our age of science realise that any relation
between a material and a spiritual world cannot be an ethical or
emotional relation alone; that it must needs be a great structural fact
of the Universe, involving laws at least as persistent, as identical
from age to age, as our known laws of Energy or of Motion. And
especially as to that central claim, of the soul's life manifested after
the body's death, it is plain that this can less and less be supported
by remote tradition alone; that it must more and more be tested by
modern experience and inquiry. Suppose, for instance, that we collect
many such histories, recorded on first-hand evidence in our critical
age; and suppose that all these narratives break down on analysis; that
they can all be traced to hallucination, misdescription, and other
persistent sources of error;--can we then expect reasonable men to
believe that this marvellous phenomenon, always vanishing into
nothingness when closely scrutinised in a modern English scene, must yet
compel adoring credence when alleged to have occurred in an Oriental
country, and in a remote and superstitious age? Had the results (in
short) of "psychical research" been purely negative, would not Christian
evidence--I do not say Christian _emotion_, but Christian
_evidence_--have received an overwhelming blow?

As a matter of fact,--or, if you prefer the phrase, in my own personal
opinion,--our research has led us to results of a quite different type.
They have not been negative only, but largely positive. We have shown
that amid much deception and self-deception, fraud and illusion,
veritable manifestations do reach us from beyond the grave. The central
claim of Christianity is thus confirmed, as never before. If our own
friends, men like ourselves, can sometimes return to tell us of love and
hope, a mightier Spirit may well have used the eternal laws with a more
commanding power. There is nothing to hinder the reverent faith that,
though we be all "the Children of the Most Highest," He came nearer than
we, by some space by us immeasurable, to That which is infinitely far.
There is nothing to hinder the devout conviction that He of His own act
"took upon Him the form of a servant," and was made flesh for our
salvation, foreseeing the earthly travail and the eternal crown. "Surely
before this descent into generation," says Plotinus,[213] "we existed in
the intelligible world; being other men than now we are, and some of us
Gods; clear souls, and minds unmixed with all existence; parts of the
Intelligible, nor severed thence; nor are we severed even now."

It is not thus to less of reverence that man is summoned, but to more.
Let him keep hold of early sanctities; but let him remember also that
once again "a great sheet has been let down out of heaven"; and lo!
neither Buddha nor Plato is found common or unclean.

Nay, as to our own soul's future, when that first shock of death is
past, it is in Buddhism that we find the more inspiring, the truer view.
That Western conception of an instant and unchangeable bliss or woe--a
bliss or woe determined largely by a man's beliefs, in this earthly
ignorance, on matters which "the angels desire to look into"--is the
bequest of a pre-Copernican era of speculative thought. In its Mahomedan
travesty, we see the same scheme with outlines coarsened into
grotesqueness;--we see it degrade the cosmic march and profluence into a
manner of children's play.

Meantime the immemorial musings of unnumbered men have dreamt of a
consummation so far removed that he who gazed has scarcely known whether
it were Nothingness or Deity. With profoundest fantasy, the East has
pondered on the vastness of the world that now is, of the worlds that
are to be. What rest or pasture for the mind in the seven days of
Creation, the four rivers of Paradise, the stars "made also"? The
farther East has reached blindly forth towards astronomical epochs,
sidereal spaces, galactic congregations of inconceivable Being. Pressed
by the incumbency of ancestral gods (as the Chinese legend tells us), it
has "created by one sweep of the imagination a thousand Universes, to be
the Buddha's realm."

The sacred tale of Buddha, developed from its earlier simplicity by the
shaping stress of many generations, opens to us the whole range and
majesty of human fate. "The destined Buddha has desired to be a Buddha
through an almost unimaginable series of worlds." No soul need ever be
without that hope. "The spirit-worlds are even now announcing the advent
of future Buddhas, in epochs too remote for the computation of men." No
obstacles without us can arrest our way. "The rocks that were thrown at
Buddha were changed into flowers." Not our own worst misdoings need
beget despair. "Buddha, too, had often been to hell for his sins." The
vast complexity of the Sum of Things need not appal us. "Beneath the
bottomless whirlpool of existences, behind the illusion of Form and
Name," we, too, like Buddha, may discover and reveal "the perfection of
the Eternal Law." Us, too, like Buddha, the cosmic welcome may await; as
when "Earth itself and the laws of all worlds" trembled with joy "as
Buddha attained the Supreme Intelligence, and entered into the Endless
Calm."

I believe that some of those who once were near to us are already
mounting swiftly upon this heavenly way. And when from that cloud
encompassing of unforgetful souls some voice is heard,--as long
ago,--there needs no heroism, no sanctity, to inspire the apostle's
ἑπιθυμἱα εἱς τὁ ἁναλὑὁαι, the desire to lift our anchor, and to sail out
beyond the bar. What fitter summons for man than the wish to live in the
memory of the highest soul that he has known, now risen higher;--to lift
into an immortal security the yearning passion of his love? "As the soul
hasteneth," says Plotinus,[214] "to the things that are above, she will
ever forget the more; unless all her life on earth leave a memory of
things done well. For even here may man do well, if he stand clear of
the cares of earth. And he must stand clear of their memories too; so
that one may rightly speak of a noble soul as forgetting those things
that are behind. And the shade of Hêraklês, indeed, may talk of his own
valour to the shades, but the true Hêraklês in the true world will deem
all that of little worth; being transported into a more sacred place,
and strenuously engaging, even above his strength, in those battles in
which the wise engage." Can we men now on earth claim more of
sustainment than lies in the incipient communion with those enfranchised
souls? What day of hope, of exaltation, has dawned like this, since the
message of Pentecost?

Yet a durable religious synthesis should do more than satisfy man's
immediate aspiration. It should be in itself progressive and
evolutionary; it should bear a promise of ever deeper holiness, to
answer to the long ages of heightening wisdom during which our race may
be destined to inhabit the earth. This condition has never yet been met.
No scheme, indeed, could meet it which was not based upon recurrent and
developing facts. To such facts we now appeal. We look, not backward to
fading tradition, but onward to dawning experience. We hope that the
intercourse, now at last consciously begun--although as through the
mouth of babes and sucklings, and in confused and stammering
speech--between discarnate and incarnate souls, may through long effort
clarify into a director communion, so that they shall teach us all they
will.

Science, then, need be no longer fettered by the limitations of this
planetary standpoint; nor ethics by the narrow experience of a single
life. Evolution will no longer appear as a truncated process, an
ever-arrested movement upon an unknown goal. Rather we may gain a
glimpse of an ultimate incandescence where science and religion fuse in
one; a cosmic evolution of Energy into Life, and of Life into Love,
which is Joy. Love, which is Joy at once and Wisdom;--we can do no more
than ring the changes on terms like these, whether we imagine the
transfigurement and apotheosis of conquering souls, or the lower, but
still sacred, destiny which may be some day possible for souls still
tarrying here. We picture the perfected soul as the Buddha, the Saviour,
the _aurai simplicis ignem_, dwelling on one or other aspect of that
trinal conception of Wisdom, Love, and Joy. For souls not yet perfected
but still held on earth I have foretold a growth in _holiness_. By this
I mean no unreal opposition or forced divorcement of sacred and secular,
of flesh and spirit. Rather I define holiness as the joy too high as yet
for our enjoyment; the wisdom just beyond our learning; the rapture of
love which we still strive to attain. Inevitably, as our link with other
spirits strengthens, as the life of the organism pours more fully
through the individual cell, we shall feel love more ardent, wider
wisdom, higher joy; perceiving that this organic unity of Soul, which
forms the inward aspect of the telepathic law, is in itself the Order of
the Cosmos, the Summation of Things. And such devotion may find its
flower in no vain self-martyrdom, no cloistered resignation, but rather
in such pervading ecstasy as already the elect have known; the Vision
which dissolves for a moment the corporeal prison-house; "the flight of
the One to the One."

"So let the soul that is not unworthy of that vision contemplate the
Great Soul; freed from deceit and every witchery, and collected into
calm. Calmed be the body for her in that hour, and the tumult of the
flesh; ay, all that is about her, calm; calm be the earth, the sea, the
air, and let Heaven itself be still. Then let her feel how into that
silent heaven the Great Soul floweth in.... And so may man's soul be
sure of Vision, when suddenly she is filled with light; for this light
is from Him and is He; and then surely shall one know His presence when,
like a god of old time, He entered into the house of one that calleth
Him, and maketh it full of light." "And how," concludes Plotinus, "may
this thing be for us? Let all else go."[215]

These heights, I confess, are above the stature of my spirit. Yet for
each of us is a fit ingress into the Unseen; and for some lesser man the
memory of one vanished soul may be beatific as of old for Plotinus the
flooding immensity of Heaven. And albeit no historical religion can
persist as a logical halting-place upon the endless mounting way--that
way which leads unbroken from the first germ of love in the heart to an
inconceivable union with the Divine--yet many a creed in turn may well
be close inwrought and inwoven with our eternal hope. What wonder, if in
the soul's long battle, some Captain of our Salvation shall sometimes
seem to tower unrivalled and alone?--οἱος γἁρ ἑρὑετο Ἱλιον Ἑκτωρ. And
yet in no single act or passion can that salvation stand; far hence,
beyond Orion and Andromeda, the cosmic process works and shall work for
ever through unbegotten souls. And even as it was not in truth the great
ghost of Hector only, but the whole nascent race of Rome, which bore
from the Trojan altar the hallowing fire, so is it not one Saviour only,
but the whole nascent race of man--nay, all the immeasurable progeny and
population of the heavens--which issues continually from behind the veil
of Being, and forth from the Sanctuary of the Universe carries the
ever-burning flame: _A eternumque adytis effert penetralibus ignem_.




APPENDICES

TO

