IX

SEEING, WE SEE NOT


It is a mere superstition, Maeterlinck tells us in one of his beautiful
essays, that there is anything irrevocable about the past. On the
contrary, we are constantly rearranging it, revising it, remaking it.
For it is only in our memory that it exists, and our conception of it
changes as the loose fringes of past events are gathered up into a
new meaning, or when a sudden fortune lights up a whole series in our
lives, and shows us, stretching back in orderly array and beautiful
significance, what we had supposed in our blindness to be a sad and
chaotic welter. It is no less a superstition to suppose that we have
a hand in making the present. The present, like the past, is always
still to be made; indeed, must wait its turn, so to speak, to be seen
in its full meaning until after the past itself has been remoulded and
reconstituted. It is depressing to think that we do not know our own
time, that the events we look upon have a permanent value far different
from the petty one that we endow them with, that they fit into a
larger whole of which we see only a dim fraction--and that the least
important because the seed of something that shall come much later
into full fruition. Must our short life pass away without knowledge
or vision of the majestic processes which are unfolding themselves
under our very eyes, while we have wasted our admiration and distorted
our purpose by striving to interpret the ephemeral, that is gone as
soon as we? Even the wisest among us can see with but a dim eye into
the future, and make rather a lucky guess at its potentialities than
a true prophecy based on a realization of the real tendencies of the
time. It is only the Past that we really make. And this may account
for our love of it. This fragile thing of tradition that we have
so carefully constructed and so lovingly beautified, this artistic
creation of a whole people or race, becomes most naturally the object
of our tenderest solicitude. Any attack upon it that suggests a marring
of its golden beauty, any new proposal that threatens to render it
superfluous, elicits the outraged cry of anger, the passionate defense,
of the mother protecting her child. For the Past is really the child
of the Present. We are the authors of its being, and upon it we lavish
all our thoughts, our interest and our delight. And even our hopes
are centred in the Past, for the most enthusiastic among us can do no
more than hope that something worth while will come out of the Past
to nourish us in the approaching Present. Concern for the Future is
so new a thing in human history that we are hardly yet at home with
the feeling. Perhaps, if we thought more about what was before us, we
should come to know more about it. Meanwhile our only consolation is
that if _we_ cannot see, neither did the generations that were before
us. And we have the advantage of _knowing_ that we do not see, while
they did not care about their ignorance at all.

We have constantly to check ourselves in reading history with the
remembrance that, to the actors in the drama, events appeared very
differently from the way they appear to us. We know what they were
doing far better than they knew themselves. We are in the position of
the novel reader who looks, before he begins to read, to see how the
plot turns out. This orderly and dramatic chronicle of history that
thrills us as we read has only been orderly and dramatic to readers of
the present time, who can see the _dénouement_ of the story. History is
peculiarly the creation of the present. Even the great men of the past
are largely the agglomerations of centuries of hero-worship. Genius is
as much a slow accretion of the ages as an endowment of man. Few great
poets were seen in the full glory of their superhuman capacity by their
fellows. Contemporary opinion of the great has been complimentary but
seldom excessively laudatory, and there are sad instances of the decay
and deflation of a supernatural personality through the smooth, gentle,
imperceptibly creeping oblivion of the centuries.

We rarely see what is distinctive in our own time. The city builders
of the West are quite unconscious of the fact that they are leaving
behind them imperishable and mighty memorials of themselves. Few of the
things that we admire now will be considered by posterity as noteworthy
and distinctive of our age. All depends on the vitality of our customs
and social habits, and some show as high a mortality as others do
a stubborn tenacity of life. What we are witnessing is a gigantic
struggle of customs and ideas to survive and propagate their kind.
The means of subsistence is limited; it is impossible that all should
be able to live. The fascinating problem for the social philosopher
is which of these beliefs and tendencies will prove strong enough to
overcome their rivals and make their stock a permanent type. How many
of the fads and brilliant theories and new habits of thought and taste
will be able to maintain their place in the world? If we could discern
them, we should know the distinction of our age. Definite epochs of
the past we distinguish and celebrate because they contained the germs
of ideas or the roots of institutions that still survive among us,
or customs and habits of thought that flourished in them with great
brilliancy but have now utterly passed away. Now these beginnings are
quite too subtle for us to see in our contemporary life, and there
are so many brilliancies that it is impossible to pick out with any
definiteness the things which have power to project themselves into
the future, and cast a broad trail of light back to our age. Most of
those very things that seem to us imperishable will be the ones to
fade,--fade, indeed, so gradually that they will not even be missed. It
is this gradual disappearance that gives the most thorough oblivion.
History remembers only the brilliant failures and the brilliant
successes.

We are fond of calling this an age of transition, but if we trace
history back we find that practically every age--at least for
many centuries--has been an age of transition. If we must set a
starting-point from which we have been moving, the social philosopher
will be inclined to place it about the beginning of the sixteenth
century. If we have been in transition for four hundred years, it
seems almost time to settle down from this wild ferment of beliefs
and discoveries that has kept the world’s mind in constant turmoil
since the time of the Renaissance. There are signs that such a
crystallization is taking place. We are weeding out our culture, and
casting aside the classical literature that was the breeding-ground for
the old ideas. We have achieved as yet little to take its place. Most
of the modern literature is rather a restless groping about in the dark
for new modes of thinking and new principles of life, and thus far it
hardly seems to have grasped the robust and vital in the new to any
appreciable extent. One can hardly believe that this morbid virus that
is still working with undiminished vigor and deadly effect will succeed
in making itself the dominant note in European literature for the next
five hundred years. One hates to think that our posterity is to be
doomed to torture itself into appreciating our feverish modern art and
music, and learn to rank the wild complexities of Strauss with the
sublimities of Beethoven. Shall we be sure that the conquest of the air
is finally achieved and a third dimension added to man’s traveling, or
is it all simply another daring and brilliant stab at the impossible,
another of those blasphemies against nature which impious man is
constantly striving to commit? There are few signs of the Socialistic
State, but who knows what births of new institutions, of which we are
now quite unaware, future ages will see to have been developing in our
very midst? Is religion doomed, or is it merely being transformed, so
that we shall be seen to have been creating amid all our indifference a
new type and a new ideal? Will our age actually be distinctive as the
era of the Dawn of Peace, or will the baby institution of arbitration
disappear before a crude and terrible reality? Are we progressing, or
shall we seem to have sown the seeds of world decay in this age of
ours, and at a great crisis in history let slip another opportunity
to carry mankind to a higher social level? It is maddening to the
philosopher to think how long he will have to live to find an answer
to these questions. He wants to know, but in the present all he can do
is to guess at random. Not immortality, but an opportunity to wake up
every hundred years or so to see how the world is progressing, may well
be his desire and his dream. Such an immortality may be incredible, but
it is the only form which has ever proved satisfactory, or ever will,
to the rational man.




