VIII

THE MYSTIC TURNED RADICAL


The mystical temperament is little enough popular in this workaday
modern world of ours. The mystic, we feel, comes to us discounted
from the start; he should in all decency make constant apologies for
his existence. In a practical age of machinery he is an anomaly, an
anachronism. He must meet the direct challenge of the scientist, who
guards every approach to the doors of truth and holds the keys of its
citadel. Any thinker who gets into the fold by another way is a thief
and a robber.

The mystic must answer that most heinous of all charges,--of being
unscientific. By tradition he is even hostile to science. For his main
interest is in wonder, and science by explaining things attacks the
very principle of his life. It not only diminishes his opportunities
for wonder, but threatens to make him superfluous by ultimately
explaining everything.

The scientist may say that there is no necessary antithesis between
explanation and that beautiful romance of thought we call wonder. The
savage, who can explain nothing, is the very creature who has no wonder
at all. Everything is equally natural to him. Only a mind that has
acquaintance with laws of behavior can be surprised at events.

The wonder of the scientist, however, although it be of a more robust,
tough-minded variety, is none the less wonder. A growing acquaintance
with the world, an increasing at-homeness in it, is not necessarily
incompatible with an ever-increasing marvel both at the beautiful
fitness of things and the limitless field of ignorance and mystery
beyond. So the modern mystic must break with his own tradition if he
is to make an appeal to this generation, and must recognize that the
antithesis between mystic and scientific is not an eternally valid one.

It is just through realization of this fact that Maeterlinck, the best
of modern mystics, makes his extraordinary appeal. For, as he tells us,
the valid mystery does not begin at the threshold of knowledge but only
after we have exhausted our resources of knowing. His frank and genuine
acceptance of science thus works out a _modus vivendi_ between the seen
and the unseen. It allows many of us who have given our allegiance
to science to hail him gladly as a prophet who supplements the work
of the wise men of scientific research, without doing violence to our
own consciences. For the world is, in spite of its scientific clamor,
still far from ready really to surrender itself to prosaicness. It is
still haunted with the dreams of the ages--dreams of short roads to
truth, visions of finding the Northwest passage to the treasures of the
Unseen. Only we must go as far as possible along the traveled routes of
science.

Maeterlinck is thus not anti-scientific or pseudo-scientific, but
rather sub-scientific. He speaks of delicately felt and subtle
influences and aspects of reality that lie beneath the surface of our
lives, of forces and shadows that cannot be measured quantitatively
or turned into philosophical categories. Or we may say that he
is ultra-scientific. As science plods along, opening up the dark
wilderness, he goes with the exploring party, throwing a search-light
before them; flickering enough and exasperatingly uncertain at times,
but sufficiently constant to light up the way, point out a path, and
give us confidence that the terrors before us are not so formidable
as we have feared. His influence on our time is so great because we
believe that he is a seer, a man with knowledge of things hidden from
our eyes. We go to him as to a spiritual clairvoyant,--to have him tell
us where to find the things our souls have lost.

But the modern mystic must not only recognize the scientific aspect
of the age,--he must feel the social ideal that directs the spiritual
energies of the time. It is the glory of Maeterlinck’s mysticism that
it has not lingered in the depths of the soul, but has passed out to
illuminate our thinking in regard to the social life about us. The
growth of this duality of vision has been with him a long evolution.
His early world was a shadowy, intangible thing. As we read the early
essays, we seem to be constantly hovering on the verge of an idea, just
as when we read the plays we seem to be hovering on the verge of a
passion. This long brooding away from the world, however, was fruitful
and momentous. The intense gaze inward trained the eye, so that when
the mists cleared away and revealed the palpitating social world about
him, his insight into its meaning was as much more keen and true than
our own as had been his sense of the meaning of the individual soul.
The light he turns outward to reveal the meaning of social progress is
all the whiter for having burned so long within.

In the essay on “Our Social Duty,” the clearest and the consummate
expression of this new outward look, there are no contaminating fringes
of vague thought; all is clear white light. With the instinct of the
true radical, the poet has gone to the root of the social attitude. Our
duty as members of society is to be radical, he tells us. And not only
that, but an excess of radicalism is essential to the equilibrium of
life. Society so habitually thinks on a plane lower than is reasonable
that it behooves us to think and to hope on an even higher plane than
seems to be reasonable. This is the overpoweringly urgent philosophy of
radicalism. It is the beautiful courage of such words that makes them
so vital an inspiration.

It is the sin of the age that nobody dares to be anything to too great
a degree. We may admire extremists in principle, but we take the best
of care not to imitate them ourselves. Who in America would even be
likely to express himself as does Maeterlinck in this essay? Who of us
would dare follow the counsel? Of course we can plead extenuation. In
Europe the best minds are thinking in terms of revolution still, while
in America our radicalism is still simply amateurish and incompetent.

To many of us, then, this call of Maeterlinck’s to the highest of
radicalisms will seem irrelevant; this new social note which appears
so strongly in all his later work will seem a deterioration from
the nobler mysticism of his earlier days. But rather should it be
viewed as the fruit of matured insight. There has been no decay,
no surrender. It is the same mysticism, but with the direction of
the vision altered. This essay is the expression of the clearest
vision that has yet penetrated our social confusion, the sanest and
highest ideal that has been set before progressive minds. It may be
that its utter fearlessness, its almost ascetic detachment from the
matter-of-fact things of political life, its clear cold light of
conviction and penetration, may repel some whose hearts have been
warmed by Maeterlinck’s subtle revelations of the spiritual life. They
may reproach him because it has no direct bearings on the immediate
practical social life; it furnishes no weapon of reform, no tool with
which to rush out and overthrow some vested abuse. But to the traveler
lost in the wood the one thing needful is a pole-star to show him
his direction. The star is unapproachable, serene, cold, and lofty.
But although he cannot touch it, or utilize it directly to extend
his comfort and progress, it is the most useful of all things to
him. It fills his heart with a great hope; it coördinates his aimless
wanderings and gropings, and gives meaning and purpose to his course.

So a generation lost in a chaos of social change can find in these
later words of Maeterlinck a pole-star and a guide. They do for the
social life of man what the earlier essays did for the individual. They
endow it with values and significances that will give steadfastness
and resource to his vision as he looks out on the great world of human
progress, and purpose and meaning to his activity as he looks ahead
into the dim world of the future.




