Chapter 1.

On Page 19, barber-shop was hyphenated between two lines for spacing.
The 1899 Harper & Brothers version used "barber shop" in this spot. Even
though barber-shop cannot be transcribed as such, the assumption is that
the 1894 version put in the hyphen by mistake. We transcribed the word
barber shop.

Chapter 2.

On Page 34, changed ca'se to 'ca'se, used as dialect for because, in the
clause: "but dat's ca'se it's mine." The author used 'ca'se eighteen
other times as dialect for because, and did not use ca'se again.

Chapter 3.

On Page 43, insert missing period after tomb.

Chapter 6.

On Page 81, add a comma after door: "The twins took a position near the
door the widow stood at Luigi's side, Rowena stood beside Angelo,..."

Chapter 7.

On Page 88, add a period after fault in the sentence: The Judge laid
himself out hospitably to make them have a good time, and if there was a
defect anywhere it was not his fault.

Chapter 9.

On Page 114, there is a word missing before the semicolon in the clause:
Tom sprang up and seized a billet of wood and raised   ; the 1899 Harper
& Brothers version provided the missing word, "it."

Chapter 11.

On Page 131, change dicision to decision in the clause: Luigi reserved
his dicision.

On Page 133, change comma to a period after years in the sentence: "I
never got a chance to try my hand at it, and I may never get a chance;
and yet if I ever do get it I shall be found ready, for I have kept up
my law-studies all these years,"

On Page 149, Correct spelling of Cappello to Capello. The surname of the
twins was Capello in the letter on page 73, and two other times in
Chapter 6.

Chapter 13.

On Page 167, Change ' to " in the sentence: "Why, my boy, you look
desolate. Don't take it so hard. Try and forget you have been kicked.'

On Page 176, ship-shape was hyphenated and split between two lines for
spacing. The 1899 Harper & Brothers version of the novel used shipshape,
and so will we.

Chapter 14.

On Page 182, changed period after hatching to question mark in the
sentence: What could be hatching.
On Page 184, remove comma after sha'n't, in the clause: but if he
doesn't, I sha'n't, let on.

On Page 189, low-down is hyphenated and split between two lines for
spacing. On Page 188, low-down is spelled with a hyphen, and on pages
241 and 243 low-downest is also hyphenated. There is no occurrence of
lowdown. We transcribed low-down with a hyphen: like a ornery low-down
hound!

Chapter 16.
On Page 216, Changed ? to ! in the sentence: En keep on sayin' it?

Chapter 18.

On Page 229, Changed 'against to against in the clause: with fury
'against the planter's wife.

On Page 233, Changed de to den in the clause "en de good gracious me."
The author always used den for then, except in this case. De is dialect
for the. Twain did not correct this in the 1899 Harper & Brothers
version of the novel, but den makes more sense then de. Roxy was
floating on the river, and then she cried good gracious me, because she
spotted the Grand Mogul.

Changed day to dey in two places. The novel used dey as dialect for they
regularly, and almost consistently, except in two cases. Both cases were
presumed errata:

•   On Page 232, en day warn't gwine to hurry
•   On Page 229, en day knows how to whale 'em, too.

Chapter 19.

On Page 253, back-yard is hyphenated and split between two lines for
spacing. The 1899 Harper & Brothers version of the novel used back-yard,
and so will we.

Chapter 20.

On Page 273, changed countenence to countenance in the clause: "I don't
know about that," and Tom's countenence darkened,...

Chapter 21.

On Page 288, there are two quotes made by the crowd in double quotes.
Twain did not correct this in the 1899 version of the novel by Harper &
Brothers. But these lines are surrounded by Wilson's narrative, which is
already in double quotes. Therefore, we have used single quotes for the
two remarks from the gallery.

•   'Why, it's so--I never noticed that before!'
•   'Why, that's so, too!'

Conclusion.

On Page 302, removed in from the sentence: "But we cannot follow his
curious fate further--that in would be a long story."

