PART I

GOSSIPS AND FANTASIES




I

A VISION OF THE BURDEN OF MAN

And it came to pass that my soul was vexed with the problems of life, so
that I could not sleep. So I opened a book by a lady novelist, and fell
to reading therein. And of a sudden I looked up, and lo! a great host of
women filled the chamber, which had become as the Albert Hall for
magnitude--women of all complexions, countries, times, ages, and sexes.
Some were bewitching and beautiful, some wan and flat-breasted, some
elegant and stately, some ugly and squat, some plain and whitewashed, and
some painted and decorated; women in silk gowns, and women in divided
skirts, and women in widows' weeds, and women in knickerbockers, and
women in ulsters, and women in furs, and women in crinolines, and women
in tights, and women in rags; but every woman of them all in tears. The
great chamber was full of a mighty babel; shouts and ululations, groans
and moans, weeping and wailing and gnashing of false and genuine teeth,
and tearing of hair both artificial and natural; and therewith the
flutter of a myriad fans, and the rustle of a million powder-puffs. And
the air reeked with a thousand indescribable scents--patchouli and attar
of roses and cherry blossom, and the heavy odours of hair-oil and dyes
and cosmetics and patent medicines innumerable.

Now when the women perceived me on my reading-chair in their midst, the
shrill babel swelled to a savage thunder of menace, so that I deemed they
were wroth with me for intruding upon them in mine own house; but as mine
ear grew accustomed to the babel of tongues, I became aware of the true
import of their ejaculations.

"O son of man!" they cried, in various voices: "thy cruel reign is over,
thy long tyranny is done; thou hast glutted thyself with victims, thou
hast got drunken on our hearts' blood, we have made sport for thee in our
blindness. But the Light is come at last, the slow night has budded into
the rose of dawn, the masculine monster is in his death-throes, the
kingdom of justice is at hand, the Doll's House has been condemned by the
sanitary inspector."

I strove to deprecate their wrath, but my voice was as the twitter of a
sparrow in a hurricane. At length I ruffled my long hair to a leonine
mane, and seated myself at the piano. And lo! straightway there fell a
deep silence--you could have heard a hairpin drop.

"What would you have me do, O daughters of Eve?" I cried. "What is my
sin? what my iniquity?" Then the clamour recommenced with tenfold
violence, disappointment at the loss of a free performance augmenting
their anger.

"Give me a husband," shrieked one.

"Give me a profession," shrieked another.

"Give me a divorce," shrieked a third.

"Give me free union," shrieked a fourth.

"Give me an income," shrieked a fifth.

"Give me my deceased sister's husband," shrieked a sixth.

"Give me my divorced husband's children," shrieked a seventh.

"Give me the right to paint from the nude in the Academy schools,"
shrieked an eighth.

"Give me an Oxford degree," shrieked a ninth.

"Give me a cigar," shrieked a tenth.

"Give me a vote," shrieked an eleventh.

"Give me a pair of trousers," shrieked a twelfth.

"Give me a seat in the House," shrieked a thirteenth.

"Daughters of the horse-leech," I made answer, taking advantage of a
momentary lull, "I am not in a position to give away any of these things.
You had better ask at the Stores." But the tempest out-thundered me.

"I want to ride bareback in the Row in tights and spangles at 1 p. m. on
Sundays," shrieked a soberly clad suburban lady, who sported a
wedding-ring. "I want to move the world with my pen or the point of my
toe; I want to write, dance, sing, act, paint, sculpt, fence, row, ride,
swim, hunt, shoot, fish, love all men from young rustic farmers to old
town _roués_, lead the Commons, keep a salon, a restaurant, and a
zoological garden, row a boat in boy's costume, with a tenor by moonlight
alone, and deluge Europe and Asia with blood shed for my intoxicating
beauty. I am primeval, savage, unlicensed, unchartered, unfathomable,
unpetticoated, tumultuous, inexpressible, irrepressible, overpowering,
crude, mordant, pugnacious, polyandrous, sensual, fiery, chaste, modest,
married, and misunderstood."

"But, madam," I remarked--for in her excitement she approached within
earshot of me--"I understand thee quite well, and I really am not
responsible for thy emotions." Her literary style beguiled me into the
responsive archaicism of the second person singular.

"Coward!" she snapped. "Coward and satyr! For centuries thou hast
trampled upon my sisters, and desecrated womanhood."

"I beg thy pardon," I rejoined mildly.

"Thou dost not deserve it," she interrupted.

"Thou art substituting hysteria for history," I went on. "I was not born
yesterday, but I have only scored a few years more than a quarter of one
century, and seeing that my own mother was a woman, I must refuse to be
held accountable for the position of the sex."

"Sophist!" she shrieked. "It is thy apathy and selfishness that
perpetuate the evil."

Then I bethought me of my long vigils of work and thought, the slow,
bitter years in which I "ate my bread with tears, and sat weeping on my
bed," and I remembered that some of those tears were for the sorrows of
that very sex which was now accusing me of organised injustice. But I
replied gently: "I am no tyrant; I am a simple, peaceful citizen, and it
is as much as I can do to earn my bread and the bread of some of thy sex.
Life is hard enough for both sexes, without setting one against the
other. We are both the outcome of the same great forces, and both of us
have our special selfishnesses, advantages, and drawbacks. If there is
any cruelty, it is Nature's handiwork, not man's. So far from trampling
on womanhood, we have let a woman reign over us for more than half a
century. We worship womanhood, we have celebrated woman in song, picture,
and poem, and half civilisation has adored the Madonna. Let us have
woman's point of view and the truth about her psychology, by all means.
But beware lest she provoke us too far. The _Ewigweibliche_ has become
too literal a fact, and in our reaction against this everlasting woman
question we shall develop in unexpected directions. Her cry for equal
purity will but end in the formal institution of the polygamy of the
Orient--"

As I spoke the figure before me appeared to be undergoing a
transformation, and, ere I had finished, I perceived I was talking to an
angry, seedy man in a red muffler.

"Thee keeps down the proletariat," he interrupted venomously. "Thee lives
on the sweat of his brow, while thee fattens at ease. Thee plants thy
foot on his neck."

"Do I?" I exclaimed, lifting up my foot involuntarily.

Mistaking the motion, he disappeared, and in his stead I saw a withered
old pauper with the Victoria Cross on his breast. "I went to the mouth of
hell for thee," he said, with large reproachful eyes; "and thou leavest
me to rot in the workhouse."

"I am awfully sorry!" I said. "I never heard of thee. It is the nation--"

"The nation!" he cried scornfully. "_Thou_ art the nation; the nation is
only a collection of individuals. Thou art responsible. Thou art the
man."

"Thou art the man," echoed a thousand voices: "Society is only an
abstraction." And, looking round, I saw, to my horror, that the women had
quite disappeared, and their places were filled by men of all
complexions, countries, times, ages, and sexes.

"I died in the streets," shouted an old cripple in the background--"round
the corner from thy house, in thy wealthy parish--I died of starvation in
this nineteenth century of the Christian era, and a generation after
Dickens's 'Christmas Carol.'"

"If I had only known!" I murmured, while my eyes grew moist. "Why didst
thou not come to me?"

"I was too proud to beg," he answered. "The really poor never beg."

"Then how am I responsible?" I retorted.

"How art thou responsible?" cried the voices indignantly; and one
dominating the rest added: "I want work and can't get it. Dost thou call
thyself civilised?"

"Civilised?" echoed a weedy young man scornfully.  "I am a genius, yet I
have had nothing to eat all day. Thy congeners killed Keats and
Chatterton, and when I am dead thou wilt be sorry for what thou hast not
done."

"But hast thou published anything?" I asked.

"How could I publish?" he replied, indignantly.

"Then how could I be aware of thee?" I inquired.

"But my great-grandfather _did_ publish," said another.  "Thou goest into
ecstacies over him, and his books have sold by tens of thousands; but me
thou leavest pensionless, to earn my living as a cooper. Bah!"

"And thou didst put _my_ father in prison," said another, "for publishing
the works of a Continental novelist; but when the novelist himself comes
here, thou puttest him in the place of honour."

I was fast growing overwhelmed with shame.

"Where is thy patriotism! Thou art letting some of the most unique
British birds become extinct!" "Yes, and thou lettest Christmas cards be
made in Germany, and thou deridest Whistler, and refusest to read Dod
Grile, and thou lettest books be published with the sheets pinned instead
of sewn. And the way thou neglectest Coleridge's grave----"

"Coleridge's grave?" interrupted a sad-eyed enthusiast. "Why, thou hast
put no stone at all to mark where James Thomson lies!"

"Thou Hun, thou Vandal!" shrieked a fresh contingent of voices in
defiance of the late Professor Freeman. "Thou hast allowed the Emanuel
Hospital to be knocked down, thou hast whitewashed the oaken ceiling of
King Charles's room at Dartmouth, and threatened to destroy the view from
Richmond Hill. Thou hast smashed cathedral windows, or scratched thy name
on them, hast pulled down Roman walls, and allowed commons to be
inclosed. Thou coverest the Lake District with advertisements of pills,
and the blue heaven itself with sky-signs; and in thy passion for cheap
and nasty pictorial journalism thou art allowing the art of
wood-engraving to die out, even as thou acceptest photogravures instead
of etchings."

I cowered before their wrath, while renewed cries of "Thou art
responsible! Thou! Thou!" resounded from all sides.

"A pretty Christian _thou_ art!" exclaimed another voice in unthinking
vituperation. "Thou decimatest savage tribes with rum and Maxim guns,
thou makest money by corrupting the East with opium. Thou allowest the
Armenians to be done to death, and thou wilt not put a stop to
child-marriages in India."

"But for thee I should have been alive to-day," broke in a venerable
spirit hovering near the ceiling. "If thou hadst refused to sell poison
except in specially shaped bottles----"

"What canst thou expect of a man who allows anybody to carry firearms?"
interrupted another voice.

"Or who fills his newspaper with divorce cases?"

"Is it any wonder the rising generation is cynical, and the young maiden
of fifteen has ceased to be bashful?"

"Shame on thee!" hissed the chorus, and advanced upon me so threateningly
that I seized my hat and rushed from the room. But a burly being with a
Blue Book blocked my way.

"Where didst thou get that hat?" he cried. "Doubtless from some sweating
establishment. And those clothes; didst thou investigate where they were
made?  didst thou inquire how much thy tailor paid his hands?  didst thou
engage an accountant to examine his books?"

"I--I am so busy," I stammered feebly.

"Shuffler! How knowest thou thou art not spreading to the world the germs
of scarlet fever and typhoid picked up in the sweaters' dens?"

"What cares _he_?" cried a tall, thin man, with a slight stoop and gold
spectacles. "Does he not poison the air every day with the smoke of his
coal fires?"

"Pison the air!" repeated a battered, blear-eyed reprobate. "He pisoned
my soul. He ruined me with promiskus charity. Whenever I was stoney-broke
'e give me doles in aid, 'e did. 'E wos werry bad to me, 'e wos. 'E
destroyed my self-respeck, druv me to drink, broke up my home, and druv
my darters on the streets."

"This is what comes of undisciplined compassion," observed the
gold-spectacled gentleman, glowering at me. "The integrity and virtue of
a whole family sacrificed to the gratification of thy altruistic
emotions!"

"Stand out of the way!" I cried to the burly man; "I wish to leave my own
house."

"And carry thy rudeness abroad?" he retorted indignantly. "Perchance thou
wouldst like to go to the Continent, and swagger through Europe clad in
thy loud-patterned checks and thine insular self-sufficiency."

I tried to move him out of the way by brute force, and we wrestled, and
he threw me. I heard myself strike the floor with a thud.

Rubbing my eyes, instead of my back, I discovered that I was safe in my
reading-chair, and that it was the lady novelist's novel that had made
the noise. I picked it up, but I still seemed to see the reproachful eyes
of a thousand tormentors, and hear their objurgations. Yet I had none of
the emotions of Scrooge, no prickings of conscience, no ferment of good
resolutions. Instead, I felt a wave of bitterness and indignation
flooding my soul.

"I will _not_ be responsible for the universe!" I cried to the ceiling.
"I am sick of the woman question, and the problem of man makes my gorge
rise. Is there one question in the world that can really be settled? No,
not one, except by superficial thinkers. Just as the comprehensive
explanation of 'the flower in the crannied wall' is the explanation of
the whole universe, so every question is but a thin layer of ice over
infinite depths. You may touch it lightly, you may skate over it; but
press it at all, and you sink into bottomless abysses. The simplest
interrogation is a doorway to chaos, to endless perspectives of winding
paths perpetually turning upon themselves in a blind maze. Suppose one is
besought to sign a petition against capital punishment. A really
conscientious and logical person, pursuing truth after the manner
recommended by Descartes, and professed by Huxley, could not settle this
question for himself without going into the endless question of Free-will
_versus_ Necessity, and studying the various systems of philosophy and
ethics. Murder may be due to insane impulse: Insanity must therefore be
studied. Moreover, ought not hanging to be abolished in cases of murder
and reserved for more noxious crimes, such as those of fraudulent
directors? This opens up new perspectives and new lines of study. The
whole theory of Punishment would also have to be gone into: should it be
restrictive, or revengeful, or reformative? (See Aristotle, Bentham,
Owen, etc.) Incidentally great tracts of the science of Psychology are
involved. And what right have we to interfere with our fellow-creatures
at all? This opens up the vast domains of Law and Government, and
requires the perusal of Montesquieu, Bodin, Rousseau, Mill, etc., etc.
Sociology would also be called in to determine the beneficent or
maleficent influence of the death-punishment upon the popular mind; and
statistics would be required to trace the operation of the systems of
punishment in various countries. History would be consulted to the same
effect. The sanctity of human life being a religious dogma, the religions
of the world would have to be studied, to see under what conditions it
has been thought permissible to destroy life. One ought not to rely on
translations: Confucius should be read in Chinese, the Koran in Arabic,
and the few years spent in the acquisition of Persian would be rewarded
by a first-hand familiarity with the Zend Avesta. The Old Testament
enjoins capital punishment. On what grounds, then, if one is leaning the
other way, may a text be set aside that seems to settle the matter
positively?  Here comes in the vast army of Bible commentators and
theologians. But perhaps the text is of late origin, interpolated. The
Dutch and German savants rise in their might, with their ingenious
theories and microscopic scholarship. But there are other scientists who
bid us not heed the Bible at all, because it contradicts the latest
editions of their primers. Is, then, science strictly accurate? To answer
this you must have a thorough acquaintance with biology, geology,
astronomy, besides deciding for yourself between the conflicting views at
nearly every point. By the time you have made up your mind as to whether
capital punishment should be abolished, it has passed out of the
statute-book, and you are dead, or mad, or murdered.

"But were this the only question a man has to settle in his short span of
years, he might cheerfully engage in its solution. But life bristles with
a hundred questions equally capital, and with a thousand-and-one minor
problems on which he is expected to have an opinion, and about which he
is asked at one time or other, if only at dinner."

At this moment the Poet who shares my chambers came in--later than he
should have done--and interrupted my soliloquy. But I was still hot, and
enlisted his interest in my vision and my apologia, and began drawing up
a list of the questions, in which after a while he became so interested
that he started adding to it. Hours flew like minutes, and only the
splitting headache we both brought upon ourselves drove us to desist.
Here is our first rough list of the questions that confront the modern
man--a disorderly, deficient, and tautological list, no doubt, to which
any reader can add many hundred more.


    VEXED QUESTIONS

    Queen Mary and Bothwell. Shakespeare and Bacon. Correct
    transliteration of Greek; pronunciation of Latin. Sunday opening of
    museums; of theatres. The English Sunday; Bank Holiday. Darwinism. Is
    there spontaneous creation? or spontaneous combustion? The germ
    theory; Pasteur's cures; Mattei's cures; Virchow's cell theory. Unity
    of Homer; of the Bible. Dickens v. Thackeray. Shall we ever fly? or
    steer balloons? The credit system; the discount system.
    Impressionism, decadence, Japanese art, the _plein air_ school.
    Realism _v._ romance; Gothic _v._ Greek art. Russian fiction, Dutch,
    Bulgarian, Norwegian, American, etc., etc.: opinion of every novel
    ever written, of every school, in every language (you must read them
    in the original); ditto of every opera and piece of music, with
    supplementary opinions about every vocalist and performer; ditto of
    every play, with supplementary opinions about every actor, dancer,
    etc.; ditto of every poem; ditto of every picture ever painted, with
    estimates of every artist in every one of his manners at every stage
    of his development and decisions as to which pictures are not
    genuine; also of every critic of literature, drama, art, and music
    (in all of which departments certain names are equal to an appalling
    plexus of questions--Wagner, Ibsen, Meredith, Browning, Comte,
    Goethe, Shakespeare, Dante, Degas, Rousseau, Tolstoï, Maeterlinck,
    Strindberg, Zola, Whistler, Leopardi, Emerson, Carlyle, Swedenborg,
    Rabelais). Socialism, its various schools, its past and its future;
    Anarchism: bombs. Labour questions: the Eight Hours' Day, the
    Unemployed, the Living Wage, etc., etc. Mr. Gladstone's career. Shall
    members of Parliament be paid? Chamberlain's position; ditto for
    every statesman in every country, to-day and in all past ages. South
    Africa, Rhodes, Captain Jim. The English girl _v._ the French or the
    American. Invidious comparisons of every people from every point of
    view, physical, moral, intellectual, and aesthetic. Vizetelly.
    Vivisection. First love _v._ later love; French marriage system _v._
    the English. The corrupt choruses in the Greek dramas (also in modern
    burlesque--with the question of the Church and Stage Guild, Zaeo's
    back, the County Council, etc.). How to make London beautiful. Fogs.
    Bi-metallism. Secondary Education. Volunteer or conscript? Anonymity
    in journalism. Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, and Mohammedanism:
    their mutual superiorities, their past and their future. Plato,
    Spinoza, Kant, Hegel, and all philosophers and philosophies. The
    Independent Theatre. The origin of language, Where do the Aryans come
    from? Was Mrs. Maybrick guilty? Same question for every great
    murderer. The Tichborne case, and every other _cause célèbre_,
    including divorce cases. Crime and punishment. Music-hall songs.
    Heredity: are acquired qualities inherited? Is tobacco a mistake? Is
    drink? Is marriage? Is the high hat? Polygamy; the social evil. Are
    the planets inhabited? Is the English concert pitch too high? The
    divided skirt. The antiquity of man. Geology: is the story of the
    rocks short, or long, or true? Geology _v._ Genesis; Genesis _v._
    Kuenen. Was Pope a poet? Was Whitman? Was Poe a drunkard, or Griswold
    a liar? Was Hamlet mad? Was Blake? Is waltzing immoral? Is humour
    declining? Is there a modern British drama? Corporal punishment in
    schools. Compulsory vaccination. What shall we do with our daughters?
    or our sons?  or our criminals? or our paupers? or ourselves? Female
    franchise. Republicanism. Which is the best soap? or tooth-powder? Is
    Morris's printing really good? Is the race progressing? Is our navy
    fit? Should dynamite be used in war? or in peace? What persons should
    be buried in Westminster Abbey? Origin of every fairy-tale. Who made
    our proverbs and ballads? Cold baths _v._ hot or Turkish. Home Rule.
    Should the Royal Academy be abolished? and who should be the next
    R.A.? Should there be an Academy of Literature? or a Channel Tunnel?
    Was De Lesseps to blame? Should we not patronise English
    watering-places? Should there be pianos in board schools? or
    theology? Authors and publishers; artists and authors. Is literature
    a trade? Should pauper aliens be admitted? or pauper couples
    separated? Bank Holiday. Irving _v._ Tree. The world's politics,
    present, future, and even past--retrospective questions being
    constantly re-agitated: as, Should the American slaves have been
    emancipated? or Was the French Revolution a Folly? _Apropos_, which
    is the best history of it? Who is the rightful Queen of England? Is
    cycling injurious to the cyclist? or the public? Who was the Man in
    the Iron Mask? Is the Stock Exchange immoral? What is influenza?
    Ought we to give cabmen more than their fare? Tips generally. Should
    dogs be muzzled? Have we a right to extend our empire? or to keep it?
    Should we federate it? Are there ghosts? Is spiritualism a fraud? Is
    theosophy? Was Madame Blavatsky? Was Jezebel a wretch, or a
    Hellenist? The abuse of the quarantine. Should ladies ride astride?
    Amateurs _v_. professionals in sports. Is prize-fighting beneficial?
    Is trial by jury played out? The cost of law: Chancery. Abuses of the
    Universities. The Cambridge Spinning House. Compulsory Greek. The
    endowment of research. A teaching university in London. Is there a
    sea-serpent? Servants _v._ mistresses. Shall the Jews have Palestine?
    Classical _v._ modern side in schools. Should we abolish the
    censorship of plays? or fees? or found a dramatic academy? or a State
    theatre? Should gambling be legal? Should potatoes be boiled in their
    skins? should dynamiters? Should newspapers publish racing tips? or
    divorce cases? or comment? The New Journalism. What is the best ninth
    move in the Evans gambit? Would Morphy have been a first-class
    chess-player to-day? Is the Steinitz gambit sound? Do plants dream?
    Ought we to fill up income-tax papers accurately? Shelley and Harriet
    and Mary. Swift and Vanessa and Stella. Lord and Lady Byron. Did Mrs.
    Carlyle deserve it? The limits of biography; of photography in
    painting; of the spot-stroke in billiards. Did Shakespeare hold
    horses? Should girls be brought up like boys, or boys like girls, or
    both like one another? Are animals automata? Have they reason? or do
    they live without reason? Will Brighton A's fall? or Peruvians rise?
    Is it cruel to cage birds and animals? What is the best breed of
    horses? Did Wellington say "Up, Guards, and at 'em"? Cremation _v._
    Burial. Should immoral men be allowed to retain office? Is suicide
    immoral? Opinion of the character of Elizabeth, Parnell, Catherine,
    Cleopatra, Rousseau, Jack the Ripper, Semiramis, Lucrezia Borgia,
    etc., etc. The present state of the Libel Law; and of the Game Laws.
    Is vegetarianism higher? or healthier? Do actors feel their parts?
    Should German type be abolished? or book-edges cut? or editions
    artificially limited? or organ-grinders? How about
    church-and-muffin-bells? Peasant proprietorship. Deer or Highlanders?
    Were our ancestors taller than we? Is fruit or market-gardening or
    cattle-farming more profitable? Dutch _v._ Italian gardening. What is
    an etching? Do dreams come true? Is freemasonry a fraud? or
    champagne? are Havanas? Best brand of whiskey? Ought Building and
    Friendly Societies to be supervised? Smoking in theatres. Should
    gentlemen pay ladies' cab-fares? Genius and insanity. Are cigarettes
    poisonous? Is luxury a boon? Thirteen at table, and all other
    superstitions--are they foolish? Why young men don't marry. Shall we
    ever reach the Pole? How soon will England and the States be at war?
    The real sites and people in Thackeray's novels. A universal penny
    post? Cheap telegrams and telephones? Is the Bank of England safe?
    Are the planets inhabited? Should girls have more liberty? Should
    they propose? or wear crinolines? Why not have an unlimited paper
    currency? or a decimal system and coinage? or a one-pound note?
    Should we abolish the Lords? or preserve the Commons? Why not
    euthanasia? Should dramatic critics write plays? Who built the
    Pyramids? Are the English the Lost Ten Tribes? Should we send
    missions to the heathen? How long will our coal hold out? Who
    executed Charles I.? Are the tablets of Tel-el-Amarna trustworthy?
    are hieroglyphic readers? Will war ever die? or people live to a
    hundred? The best moustache-forcer, bicycle, typewriter, and system
    of shorthand or of teaching the blind? Was Sam Weller possible? Who
    was the original of Becky Sharp? Of Dodo? Does tea hurt? Do
    gutta-percha shoes? or cork soles? Shall we disestablish the church?
    or tolerate a reredos in St. Paul's? Is Euclid played out? Is there a
    fourth dimension of space? Which is the real old Curiosity Shop? Is
    the Continental man better educated than the Briton? Why can't we
    square the circle? or solve equations to the _n_th degree? or
    colour-print in England? What is the use of South Kensington? Is
    paraffin good for baldness? or eucalyptus for influenza? How many
    elements are there? Should cousins marry? or the House be adjourned
    on Derby Day? Do water-colours fade? Will the ether theory live? or
    Stanley's reputation? Is Free Trade fair? Is a Free Press? Is
    fox-hunting cruel? or pigeon-shooting? How about the Queen's
    staghounds? Should not each railway station bear its name in big
    letters? and have better refreshments? Should we permit sky-signs?
    Limits of advertisement. Preservation of historic buildings and
    beautiful views _v_. utilitarianism. Is the coinage ugly? Should we
    not get letters on Sunday? Who really wrote the "Marseillaise"? Are
    examinations any real test? Promotion in the Army or the Civil
    Service. Is logic or mathematics the primal science? and what is the
    best system of symbolic logic? Should curates be paid more and
    archbishops less? Should postmen knock? or combine? Are they under
    military régime? or underpaid? Should Board School children be taught
    religion? The future of China and Japan. Is Anglo-Indian society
    immoral? Style or matter? Have we one personality or many?--with a
    hundred other questions of psychology and ethics. A graduated income
    tax--with a hundred other questions of political economy. Asphalt for
    horses. Will the French republic endure? Will America have an
    aristocracy? Shall Welsh perish? Is Platonic love possible? Did
    Shakespeare write "Coriolanus"? Is there a skull in Holbein's
    "Ambassadors"? What is the meaning of Dryden's line, "He was and is
    the Captain of the Test"? or of the horny projection under the left
    wing of the sub-parasite of the third leg of a black-beetle? Was Orme
    poisoned? Are there fresh-water jelly-fishes? Is physiognomy true? or
    phrenology? or graphology? or cheiromancy? If so, what are their
    laws? Opinions on Guelphs and Ghibellines, fasting displays,
    infanticide, the genealogy of the peerage, the origin of public-house
    signs, Siberia, the author of Junius, of the Sibylline Books,
    werewolves, dyeing one's hair, coffin-ships, standing armies, the
    mediaeval monasteries, Church Brotherhoods, state insurance of the
    poor, promiscuous almsgiving, the rights of animals, the C. D. Acts,
    the Kernoozer Club, emigration, book-plates, the Psychical Society,
    Kindergarten, Henry George, Positivism, Chevalier's Coster,
    colour-blindness, Total Abstinence, Arbitration, the best hundred
    books, Local Option, Women's Rights, the Wandering Jew, the Flying
    Dutchman, the Neanderthal skull, the Early Closing movement, the
    Prince of Wales, and the Tonic Sol-fa notation. Is there an English
    hexameter? Is a perfect translation impossible? Will the coloured
    races conquer? Is consumption curable? Is celibacy possible? Can
    novels be really dramatised? Is the French school of acting superior
    to ours? Should literary men be offered peerages? or refuse them?
    Should quack-doctors be prosecuted? Should critics practise without a
    license? Are the poor happier or unhappier than the rich? or is Paley
    right? Did Paley steal his celebrated watch? Did Milton steal from
    Vondel? Is the Salon dead in England? Should duelling be revived?
    What is the right thing in dados, hall-lamps, dressing-gowns, etc.?
    Should ladies smoke? Is there a Ghetto in England? Anti-Semitism. Why
    should London wait? or German waiters? Mr. Stead's revival of
    pilgrimages. Is Grimm's Law universal? The abuses of the Civil
    Service; of the Pension List. Dr. Barnardo. Grievances of
    match-girls; of elementary teachers. Are our police reliable? Is
    Stevenson's Scotch accurate? Is our lifeboat service efficient? The
    Eastern Question. What is an English fairy-tale? What are the spots
    on the sun? Have they anything to do with commercial crises? Should
    we spoil the Court if we spared the Black Rod? or the City if we
    spared the Lord Mayor? Is chloroforming dangerous? Should armorial
    bearings be taxed? or a tradesman's holiday use of his cart? Should
    classical texts be Bowdlerised for school-boys? Is the confessional
    of value? Is red the best colour for a soldier's uniform or for a
    target? Will it rain to-morrow? Ought any one to carry firearms? Do
    we permit the cancan on the English stage? or aërial flights without
    nets? Where are the lost Tales of Miletus? Should lawyers wear their
    own hair? Was the Silent System so bad? Should a novel have a
    purpose? Was the _Victoria_ Fund rightly distributed? What is the
    origin of Egyptian civilisation? Is it allowable to say, "It's me"?
    Every other doubtful point of grammar and--worse still--of
    pronunciation; also of etymology. May we say "Give an ovation"? Is
    the German Emperor a genius, or a fool? Should bachelors be taxed?
    Will the family be abolished? Ensilage. Why was Ovid banished from
    Rome? Is the soul immortal? Is our art-pottery bad? Is the Revised
    Version of the Bible superior to the Old? Who stole Gainsborough's
    picture? Which are the rarest coins and stamps? Is there any sugar in
    the blood? Blondes or brunettes? Do monkeys talk? What should you
    lead at whist? Should directors of insolvent companies be prosecuted?
    Or classics be annotated? Was Boswell a fool? Do I exist? Does
    anybody else exist? Is England declining? Shall the costers stand in
    Farringdon Street? Do green wall-papers contain arsenic? Shall we
    adopt phonetic spelling? Is life worth living?


The last question at least I thought I could answer, as I bore to bed
with me that headache which you have doubtless acquired if you have been
foolish enough to read the list. If only one were a journalist, one would
have definite opinions on all these points.

And to these questions every day brings a fresh quota. You are expected
to have read the latest paragraph in the latest paper, and the newest
novel, and not to have missed such and such an article in such and such a
quarterly. And all the while you are fulfilling the duties of, and
solving the problems of, son, brother, cousin, husband, father, friend,
parishioner, citizen, patriot, all complicated by specific religious and
social relations, and earning your living by some business that has its
own hosts of special problems, and you are answering letters from
everybody about everything, and deciding as to the genuineness of begging
appeals, and wrestling with some form or forms of disease, pain, and
sorrow.

"Truly, we are imperfect instruments for determining truth," I said to
the Poet. "The sane person acts from impulse, and only pretends to give a
reason. Reason is only called in to justify the verdict of prejudice.
Sometimes the impulse is sentiment--which is prejudice touched with
emotion. We cannot judge anything on pure, abstract grounds, because the
balance is biassed. A human being is born a bundle of prejudices, a group
of instincts and intuitions and emotions that precede judgment.
Patriotism is prejudice touched with pride, and politics is prejudice
touched with spite. Philosophy is prejudice put into propositions, and
art is prejudice put into paint or sound, and religion is a pious
opinion. Every man is born a Platonist or an Aristotelian, a Romanticist,
or a Realist, or an Impressionist, and usually erects his own limitations
into a creed. Every country, town, district, family, individual, has a
special set of prejudices along the lines of which it moves, and which it
mistakes for exclusive truths or reasoned conclusions. Touch human
society anywhere, it is rotten, it crumbles into a myriad notes of
interrogation; the acid of analysis dissolves every ideal. Humanity only
keeps alive and sound by going on in faith and hope,--_solvitur
ambulando_,--if it sat down to ask questions, it would freeze like the
traveller in the Polar regions. The world is saved by bad logic."

"And by good feeling," added my friend the Poet.

"And in the face of all these questions," I cried, surveying the list
ruefully again, "we go on accumulating researches and multiplying books
without end, vituperating the benefactors who destroyed the library of
Alexandria, and exhuming the civilisations that the earthquakes of Time
have swallowed under. The Hamlet of centuries, 'sicklied o'er with the
pale cast of thought,' the nineteenth of that ilk mouches along,
soliloquising about more things in heaven and earth than were dreamt of
in any of its predecessors' philosophies. Ah me! Analysis is paralysis
and introspection is vivisection and culture drives one mad. What will be
the end of it all?"

"The end will be," answered the Poet, "that the overstrung nerves of the
century will give way, and that we shall fall into the simple old faith
of Omar Khayyám:

  "A Book of Verses underneath the Bough,
   A Jug of Wine, a Loaf of Bread, and Thou
   Beside me singing in the Wilderness--
   O Wilderness were Paradise enow."

"Yes," said I, "the only wisdom is to live. Action is substance and
thought shadow." And so--paradoxically enough--I began to think out

  A WORKING PHILOSOPHY

  The solar system turns without thine aid.
  Live, die! The universe is not afraid.
  What is is right! If aught seems wrong below,
  Then wrong it is--of thee to leave it so.
  Then wrong it first becomes for human thought,
  Which else would die of dieting on naught.
  Tied down by race and sex and creed and station,
  Go, learn to find thy strength in limitation,
  To do the little good that comes to hand,
  Content to love and not to understand;
  Faithful to friends and country, work and dreams,
  Knowing the Real is the thing that seems.
  While reverencing every nobleness,
  In whatsoever tongue or shape or dress,
  Speak out the word that to _thy_ soul seems right,
  Strike out thy path by individual light:
  'Tis contradictory rays that give the White.

"The ideas are good. But what a pity you are not a poet!" said my friend
the Poet.

But, though I recognise that prejudice in the deepest sense supplies the
matter of judgment, while logic is only regulative of the form, yet in
the more work-a-day sense of the word in which prejudice is taken to mean
an opinion formed without reasoning and maintained in despite of it, I
claim to write absolutely without prejudice. The syllogism is my lord and
king. A kind-hearted lady said I had a cruel face. It is true. I am
absolutely remorseless in tracking down a _non sequitur_, pitiless in
forcing data to yield up their implicit conclusions. "Logic! Logic!"
snorted my friend the Poet. "Life is not logical. We cannot be logical."
"Of course not," said I; "I should not dream of asking men to live
logically: all I ask is that they should argue logically."

But to be unprejudiced does not mean to have no convictions. The
superficial confuse definiteness with prejudice, forgetting that definite
opinions may be the result of careful judgment. Post-judiced I trust I
am. But prejudiced? Heaven forfend! Why, 'tis because I do not wish to
bind myself to anything that I may say in them that I mark these personal
communications "Without Prejudice"! For I do not at all mind
contradicting myself. If it were some one of reverend years or superior
talents I might hesitate, but between equals----! Contradiction is the
privilege of _camaraderie_ and the essence of _causerie_. We agree to
differ--I and myself. I am none of your dogmatic fellows with
pigeon-holes for minds, and whatever I say I do not stick to. And I will
tell you why. There is hardly a pretty woman of my acquaintance who has
not asked for my hand. Owing to this passion for palmistry in polite
circles, I have discovered that I possess as many characters as there are
palmists. Do you wonder, therefore, if, with such a posse of
personalities to pick from, I am never alike two days running? With so
varied a psychological wardrobe at command, it would be mere self-denial
to be faithful to one's self. I leave that to the one-I'd who can see
only one side of a question. Said Tennyson to a friend (who printed it):
"'In Memoriam' is more optimistic than I am"; and there is more of the
real man in that little remark than in all the biographies. The published
prophet has to live up to his public halo. So have I seen an actress on
tour slip from a third-class railway carriage into a brougham. Tennyson
was not mealy-mouthed, but then he did not bargain for an audience of
phonographs. Nowadays it is difficult to distinguish your friends from
your biographers. The worst of it is that the land is thick with fools
who think nothing of a great man the moment they discover he was a man.
Tennyson was all the greater for his honest doubt. The cocksure centuries
are passed for ever. In these hard times we have to work for our
opinions; we cannot rely on inheriting them from our fathers.

I write with a capital I at the risk of being accused of egotism.
Apparently it is more modest to be conceited in the third person, like
the child who says "Tommy is a good boy," or in the first person plural,
like the leader-writer of "The Times," who bids the Continent tremble at
his frown. By a singular fallacy, which ought scarcely to deceive
children, it is forgotten that everything that has ever been written
since the world began has been written by some one person, by an "I,"
though that "I" might have been omitted from the composition or replaced
by the journalistic "we." To some extent the journalist does sink his
personality in that imaginary personality of his paper, a personality
built up, like the human personality, by its past; and the result is a
pompous, colourless, lifeless simulacrum. But in every other department
of letters the trail of the "I" is over every page and every sentence.
The most impersonal essays and poems are all in a sense egoistic.
Everything should really be between inverted commas with an introductory
_Thus say I_. But as these are omitted, as being understood, they come at
last to be _mis_understood.

In the days ere writing was invented, this elementary error was not
possible. The words were heard issuing from the lips of a single man;
every opinion, every law of conduct, must have been at first formulated
through the lips of some one man. And to this day, in spite of the
wilderness of tradition and authority by which we are overgrown, the
voice of the one man is still our only living source of inspiration and
help. Every new thought must pass through the brain, every moral ideal
through the conscience, of an individual. Voices, voices, we want--not
echoes. Better the mistaken voice of honest individuality than the
soulless bleat of the flock. There are too many of Kipling's Tomlinsons
in the world, whose consciences are wholly compact of _on dits_, on whom
the devil himself, sinned they never so sadly, would refuse to waste his
good pit-coal. "Bad taste"--that opprobrious phrase which, worse than the
accusation of a crime, cannot be refuted, for it is the king of the
question-beggars,--"bad taste" is responsible for half the reticence that
marks current writing, for the failure to prick the bladders of every
species that bloat themselves all around us. "Good taste" is the
staunchest ally of hypocrisy, and corruption is the obverse side of
civilisation. I do not believe in these general truths that rule the
market. What is "true for all" is false for each. It is the business of
every man to speak out, to be himself, to contribute his own thought to
the world's thinking--to be egoistic. To be egoistic is not to be
egotistic. Egoism should be distinguished from egotism. The egoist thinks
for himself, the egotist about himself. Mr. Meredith's Sir Willoughby
should not have been styled the _Egoist_. The egoist offers his thought
to his fellow-men, the egotist thinks it is the only thought worth their
acceptance. These papers of mine joyously plead guilty to egoism, but not
to egotism. If they, for instance, pretend to appraise the powers of my
contemporaries, they do not pretend to be more than an individual
appraisal. Whoever wants another opinion can go somewhere else. There is
no lack of practitioners in criticism, more or less skilful. There must
be a struggle for existence among opinions, as among all other things,
and the egoist is content to send the children of his thought into the
thick of the fray, confident that the fittest will survive. Only he is
not so childish as to make-believe that an impersonal dignified
something-not-himself that makes for the ink-pot is speaking--and not he
himself, he "with his little I." The affectation of modesty is perhaps
the most ludicrous of all human shams. I am reminded of the two Jews who
quarrelled in synagogue, during the procession of palm-branches, because
each wanted to be last, as befitted the humblest man in Israel, which
each claimed to be. This is indeed "the pride that apes humility." There
is a good deal of this sort of pride in the careful and conscientious
suppression of the egoistic in books and speeches. I have nothing of this
modesty to be proud of. I know that I am cleverer than the man in the
street, though I take no credit to myself for it, as it is a mere
accident of birth, and on the whole a regrettable one. It was this
absence of modesty from my composition that recently enabled me to
propose the toast of literature coupled with the name of Mr. Zangwill. I
said that I could wish that some one more competent and distinguished
than myself had been chosen to do justice to such a toast and to such a
distinguished man of letters, but I did my best to pay him the tribute he
deserved ere I sat down amid universal applause. When I rose amid renewed
cheers to reply, I began by saying that I could wish that some one more
competent and distinguished than myself had been chosen to respond to so
important a toast--the last speaker had considerably overrated my humble
achievements in the fields of literature. So that you see I could easily
master the modest manner, if I took any pains or set any store by it. But
in my articles of faith the "I" is just what I would accentuate most, the
"I" through which for each of us the universe flows, by which any truth
must be perceived in order to be true, and which is not to be replaced by
that false abstraction, the communal mind. Here are a laughing
philosopher's definitions of some cardinal things:

    Philosophy--All my I.
    Art--All my Eye.
    Religion--All my Ay.

Also at the outset let it be distinctly understood that I write without
any prejudice in favour of grammar. The fear of the critics is the
beginning of pedantry. I detest your scholiast whose footnotes would take
Thackeray to task for his "and whiches," and your professor who disdains
the voice of the people, which is the voice of the god of grammar. I know
all the scholiast has to say (surely he is the silly [Greek:
scholastikos] of Greek anecdote), and indeed I owe all my own notions of
diction to a work on "Style" written by him. It was from the style of
this work that I learnt what to avoid. The book reminded me of my old
schoolmaster, who grew very angry with me for using the word "ain't," and
vociferated "Ain't! How often am I to tell you ain't ain't a word?" I
suppose one may take it for granted that the greater the writer the worse
the grammar. "Fools follow rules. Wise men precede them." (Query: this
being a quotation from myself, was I bound to put the inverted commas?)
Shakespeare has violated every rule of the schoolroom, and the more
self-conscious stylist of our own day--Stevenson--would be caned for
composition. I find him writing "They are not us," which is almost as
blasphemous as "It's me." His reputation has closed the critics' eyes to
such sentences as these in his essay on "Some Portraits by Raeburn":
"Each of his portraits are not only a piece of history ..."; "Neither of
the portraits of Sir Walter Scott were very agreeable to look upon."
Stevenson is a master, but not a schoolmaster, of English. Of course bad
grammar does not make a genius, any more than bad morals. (Note how much
this sentence would lose in crispness if I made it grammatical by tacking
on "do.") My friend the musician complained to me that when he studied
harmony and form he was told he must not do this, that and the other;
whereas, when he came to look into the works of the great composers he
found they made a practice of all the three. "Am I a genius?" he queried
pathetically. "If so, I could do as I please. I wish I knew." Every
author who can read and write is in the same predicament: on the one hand
his own instinct for a phrase or a sentence, on the other the contempt of
every honest critic. The guardians of the laws of English have a stock of
taboos; but unlike the guardians of the laws of England they credit every
disregard of them to ignorance. They cannot conceive of malice
aforethought. We are forbidden, for example, to use the word "phenomenal"
in the sense of "extraordinary." But, with Mr. Crummles's Infant
Phenomenon in everybody's mind, can we expect the adjective to shake off
the old associations of its parent noun?

Last year I culled an amusing sentence from a "Standard" criticism of a
tale of adventure: "The story is a well-told, and in spite of the word
'unreliable,' a well-written one." Now just as many foolish persons
object to "a ... one" as to "unreliable." As for the first phrase, I am
sure so great a writer as Tom Hood would have pronounced it A1, while
"unreliable" is defended with unusual warmth by Webster's Dictionary. The
contention that "reliable" should be "reli-on-able," is ridiculous, and
Webster's argument is "laughable," which should obviously be
"laugh-at-able." These remarks are made quite without prejudice, for
personally I have little to complain of. (By the way, this sentence is as
open to blame as that of the professor who told his pupils "You must not
use a preposition to end a sentence with.") Though I have sat under an
army of critics, I have but once been accused of inelegant English, and
then it was only by a lady who wrote that my slipshod style "aggravated"
her.

Finally it will be remarked that by dispensing with illustrations I
preserve intact my egoism and the dignity of a rival art. Nothing can be
more absurd than the conventional illustration which merely attempts to
picture over again what the writer has already pictured in words. Not
only is the effort superfluous, a waste of force, but the artist's
picture is too often in flat contradiction of the text. Whom are you to
believe, the author or the artist? the man who tells you that the heroine
is ethereal, or the man who plainly demonstrates that she is podgy? How
often, too, do the people dress differently in the words and in the
picture, not to speak of the shifting backgrounds! Dickens had so much
difficulty with his illustrations because he saw his characters so much
more clearly than any other novelist; the sight of his inner eye was so
good. And one can understand, too, how Cruikshank came to fancy he had
created Oliver Twist, much as an actor imagines he "creates" a character.
The true collaboration between author and artist requires that the work
should be divided between them, not reduplicated. Those parts of the
story which need the intervention of words should be allotted to the
writer, while to the artist should be entrusted the parts better told by
pencil. Neither need trench on the other's province. Description--which
so many readers skip already--would be abolished. Even incidents--such as
murder--could be caught by the artist in the act. And after the artist
had killed a character, the author could preach over his corpse. Thus
there would be an agreeable reversion to picture-language, the earliest
way of writing, and the latest. The ends of the ages would meet in a
romance written on these lines:--

"Sick at heart we watched till the grey dawn stole in through the
diamond-paned casements of the Grange, and then, at last, when we had
given up all hope, we saw coming up the gravel pathway----"

[_Illustration._[*]]

After which the author proceeds: "Fascinated by the blood that dripped
from the edges of the eight umbrellas, we stood silent; then, throwing
off our coats, we----

[_Illustration._[*]]

"So that was how I won the sweetest little bride I ever wedded. But if I
live to wed a hundred, I shall never forget that terrible night in
Grewsome Grange.

"THE END."

[* Transcriber's note: So in original. These are _not_ placeholders for
actual illustrations in the book.]

My friend the artist once collaborated with me in an experiment of this
sort, but we did not pursue it, discovering how feeble an advance ours
would be after all; for there were points at which both of us felt we
ought to give way to the tone-poet. When the emotions became too
intangible for intellectual expression I asked my friend the musician to
insert paragraphs in a minor key. The love-scenes I was particularly
anxious to have written in musical phrases. But he shrank from so
unconventional a form, not being sure he was a genius. I was also
disheartened by the disappointing behaviour of the diverse scents with
which I had expressed myself on certain blank pages. They would not
remain in their places.




