The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Secret of the Creation
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Secret of the Creation

Author: Howard D. Pollyen


        
Release date: May 25, 2007 [eBook #21610]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21610

Credits: Produced by Kevin Handy, V. L. Simpson, Suzanne Lybarger
        and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Kevin Handy, V. L. Simpson, Suzanne Lybarger
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





  Transcriber's Note: Authorial idiosyncracies have been retained.


THE

SECRET OF THE

CREATION

_By_

DR. HOWARD D. POLLYEN

This book, the great wonder of the literary
age.

Contains the first and second chapters of the
secret of the creation.

The mightiest book ever written on earth
among men.

Price 25c


THE SECRET OF THE CREATION

_By_

DR. HOWARD D. POLLYEN

THIS BOOK

 The great wonder of the literary age.
Contains the first and second chapters
   of the Secret of the Creation.
  The most mighty book ever written
        on earth among men.

    Also contains songs and poems by Dr. Howard D. Pollyen,
    the world's greatest author and writer of all times.

    Author of the deepest and most mystifying
    songs--revealing the whole history of the human soul.

    The Secret of the Creation in full will follow this
    little book which is but a touch of heaven's torchlight
    to the human heart.


The Secret of the Creation

By Dr. Howard D. Pollyen

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

The Creation of the Heavens


Jehovah has no beginning. He himself created time, and taught its
principles to the living things he also created, giving to them
comprehension, by which we ascribe, unto the infiniteness of Jehovah a
time and a beginning.

Before that there were not any man or angels or living creatures of any
form created. When there were no worlds yet formed, nature stood in
three kingdoms. They were Light, Water, and Darkness.

Then the kingdom of the light strove against the kingdom of darkness,
and the darkness contended with the light. The two elements came
together, each of them a separate unit, contending against the other.
And in their controversy the virtue of the power of each of them became
formed and concentrated into a living being. Their personalities are as
those of men, but their substance is power. The virtue--the
pre-motive--the ruling quorum--the master of all power: The being of
light was much greater than the being of darkness and ruled over him;
therefore was his name Jehovah. The being of darkness hated him with
great envy, thereby was his name Satan. But they were both lonesome;
being alone: Even as light and darkness is obstinate to each other.

Then Jehovah saw that he was the master of nature, all power being
controlled by his hands. He looked upon the kingdom of the Waters and
saw that their alluvian substance could be divided and congealed into
many kingdoms of minerals, and he decided to create a world. He sent a
current of electricity in its first nature through the face of the
waters and said, "let the minerals be gathered together, each one in its
place in perfect order for the earth; and let the dry land appear above
the face of the waters." And the natural electricity went forth and
returned to and fro, and it was done.

And Jehovah came and walked upon the world which he had created, and he
called it Heaven. For it was a place upon which he would cause to rest
the substance of life--out of which he had come. And he called to the
kingdom of light and saw that it was an immensity of life. Dividing it
he formed and created minor beings after his own image and in his own
form. And he called them souls. But they were naked, having no substance
for bodies like him. All the face of the heaven was filled with them as
they glittered before their creator in hosts. Some of them were great
and some of them were small; all being different, each one shining
according to the power of its own light.

Then Jehovah created souls for other living things of all manner of
shapes and forms, great and small--unto the infinite small things until
the substance of life was contained.

Jehovah set for his created things an order and a procession of life,
creating for them bodies. And they arose up and began to fill all the
face of heaven with songs and music. And thus the Heaven and the hosts
of it were finished.

And Satan enveighed Jehovah and the things which he had made, for he
knew that there was no power of creating forces in the virtue of
darkness, and that he himself could not create or make any living thing
to stand before him in life. Therefore he hated life and sought with all
his power to destroy the created things of Jehovah. Satan's power went
out as a shadower of darkness towards them. It was the virtue of his own
evil self--his spirit of darkness--which attempted to come upon the
people and the beasts which Jehovah had made, to destroy them.

But a light went forth from Jehovah as a refuge and a defense. It was
the virtue of his own righteous self--his spirit of perfection--the
embodiment of his almighty mind. The righteousness of his power went
forth and filled all his creation, and shielded and protected all the
living things which he had made from the darkness and evil of Satan.

The creation teemed with the glory of Jehovah, an unmentionable space,
for there was no time there. Neither were there the aged or dying, for
Satan had not as yet cursed any thing that Jehovah had made. But justice
being the authority of Jehovah, he must be just with Satan also. He
could not prevent Satan from coming upon the earth and walking to and
fro through his creation. Jehovah could be jealous, but not selfish and
unjust. If Satan could persuade any of his creatures to forsake him and
to receive within them the power of his own Satanic spirit, justice said
that they were his and Jehovah should bear the loss.

But Satan could not withstand the light and glory of Jehovah, for
Jehovah's brilliancy filled the heaven. He dwelt upon a throne in a
temple of power. The throne and temple were living power. Being gathered
together a natural substance which is power, and the pre-motive glory of
all beauty giving life to the living by its power of that which he
chose to array his dwelling place with. The virtue of the colors, the
red and green, azure, onyx, diamond, bedellium, saraf, amber, and all
manner of adornments of beauty, were faded of their virgin colors and
their sereness of glory, were brought forth in the construction of his
temple and throne. So that no being should be able to surpass Jehovah in
glory hence.

And the temple and the throne in the temple is one living thing of
eternal life, borne by other living things. Where Jehovah wills to go,
the temple also can go. Eternal substance of power like streams of fire,
but more white like the light of diamond issuing toward every point of
the creation as it goes forth in its glory; and there is nothing unseen
or hid from its light.

In the language and knowledge of man, infinite was the time that Satan
sought before he was able to defile any of the sons and daughters of
Jehovah. But out somewhere in the eternity sin began to steal into the
souls of the sons of the mighty. And they began to hate Jehovah and to
envy his glory in a great dispensation. Satan diminishing them after his
own power until one-third of all the hosts of heaven were defiled with
sin. And they had fallen from their power and from their former glory,
and had strayed away from their father's house; the brightness of their
souls glittering not. Satan had captivated them over into his great
night of despair--and they knew it not, for Satan had always appeared to
them arrayed in glory as if Jehovah, and they supposed that he was able
to continually give them light. But they were cast away from Jehovah,
and there was darkness and violence and despair, for the light of Satan
was as the shadows of a great night. There was no sun and moon and stars
to give them artificial light, for Jehovah is the only light of the
living soul, and his glory is the light of that world. The heaven was
filled with violence and his name was blasphemed with many inventions.
But they repented not from Satan unto Jehovah. Then there was war upon
the face of all the heaven: Michael and Mikrell and Gabriel, and the
millions of the mighty ones of the righteous came before Jehovah in a
council of war. And it was decreed that all the hosts of the wicked
should be slain and cast out of the heaven. And that the face of the
heaven should be cleansed.

Then one came and stood before Jehovah--one whom he loved greater than
the love which he had for many of his created beings. He being the
excellency of his beginning, his son by love. And he said "Father, if
all these be slain and cast down they remain dead forever. They are
Satan's and he rejoices against thee that he shall ever have them. I go
in their midst and redeem them from Satan that they shall live again. I
shall purchase them from Satan with my own life. I die that they might
live again. Father, make for them another world that they might live
again and have a chance to repent from Satan unto thee. That they in
their great hosts remain not dead--forever dead." And Jehovah said,
"Son, if we make man again in our own image after our glory; again will
man sin, and Satan will have the mastery over him, and there would be
none to inhabit the new world which I create." Then the son said,
"Father, it shall be righteous that you make man again, for I shall go
with him until a day in which I shall meet thee out upon that world and
there again I will pay the price of man's sins, and redeem him from the
power of Satan, that not all of those be lost--forever lost."

The decree of Jehovah was given that they should live again. Then
Michael, the captain of Jehovah's hosts, went forth and fought against
the Dragon; and the Dragon and his armies fought, but prevailed not;
neither was there any more room found in heaven for Satan and his host.
And the great Dragon--Satan--was cast out of heaven and all his angels
with him.

And his right to dwell upon the face of heaven was forfeited when his
servants had slain the son of Jehovah. Who also redeemed the souls of
the dead from Satan's power when they had shed the blood of the captain
of salvation. And the heaven was cleansed from sin. Neither could Satan
or any of his servants return. All those who had sinned were forever
cast down. And the decree was set that they should not ascend again into
heaven in the infinite eternity. But those of Jehovah's servants who
loved not their lives in the days of battle and were slain in the war,
if they chose to follow their lost brothers down into the new world,
they from there might ascend again unto their father's house.

And the waters stood beneath the heavens, and there was no form or void
in their substance. And the darkness prevailed unchanging. Then the
spirit of Jehovah moved upon the face of the waters beholding all
things. And Jehovah said let the light appear upon the face of the deep,
and let the darkness be gathered together in one place beneath the
heaven, and half of its place be given for the light, and it was so. And
Jehovah beheld the light that it was glorious. And he said let the
firmament of electricity divide the waters again beneath the heaven. And
let the substance of the upper part of the waters above the firmament be
gathered together and let the dry land appear.

And let the waters whose substance have formed the earth be gathered
together, and let the earth and the waters stand in perfectness in their
orders. And let the firmament beneath the heaven of electricity remain
unmovable, and let there be a door as a gateway from the heaven to the
earth remain through the firmament.

And thus on the first and second space of time which became days Jehovah
formed the earth and laid up veins of the minerals after their kinds in
their places, in perfect order. The mountains rising up high above the
seas, giving to the seas their places of permanency in the lower places
of the earth. In the third day Jehovah created the trees and
vegetation--all manner of trees to eradicate the face of the earth from
its nakedness. He created the seeds in the earth, each seed after its
kind, so it could not change forever from the laws of nature. The fourth
day he created great lights, the sun and moon and stars, and set them in
the firmament above the earth. In abodement of twelve houses. Made to
rule the darkness and to alternate nature, giving life to the things
which were to live in the parts of the earth where there was to be life.

He made three hundred and sixty-four roads in the firmament above the
earth, and placed the sun and the moon in them. The roads he made in an
oblong shape and joined them together at one place in the East and in
the West, that the sun should make his circuits over the earth and drive
the darkness before him. And that the moon should make her circuits over
the earth to alternate and rule the darkness. And for her aid he made
the stars and set them in their places in the firmament and in the cross
roads which run across the pathways of the sun and moon; setting them in
order in twelve groups. And Jehovah wrote the stars and their pathways
upon the face of the firmament. They tell the story of his creation and
his love for the things he has created. As they move in their concourses
they are constantly spelling out the things which have never been
changed, glittering above the mist of the earth in their work of
perfection.

And in the midst of the earth he set a magnet joining the heaven and the
earth together that the heaven and the earth should not move out of
their place forever. The magnet in its dimensions is perfectly round--a
tower of bluish mist shining bright like silver--where it stands in its
zone of perpetual darkness; where he made not a light to shine superior
to the darkness. And the magnet revolves around perpetually in its
protraction, carrying the sun and moon and stars in their circuits over
the face of the earth in their roads--in their courses according to
their metallic natures--around in a circuit over the parts of the earth,
where he designed for his things of life to live. Each monitor of the
firmament moving in its own place according to its power with the magnet
of its own nature to do the things it was created to do, until its work
should be finished; then it falls from its place when its course is run,
and is no more.

And the sun sped on his course driving the darkness before him as it
closed up again behind him. And the morning and the evening were the
fourth day in the beginning of time. And the moon and the stars in their
courses over the earth drew up the metallic substance of the earth and
distilled and gave it to the sun; and he in his great speed cast them
out upon the earth, again in minute atoms, and as they came in contact
with their own primordial atoms which lie upon the earth, and more
densely in the lower parts of the earth, they explode, causing
atmospherical heat; each atom giving forth a yellow flame of light as it
explodes, so minute that one light cannot be distinguished from another
by the sense of man.

Thus on the fourth day began heat to gender upon the face of the earth,
preventing the ice and snow from overcoming the life of vegetation in
the circuit of life which the creator had decreed upon the plains of
the world. And the sun went forth upon his circuit and came around again
to the place from where he had started, encircling the magnet in the
center of the earth, thus beginning an endless day and an endless night,
perpetually unchanging. His roads were decreed that from hence he should
run from the east to the west upon one line, then from the west to the
east around on another line each day, drawing closer to the magnet on
one side and falling farther away on the other side, creating an endless
summer and an endless winter, and a springtime and a fall perpetually.

The light of the sun as it came upon its nearest lines to the magnet
where it stood in the center and lowest part of the earth, far enough
distant that his rays could not penetrate into the region of the magnet
and disturb its silence as it stands in its sea of ice and darkness,
while the light of the sun from the outer roads from the magnet was
bounded about by darkness and unchanging ice. And towards the west
Jehovah had set up a great chain of mountains to hold back the light
while the sun was upon his outer roads, that half of the nights might be
long towards the region of the magnet. While to the east he had set up
no great mountains that the light of the sun on its outer roads from
thence might reach across the plains towards the region of the magnet,
that half of the nights might be light and giving glories of light for
half of the time of the years. While in the great white way of life the
continents and islands lay all teeming with glory.

The large continents having divides of high lands through them, from
which large rivers flow, some towards the outer seas and some of them
flow down towards the lower parts of the earth towards the magnet. Then
the sons of Jehovah and the morning stars sang together and shouted for
joy when they saw the glory of Jehovah's creation. And the morning of
the fifth day began.

And Jehovah said let the waters and the earth bring forth living
creatures. Things to be in the seas after their kinds, and living
creatures to be upon the earth and in the earth. Things that have life
to live in the dust of the world, and fowl that they may soar above the
earth. And Jehovah and his tribune formed the flesh and bones of fish to
live in the waters, his spirit being in the labor and toil of the day.
He formed great whales and fish of mighty propensities to consume the
substance of life in the waters. And for them he made Leviathan to be
their king and a god over them. And the creatures of the waters were in
the seas and in the rivers and in the earth, everywhere that there is
water, every one after its kind unchangeable. He also made the fowl upon
the earth out of the clay of the earth, every one after its kind, upon
the continents and islands where it should live; and gave to them an
order of life as the things of the waters, the female delivering the
substance of flesh in an egg; and by the process of heat the shell
becoming expanded and then the spirit of the fowl entering into the
substance through the expanded pores of the shell, forming flesh to
itself, while containing knowledge of the world. As soon as its flesh is
strong enough it mines a passage for itself through the shell and takes
its flesh into the world. And Jehovah made the beasts out of the earth
after their kinds, in their forms upon the islands and continents where
they should live. And the Tribune formed all manner of beasts, both
great and small, out of the earth. They formed their flesh and bones and
cast their souls in them. And they arose up in life a pair of them of
every kind, in every part of the earth where the decree had gone forth
that they should live. And they made beasts after the form of man, and
in his appearance of many sizes and shapes, walking upon their two feet
with two hands to handle things as a man. And they were of many colors,
some black and brown and yellow striped, white and spotted and striped
with all manner of colors. And they were upon the face of the earth and
in the waters.

And Jehovah and his Tribune made huge beasts great in power and form, to
dwell upon parts of the earth. The unicorn was larger than the elephant.
He had horns as the horns of a bull. He was mighty in strength and was a
ferocious beast. Mazaroth was much larger than the unicorn; he was a
beast of the rivers, of the swamps, and glades. Arcturus was a roving
beast of the plains; he went in droves in his day. His army stood on the
plains in the shade of the mountains as a cluster of little hills
crouched, beneath the trees. He heeded not the battle cry of man in his
ways. Magathuren was a roving beast of the smooth parts of the earth; he
could not pass up or down a steep incline or step over anything above
his knees. He had a straight horn with which he lifted the trunks of
fallen trees and things out of his way, as he passed to and fro over the
earth. Behemoth was also a beast of the plains; he was the largest beast
which Jehovah made to dwell upon the dry land of the earth. But he was
not like Leviathan, the king or the pride of the deep. And there were
also great beasts made to dwell in the seas as well as upon the earth;
until the substance, of life was contained. And there went up a mist
from the waters of the earth, and rain fell upon the dry land, bringing
forth food for the living things which were made. But as yet Jehovah had
not made man upon the earth.




