CHAPTER V.

_On the Excellence of Christianity in certain important Particulars.
Argument which results thence in Proof of its divine Origin._


The writer of the present work, having now completed a faint delineation
of the leading features of real Christianity, may be permitted to
suspend for a few moments the farther execution of his plan, for the
purpose of pointing out some excellences which she really possesses; but
which, as they are not to be found in that superficial system which so
unworthily usurps her name, appear scarcely to have attracted sufficient
notice. If he should seem to be deviating from the plan which he
proposed to himself, he would suggest as his excuse; that the
observations which he is about to offer will furnish a strong argument,
in favour of the correctness of his preceding delineation of
Christianity, since she will _now_ appear to exhibit more clearly, than
as she is usually drawn, the characters of her Divine original.

It holds true, indeed, in the case of Christianity, as in that of all
the works of God, that though a superficial and cursory view cannot
fail to discover to us somewhat of their beauty; yet, when on a more
careful and accurate scrutiny we become better acquainted with their
properties, we become also more deeply impressed by a conviction of
their excellence. We may begin by referring to the last chapter for an
instance of the truth of this assertion. Therein was pointed out that
intimate connection, that perfect harmony, between the leading doctrines
and the practical precepts of Christianity, which is apt to escape the
attention of the ordinary eye.

It may not be improper also to remark, though the position be so obvious
as almost to render the statement of it needless, that there is the same
close connection and perfect harmony in the leading doctrines of
Christianity among each other. It is self-evident, that the corruption
of human nature, that our reconciliation to God by the atonement of
Christ, and that the restoration of our primitive dignity by the
sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit, are all parts of one whole,
united in close dependence and mutual congruity.

Perhaps, however, it has not been sufficiently noticed, that in the
chief practical precepts of Christianity, there is the same essential
agreement, the same mutual dependency of one upon another. Let us survey
this fresh instance of the wisdom of that system, which is the only
solid foundation of our present or future happiness.

The virtues most strongly and repeatedly enjoined in Scripture, and by
our progress in which we may best measure our advancement in holiness,
are the fear and love of God and of Christ; love, kindness, and meekness
towards our fellow-creatures; indifference to the possessions and
events of this life, in comparison with our concern about eternal
things; self-denial, and humility.

It has been already pointed out in many particulars, how essentially
such of these Christian graces as respect the Divine Being are connected
with those, which have more directly for their objects our
fellow-creatures and ourselves. But in the case of these two last
descriptions of Christian graces; the more attentively we consider them
with reference to the acknowledged principles of human nature, and to
indisputable facts, the more we shall be convinced that they afford
mutual aid towards the acquisition of each other; and that when
acquired, they all harmonize with each other in perfect and essential
union. This truth may perhaps be sufficiently apparent from what has
been already remarked; but it may not be useless to dwell on it a little
more in detail. Take then the instances of loving-kindness and meekness
towards others; and observe the solid foundation which is laid for them
in self-denial, in moderation as to the good things of this life, and in
humility. The chief causes of enmity among men are, pride and
self-importance, the high opinion which men entertain of themselves, and
the consequent deference which they exact from others: the
over-valuation of worldly possessions and of worldly honours, and in
consequence, a too eager competition for them. The rough edges of one
man rub against those of another, if the expression may be allowed; and
the friction is often such as to injure the works, and disturb the just
arrangements and regular motions of the social machine. But by
Christianity all these roughnesses are filed down: every wheel rolls
round smoothly in the performance of its appointed function, and there
is nothing to retard the several movements, or break in upon the general
order. The religious system indeed of the bulk of nominal Christians is
satisfied with some tolerable appearances of virtue: and accordingly,
while it recommends love and beneficence, it tolerates, as has been
shewn, pride and vanity in many cases; it even countenances and commends
the excessive valuation of character; and at least allows a man's whole
soul to be absorbed in the pursuit of the object which he is following,
be it what it may of personal or professional success. But though these
latter qualities may, for the most part, fairly enough consist with a
soft exterior and courtly demeanor, they cannot so well accord with the
genuine internal principle of love. Some cause of discontent, some
ground of jealousy or of envy will arise, some suspicion will corrode,
some disappointment will sour, some slight or calumny will irritate and
provoke reprisals. In the higher walks of life, indeed, we learn to
disguise our emotions; but such will be the real inward feelings of the
soul, and they will frequently betray themselves when we are off our
guard, or when we are not likely to be disparaged by the discovery. This
state of the higher orders, in which men are scuffling eagerly for the
same objects, and wearing all the while such an appearance of sweetness
and complacency, has often appeared to me to be not ill illustrated by
the image of a gaming table. There, every man is intent only on his own
profit; the good success of one is the ill success of another, and
therefore the general state of mind of the parties engaged may be pretty
well conjectured. All this, however, does not prevent, in well-bred
societies, an exterior of perfect gentleness and good humour. But let
the same employment be carried on among the lower orders, who are not so
well schooled in the art of disguising their feelings; or in places
where, by general connivance, people are allowed to give vent to their
real emotions; and every passion will display itself, by which the
"human face divine" can be distorted and deformed. For those who never
have been present at so humiliating a scene, the pencil of Hogarth has
provided a representation of it, which is scarcely exaggerated; and the
horrid name[105], by which it is familiarly known among its frequenters,
sufficiently attests the fidelity of its resemblance.

But Christianity is not satisfied with producing merely the specious
guise of virtue. She requires the substantial reality, which may stand
the scrutinizing eye of that Being "who searches the heart." Meaning
therefore that the Christian should live and breathe; in an atmosphere,
as it were, of benevolence, she forbids whatever can tend to obstruct
its diffusion or vitiate its purity. It is on this principle that
Emulation is forbidden: for, besides that this passion almost insensibly
degenerates into envy, and that it derives its origin chiefly from pride
and a desire of self-exaltation; how can we easily love our neighbour as
ourselves, if we consider him at the same time our rival, and are intent
upon surpassing him in the pursuit of whatever is the subject of our
competition?

Christianity, again, teaches us not to set our hearts on earthly
possessions and earthly honours; and thereby provides for our really
loving, or even cordially forgiving, those who have been more successful
than ourselves in the attainment of them, or who have even designedly
thwarted us in the pursuit. "Let the rich," says the Apostle, "rejoice
in that he is brought low." How can he who means to attempt, in any
degree, to obey this precept, be irreconcilably hostile towards any one
who may have been instrumental in his depression?

Christianity also teaches us not to prize human estimation at a very
high rate; and thereby provides for the practice of her injunction, to
love from the heart those who, justly or unjustly, may have attacked our
reputation, and wounded our character. She commands not the shew, but
the reality of meekness and gentleness; and by thus taking away the
aliment of anger and the fomenters of discord, she provides for the
maintenance of peace, and the restoration of good temper among men, when
it may have sustained a temporary interruption.

It is another capital excellence of Christianity, that she values moral
attainments at a far higher rate than intellectual acquisitions, and
proposes to conduct her followers to the heights of virtue rather than
of knowledge. On the contrary, most of the false religious systems which
have prevailed in the world, have proposed to reward the labour of their
votary, by drawing aside the veil which concealed from the vulgar eye
their hidden mysteries, and by introducing him to the knowledge of their
deeper and more sacred doctrines.

This is eminently the case in the Hindoo, and in the Mahometan Religion,
in that of China, and, for the most part, in the various modifications
of ancient Paganism. In systems which proceed on this principle, it is
obvious that the bulk of mankind can never make any great proficiency.
There was accordingly, among the nations of antiquity, one system,
whatever it was, for the learned, and another for the illiterate. Many
of the philosophers spoke out, and professed to keep the lower orders in
ignorance for the general good; plainly suggesting that the bulk of
mankind was to be considered as almost of an inferior species. Aristotle
himself countenanced this opinion. An opposite mode of proceeding
naturally belongs to Christianity, which without distinction professes
an equal regard for all human beings, and which was characterized by her
first Promulgator as the messenger of "glad tidings to the poor."

But her preference of moral to intellectual excellence is not to be
praised, only because it is congenial with her general character, and
suitable to the ends which she professes to have in view. It is the part
of true wisdom to endeavour to excel there, where we may really attain
to excellence. This consideration might be alone sufficient to direct
our efforts to the acquisition of virtue rather than of knowledge.--How
limited is the range of the greatest human abilities! how scanty the
stores of the richest human knowledge! Those who undeniably have held
the first rank, both for natural and acquired endowments, instead of
thinking their pre-eminence a just ground of self-exaltation, have
commonly been the most forward to confess that their views were bounded
and their attainments moderate. Had they indeed been less candid, this
is a discovery which we could not have failed to make of ourselves.
Experience daily furnishes us with examples of weakness, and
short-sightedness, and error, in the wisest and the most learned of men,
which might serve to confound the pride of human wisdom.

Not so in morals.--Made at first in the likeness of God, and still
bearing about us some faint traces of our high original, we are offered
by our blessed Redeemer the means of purifying ourselves from our
corruptions, and of once more regaining the image of our Heavenly
Father[106]. In love, the compendious expression for almost every
virtue, in fortitude under all its forms, in justice, in humility, and
in all the other graces of the Christian character, we are made capable
of attaining to heights of real elevation: and were we but faithful in
the use of the means of grace which we enjoy; the operations of the Holy
Spirit, prompting and aiding our diligent endeavours, would infallibly
crown our labours with success, and make us partakers of a Divine
nature. The writer has himself known some who have been instances of the
truth of this remark. To the memory of one,[107] now no more, may he be
permitted to offer the last tribute of respectful friendship? His
course, short but laborious, has at length terminated in a better world;
and his luminous tract still shines in the sight, and animates the
efforts of all who knew him, and "marshals them the way" to Heavenly
glory. Let me not be thought to undervalue any of the gifts of God, or
of the fruits of human exertion: but let not these be prized beyond
their proper worth. If one of those little industrious reptiles, to
which we have been well sent for a lesson of diligence and foresight,
were to pride itself upon its strength, because it could carry off a
larger grain of wheat than any other of its fellow-ants; should we not
laugh at the vanity which could be highly gratified with such a
contemptible pre-eminence? And is it far different to the eye of reason,
when man, weak, short-sighted man, is vain of surpassing others in
knowledge, in which at best his progress must be so limited; forgetting
the true dignity of his nature, and the path which would conduct him to
real excellence?

The unparalleled value of the precepts of Christianity ought not be
passed over altogether unnoticed in this place, though it be needless to
dwell on it; since it has been often justly recognized and asserted, and
has in some points been ably illustrated, and powerfully enforced by the
masterly pen of a late writer. It is by no means however the design of
this little work to attempt to trace the various excellencies of
Christianity; but it may not have been improper to point out a few
particulars, which, in the course of investigation, have naturally
fallen under our notice, and hitherto perhaps may scarcely have been
enough regarded. Every such instance, it should always be remembered, is
a fresh proof of Christianity being a revelation from God.

It is still less, however, the intention of the writer to attempt to
vindicate the Divine origin of our Holy Religion. This task has often
been executed by far abler advocates. In particular, every Christian,
with whatever reserves his commendations must be disqualified, should be
forward to confess his obligations _on this head_ to the author before
alluded to; whose uncommon acuteness has enabled him, in a field already
so much trodden, to discover arguments which had eluded the observation
of all by whom he was preceded, and whose unequalled perspicuity puts
his reader in complete possession of the fruits of his sagacity.
Anxious, however, in my little measure, to contribute to the support of
this great cause, may it be permitted me to state one argument, which
impresses my mind with particular force. This is, the great variety of
the _kinds_ of evidence which have been adduced in proof of
Christianity, and the confirmation thereby afforded of its truth:--the
proof from prophecy--from miracles--from the character of Christ--from
that of his Apostles--from the nature of the doctrines of
Christianity--from the nature and excellence of her _practical
precepts_--from the accordance we have lately pointed out between the
doctrinal and practical system of Christianity, whether considered each
in itself or in their mutual relation to each other--from other species
of internal evidence, afforded in the more abundance in proportion as
the sacred records have been scrutinized with greater care--from the
account of co-temporary or nearly co-temporary writers--from the
impossibility of accounting on any other supposition, than that of the
truth of Christianity, for its promulgation and early prevalence: these
and other lines of argument have all been brought forward and ably urged
by different writers, in proportion as they have struck the minds of
different observers more or less forcibly. Now, granting that some
obscure and illiterate men, residing in a distant province of the Roman
empire, had plotted to impose a forgery upon the world; though some
foundation for the imposture might, and indeed must, have been attempted
to be laid; it seems, at least to my understanding, morally impossible
that _so many different species of proofs_, and all so strong, should
have lent their _concurrent_ aid, and have united their _joint_ force in
the establishment of the falsehood. It may assist the reader in
estimating the value of this argument, to consider upon how different a
footing, in this respect, has rested every other religious system,
without exception, which was ever proposed to the world; and, indeed,
every other historical fact, of which the truth has been at all
contested.




