CHAPTER IV.

_On the prevailing inadequate Conceptions concerning the Nature and the
Strictness of_ PRACTICAL _Christianity._


SECT. I.

One part of this title may perhaps on the first view excite some
surprise in any one, who may have drawn a hasty inference from the
charges conveyed by the two preceding chapters. Such an one might be
disposed to expect, that they who have very low conceptions of the
corruption of human nature, would be proportionably less indulgent to
human frailty; and that they who lay little stress on Christ's
satisfaction for sin, or on the operations of the Holy Spirit, would be
more high and rigid in their demands of diligent endeavours after
universal holiness; since their scheme implies that we must depend
chiefly on our own exertions and performances for our acceptance with
God.

But any such expectations as these would be greatly disappointed. There
is in fact a region of truth, and a region of errors. They who hold the
fundamental doctrines of Scripture in their due force, hold also in its
due degree of purity the practical system which Scripture inculcates.
But they who explain away the former, soften down the latter also, and
reduce it to the level of their own defective scheme. It is not from any
confidence in the superior amount of their own performances, or in the
greater vigour of their own exertions, that they reconcile themselves to
their low views of the satisfaction of Christ, and of the influence of
the Spirit; but it should rather seem their plan so to depress the
required standard of practice, that no man need fall short of it, that
no superior aid can be wanted for enabling us to attain to it. It
happens however with respect to their simple method of morality, as in
the case of the short ways to knowledge, of which some vain pretenders
have vaunted themselves to be possessed: despising the beaten track in
which more sober and humble spirits have been content to tread, they
have indignantly struck into new and untried paths; but these have
failed of conducting them to the right object, and have issued only in
ignorance and conceit.

It seems in our days to be the commonly received opinion, that provided
a man admit in general terms the truth of Christianity, though he know
not or consider not much concerning the particulars of the system; and
if he be not habitually guilty of any of the grosser vices against his
fellow creatures, we have no great reason to be dissatisfied with him,
or to question the validity of his claim to the name and consequent
privileges of a Christian. The title implies no more than a sort of
formal, general assent to Christianity in the gross, and a degree of
morality in practice, but little if at all superior to that for which we
look in a good Deist, Mussulman, or Hindoo.

If any one be disposed to deny that this is a fair representation of the
religion of the bulk of the Christian world, he might be asked, whether
if it were proved to them beyond dispute that Christianity is a mere
forgery, would this occasion any great change in their conduct or habits
of mind? Would any alteration be made in consequence of this discovery,
except in a few of their speculative opinions, which, when distinct from
practice, it is a part of their own system, as has been before remarked,
to think of little consequence, and in their attendance on public
worship, which however (knowing the good effects of religion upon the
lower orders of the people) they might still think it better to attend
occasionally for example's sake? Would not their regard for their
character, their health, their domestic and social comforts, still
continue to restrain them from vicious excesses, and to prompt them to
persist in the discharge, according to their present measure, of the
various duties of their stations? Would they find themselves
dispossessed of what had been to them hitherto the repository of counsel
and instruction, the rule of their conduct, their habitual source of
peace, and hope, and consolation?

It were needless to put these questions. They are answered in fact
already by the lives of many known unbelievers, between whom and these
professed Christians, even the familiar associates of both, though men
of discernment and observation, would discover little difference either
in conduct or temper of mind. How little then does Christianity deserve
that title to novelty and superiority which has been almost universally
admitted; that pre-eminence, as a practical code, over all other systems
of ethics! How unmerited are the praises which have been lavished upon
it by its friends; praises, in which even its enemies (not in general
disposed to make concessions in its favour) have so often been unwarily
drawn in to acquiesce!

Was it then for this, that the Son of God condescended to become our
instructor and our pattern, leaving us an example that we might tread in
his steps? Was it for this that the apostles of Christ voluntarily
submitted to hunger and nakedness and pain, and ignominy and death, when
forewarned too by their Master that such would be their treatment? That,
after all, their disciples should attain to no higher a strain of virtue
than those who rejecting their Divine authority, should still adhere to
the old philosophy?

But it may perhaps be objected that we are forgetting an observation
which we ourselves have made, that Christianity has raised the general
standard of morals; to which therefore Infidelity herself now finds it
prudent to conform, availing herself of the pure morality of
Christianity, and sometimes wishing to usurp to herself the credit of
it, while she stigmatizes the authors with the epithets of ignorant
dupes or designing impostors!

But let it then be asked, are the motives of Christianity so little
necessary to the practice of it, its principles to its conclusions, that
the one may be spared and yet the other remain in undiminished force?
Still then, its _Doctrines_ are no more than a barren and inapplicable
or at least an unnecessary theory, the place of which, it may perhaps be
added, would be well supplied by a more simple and less costly scheme.

But can it be? Is Christianity then reduced to a mere creed? Is its
practical influence bounded within a few external plausibilities? Does
its essence consist only in a few speculative opinions, and a few
useless and unprofitable tenets? And can this be the ground of that
portentous distinction, which is so unequivocally made by the Evangelist
between those who accept, and those who reject the Gospel: "He that
believeth on the Son, hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not
the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God abideth on him?" This
were to run into the very error which the bulk of professed Christians
would be most forward to condemn, of making an unproductive faith the
rule of God's future judgment, and the ground of an eternal separation.
Thus not unlike the rival circumnavigators from Spain and Portugal, who
setting out in contrary directions, found themselves in company at the
very time they thought themselves farthest from each other; so the bulk
of professed Christians arrive, though by a different course, almost at
the very same point, and occupy nearly the same station as a set of
enthusiasts, who also rest upon a barren faith, to whom on the first
view they might be thought the most nearly opposite, and whose tenets
they with reason profess to hold in peculiar detestation. By what
pernicious courtesy of language is it, that this wretched system has
been flattered with the name of Christianity.

The morality of the Gospel is not so slight a fabric. Christianity
throughout the whole extent exhibits proofs of its Divine original, and
its practical precepts are no less pure than its doctrines are sublime.
Can the compass of language furnish injunctions stricter in their
measure or larger in their comprehension, than those with which the word
of God abounds; "_Whatsoever_ ye do in _word_ or _deed_, do _all_ in the
name of the Lord Jesus;"--"Be _ye_ holy, _for God is holy_:"--"Be ye
_perfect_ as your Father which is in Heaven is _perfect_?" We are
commanded to _perfect_ holiness, to go on unto _perfection_.

Such are the Scripture admonitions; and surely they to whom such
admonitions are addressed, may not safely acquiesce in low attainments:
a conclusion to which also we are led by the force of the expressions by
which Christians are characterized in Scripture, and by the radical and
thorough change, which is represented as taking place in any man on his
becoming a real Christian. "Every one," it is said, "that hath this
hope, purifieth himself even as God is pure:" true Christians are said
to be "partakers of the Divine nature;"--"to be created anew in the
image of God;"--"to be temples of the Holy Ghost;" the effects of which
must appear "in _all_ goodness and righteousness and truth."

Great as was the progress which the apostle Paul had made in all virtue,
he declares of himself that _he_ still presses forward, "forgetting the
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto the things which are
before." He prays for his beloved disciples, "that they may be _filled_
with _all_ the fulness of God;" that they may be _filled_ "with the
fruits of righteousness:" "that they might walk worthy of the Lord unto
_all_ pleasing, being fruitful in _every_ good work." Nor is it a less
pregnant and comprehensive petition, which, from our blessed Saviour's
inserting it in that form of prayer which he has given as a model for
our imitation, we may infer ought to be the habitual sentiment of our
hearts; "Thy will be done in Earth _as it is in Heaven_."

These few extracts from the word of God will serve abundantly to
vindicate the _strictness_ of the Christian morality: but this point
will however be still more fully established, when we proceed to
investigate the _nature_, _essence_, and _governing principles_ of the
Christian character.

It is the grand essential practical characteristic of true Christians,
that relying on the promises to repenting sinners of acceptance through
the Redeemer, they have renounced and abjured all other masters, and
have cordially and unreservedly devoted themselves to God. This is
indeed the very figure which baptism daily represents to us: like the
father of Hannibal, we there bring our infant to the altar, we
consecrate him to the service of _his proper owner_, and vow _in his
name_ eternal hostilities against all the enemies of his salvation.
After the same manner Christians are become the sworn enemies of sin;
they will henceforth hold no parley with it, they will allow it in no
shape, they will admit it to no composition; the war which they have
denounced against it, is cordial, universal, irreconcilable.

But this not all--It is now their determined purpose to yield themselves
without reserve to the reasonable service of their rightful Sovereign.
"They are not their own:"--their bodily and mental faculties, their
natural and acquired endowments, their substance, their authority, their
time, their influence; all these, they consider as belonging to them,
not for their own gratification, but as so many instruments to be
consecrated to the honour and employed in the service of God. This must
be the master principle to which every other must be subordinate.
Whatever may have been hitherto their ruling passion; whatever hitherto
their leading pursuit; whether sensual, or intellectual, of science, of
taste, of fancy, or of feeling, it must now possess but a secondary
place; or rather (to speak more correctly) it must exist only at the
pleasure, and be put altogether under the controul and direction, of its
true and legitimate superior.

Thus it is the prerogative of Christianity "to bring into captivity
_every thought_ to the obedience of Christ." They who really feel its
power, are resolved (in the language of Scripture) "to live no longer to
themselves, but to him that died for them;" they know indeed their own
infirmities; they know, that the way on which they have entered is
strait and difficult, but they know too the encouraging assurance,
"They who wait on the Lord shall renew their strength;" and relying on
this animating declaration, they deliberately purpose that, so far as
they may be able, the grand governing maxim of their future lives shall
be, "_to do all to the glory of God_."

Behold here the seminal principle, which contains within it, as in an
embryo state, the rudiments of all true virtue; which, striking deep its
roots, though feeble perhaps and lowly in its beginnings, silently
progressive; and almost insensibly maturing, yet will shortly, even in
the bleak and churlish temperature of this world, lift up its head and
spread abroad its branches, bearing abundant fruits; precious fruits of
refreshment and consolation, of which the boasted products of philosophy
are but sickly imitations, void of fragrance and of flavour. But,

    Igneus est ollis vigor & _coelestis_ origo.

At length it shall be transplanted into its native region, and enjoy a
more genial climate, and a kindlier soil; and, bursting forth into full
luxuriance, with unfading beauty and unexhausted odours, shall flourish
for ever in the paradise of God.

But while the servants of Christ continue in this life, glorious as is
the issue of their labours, they receive but too many humiliating
memorials of their remaining imperfections, and they daily find reason
to confess, that they cannot do the things that they would. Their
_determination_, however, is still unshaken, and it is the fixed desire
of their hearts to improve in _all holiness_--and this, let it be
observed, on many accounts. Various passions concur to push them
forward; they are urged on by the dread of failure, in this arduous but
necessary work; they trust not, where their all is at stake, to lively
emotions, or to internal impressions however warm; the example of Christ
is their pattern, the word of God is their rule; there they read, that
"without holiness no man shall see the Lord." It is the description of
real Christians, that "they are gradually changed into the image of
their Divine Master;" and they dare not allow themselves to believe
their title sure, except so far as they can discern in themselves the
growing traces of this blessed resemblance.

It is not merely however the fear of misery, and the desire of
happiness, by which they are actuated in their endeavours to excel in
all holiness; they love it for its own sake: nor is it _solely_ by the
sense of self-interest (this, though often unreasonably condemned, is
but it must be confessed a principle of an inferior order) that they are
influenced in their determination to obey the will, and to cultivate the
favour of God. This determination has its foundations indeed in a deep
and humiliating sense of his exalted Majesty and infinite power, and of
their own extreme inferiority and littleness, attended with a settled
conviction of its being their duty as his creatures, to submit in all
things to the will of their great Creator. But these awful impressions
are relieved and ennobled by an admiring sense of the infinite
perfections and infinite amiableness of the Divine Character; animated
by a confiding though humble hope of his fatherly kindness and
protection; and quickened by the grateful recollection of immense and
continually increasing obligations. This is the Christian love of God! A
love compounded of admiration, of preference, of hope, of trust, of
joy; chastised by reverential awe, and wakeful with continual gratitude.

I would here express myself with caution, lest I should inadvertently
wound the heart of some weak but sincere believer. The elementary
principles which have been above enumerated, may exist in various
degrees and proportions. A difference in natural disposition, in the
circumstances of the past life, and in numberless other particulars, may
occasion a great difference in the predominant tempers of different
Christians. In one the love, in another the fear of God may have the
ascendency; trust in one, and in another gratitude; but in greater or
less degrees, a cordial complacency in the sovereignty, an exalted sense
of the perfections, a grateful impression of the goodness, and a humble
hope of the favour of the Divine Being, are common to them
all.--Common--the determination to devote themselves without exceptions,
to the service and glory of God.--Common--the desire of holiness and of
continual progress towards perfection.--Common--an abasing consciousness
of their own unworthiness, and of their many remaining infirmities,
which interpose so often to corrupt the simplicity of their intentions,
to thwart the execution of their purer purposes, and frustrate the
resolutions of their better hours.

But some perhaps, who will not directly and in the gross oppose the
conclusions for which we have been contending, may endeavour to elude
them. It may be urged, that to represent them as of general application,
is going much too far; and however true in the case of some individuals
of a higher order, it may be asserted they are not applicable to
ordinary Christians; from these so much will not surely be expected; and
here perhaps there may be a secret reference to that supposed
mitigation of the requisitions of the divine Law under the Christian
dispensation, which was formerly noticed. This is so important a point
that it ought not to be passed over: let us call in the authority of
Scripture; at the same time, not to tire the patience of our readers,
but a few passages shall be cited, and we must refer to the word of God
itself those who wish for fuller satisfaction. The difficulty here is
not to find proofs, but to select with discretion from the multitude
which pour in upon us. Here also, as in former instances, the positive
injunctions of Scripture are confirmed and illustrated by various
considerations and inferences, suggested by other parts of the sacred
Writings, all tending to the same infallible conclusion.

In the first place, the precepts are expressed in the broadest and most
general terms; there is no hint given, that any persons are at liberty
to conceive themselves exempted from the obligation of them; and in any
who are disposed to urge such a plea of exemption, it may well excite
the most serious apprehension to consider how the plea would be received
by an earthly tribunal: no weak argument this to any who are acquainted
with the Scriptures, and who know how often God is there represented as
reasoning with mankind on the principles, which they have established
for their dealings with each other.

But in the next place the precepts in question contain within themselves
abundant proofs of their _universal_ application, inasmuch as they are
grounded on circumstances and relations common to _all_ Christians, and
of the benefits of which, even our Objectors themselves (though they
would evade the practical deductions from them) would not be willing to
relinquish their share. Christians "are not their own," because "_they
are bought with a price_;" they are not "to live unto themselves, but
_to him that died for them_;" they are commanded to do the most
difficult duties, "that they may be the children of their Father which
is in heaven;" and "except a man _be born again of the Spirit_" (thus
again becoming one of the sons of God) "_he cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven_." It is "_because they are sons_," that God has given
them what in Scripture language is styled _the Spirit of adoption_. It
is only of "as many _as are led by the Spirit of God_," that it is
declared that "they are the sons of God;" and we are expressly warned
(in order as it were to prevent any such loose profession of
Christianity as that which we are here combating) "_If any man_ have not
the Spirit of Christ, _he is none of his_." In short, Christians in
general are every where denominated _the servants and the children_ of
God, and are required to serve him with that submissive obedience, and
that affectionate promptitude of duty, which belong to those endearing
relations.

Estimate next, the force of that well known passage--"Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with _all_ thy heart, and with _all_ thy mind, and with
_all_ thy soul, and with _all_ thy strength!" The injunction is
multiplied on us, as it were, to silence the sophistry of the caviller,
and to fix the most inconsiderate mind. And though, for the sake of
argument, we should concede for the present, that, under _the
qualifications formerly suggested_, an _ardent_ and _vigorous_ affection
were not indispensably required of us; yet surely if the words have any
meaning at all, the least which can be intended by them is that settled
predominant esteem and cordial preference for which we are now
contending. The conclusion which this passage forces on us, is
strikingly confirmed by other parts of Scripture, wherein the love of
God is positively commended to the _whole_ of a Christian church[68]; or
wherein the want of it[69], or wherein its not being the chief and
ruling affection, is charged on persons professing themselves
Christians, as being sufficient to disprove their claim to that
appellation, or as being equivalent to denying it[70]. Let not therefore
any deceive themselves by imagining, that only an absolute unqualified
renunciation of the desire of the favour of God is _here_ condemned. God
will not accept of a _divided_ affection; a _single_ heart, and a
_single_ eye are in express terms declared to be indispensably required
of us. We are ordered, under the figure of amassing heavenly treasure,
to make the favour and service of God our _chief_ pursuit, for this very
reason, because "_where our treasure is, there will our hearts be
also_." It is on this principle that in speaking of particular vices,
such phrases are often used in Scripture, as suggest that their
criminality mainly consists in drawing away the HEART from Him who is
the just object of its preference; and that sins, which we might think
very different in criminality, are classed together, because they all
agree in this grand character. Nor is this preference asserted only over
affections which are vicious in themselves, and to which therefore
Christianity might well be supposed hostile; but over those also which
in their just measure are not only lawful, but even most strongly
enjoined on us. "He that loveth father and mother more than me," says
our blessed Saviour, "is not worthy of me;" "and he that loveth son or
daughter more than me, is not worthy of me[71]." The spirit of these
injunctions harmonizes with many commendations in Scripture of zeal for
the honour of God; as well as with that strong expression of disgust and
abhorrence with which the lukewarm, those that are neither cold nor hot,
are spoken of as being more loathsome and offensive than even open and
avowed enemies.

Another class of instances tending to the same point is furnished by
those many passages of Scripture, wherein the promoting of _the glory_
of God is commanded as our supreme and universal aim, and wherein the
honour due unto _Him_ is declared to be that in which He will allow no
competitor to participate. On this head indeed the Holy Scriptures are,
if possible, more peremptory than on the former; and at the same time so
full as to render particular citations unnecessary, in the case of any
one who has ever so little acquaintance with the word of God.

To put the same thing therefore in another light. All who have read the
Scriptures must confess that idolatry is the crime against which God's
highest resentment is expressed, and his severest punishment denounced.
But let us not deceive ourselves. It is not in bowing the knee to idols
that idolatry consists, so much as in the internal homage of the heart;
as in the feeling towards them of any of that supreme love, or
reverence, or gratitude, which God reserves to himself as his own
exclusive prerogative. On the same principle, whatever else draws off
the heart from him, engrosses our prime regard, and holds the chief
place in our esteem and affections, _that_, in the estimation of reason,
is no less an idol to us, than an image of wood or stone would be;
before which we should fall down and worship. Think not this a strained
analogy; it is the very language and argument of inspiration. The
servant of God is commanded not to set up his idol in his _Heart_; and
sensuality and covetousness are repeatedly termed _Idolatry_. The same
God who declares--"My glory will I not give to another, neither my
praise _to graven images_," declares also--"Let not the wise man glory
in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man _glory_ in his might; let not
the rich man _glory_ in his riches[72]." "No flesh may _glory_ in his
presence;" "he that _glorieth_, let him glory in the Lord." The sudden
vengeance by which the vain-glorious ostentation of Herod was punished,
when, acquiescing in the servile adulation of an admiring multitude, "he
gave not God the _glory_," is a dreadful comment on these injunctions.

These awful declarations, it is to be feared, are little regarded. Let
the Great, and the Wise, and the Learned, and the Successful lay them
seriously to heart, and labour habitually to consider their superiority,
whether derived from nature, or study, or fortune, as the unmerited
bounty of God. This reflection will naturally tend to produce a
disposition, instead of that proud self complacency so apt to grow upon
the human heart, in all respects opposite to it; a disposition
honourable to God, and useful to man, a temper composed of reverence,
humility, and gratitude, and delighting to be engaged in the praises,
and employed in the benevolent service of the universal Benefactor.

But, to return to our subject, it only remains to be remarked, that here
as in the former instances, the characters of the righteous and of the
wicked, as delineated in Scripture, exactly correspond with the
representations which have been given of the Scripture injunctions.

The necessity of this cordial unreserved devotedness to the glory and
service of God, as being indispensable to the character of the true
Christian, has been insisted on at the greater length, not only on
account of its own extreme importance, but also because it appears to be
a duty too generally overlooked. Once well established, it will serve as
a fundamental principle both for the government of the heart and
regulation of the conduct; and will prove eminently useful in the
decision of many practical cases, which it might be difficult to bring
under the undisputed operation of any subordinate or appropriate rule.


SECT. II.

And now, having endeavoured to establish the strictness, and to
ascertain the essential character of true practical Christianity, let us
investigate a little more in detail the practical system of the bulk of
professed Christians among ourselves[73].

It was formerly remarked, that the whole subject of Religion was often
viewed from such a distance as to be seen only in the gross. We now, it
is to be feared, shall find too much cause for believing that they who
approach a little nearer, and do discover in Christianity somewhat of a
distinct form, yet come not close enough to discern her peculiar
lineaments and conformation. The writer must not be understood to mean
that the several misconceptions, which he shall have occasion to point
out, will be generally found to exist with any thing like precision,
much less that they are regularly digested into a system; nor will it be
expected they all should meet in the same person, nor that they will not
be found in different people, and under different circumstances,
variously blended, combined, and modified. It will be enough if we
succeed in tracing out great and general outlines. The human countenance
may be well described by its general characters, though infinitely
varied by the peculiarities which belong to different individuals, and
often by such shades and minutenesses of difference, as though
abundantly obvious to our perceptions, it would exceed the power of
definition to discriminate, or even of language to express.

A very erroneous notion appears to prevail concerning the true nature of
Religion. Religion, agreeably to what has been already stated, (the
importance of the subject will excuse repetition) may be considered as
the implantation of a vigorous and active principle; it is seated in
the heart, where its authority is recognized as supreme, whence by
degrees it expels whatever is opposed to it, and where it gradually
brings all the affections and desires under its complete controul and
regulation.

But though the heart be its special residence, it may be said to possess
in a degree the ubiquity of its Divine Author. Every endeavour and
pursuit must acknowledge its presence; and whatever does not, or will
not, or cannot receive its sacred stamp, is to be condemned as
inherently defective, and is to be at once abstained from or abandoned.
It is like the principle of vitality, which, animating and informing
every part, lives throughout the whole of the human body, and
communicates its kindly influence to the smallest and remotest fibres of
the frame. But the notion of Religion entertained by many among us seems
altogether different. They begin indeed, in submission to her clear
prohibitions, by fencing off from the field of human action, a certain
district, which, though it in many parts bear fruits on which they cast
a longing eye, they cannot but confess to be forbidden ground. They next
assign to Religion a portion, larger or smaller according to whatever
may be their circumstances and views, in which however she is to possess
merely a qualified jurisdiction, and having so done, they conceive that
without let or hindrance they have a right to range at will over the
spacious remainder. Religion can claim only a stated proportion of their
thoughts, and time, and fortune, and influence; and of these, or perhaps
of any of them, if they make her any thing of a liberal allowance, she
may well be satisfied: the rest is now their own to do what they will
with; they have paid their tythes, say rather their composition, the
demands of the Church are satisfied, and they may surely be permitted to
enjoy what she has left without molestation or interference.

It is scarcely possible to state too strongly the mischief which results
from this fundamental error. At the same time its consequences are so
natural and obvious, that one would think it scarcely possible not to
foresee that they must infallibly follow. The greatest part of human
actions is considered as indifferent. If men are not chargeable with
actual vices, and are decent in the discharge of their religious duties;
if they do not stray into the forbidden ground, if they respect the
rights of the conceded allotment, what more can be expected from them?
Instead of keeping at a distance from _all sin_, in which alone consists
our safety, they will be apt not to care how near they approach what
they conceive to be the boundary line; if they have not actually passed
it, there is no harm done, it is no trespass. Thus the free and active
spirit of Religion is "cribbed and hemmed in;" she is checked in her
disposition to expand her territory, and enlarge the circle of her
influence. She must keep to her prescribed confines, and every attempt
to extend them will be resisted as an encroachment.

But this is not all. Since whatever can be gained from her allotment, or
whatever can be taken in from the forbidden ground, will be so much of
addition to that land of liberty, where men may roam at large, free from
restraint or molestation, they will of course be constantly, and almost
insensibly, straitening and pressing upon the limits of the religious
allotment on the one hand; and on the other, will be removing back a
little farther and farther the fence which abridges them on the side of
the forbidden ground. If Religion attempt for a time to defend her
frontier, she by degrees gives way. The space she occupies diminishes
till it be scarcely discernible; whilst, her spirit extinguished, and
her force destroyed, she is little more than the nominal possessor even
of the contracted limits to which she has been avowedly reduced.

This it is to be feared is but too faithful a representation of the
general state of things among ourselves. The promotion of the glory of
God, and the possession of his favour, are no longer recognized as the
objects of our highest regard, and most strenuous endeavours; as
furnishing to us, a vigorous, habitual, and universal principle of
action. We set up for ourselves: we are become our own masters. The
sense of constant homage and continual service is irksome and galling to
us; and we rejoice in being emancipated from it, as from a state of base
and servile villainage. Thus the very tenure and condition, by which
life and all its possessions are held, undergo a total change: our
faculties and powers are now our own: whatever we have is regarded
rather as a property than as a trust; or if there still exist the
remembrance of some paramount claim, we are satisfied with an occasional
acknowledgment of a nominal right; we pay our pepper corn, and take our
estates to ourselves in full and free enjoyment.

Hence it is that so little sense of responsibility seems attached to the
possession of high rank, or splendid abilities, or affluent fortunes, or
other means or instruments of usefulness. The instructive admonitions,
"give an account of thy stewardship,"--"occupy till I come;" are
forgotten. Or if it be acknowledged by some men of larger views than
ordinary, that a reference is to be had to some principle superior to
that of our own gratification, it is, at best, to the good of society,
or to the welfare of our families: and even then the obligations
resulting from these relations, are seldom enforced on us by any higher
sanctions than those of family comfort, and of worldly interest or
estimation. Besides; what multitudes of persons are there, people
without families, in private stations, or of a retired turn, to whom
they are scarcely held to apply! and what multitudes of cases to which
it would be thought unnecessary scrupulosity to extend them! Accordingly
we find _in fact_, that the generality of mankind among the higher
order, in the formation of their schemes, in the selection of their
studies, in the choice of their place of residence, in the employment
and distribution of their time, in their thoughts, conversation, and
amusements, are considered as being at liberty, if there be no actual
vice, to consult in the main their own gratification.

Thus the generous and wakeful spirit of Christian Benevolence, seeking
and finding every where occasions for its exercise, is exploded, and a
system of _decent selfishness_ is avowedly established in its stead; a
system scarcely more to be abjured for its impiety, than to be abhorred
for its cold insensibility to the opportunities of diffusing happiness.
"Have we no families, or are they provided for? Are we wealthy, and bred
to no profession? Are we young and lively, and in the gaiety and vigour
of youth? Surely we may be allowed to take our pleasure. We neglect no
duty, we live in no vice, we do nobody any harm, and have a right to
amuse ourselves. We have nothing better to do, we wish we had; our time
hangs heavy on our hands for want of it."

I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beer-sheba, and cry "It is all
barren." No man has a right to be idle--Not to speak of that great work
which we all have to accomplish, and surely the _whole_ attention of a
short and precarious life is not more than an eternal interest may well
require; where is it that in such a world as this, health and leisure
and affluence may not find some ignorance to instruct, some wrong to
redress, some want to supply, some misery to alleviate? Shall Ambition
and Avarice never sleep? Shall they never want objects on which to
fasten? Shall they be so observant to discover, so acute to discern, so
eager, so patient to pursue, and shall the Benevolence of Christians
want employment?

Yet thus life rolls away with too many of us in a course of "shapeless
idleness." Its recreations constitute its chief business. Watering
places--the sports of the field--cards! never failing cards!--the
assembly--the theatre--all contribute their aid--amusements are
multiplied, and combined, and varied, "to fill up the void of a listless
and languid life;" and by the judicious use of these different
resources, there is often a kind of sober settled plan of domestic
dissipation, in which with all imaginable decency year after year wears
away in unprofitable vacancy. Even old age often finds us pacing in the
same round of amusements, which our early youth had tracked out.
Meanwhile, being conscious that we are not giving into any flagrant
vice, perhaps that we are guilty of no irregularity, and it may be, that
we are not neglecting the offices of Religion, we persuade ourselves
that we need not be uneasy. In the main we do not fall below the general
standard of morals, of the class and station to which we belong, we may
therefore allow ourselves to glide down the stream without apprehension
of the consequences.

Some, of a character often hardly to be distinguished from the class we
have been just describing, take up with _sensual_ pleasures. The chief
happiness of their lives consists in one species or another of animal
gratification; and these persons perhaps will be found to compose a
pretty large description. It will be remembered, that it belongs not to
our purpose to speak of the grossly and scandalously profligate, who
renounce all pretensions to the name of Christians; but of those who,
maintaining a certain decency of character, and perhaps being tolerably
observant of the forms of Religion, may yet be not improperly termed
_sober sensualists_. These, though less impetuous and more measured, are
not less staunch and steady, than the professed votaries of licentious
pleasure, in the pursuit of their favourite objects. "Mortify the flesh,
with its affections and lusts," is the Christian _precept_; a soft
luxurious course of habitual indulgence, is the _practice_ of the bulk
of modern Christians: and that constant moderation, that wholesome
discipline of restraint and self-denial, which are requisite to prevent
the unperceived encroachments of the inferior appetites, seem altogether
disused, as the exploded austerities of monkish superstition.

Christianity calls her professors to a state of diligent watchfulness
and active services. But the persons of whom we are now speaking,
forgetting alike the duties they owe to themselves and to their
fellow-creatures, often act as though their condition were meant to be a
state of uniform indulgence, and vacant, unprofitable sloth. To multiply
the comforts of affluence, to provide for the gratification of appetite,
to be luxurious without diseases, and indolent without lassitude, seems
the chief study of their lives. Nor can they be clearly exempted from
this class, who, by a common error, substituting the means for the end,
make the preservation of health and spirits, not as instruments of
usefulness, but as sources of pleasure, their great business and
continual care.

Others again seem more to attach themselves to what have been well
termed the 'pomps and vanities of this world.' Magnificent houses, grand
equipages, numerous retinues, splendid entertainments, high and
fashionable connections, appear to constitute, in their estimation, the
supreme happiness of life. This class too, if we mistake not, will be
found numerous in our days; for it must be considered, _that it is the
heart_, _set on these things_, which constitutes the essential
character. It often happens, that persons, to whose rank and station
these indulgences most properly belong, are most indifferent to them.
The undue solicitude about them is more visible in persons of inferior
conditions and smaller fortunes, in whom it is not rarely detected by
the studious contrivances of a misapplied ingenuity to reconcile parade
with oeconomy, and glitter at a cheap rate. But this temper of display
and competition is a direct contrast to the lowly, modest, unassuming
carriage of the true Christian: and wherever there is an evident effort
and struggle to excel in the particulars here in question, a manifest
wish thus to rival superiors, to outstrip equals, to dazzle inferiors;
it is manifest the great end of life, and of all its possessions, is too
little kept in view, and it is to be feared that the gratification of a
vain ostentatious humour is the predominant disposition of the heart.

As there is a sober sensuality, so is there also a sober avarice, and a
sober ambition. The commercial and the professional world compose the
chief sphere of their influence. They are often recognized and openly
avowed as just master principles of action. But where this is not the
case, they assume such plausible shapes, are called by such specious
names, and urge such powerful pleas, that they are received with
cordiality, and suffered to gather strength without suspicion. The
seducing considerations of diligence in our callings, of success in our
profession, of making handsome provisions for our children, beguile our
better judgments. "We rise early, and late take rest, and eat the bread
of carefulness." In our few intervals of leisure, our exhausted spirits
require refreshment; the serious concerns of our immortal souls, are
matters of speculation too grave and gloomy to answer the purpose, and
we fly to something that may better deserve the name of relaxation, till
we are again summoned to the daily labours of our employment.

Meanwhile Religion seldom comes in our way, scarcely occurs to our
thoughts; and when some secret misgivings begin to be felt on this head,
company soon drowns, amusements dissipate, or habitual occupations
insensibly displace or smother the rising apprehension. Professional and
commercial men perhaps, especially when they happen to be persons of
more than ordinary reflection, or of early habits of piety not quite
worn away, easily quiet their consciences by the plea, that necessary
attention to their business leaves them no time to think on these
serious subjects at present. "Men of leisure they confess should
consider them; they themselves will do it hereafter when they retire;
meanwhile they are usefully or at least innocently employed." Thus
business and pleasure fill up our time, and the "one thing needful," is
forgotten. Respected by others, and secretly applauding ourselves,
(perhaps congratulating ourselves that we are not like such an one who
is a spendthrift or a mere man of pleasure, or such another who is a
notorious miser) the true principle of action is no less wanting in us,
and personal advancement or the acquisition of wealth is the object of
our supreme desires and predominant pursuit.

It would be to presume too much on the reader's patience to attempt a
delineation of the characters of the politician, the metaphysician, the
scholar, the poet, the virtuoso, the man of taste, in all their
varieties. Of these and many other classes which might be enumerated,
suffice it to remark, and to appeal to every man's own experience for
the truth of the observation, that they in like manner are often
completely engrossed by the objects of their several pursuits. In many
of these cases indeed a generous spirit surrenders itself wholly up with
the less reserve, and continues absorbed with the fuller confidence,
from the consciousness of not being led to its object by self-interested
motives. Here therefore these men are ardent, active, laborious,
persevering, and they think, and speak, and act, as those, the whole
happiness of whose life turns on the success or failure of their
endeavours. When such, as we have seen it, is the undisturbed composure
of mere triflers, it is less wonderful that the votaries of learning and
of taste, when absorbed in their several pursuits, should be able to
check still more easily any growing apprehension, silencing it by the
suggestion, that they are more than harmlessly, that they are
meritoriously employed. "Surely the thanks of mankind are justly paid to
those more refined spirits who, superior alike to the seductions of
ease, and the temptations of avarice, devote their time and talents to
the less gainful labours of increasing the stores of learning or
enlarging the boundaries of science; who are engaged in raising the
character and condition of society, by improving the liberal arts, and
adding to the innocent pleasures or elegant accomplishments of life."
Let not the writer be so far misunderstood, as to be supposed to
insinuate that Religion is an enemy to the pursuits of taste, much less
to those of learning and of science. Let these have their _due_ place in
the estimation of mankind; but this must not be the _highest_ place. Let
them know their just _subordination_. They deserve not to be the
_primary_ concern, for there is another, to which in importance they
bear no more proportion than our span of existence to eternity.

Thus the supreme desires of the heart, the center to which they should
tend, losing its attractive force, are permitted without controul to
take that course, whatever it may be, which best suits our natural
temper, or to which they are impelled by our various situations and
circumstances. Sometimes they manifestly appear to be almost entirely
confined to a single track; but perhaps more frequently the lines in
which they move are so intermingled and diversified, that it becomes not
a little difficult, even when we look into ourselves, to ascertain the
object by which they are chiefly attracted, or to estimate with
precision the amount of their several forces, in the different
directions in which they move. "Know thyself," is in truth an injunction
with which the careless and the indolent cannot comply. For this
compliance, it is requisite, in obedience to the Scripture precept, "to
keep the heart with all diligence." Mankind are in general deplorably
ignorant of their true state; and there are few perhaps who have any
adequate conception of the real strength of the ties, by which they are
bound to the several objects of their attachment, or who are aware how
small a share of their regard is possessed by those concerns on which it
ought to be supremely fixed.

But if it be indeed true, that except the affections of the soul be
supremely fixed on God; that unless it be _the leading and governing
desire and primary pursuit_ to possess his favour and promote his glory,
we are considered as having transferred our fealty to an usurper, and as
being in fact revolters from our lawful sovereign; if this be indeed the
Scripture doctrine, all the several attachments which have been lately
enumerated, of the different classes of society, wherever they interest
the affections, and possess the soul in any such measure of strength as
deserves to be called _predominance_, are but so many varied expressions
of _disloyalty_. God requires to set up his throne in the heart, and to
reign in it without a rival: if he be kept out of his right, it matters
not by what competitor. The revolt may be more avowed or more secret;
it may be the treason of deliberate preference, or of inconsiderate
levity; we may be the subjects of a more or of a less creditable master;
we may be employed in services more gross or more refined: but whether
the slaves of avarice, of sensuality, of dissipation, of sloth, or the
votaries of ambition, of taste, or of fashion; whether supremely
governed by vanity and self-love, by the desire of literary fame or of
military glory, we are alike estranged from the dominion of our rightful
sovereign. Let not this seem a harsh position; it can appear so only
from not adverting to what was shewn to be the _essential nature_ of
true Religion. He who bowed the knee to the god of medicine or of
eloquence, was no less an idolater than the worshipper of the deified
patrons of lewdness or of theft. In the several cases which have been
specified, the _external acts_ indeed are different; but in _principle_
the disaffection is the same; and unless we return to our allegiance, we
must expect the title, and prepare to meet the punishment, of rebels on
that tremendous day, when all false colours shall be done away, and
(there being no longer any room for the evasions of worldly sophistry,
or the smooth plausibilities of worldly language) "that which is often
highly esteemed amongst men, shall appear to have been abomination in
the sight of God."

These fundamental truths seem vanished from the mind, and it follows of
course, that every thing is viewed less and less through a religious
medium. To speak no longer of instances wherein _we ourselves_ are
concerned, and wherein the unconquerable power of indulged appetite may
be supposed to beguile our better judgment, or force us on in defiance
of it; not to insist on the motives by which the conduct of men is
determined, often avowedly, in what are to _themselves_ the most
important incidents of life; what are the judgments which they form in
the case of _others_? Idleness, profusion, thoughtlessness, and
dissipation, the misapplication of time or of talents, the trifling away
of life in frivolous occupations or unprofitable studies; all these
things we may regret in those around us, in the view of their temporal
effects; but they are not considered in a religious connection, or
lamented as endangering everlasting happiness. Excessive vanity and
inordinate ambition are spoken of as weaknesses rather than as sins;
even covetousness itself, though a hateful passion, yet, if not extreme,
scarcely presents the face of _Irreligion_. Is some friend, or even some
common acquaintance sick, or has some accident befallen him? How
solicitously do we inquire after him, how tenderly do we visit him, how
much perhaps do we regret that he has not better advice, how apt are we
to prescribe for him, and how should we reproach ourselves, if we were
to neglect any means in our power of contributing to his recovery! But
"the mind diseased" is neglected and forgotten--"_that_ is not our
affair; we hope (we do not perhaps really believe) that here it is well
with him." The truth is, we have no solicitude about his spiritual
interest. Here he is treated like the unfortunate traveller in the
Gospel; we look upon him; we see but too well his sad condition, but
(Priest and Levite alike) we pass by on the other side, and leave him to
the officious tenderness of some poor despised Samaritan.

Nay, take the case of our very children, when our hearts being most
interested to promote their happiness, we must be supposed most desirous
of determining on right principles, and where therefore the real
standard of our deliberate judgments may be indisputably ascertained: in
their education and marriage, in the choice of their professions, in our
comparative consideration and judgment of the different parts of their
several characters, how little do we reflect that they are immortal
beings! Health, learning, credit, the amiable and agreeable qualities,
above all, fortune and success in life, are taken, and not unjustly
taken, into the account; but how small a share in forming our opinions
is allowed to the probable effect which may be produced on their eternal
interests! Indeed the subjects of our mutual inquiries, and
congratulations, and condolences, prove but too plainly what
considerations are in these cases uppermost in our thoughts.

Such are the fatal and widely spreading effects, which but too naturally
follow from the admission of the grand fundamental error before
mentioned, that of not considering Religion as a principle of universal
application and command. Robbed of its best energies, Religion now takes
the form of a cold compilation of restraints and prohibitions. It is
looked upon simply as a set of penal statutes; these, though wise and
reasonable, are however, so far as they extend, abridgments of our
natural liberty, and nothing which comes to us in this shape is
extremely acceptable:

    Atqui nolint occidere quemquam, posse volunt.

Considering moreover, that the matter of them is not in general very
palatable, and that the partiality of every man where his own cause is
in question, will be likely to make him construe them liberally in his
own favour, we might beforehand have formed a tolerable judgment of the
manner in which they are actually treated. Sometimes we attend to the
words rather than to the spirit of Scripture injunctions, overlooking
the principle they involve, which a better acquaintance with the word of
God would have clearly taught us to infer from them. At others, "the
spirit of an injunction is all;" and this we contrive to collect so
dexterously, as thereby to relax or annul the strictness of the terms.
"Whatever is not expressly forbidden cannot be _very_ criminal; whatever
is not positively enjoined, cannot be indispensably necessary--If we do
not offend against the laws, what more can be expected from us?--The
persons to whom the strict precepts of the Gospel were given, were in
very different circumstances from those in which we are placed. The
injunctions were drawn rather tighter than is quite necessary, in order
to allow for a little relaxation in practice. The expressions of the
sacred Writers are figurative; the Eastern style is confessedly
hyperbolical."

By these and other such dishonest shifts (by which however we seldom
deceive ourselves, except it be in thinking that we deceive others) the
pure but strong morality of the word of God is explained away, and its
too rigid canons are softened down, with as much dexterity as is
exhibited by those who practise a logic of the same complexion, in order
to escape from the obligations of human statutes. Like Swift's
unfortunate Brothers[74], we are sometimes put to difficulties, but our
ingenuity is little inferior to their's. If totidem verbis[75] will not
serve our turn, try totidem syllabis; if totidem syllabis fail, try
totidem literis: then there is in our case, as well as in theirs, "an
allegorical sense" to be adverted to; and if every other resource fail
us, we come at last to the same conclusion as the Brothers adopted, that
after all, those rigorous clauses require some allowance, and a
favourable interpretation, and ought to be understood "cum grano salis."

But when the law both in its spirit and its letter is obstinate and
incorrigible, what we cannot bend to our purpose we must break--"Our
sins we hope are of the smaller order; a little harmless gallantry, a
little innocent jollity, a few foolish expletives which we use from the
mere force of habit, meaning nothing by them; a little warmth of
colouring and licence of expression; a few freedoms of speech in the
gaiety of our hearts, which, though not perhaps strictly correct, none
but the over-rigid would think of treating any otherwise than as venial
infirmities, and in which very grave and religious men will often take
their share, when they may throw off their state, and relax without
impropriety. We serve an all-merciful Being, who knows the frailty of
our nature, the number and strength of our temptations, and will not be
extreme to mark what is done amiss. Even the less lenient judicatures of
human institution concede somewhat to the weakness of man. It is an
established maxim--'De minimis non curat lex.' We hope we are not worse
than the generality. All men are imperfect. We own we have our
infirmities; we confess it is so; we wish we were better, and trust as
we grow older we shall become so; we are ready to acknowledge that we
must be indebted for our admission into a future state of happiness, not
to our own merit, but to the clemency of God, and the mercy of our
Redeemer."

But let not this language be mistaken for that of true Christian
humiliation, of which it is the very essence to feel the burden of sin,
and to long to be released from it: nor let two things be confounded,
than which none can be more fundamentally different, the allowed want of
universality in our determination, and our endeavour to obey the will of
God, and that defective accomplishment of our purposes, which even the
best of men will too often find reason to deplore. In the persons of
whom we have been now speaking, the unconcern with which they can amuse
themselves upon the borders of sin, and the easy familiarity with which
they can actually dally with it in its less offensive shapes, shew
plainly that, distinctly from its consequences, it is by no means the
object of their aversion; that there is no love of holiness as such; no
endeavour to acquire it, no care to prepare the soul for the reception
of this divine principle, and to expel or keep under whatever might be
likely to obstruct its entrance, or dispute its sovereignty.

It is indeed a most lamentable consequence of the practice of regarding
Religion as a compilation of statutes, and not as an internal principle,
that it soon comes to be considered as being conversant about _external
actions_ rather than about _habits of mind_. This sentiment sometimes
has even the hardiness to insinuate and maintain itself under the guise
of extraordinary concern for _practical Religion_; but it soon discovers
the falsehood of this pretension, and betrays its real nature. The
expedient indeed of attaining to superiority in practice, by not wasting
any of the attention on the internal principles from which alone
practice can flow, is about as reasonable, and will answer about as
well, as the oeconomy of the architect, who should account it mere
prodigality to expend any of his materials in laying foundations, from
an idea that they might be more usefully applied to the raising of the
superstructure. We know what would be the fate of such an edifice.

It is indeed true, and a truth never to be forgotten, that all
pretensions to internal principles of holiness are vain when they are
contradicted by the conduct; but it is no less true, that the only
effectual way of improving the latter, is by a vigilant attention to the
former. It was therefore our blessed Saviour's injunction, "Make the
tree good" as the necessary means of obtaining good fruit; and the holy
Scriptures abound in admonitions, to let it be our chief business to
cultivate our hearts with all diligence, to examine into their state
with impartiality, and watch over them with continual care. Indeed it is
the _Heart_ which constitutes the _Man_; and external actions derive
their whole character and meaning from the motives and dispositions of
which they are the indications. Human judicatures, it is true, are
chiefly conversant about the former, but this is only because to our
limited perceptions the latter can seldom be any otherwise clearly
ascertained. The real object of inquiry to human judicatures is the
_internal_ disposition; it is to this that they adapt the nature, and
proportion the degree, of their punishments.

Yet though this be a truth so obvious, so established, that to have
insisted on it may seem almost needless; it is a truth of which we are
apt to lose sight in the review of our religious Character, and with
which the _habit_, of considering Religion as consisting rather in
external actions, than internal principles, is at direct and open war.
This mode of judging may well be termed _habitual_: for though by some
persons it is advisedly adopted, and openly avowed, yet in many cases
for want of due watchfulness, it has stolen insensibly upon the mind; it
exists unsuspected, and is practised, like other habits, without
consciousness or observation.

In what degree soever this pernicious principle prevails, in that degree
is the mischief it produces. The vicious affections, like noxious weeds,
sprout up and increase of themselves but too naturally; while the graces
of the Christian temper, exotics in the soil of the human heart, like
the more tender productions of the vegetable world, though the light and
breath of Heaven must quicken them, require on our part also, in order
to their being preserved in health and vigour, constant superintendence
and assiduous care. But so far from their being earnestly sought for, or
watchfully reared, with unremitted prayers for that Divine Grace,
without which all our labours must be ineffectual; such is the result of
the principle we are here condemning, that no endeavours are used for
their attainment, or they are suffered to droop and die almost without
an effort to preserve them. The culture of the mind is less and less
attended to, and at length perhaps is almost wholly neglected. Way
being thus made for the unobstructed growth of other tempers, the
qualities of which are very different, and often directly opposite,
these naturally overspread and quietly possess the mind; their
contrariety to the Christian spirit not being discerned, and even
perhaps their presence being scarcely acknowledged, except when their
existence and their nature are manifested in the conduct by marks too
plain to be overlooked or mistaken.

Some of the most important branches of the Christian temper, wherein the
bulk of nominal Christians appear eminently and allowedly defective,
have been already noticed in this and in the preceding chapter. Many
others still remain to be particularized.

First then, it is the comprehensive compendium of the character of true
Christians, that "they are walking by faith, and not by sight." By this
description is meant, not merely that they so firmly believe in the
doctrine of future rewards and punishments, as to be influenced by that
persuasion to adhere in the main to the path of duty, though tempted to
forsake it by present interest, and present gratification; but farther,
that the great truths revealed in Scripture concerning the unseen world,
are the ideas for the most part uppermost in their thoughts, and about
which habitually their hearts are most interested. This state of mind
contributes, if the expression may be allowed, to rectify the illusions
of vision, to bring forward into nearer view those eternal things which
from their remoteness are apt to be either wholly overlooked, or to
appear but faintly in the utmost bounds of the horizon; and to remove
backward, and reduce to their true comparative dimensions, the objects
of the present life, which are apt to fill the human eye, assuming a
false magnitude from their vicinity. The true Christian knows from
experience however, that the former are apt to fade from the sight, and
the latter again to swell on it. He makes it therefore his continual
care to preserve those just and enlightened views, which through Divine
mercy he has obtained. Not that he will retire from that station in the
world which Providence seems to have appointed him to fill: he will be
active in the business of life, and enjoy its comforts with moderation
and thankfulness; but he will not be "totus in illis," he will not give
up his whole soul to them, they will be habitually subordinate in his
estimation to objects of more importance. The awful truth has sunk deep
into his mind, "the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal;" and in the tumult and bustle of life,
he is sobered by the still small voice which whispers to him "the
fashion of this world passes away." This circumstance alone must, it is
obvious, constitute a vast difference between the habitual temper of his
mind, and that of the generality of nominal Christians, who are almost
entirely taken up with the concerns of the present world. They _know_
indeed that they are mortal, but they do not _feel_ it. The truth rests
in their understandings, and cannot gain admission into their hearts.
This speculative persuasion is altogether different from that strong
_practical_ impression of the infinite importance of eternal things,
which attended with a proportionate sense of the shortness and
uncertainty of all below, while it prompts to activity from a conviction
that "the night cometh when no man can work," produces a certain
firmness of texture, which hardens us against the buffets of fortune,
and prevents our being very deeply penetrated by the cares and
interests, the goods or evils, of this transitory state. Thus this just
impression of the relative value of temporal and eternal things,
maintains in the soul a dignified composure through all the vicissitudes
of life. It quickens our diligence, yet moderates our ardour; urges us
to just pursuits, yet checks any undue solicitude about the success of
them, and thereby enables us, in the language of Scripture, "to use this
world as not abusing it," rendering us at once beneficial to others and
comfortable to ourselves.

But this is not all--besides the distinction between the nominal and the
real Christian, which results from the impressions produced on them
respectively by the _eternal duration_ of heavenly things, there is
another grounded on their _nature_, no less marked, nor less important.
They are stated in Scripture, not only as entitling themselves to the
notice of the true Christian from considerations of interest, but as
approving themselves to his judgment from a conviction of their
excellence, and yet farther, as recommending themselves to his feelings,
by their being suited to the renewed dispositions of his heart. Indeed
were the case otherwise, did not their qualities correspond with his
inclinations; however he might endure them on principles of duty, and be
coldly conscious of their superior worth, he could not lend himself to
them with cordial complacency, much less look to them as the surest
source of pleasure. But this is the light in which they are habitually
regarded by the true Christian. He walks in the ways of Religion, not
by constraint, but willingly; they are to him not only safe, but
comfortable; "ways of pleasantness as well as of peace." Not but that
here also he is from experience aware of the necessity of constant
support, and continual watchfulness; without these, his old estimate of
things is apt to return on him, and the former objects of his affections
to resume their influence. With earnest prayers, therefore, for the
Divine Help, with jealous circumspection, and resolute self-denial, he
guards against, and abstains from, whatever might be likely again to
darken his _enlightened judgment_, or to vitiate his reformed taste;
thus making it his unwearied endeavour to grow in the knowledge and love
of heavenly things, and to obtain a warmer admiration, and a more
cordial relish of their excellence.

That this is a just representation of the habitual judgment, and of the
leading disposition of true Christians, will be abundantly evident, if,
endeavouring to form ourselves after our proper model, we consult the
sacred Scripture. But in vain are Christians there represented as having
set their _affections_ on things above, as _cordially rejoicing_ in the
service, and delighting in the worship of God. Pleasure and Religion are
contradictory terms with the bulk of nominal Christians. They may look
back indeed on their religious offices with something of a secret
satisfaction, and even feel it during the performance of them, from the
idea of being engaged in the discharge of a duty; but this is altogether
different from the pleasure which attends an employment in itself
acceptable and grateful to us. The writer must here again guard against
being understood to speak of a deficiency in the _warmth_ and
_vehemence_ merely of religious affections. Are the service and worship
of God _pleasant_ to these persons? it is not asked whether they are
_delightful_. Do they diffuse over the soul any thing of that calm
complacency, that mild and grateful composure, which bespeaks a mind in
good humour with itself and all around it, and engaged in a service
suited to its taste, and congenial with its feelings?

Let us appeal to that Day which is especially devoted to the offices of
Religion: Do they joyfully avail themselves of this blessed opportunity
of withdrawing from the business and cares of life; when, without being
disquieted by any doubt whether they are not neglecting the duties of
their proper callings, they may be allowed to detach their minds from
earthly things, that by a fuller knowledge of heavenly objects, and a
more habitual acquaintance with them, their hope may grow more "full of
immortality?" Is the day cheerfully devoted to those holy exercises for
which it was appointed? Do they indeed "come into the courts of God with
gladness?" And how are they employed when not engaged in the public
services of the day? Are they busied in studying the word of God, in
meditating on his perfections, in tracing his providential
dispensations, in admiring his works, in revolving his mercies, (above
all, the transcendent mercies of redeeming love) in singing his praises,
"and speaking good of his name?" Do their secret retirements witness the
earnestness of their prayers and the warmth of their thanksgivings,
their diligence and impartiality in the necessary work of
self-examination, their mindfulness of the benevolent duty of
intercession? Is the kind purpose of the institution of a Sabbath
answered by them, in its being made to their servants and dependents a
season of rest and comfort? Does the instruction of their families, or
of the more poor and ignorant of their neighbours, possess its due share
of their time? If blessed with talents or with affluence, are they
sedulously employing a part of this interval of leisure in relieving the
indigent, and visiting the sick, and comforting the sorrowful, in
forming plans for the good of their fellow-creatures, in considering how
they may promote both the temporal and spiritual benefit of their
friends and acquaintance: or if their's be a larger sphere, in devising
measures whereby through the Divine blessing, they may become the
honoured instruments of the more extended diffusion of religious truth?
In the hours of domestic or social intercourse, does their conversation
manifest the subject of which their hearts are full? Do their language
and demeanor shew them to be more than commonly gentle, and kind, and
friendly, free from rough and irritating passions?

Surely an entire day should not seem long amidst these various
employments. It might well be deemed a privilege thus to spend it, in
the more immediate presence of our Heavenly Father, in the exercises of
humble admiration and grateful homage; of the benevolent, and domestic,
and social feelings, and of all the best affections of our nature,
prompted by their true motives, conversant about their proper objects,
and directed to their noblest end; all sorrows mitigated, all cares
suspended, all fears repressed, every angry emotion softened, every
envious or revengeful or malignant passion expelled; and the bosom, thus
quieted, purified, enlarged, ennobled, partaking almost of a measure of
the Heavenly happiness, and become for a while the seat of love, and
joy, and confidence, and harmony.

The nature, and uses, and proper employments of a Christian Sabbath,
have been pointed out more particularly, not only because the day will
be found, when thus employed, eminently conducive, through the Divine
blessing, to the maintenance of the religious principle in activity and
vigour; but also because we must all have had occasion often to remark,
that many persons, of the graver and more decent sort, seem not seldom
to be nearly destitute of religious resources. The Sunday is with them,
to say the best of it, a _heavy_ day; and that larger part of it, which
is not claimed by the public offices of the church, dully drawls on in
comfortless vacuity, or without improvement is trifled away in vain and
unprofitable discourse. Not to speak of those who by their more daring
profanation of this sacred season, openly violate the laws and insult
the religion of their country, how little do many seem to enter into the
_spirit_ of the institution, who are not wholly inattentive to its
exterior decorums! How glad are they to qualify the rigor of their
religious labours! How hardly do they plead against being compelled to
devote the _whole_ of the day to Religion, claiming to themselves no
small merit for giving up to it a part, and purchasing therefore, as
they hope, a right to spend the remainder more agreeably! How
dexterously do they avail themselves of any plausible plea for
introducing some weekday employment into the Sunday, whilst they have
not the same propensity to introduce any of the Sunday's peculiar
employment into the rest of the week! How often do they find excuses
for taking journeys, writing letters, balancing accounts; or in short
doing something, which by a little management might probably have been
anticipated, or which, without any material inconvenience, might be
postponed! Even business itself is recreation, compared with Religion,
and from the drudgery of this day of Sacred Rest they fly for relief to
their ordinary occupations.

Others again who would consider business as a prophanation, and who
still hold out against the encroachments of the card table, get over
much of the day, and gladly seek for an innocent resource, in the social
circle or in family visits, where it is not even pretended that the
conversation turns on such topics as might render it in any way
conducive to religious instruction, or improvement. Their families
meanwhile are neglected, their servants robbed of Christian privileges,
and their example quoted by others, who cannot see that they are
themselves less religiously employed, while playing an innocent game at
cards, or relaxing in the concert room.

But all these several artifices, _whatever they may be_, _to unhallow_
the Sunday and to change its character (it might be almost said "to
relax its horrors,") prove but too plainly, however we may be glad to
take refuge in Religion, when driven to it by the loss of every other
comfort, and to retain as it were a reversionary interest in an asylum,
which may receive us when we are forced from the transitory enjoyments
of our present state; that _in itself_ it wears to us a gloomy and
forbidding aspect, and not a face of consolation and joy; that the
worship of God is with us a _constrained_ and not a _willing_ service,
which we are glad therefore to abridge though we dare not omit it.

Some indeed there are who with concern and grief will confess this to be
their uncomfortable and melancholy state; who humbly pray, and
diligently endeavour, for an imagination less distracted at devotional
seasons, for a heart more capable of relishing the excellence of divine
things; and who carefully guard against whatever has a tendency to chain
down their affections to earthly enjoyments. Let not such be
discouraged. It is not they whom we are condemning: but such as knowing
and even acknowledging this to be their case, yet proceed in a way
directly contrary: who, scarcely seeming to suspect that any thing is
wrong with them, voluntarily acquiesce in a state of mind which is
directly contrary to the positive commands of God, which forms a perfect
contrast to the representations given us in Scripture of the Christian
character, and accords but too faithfully in one leading feature with
the character of those, who are stated to be the objects of Divine
displeasure in this life, and of Divine punishment in the next.

It is not however only in these essential constituents of a devotional
frame that the bulk of nominal Christians are defective. This they
freely declare (secretly feeling perhaps some complacency from the
frankness of the avowal) to be a higher strain of piety than that to
which they aspire. Their forgetfulness also of some of the leading
dispositions of Christianity, is undeniably apparent in their allowed
want of the spirit of kindness, and meekness, and gentleness, and
patience, and long suffering; and above all, of that which is the stock
on which alone these dispositions can grow and flourish, that
_humility_ and _lowliness of mind_, in which perhaps more than in any
other quality may be said to consist the true essence and vital
principle of the Christian temper. These dispositions are not only
neglected, but even disavowed and exploded, and their opposites, if not
rising to any great height, are acknowledged and applauded. _A just
pride, a proper and becoming pride_, are terms which we daily hear from
Christian lips. To possess _a high spirit_, to behave with _a proper
spirit_ when used ill,--by which is meant a quick feeling of injuries,
and a promptness in resenting them,--entitles to commendation; and a
meek-spirited disposition, the highest Scripture eulogium, expresses
ideas of disapprobation and contempt. Vanity and vain glory are suffered
without interruption to retain their natural possession of the heart.
But here a topic opens upon us of such importance, and on which so many
mistakes are to be found both in the writings of respectable authors,
and in the commonly prevailing opinions of the world, that it may be
allowed us to discuss it more at large, and for this purpose to treat of
it in a separate section.


SECTION III.

_On the Desire of human Estimation and Applause--The generally
prevailing Opinions contrasted with those of the true Christian._

The desire of human estimation, and distinction, and honour, of the
admiration and applause of our fellow creatures, if we take it in its
full comprehension, and in all its various modifications, from the
thirst of glory to the dread of shame, is the passion of which the
empire is by far the most general, and perhaps the authority the most
commanding. Though its power be most conspicuous and least controulable
in the higher classes of society, it seems, like some resistless
conqueror, to spare neither age, nor sex, nor condition; and taking ten
thousand shapes, insinuating itself under the most specious pretexts,
and sheltering itself when necessary under the most artful disguises, it
winds its way in secret, when it dares not openly avow itself, and mixes
in all we think, and speak, and do. It is in some instances the
determined and declared pursuit, and confessedly the main practical
principle; but where this is not the case, it is not seldom the grand
spring of action, and in the Beauty and the Author, no less than in the
Soldier, it is often the master passion of the soul.

This is the principle which parents recognize with joy in their infant
offspring, which is diligently instilled and nurtured in advancing
years, which, under the names of honourable ambition and of laudable
emulation, it is the professed aim of schools and colleges to excite and
cherish. The writer is well aware that it will be thought he is pushing
his opinions much too far, when he ventures to assail this great
principle of human action; "a principle," its advocates might perhaps
exclaim, "the extinction of which, if you could succeed in your rash
attempt, would be like the annihilation in the material world of the
principle of motion; without it all were torpid and cold and
comfortless. We grant," they might go on to observe, "that we never
ought to deviate from the paths of duty in order to procure the applause
or to avoid the reproaches of men, and we allow that this is a rule too
little attended to in practice. We grant that the love of praise is in
some instances a ridiculous, and in others a mischievous passion; that
to it we owe the breed of coquettes and coxcombs, and, a more serious
evil, the noxious race of heroes and conquerors. We too are ready, when
it appears in the shape of vanity, to smile at it as a foible, or in
that of false glory, to condemn it as a crime. But all these are only
its perversions; and on account of them to contend against its true
forms, and its legitimate exercise, were to give into the very error
which you formerly yourself condemned, of arguing against the use of a
salutary principle altogether, on account of its being liable to
occasional abuse. When turned into the right direction, and applied to
its true purposes, it prompts to every dignified and generous
enterprise. It is erudition in the portico, skill in the lycæum,
eloquence in the senate, victory in the field. It forces indolence into
activity, and extorts from vice itself the deeds of generosity and
virtue. When once the soul is warmed by its generous ardor, no
difficulties deter, no dangers terrify, no labours tire. It is this
which, giving by its stamp to what is virtuous and honourable its just
superiority over the gifts of birth and fortune, rescues the rich from a
base subjection to the pleasures of sense, and makes them prefer a
course of toil and hardship to a life of indulgence and ease. It
prevents the man of rank from acquiescing in his hereditary greatness,
and spurs him forward in pursuit of _personal_ distinction, and of a
nobility which he may justly term his own. It moderates and qualifies
the over-great inequalities of human conditions; and reaching to those
who are above the sphere of laws, and extending to cases which fall not
within their province, it limits and circumscribes the power of the
tyrant on his throne, and gives gentleness to war, and to pride,
humility.

"Nor is its influence confined to public life, nor is it known only in
the great and the splendid. To it is to be ascribed a large portion of
that courtesy and disposition to please, which naturally producing a
mutual appearance of good will, and a reciprocation of good offices,
constitute much of the comfort of private life, and give their choicest
sweets to social and domestic intercourse. Nay, from the force of habit,
it follows us even into solitude, and in our most secret retirements we
often act as if our conduct were subject to human observation, and we
derive no small complacency from the imaginary applauses of an ideal
spectator."

So far of the _effects_ of the love of praise and distinction: and if
after enumerating some of these, you should proceed to investigate its
_nature_, "We admit," it might be added, "that a hasty and misjudging
world often misapplies commendations and censures: and whilst we
therefore confess, that the praises of the discerning few are alone
truly valuable; we acknowledge that it were better if mankind were
always to act from the sense of right and the love of virtue, without
reference to the opinions of their fellow-creatures. We even allow,
that independently of consequences, this were perhaps in itself a higher
strain of virtue; but it is a degree of purity which it would be vain to
expect from the bulk of mankind. When the _intrinsic excellence_ of this
principle however is called in question, let it be remembered, that in
its higher degrees it was styled, by one who meant rather to detract
from its merits than to aggravate them, 'the infirmity of _noble_
minds;' and surely, that in such a soil it most naturally springs up,
and flourishes, is no mean proof of its exalted origin and generous
nature.

"But were these more dubious, and were it no more than a splendid error;
yet considering that it works so often in the right direction, it were
enough to urge in its behalf, that it is a principle of real _action_,
and approved energy. That, as much as practice is better than theory,
and solid realties than empty speculation, so much is it to be preferred
for general use before those higher principles of morals, which however
just and excellent in themselves, you would in vain attempt to bring
home to the 'business and bosoms of mankind' at large. Reject not then a
principle thus universal in its influence, thus valuable in its effects;
a principle, which, by whatever name you may please to call it, acts by
motives and considerations suited to our condition; and which, putting
it at the very lowest, must be confessed, in our present infirm state,
to be an habitual aid and an ever present support to the feebleness of
virtue! In a selfish world it produces the effects of disinterestedness,
and when public spirit is extinct, it supplies the want of patriotism.
Let us therefore with gratitude avail ourselves of its help, and not
relinquish the good which it freely offers, from we know not what vain
dreams of impracticable purity and unattainable perfection."

All this and much more might be urged by the advocates of this favourite
principle. It would be however no difficult task to shew that it by no
means merits this high eulogium. To say nothing of that larger part of
the argument of our opponents, which betrays, and even proceeds upon,
that mischievous notion of the innocence of error, against which we have
already entered our formal protest, the principle in question is
manifestly of a most inconstant and variable nature; as inconstant and
variable as the innumerably diversified modes of fashions, habits, and
opinions in different periods and societies. What it tolerates in one
age, it forbids in another; what in one country it prescribes and
applauds, in another it condemns and stigmatizes! Obviously and openly,
it often takes vice into its patronage, and sets itself in direct
opposition to virtue. It is calculated to produce rather the
_appearance_ than the _reality_ of excellence; and at best not to check
the _love_ but only the _commission_ of vice. Much of this indeed was
seen and acknowledged by the philosophers, and even by the poets, of the
Pagan world. They declaimed against it as a mutable and inconsistent
principle; they lamented the fatal effects which, under the name of
false glory, it had produced on the peace and happiness of mankind. They
condemned the pursuit of it when it led its followers out of the path of
virtue, and taught that the praise of the wise and of the good only was
to be desired.

But it was reserved for the page of Scripture to point out to us
distinctly, wherein it is apt to be essentially defective and vicious,
and to discover to us more fully its encroaching nature and dangerous
tendencies; teaching us at the same time, how, being purified from its
corrupt qualities, and reduced under just subordination, it may be
brought into legitimate exercise, and be directed to its true end.

In the sacred volume we are throughout reminded, that we are originally
the creatures of God's formation, and continual dependents on his
bounty. There too we learn the painful lesson of man's degradation and
unworthiness. We learn that humiliation and contrition are the tempers
of mind best suited to our fallen condition, and most acceptable in the
sight of our Creator. We learn that these (to the repression and
extinction of that spirit of arrogance and self-importance, so natural
to the heart of man) it should be our habitual care to cherish and
cultivate; studiously maintaining a continual sense, that, not only for
all the _natural_ advantages over others which we may possess, but that
for all our _moral_ superiority also, we are altogether indebted to the
unmerited goodness of God. It might perhaps be said to be the great end
and purpose of all revelation, and especially to be the design of the
Gospel, to reclaim us from our natural pride and selfishness, and their
fatal consequences; to bring us to a just sense of our weakness and
_depravity_; and to dispose us, with unfeigned humiliation, to abase
ourselves, and give glory to God. "No flesh may glory in his presence;
he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord"--"The lofty looks of man
shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and
the Lord alone shall be exalted[76]."

These solemn admonitions are too generally disregarded, and their
intimate connection with the subject we are now considering, appears to
have been often entirely overlooked, even by Christian moralists. These
authors, without reference to the main spring, and internal principle of
conduct, are apt to speak of the love of human applause, as being
meritorious or culpable, as being the desire of true or of false glory,
accordingly as the external actions it produces, and the pursuits to
which it prompts, are beneficial or mischievous to mankind. But it is
undeniably manifest, that in the judgment of the word of God, the love
of worldly admiration and applause is in its _nature_ essentially and
radically corrupt; so far as it partakes of a disposition to exalt and
aggrandize ourselves, to pride ourselves on our natural or acquired
endowments, or to assume to ourselves the merit and credit of our good
qualities, instead of ascribing all the honour and glory where only they
are due. Its _guilt_ therefore in these cases, is not to be measured by
its effects on the happiness of mankind; nor is it to be denominated
_true or false_ glory, accordingly as the ends to which it is directed
are beneficial or mischievous, just or unjust objects of pursuit; but it
is _false_, because it exalts that which ought to be abased, and
_criminal_, because it encroaches on the prerogative of God.

The Scriptures further instruct us, not merely that mankind are liable
to error, and therefore that the world's commendations _may be_
sometimes mistaken; but that their judgment being darkened and their
hearts depraved, its applauses and contempt will for the most part be
systematically misplaced; that though the beneficent and disinterested
spirit of Christianity, and her obvious tendency to promote domestic
comfort and general happiness, cannot but extort applause; yet that her
aspiring after more than ordinary excellence, by exciting secret
misgivings in others, or a painful sense of inferiority not unmixed with
envy, cannot fail often to disgust and offend. The word of God teaches
us, that though such of the doctrines and precepts of Christianity, as
are coincident with worldly interests and pursuits, and with worldly
principles and systems, may be professed without offence; yet, that what
is opposite to these, or even different from them, will be deemed
needlessly precise and strict, the indulgence of a morose and gloomy
humour, the symptoms of a contracted and superstitious spirit, the marks
of a mean, enslaved, or distorted understanding. That for these and
other reasons, the follower of Christ must not only make up his mind to
the _occasional relinquishment_ of worldly favour, but that it should
even afford him matter of holy jealousy and suspicion of himself, when
it is very lavishly and very generally bestowed.

But though the standard of worldly estimation differed less from that of
the Gospel; yet since our affections ought to be set on heavenly things,
and conversant about heavenly objects; and since in particular the love
and favour of God ought to be the matter of our supreme and habitual
desire, to which every other should be subordinated; it follows, that
the love of human applause must be manifestly injurious, so far as it
tends to draw down our regards to earthly concerns, and to bound and
circumscribe our desires within the narrow limits of this world.
Particularly, that it is _impure_, so far as it is tinctured with a
disposition to estimate too highly, and love too well, the good opinion
and commendations of man.

But though, by these and other instructions and considerations, the Holy
Scripture warns us against the inordinate desire or earnest pursuit of
worldly estimation and honour; though it so greatly reduces their value,
and prepares us for losing them without surprise, and for relinquishing
them with little reluctance: yet it teaches us, that Christians in
general are not only not called upon absolutely and voluntarily to
renounce or forego them; but that when, without our having solicitously
sought them, they are bestowed on us for actions intrinsically good, we
are to accept them as being intended by Providence, to be sometimes,
even in this disorderly state of things, a present solace, and a reward
to virtue. Nay more, we are instructed, that in our general deportment,
that in little particulars of conduct otherwise indifferent, that in the
_circumstances_ and _manner_ of performing actions in themselves of a
determined character and indispensable obligation, (guarding however
against the smallest degree of artifice or deceit) that by watching for
opportunities of doing little kindnesses, that by avoiding
singularities, and even humouring prejudices, where it may be done
without the slightest infringment on truth or duty, we ought to have a
due respect and regard to the approbation and favour of men. These
however we should not value, chiefly as they may administer to our own
gratification, but rather as furnishing means and instruments of
influence, which we may turn to good account, by making them subservient
to the improvement and happiness of our fellow creatures, and thus
conducive to the _glory of God_. The remark is almost superfluous, that
on occasions like these we must even watch our hearts with the most
jealous care, lest pride and self love insensibly infuse themselves, and
corrupt the purity of principles so liable to contract a taint.

Credit and reputation, in the judgment of the true Christian, stand on
ground not very different from riches; which he is not to prize highly,
or to desire and pursue with solicitude; but which, when they are
allotted to him by the hand of Providence, he is to accept with
thankfulness, and use with moderation; relinquishing them when it
becomes necessary, without a murmur; guarding most circumspectly, so
long as they remain with him, against that sensual and selfish temper,
and no less against that pride and wantonness of heart, which they are
too apt to produce and cherish; thus considering them as in themselves
acceptable, but, from the infirmity of his nature, as highly dangerous
possessions, and valuing them chiefly not as instruments of luxury or
splendour, but as affording the means of honouring his heavenly
Benefactor, and lessening the miseries of mankind.

Christianity however, as was formerly observed, proposes not to
extinguish our natural desires, but to bring them under just controul,
and direct them to their true objects. In the case both of riches and of
honour, she maintains the consistency of her character. While she
commands us not to set our hearts on _earthly_ treasures, she reminds us
that "we have in _Heaven_ a better and more enduring substance" than
this world can bestow; and while she represses our solicitude respecting
earthly credit, and moderates our attachment to it, she holds forth to
us, and bids us habitually to aspire after, the splendours of that
better state, where is true glory, and honour, and immortality; thus
exciting in us a just ambition, suited to our high origin, and worthy of
our large capacities, which the little, misplaced, and perishable
distinctions of this life would in vain attempt to satisfy.

It would be mere waste of time to enter into any laboured argument to
prove at large, that the light in which worldly credit and estimation
are regarded, by the bulk of professed Christians, is extremely
different from that in which they are placed by the page of Scripture.
The _inordinate_ love of _worldly glory_ indeed, implies a passion,
which from the nature of things cannot be called into exercise in the
generality of mankind, because, being conversant about great objects, it
can but rarely find that field which is requisite for its exertions. But
we every where discover the same principle reduced to the dimensions of
common life, and modified and directed according to every one's sphere
of action. We may discover it in a supreme love of distinction, and
admiration, and praise; in the universal acceptableness of flattery; and
above all in the excessive valuation of our worldly character, in that
watchfulness with which it is guarded, in that jealousy when it is
questioned, in that solicitude when it is in danger, in that hot
resentment when it is attacked, in that bitterness of suffering when it
is impaired or lost. All these emotions, as they are too manifest to be
disputed, so are they too reputable to be denied. Dishonour, disgrace,
and shame present images of horror too dreadful to be faced; they are
evils, which it is thought the mark of a generous spirit to consider as
excluding every idea of comfort and enjoyment, and to feel, in short, as
too heavy to be borne.

The consequences of all this are natural and obvious. Though it be not
openly avowed, that we are to follow after worldly estimation, or to
escape from worldly disrepute, when they can only be pursued or avoided
by declining from the path of duty; nay though the contrary be
recognized as being the just opinion; yet all the effect of this
speculative concession is soon done away _in fact_. Estimating worldly
credit as of the highest intrinsic excellence, and worldly shame as the
greatest of all possible evils, we sometimes shape and turn the path of
duty itself from its true direction, so as it may favour our acquisition
of the one, and avoidance of the other; or when this cannot be done, we
boldly and openly turn aside from it, declaring the temptation is too
strong to be resisted.

It were easy to adduce numerous proofs of the truth of these assertions.
It is proved, indeed, by that general tendency in Religion to conceal
herself from the view, (for we might hope that in these cases she often
is by no means altogether extinct) by her being apt to vanish from our
conversations, and even to give place to a pretended licentiousness of
sentiments and conduct, and a false shew of infidelity. It is proved, by
that complying acquiescence and participation in the habits and manners
of this dissipated age, which, has almost confounded every external
distinction between the Christian and the Infidel, and has made it so
rare to find any one who dares incur the charge of Christian
singularity, or who can say with the Apostle that "he is not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ." It is proved (how can this proof be omitted by
one to whose lot it has so often fallen to witness and lament, sometimes
he fears to afford an instance of it?) by that quick resentment, those
bitter contentions, those angry retorts, those malicious triumphs, that
impatience of inferiority, that wakeful sense of past defeats, and
promptness to revenge them, which too often change the character of a
Christian deliberative Assembly, into that of a stage for prize
fighters: violating at once the proprieties of public conduct, and the
rules of social decorum, and renouncing and chasing away all the
charities of the Religion of Jesus!

But from all lesser proofs, our attention is drawn to one of a still
larger size, and more determined character. Surely the reader will here
anticipate our mention of the practice of Duelling: a practice which, to
the disgrace of a Christian society, has long been suffered to exist
with little restraint or opposition.

This practice, whilst it powerfully supports, mainly rests on, that
excessive over-valuation of character, which teaches that worldly credit
is to be preserved at _any_ rate, and disgrace at _any_ rate to be
avoided. The _unreasonableness_ of duelling has been often proved, and
it has often been shewn to be criminal on various principles: sometimes
it has been opposed on grounds hardly tenable; particularly when it has
been considered as an indication of malice and revenge[77]. But it
seems hardly to have been enough noticed in what chiefly consists its
_essential_ guilt; that it is a deliberate preference of the favour of
man, before the favour and approbation of God, _in articulo mortis_, in
an instance, wherein our own life, and that of a fellow creature are at
stake, and wherein we run the risk of rushing into the presence of our
Maker in the very act of offending him. It would detain us too long, and
it were somewhat beside our present purpose, to enumerate the
mischievous consequences which result from this practice. They are many
and great; and if regard be had merely to the temporal interests of men,
and to the well being of society, they are but poorly counterbalanced by
the plea, which must be admitted in its behalf by a candid observer of
human nature, of a courtesy and refinement in our modern manners unknown
to ancient times.

But there is one observation which must not be omitted, and which seems
to have been too much overlooked: In the judgment of that Religion which
requires purity of heart, and of that Being to whom, as was before
remarked, "thought is action," he cannot be esteemed innocent of this
crime, who lives in a settled habitual determination to commit it, when
circumstances shall call upon him so to do[78]. This is a consideration
which places the crime of duelling on a different footing from almost
any other; indeed there is perhaps NO other, which mankind habitually
and deliberately resolve to practise whenever the temptation shall
occur. It shews also that the crime of duelling is far more general in
the higher classes than is commonly supposed, and that the whole sum of
the guilt which the practice produces is great, beyond what has perhaps
been ever conceived! It will be the writer's comfort to have solemnly
suggested this consideration, to the consciences of those by whom this
impious practice might be suppressed: If such there be, which he is
strongly inclined to believe, their's is the crime, and their's the
responsibility of suffering it to continue[79].

In the foregoing observations, it has not been the writer's intention to
discuss completely that copious subject, the love of worldly estimation.
It would be to exceed the limits of a work like this, fully to
investigate so large, and at the same time so important a topic. Enough
however may have perhaps been said, to make it evident that this
principle is of a character highly _questionable_; that it should be
brought under absolute subjection, and watched with the most jealous
care: That, notwithstanding its lofty pretensions, it often can by no
means justly boast that high origin and exalted nature, which its
superficial admirers are disposed to concede to it. What real intrinsic
essential value, it might be asked, does there appear to be in a
virtue, which had wholly changed its nature and character, if public
opinion had been different? But it is in truth of base extraction, and
ungenerous qualities, springing from selfishness and vanity, and low
ambition; by these it subsists, and thrives, and acts; and envy, and
jealousy, and detraction, and hatred, and variance, are its too faithful
and natural associates. It is, to say the best of it, a root which bears
fruits of a poisonous as well as of a beneficial quality. If it
sometimes stimulates to great and generous enterprises, if it urges to
industry, and sometimes to excellence, if in the more contracted sphere
it produces courtesy and kindness; yet to its account we must place the
ambition which desolates nations, and many of the competitions and
resentments which interrupt the harmony of social life. The former
indeed has been often laid to its charge, but the latter have not been
sufficiently attended to; and still less has its _noxious_ influence on
the vital principle, and distinguishing graces of the Christian
character, been duly pointed out and enforced.

To read indeed the writings of certain Christian moralists,[80] and to
observe how little they seem disposed to call it in question, except
where it raves in the conqueror, one should be almost tempted to
suspect; that, considering it as a principle of such potency and
prevalence, as that they must despair of bringing it into just
subjection, they were intent only on complimenting it into good humour
(like those barbarous nations which worship the evil Spirit through
fear;) or rather, that they were making a sort of composition with an
enemy they could not master, and were willing, on condition of its
giving up the trade of war, to suffer it to rule undisturbed, and range
at pleasure.

But the truth is, that the reasonings of Christian moralists too often
exhibit but few traces of the genius of Christian morality. Of this
position, the case before us is an instance. This principle of the
desire of worldly distinction and applause, is often allowed, and even
commended, with too few qualifications, and too little reserve. To covet
wealth is base and sordid, but to covet honour is treated as the mark of
a generous and exalted nature. These writers scarcely seem to bear in
mind, that though the principle in question tends to prevent the
commission of those grosser acts of vice which would injure us in the
general estimation; yet that it not only stops there, but that it there
begins to exert almost an equal force in the opposite direction. They do
not consider how apt this principle is, even in the case of those who
move in a contracted sphere, to fill us with vain conceits, and vicious
passions; and above all how it tends to fix the affections on earthly
things, and to steal away the heart from God. They acknowledge it to be
criminal when it produces mischievous effects, but forget how apt it is,
by the substitution of a false and corrupt motive, to vitiate the purity
of our good actions, depriving them of all which rendered them truly and
essentially valuable. That, not to be too hastily approved, because it
takes the side of virtue, it often works her ruin while it asserts her
cause, and like some vile seducer, pretends affection only the more
surely to betray.

It is the distinguishing glory of Christianity not to rest satisfied
with superficial appearances, but to rectify the _motives_, and purify
the _heart_. The true Christian, in obedience to the lessons of
Scripture, no where keeps over himself a more resolute and jealous
guard, than where the desire of human estimation and distinction is in
question. No where does he more deeply feel the insufficiency of his
unassisted strength, or more diligently and earnestly pray for divine
assistance. He may well indeed watch and pray against the encroachments
of a passion, which, when suffered to transgress its just limits,
discovers a peculiar hostility to the distinguishing graces of the
Christian temper; a passion which must insensibly acquire force, because
it is in continual exercise; to which almost every thing _without_
administers nutriment, and the growth of which _within_ is favoured and
cherished by such powerful auxiliaries as pride and selfishness, the
natural and perhaps inexterminable inhabitants of the human heart; of
which the predominance, if established, is thus so pernicious, and which
possesses so many advantages for effecting its establishment.

Strongly impressed therefore with a sense of the indispensable necessity
of guarding against the progress of this encroaching principle, in
humble reliance on superior aid, the true Christian thankfully uses the
means, and habitually exercises himself in the considerations and
motives, suggested to him for that purpose by the word of God. He is
much occupied in searching out, and contemplating his own infirmities.
He endeavours to acquire and maintain a just conviction of his great
unworthiness; and to keep in continual remembrance, that whatever
distinguishes himself from others, is not properly his own, but that he
is altogether indebted for it to the undeserved bounty of Heaven. He
diligently endeavours also, habitually to preserve a _just_ sense of the
real worth of human distinction and applause, knowing that he shall
covet them less when he has learned not to over-rate their value. He
labours to bear in mind, how undeservedly they are often bestowed, how
precariously they are always possessed. The censures of good men justly
render him suspicious of himself, and prompt him carefully and
impartially to examine into those parts of his character, or those
particulars of his conduct, which have drawn on him their
animadversions. The favourable opinion and the praises of good men are
justly acceptable to him, where they accord with the testimony of his
own heart; that testimony being thereby confirmed and warranted. Those
praises favour also and strengthen the growth of mutual confidence and
affection, where it is his delight to form friendships, rich not less in
use than comfort, and to establish connections which may last for ever.
But even in the case of the commendations of good men, he suffers not
himself to be beguiled into an over-valuation of them, lest he should be
led to substitute them in the place of conscience. He guards against
this by reflecting how indistinctly we can discern each other's motives,
how little enter into each other's circumstances, how mistaken therefore
may be the judgments formed of us, or of our actions, even by good men,
and that it is far from improbable, that we may at some time be
compelled to forfeit their esteem, by adhering to the dictates of our
own consciences.

But if he endeavours thus to set loose to the favour and applause even
of good men, much more to those of the world at large; not but that he
is sensible of their worth as means and instruments of usefulness and
influence; and under the limitations and for the ends allowed in
Scripture (these it is needless to repeat) he is glad to possess,
observant to acquire, and careful to retain them. He considers them
however, if we may again introduce the metaphor, like the precious
metals, as having rather an exchangeable than an intrinsic value, as
desirable not simply in their possession, but in their use. In this
view, he holds himself to be responsible for that share of them which he
enjoys, and, to continue the figure, as bound not to let them lie by him
unemployed, this were hoarding; not to lavish them prodigally, this
would be waste; not imprudently to misapply them, this were folly and
caprice: but as under an obligation to regard them as conferred upon him
that they might be brought into action, and as what therefore he may by
no means throw away, though ready, if it be required, to relinquish them
with cheerfulness; and never feeling himself at liberty, in
consideration of the use he intends to make of them, to acquire or
retain them unlawfully. He holds it to be his bounden duty to seek
diligently for occasions of rendering them subservient to their true
purposes; and when any such occasion is found, to expend them cheerfully
and liberally, but with discretion and frugality; being no less prudent
in determining the measure, than in selecting the objects of their
application, that they may go the farther by being thus managed with
oeconomy.

Acting therefore on these principles, he will studiously and diligently
use any degree of worldly credit he may enjoy, in removing or lessening
prejudices; in conciliating good-will, and thereby making way for the
less obstructed progress of truth; and in providing for its being
entertained with candour, or even with favour, by those who would bar
all access against it in any rougher or more homely form. He will make
it his business to set on foot and forward benevolent and useful
schemes; and where they require united efforts, to obtain and preserve
for them this co-operation. He will endeavour to discountenance vice, to
bring modest merit into notice; to lend as it were his light to men of
real worth, but of less creditable name, and perhaps of less
conciliating qualities and manners; that they may thus shine with a
reflected lustre, and be useful in their turn, when invested with their
just estimation. But while by these and various other means he strives
to render his reputation, so long as he possesses it, subservient to the
great ends of advancing the cause of Religion and Virtue, and of
promoting the happiness and comfort of mankind, he will not transgress
the rule of the Scripture precepts in order to obtain, to cultivate, or
to preserve it, resolutely disclaiming that dangerous sophistry of
"doing evil that good may come." Ready however to relinquish his
reputation when required so to do, he will not throw it away; and so far
as he allowably may, he will cautiously avoid occasions of diminishing
it, instead of studiously seeking, or needlessly multiplying them, as
seems sometimes to have been the practice of worthy but imprudent men.
There will be no capricious humours, no selfish tempers, no moroseness,
no discourtesy, no affected severity of deportment, no peculiarity of
language, no indolent neglect, or wanton breach, of the ordinary forms
or fashions of society. His reputation is a possession capable of uses
too important to be thus sported away; if sacrificed at all, it shall be
sacrificed at the call of duty. The world shall be constrained to allow
him to be amiable, as well as respectable in other parts of his
character; though in what regards Religion, they may account him
unreasonably precise and strict. In this no less than in other
particulars, he will endeavour to reduce the enemies of Religion to
adopt the confession of the accusers of the Jewish ruler, "we shall not
find any fault or occasion against this Daniel--except concerning the
law of his God:" and even there, if he give offence, it will only be
where he dares not do otherwise; and if he fall into dis-esteem or
disgrace it shall not be chargeable to any conduct which is justly
dishonourable, or even to any unnecessary singularities on his part, but
to the false standard of estimation of a misjudging world. When his
character is thus mistaken, or his conduct thus misconstrued, he will
not wrap himself up in a mysterious sullenness; but will be ready, where
he thinks any one will listen to him with patience and candour, to clear
up what has been dubious, to explain what has been imperfectly known,
and "speaking the truth in love" to correct, if it may be, the erroneous
impressions which have been conceived of him. He may sometimes feel it
his duty publicly to vindicate his character from unjust reproach, and
to repel the false charges of his enemies; but he will carefully however
watch against being led away by pride, or being betrayed into some
breach of truth or of Christian charity, when he is treading in a path
so dangerous. At such a time he will also guard, with more than ordinary
circumspection, against any undue solicitude about his worldly
reputation for its own sake; and when he has done what duty requires for
its vindication, he will sit down with a peaceable and quiet mind, and
it will be matter of no very deep concern to him if his endeavours
should have been ineffectual. If good men in every age and nation have
been often unjustly calumniated and disgraced, and if, in such
circumstances, even the darkness of paganism has been able contentedly
to repose itself on the consciousness of innocence, shall one who is
cheered by the Christian's hope, who is assured also, that a day will
shortly come in which whatever is secret shall be made manifest, and the
mistaken judgments of men, perhaps even of good men, being corrected,
that "he shall then have praise of God;" shall such an one, I say, sink?
shall he even bend or droop under such a trial? They might be more
excusable in over-valuing human reputation to whom all beyond the grave
was dark and cheerless. They also might be more easily pardoned for
pursuing with some degree of eagerness and solicitude that glory which
might survive them, thus seeking as it were to extend the narrow span of
their earthly existence: but far different is our case, to whom these
clouds are rolled away, and "life and immortality brought to light by
the Gospel." Not but that worldly favour and distinction are amongst the
best things this world has to offer: but the Christian knows it is the
very condition of his calling, _not_ to have his portion here; and as in
the case of any other earthly enjoyments, so in that also of worldly
honour, he dreads, lest his supreme affections being thereby gratified,
it should be hereafter said to him "remember that thou in thy life time
receivedst thy good things."

He is required by his holy calling to be victorious over the world; and
to this victory, the conquest of the dread of its dis-esteem and
dishonour is essentially and indispensably required. He reflects on
those holy men who "had trial of cruel mockings;" he remembers that our
blessed Saviour himself "was despised and rejected of men;" and what is
he, that he should be exempted from the common lot, or think it much to
bear the scandal of his profession? If therefore he is creditable and
popular, he considers this, if the phrase may be pardoned, as something
beyond his bargain; and he watches himself, with double care, lest he
should grow over-fond of what he may be shortly called upon to
relinquish. He meditates often on the probability of his being involved
in such circumstances, as may render it necessary for him to subject
himself to disgrace and obloquy; thus familiarizing himself with them
betimes, and preparing himself, that when the trying hour arrives they
may not take him unawares.

But the cultivation of the desire of "that honour which cometh from
God," he finds the most effectual means of bringing his mind into a
proper temper, in what regards the love of human approbation. Christian!
would thou indeed reduce this affection under just controul--_sursum
corda!_ Rise on the wings of contemplation, until the praises and the
censures of men die away upon the ear, and the still small voice of
conscience is no longer drowned by the din of this nether world. Here
the sight is apt to be occupied with earthly objects, and the hearing to
be engrossed with earthly sounds; but there thou shalt come within the
view of that resplendent and incorruptible crown, which is held forth to
thy acceptance in the realms of light, and thine ear shall be regaled
with Heavenly melody! Here we dwell in a variable atmosphere--the
prospect is at one time darkened by the gloom of disgrace, and at
another the eye is dazzled by the gleamings of glory: but thou hast now
ascended above this inconstant region; no storms agitate, no clouds
obscure the air, and the lightnings play, and the thunders roll beneath
thee.

Thus, at chosen seasons, the Christian exercises himself; and when, from
this elevated region he descends into the plain below, and mixes in the
bustle of life, he still retains the impressions of his more retired
hours. By these he realizes to himself the unseen world; he accustoms
himself to speak and act as in the presence of "an innumerable company
of angels, and of the spirits of just men made perfect, and of God the
Judge of all;" the consciousness of _their_ approbation cheers and
gladdens his soul, under the scoffs and reproaches of an undiscerning
world, and to his delighted ear, their united praises form a _harmony_
which a few discordant earthly voices cannot interrupt.

But though the Christian be sometimes enabled thus to triumph over the
inordinate love of human applause, he does not therefore deem himself
secure from its encroachments. On the contrary, he is aware, so strong
and active is its principle of vitality, that even where it seems
extinct, let but circumstances favour its revival, and it will spring
forth again in renewed vigour. And as his watch must thus during life
know no termination, because the enemy will ever be at hand; so it must
be the more close and vigilant, because he is no where free from danger,
but is on every side open to attack. "Sume superbiam quæsitam meritis,"
was the maxim of a worldly moralist: but the Christian is aware, that he
is particularly assailable where he really excels; there he is in
especial danger, lest his motives, originally pure, being insensibly
corrupted, he should be betrayed into an anxiety about worldly favour,
false in principle or excessive in degree, when he is endeavouring to
render his virtue amiable and respected in the eyes of others, and in
obedience to the Scripture injunction, is willing to let his "light so
shine before men, that they may see his good works, and glorify his
Father which is in heaven."

He watches himself also on small as well as on great occasions: the
latter indeed, in the case of many persons, can hardly ever be expected
to occur, whereas the former are continually presenting themselves: and
thus, whilst on the one hand they may be rendered highly useful in
forming and strengthening a just habit of mind in the particular in
question; so, on the other, they are the means most at hand for enabling
us to discover our own real character. Let not this be slightly passed
over. If any one finds himself shrinking from disrepute or dis-esteem in
little instances; but apt to solace himself with the persuasion, that
his spirits being fully called forth to the encounter, he could boldly
stand the brunt of sharper trials; let him be slow to give entertainment
to so beguiling a suggestion; and let him not forget that these little
instances, where no credit is to be got, and the vainest can find small
room for self-complacency, furnish perhaps the truest tests whether we
are ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, and are willing, on principles
really pure, to bear reproach for the name of Jesus.

The Christian too is well aware that the excessive desire of human
approbation is a passion of so subtile a nature, that there is nothing
into which it cannot penetrate; and from much experience, learning to
discover it where it would lurk unseen, and to detect it under its more
specious disguises, he finds, that elsewhere disallowed and excluded, it
is apt to insinuate itself into his very religion, where it especially
delights to dwell, and obstinately maintains its residence. Proud piety
and ostentatious charity, and all the more open effects it there
produces, have been often condemned, and we may discover the tendencies
to them in ourselves, without difficulty. But where it appears not so
large in bulk, and in shape so unambiguous, let its operation be still
suspected. Let not the Christian suffer himself to be deceived by any
external dissimilitudes between himself and the world around him,
trusting perhaps to the sincerity of the principle to which they
originally owed their rise; but let him beware lest through the
insensible encroachments of the subtle usurper, his religion should at
length have "only a name to live," being gradually robbed of its
vivifying principle; lest he should be mainly preserved in his religious
course by the dread of incurring the charge of levity, for quitting a
path on which he had deliberately entered. Or where, on a strict and
impartial scrutiny of his governing motives, he may fairly conclude
this not to be the case, let him beware lest he be influenced by this
principle in particular parts of his character, and especially where any
external singularities are in question; closely scrutinizing his
apparent motives, lest he should be prompted to his more than ordinary
religious observances, and be kept from participating in the licentious
pleasures of a dissipated age, not so much by a vigorous principle of
internal holiness, as by a fear of lessening himself in the good opinion
of the stricter circle of his associates, or of suffering even in the
estimation of the world at large, by violating the proprieties of his
assumed character.

To those who, in the important particular which we have been so long
discussing, wish to conform themselves to the injunctions of the word of
God, we must advise a laborious watchfulness, a jealous guard, a close
and frequent scrutiny of their own hearts, that they may not mistake
their real character, and too late find themselves to have been
mistaken, as to what they had conceived to be their governing motives.
Above all, let them labour, with humble prayers for the Divine
assistance, to fix in themselves a deep, habitual, and practical sense
of the excellence of "that honour which cometh from God," and of the
comparative worthlessness of all earthly estimation and pre-eminence. In
truth, unless the affections of the soul be thus predominantly engaged
on the side of heavenly in preference to that of human honour, though we
may have relinquished the pursuit of fame, we shall not have acquired
that firm contexture of mind, which can bear disgrace and shame, without
yielding to the pressure. Between these two states there is a wide
interval, and he who, on a sober review of his conduct and motives,
finds reason to believe he has arrived at the one, must not therefore
conclude he has reached the other. To the one, a little natural
moderation and quietness of temper may be sufficient to conduct us: but
to the other, we can only attain by much discipline and slow advances;
and when we think we have made great way, we shall often find reason to
confess in the hour of trial, that we had greatly, far too greatly,
over-rated our progress.

When engaged too in the prosecution of this course, we must be aware of
the snares which lie in our way, and of the deceits to which we are
liable: and we must be provided against these impositions, by having
obtained a full and distinct conception of the temper of mind with
regard to human favour, which is prescribed to us in Scripture; and by
continually examining our hearts and lives to ascertain how far they
correspond with it. This will prevent our substituting contemplation in
the place of action, and giving ourselves too much up to those religious
meditations which were formerly recommended, in which we must not
indulge to the neglect of the common _duties_ of life: this will prevent
our mistaking the gratification of an indolent temper for the
Christian's disregard of fame; for, never let it be forgotten, we must
_deserve_ estimation, though we may not _possess_ it, forcing men of the
_world_ to acknowledge, that we do not want their boasted spring of
action to set us in motion; but that its place is better supplied to us
by another, which produces all the good of their's without its evil;
thus demonstrating the superiority of the principle which animates us,
by the superior utility and excellence of its effects. This principle,
in order to be pure and genuine, though nerved with more than mortal
firmness, must be sweetened by love, and tempered with humility. The
former of these qualities will render us kind, friendly, and beneficent,
preventing our being no longer on the watch to promote the happiness or
comfort of others, than whilst we are stimulated by the desire of their
applause; the produce of which passion, whatever may be vaunted of its
effects on social intercourse, is often nothing better than selfishness,
but ill concealed under a superficial covering of exterior courtesy.

Humility, again, reducing us in our own value, will moderate our claims
on worldly estimation. It will check our tendency to ostentation and
display, prompting us rather to avoid, than to attract notice. It will
dispose us to sit down in quiet obscurity, though, judging ourselves
impartially, we believe ourselves better entitled to credit, than those
on whom it is conferred; closing the entrance against a proud, painful,
and malignant passion, from which, under such circumstances, we can
otherwise be hardly free, the passion of "high disdain from sense of
injured merit."

Love and humility will concur in producing a frame of mind, not more
distinct from an ardent thirst of glory, than from that frigid
disregard, or insolent contempt, or ostentatious renunciation of human
favour and distinction, which we have sometimes seen opposed to it.
These latter qualities may not infrequently be traced to a slothful,
sensual, and selfish temper; to the consciousness of being unequal to
any great and generous attempts; to the disappointment of schemes of
ambition or of glory; to a little personal experience of the world's
capricious and inconstant humour. The renunciation in these cases,
however sententious, is often far from sincere; and it is even made not
unfrequently, with a view to the attainment of that very distinction
which it affects to disclaim. In some other of these instances, the
over-valuation and inordinate desire of worldly credit, however
disavowed, are abundantly evident, from the merit which is assumed for
relinquishing them; or from that sour and surly humour, which betrays a
gloomy and a corroded mind, galled and fretting under the irritating
sense of the want of that which it most wishes to possess.

But the Christian's is a far different temper: not a temper of sordid
sensuality, or lazy apathy, or dogmatizing pride, or disappointed
ambition: more truly independent of worldly estimation than philosophy
with all her boasts, it forms a perfect contrast to Epicurean
selfishness, and to Stoical pride, and to Cynical brutality. It is a
temper compounded of firmness, and complacency, and peace, and love; and
manifesting itself in acts of kindness and of courtesy; a kindness, not
pretended but genuine; a courtesy, not false and superficial, but
cordial and sincere. In the hour of popularity it is not intoxicated, or
insolent; in the hour of unpopularity, it is not desponding or morose;
unshaken in constancy, unwearied in benevolence, firm without roughness,
and assiduous without servility.

Notwithstanding the great importance of the topic which we have been
investigating, it will require much indulgence on the part of the
reader, to excuse the disproportionate length into which the discussion
has been almost insensibly drawn out: yet this, it is hoped, may not be
without its uses, if the writer have in any degree succeeded in his
endeavour, to point out the dangerous qualities and unchristian
tendencies of a principle, of such general predominance throughout the
higher classes of society, and to suggest to the serious inquirer some
practical hints for its regulation and controul. Since the principle
too, of which we have been treating, is one of the most ordinary
modifications of pride; the discussion may also serve in some degree to
supply a manifest deficiency, a deficiency to be ascribed to the fear of
trespassing too far on the reader's patience, in having but slightly
touched on the allowed prevalence of that master passion, and on the
allowed neglect of its opposite, humility.


SECTION IV.

_The generally prevailing Error, of substituting amiable Tempers and
useful Lives in the place of Religion, stated and confuted; with Hints
to real Christians._

There is another practical error very generally prevalent, the effects
of which are highly injurious to the cause of Religion; and which in
particular is often brought forward when, upon Christian principles, any
advocates for Christianity would press the practice of Christian
virtues. Before we proceed, therefore, to comment upon what remains to
be discussed, of the misconceptions and defects of the bulk of professed
Christians, it may not be amiss to dispose of this objection to our
whole scheme.

The error in question is that of exaggerating the merit of certain
amiable and useful qualities, and of considering them as of themselves
sufficient to compensate for the want of the supreme love and fear of
God.

It seems to be an opinion pretty generally prevalent, that kindness and
sweetness of temper; sympathizing, and benevolent, and generous
affections; attention to what in the world's estimation are the
domestic, relative, and social duties; and above all a life of general
activity and usefulness, may well be allowed, in our imperfect state, to
make up for the defect of what in strict propriety of speech is termed
Religion.

Many indeed will unreservedly declare, and more will hint the opinion,
that "the difference between the qualities above-mentioned and Religion,
is rather a verbal or logical, than a real and essential difference; for
in truth what are they but Religion in substance if not in name? Is it
not the great end of Religion, and in particular the glory of
Christianity, to extinguish the malignant passions; to curb the
violence, to controul the appetites, and to smooth the asperities of
man; to make us compassionate and kind, and forgiving one to another; to
make us good husbands, good fathers, good friends, and to render us
active and useful in the discharge of the relative, social, and civil
duties? We do not deny that in the general mass of society, and
particularly in the lower orders, such conduct and tempers cannot be
diffused and maintained by any other medium than that of Religion. But
if the end be effected, surely it is only unnecessary refinement to
dispute about the means. It is even to forget your own principles; and
to refuse its just place to solid practical virtue, while you assign too
high a value to speculative opinions."

Thus a fatal distinction is admitted between Morality and Religion: a
great and desperate error, of which it is the more necessary to take
notice; because many who would condemn, as too strong, the language in
which this opinion is sometimes openly avowed, are yet more or less
tinctured with the notion itself; and under the habitual and almost
unperceived influence of this beguiling suggestion, are vainly solacing
their imaginations, and repressing their well-grounded fears concerning
_their own_ state; and are also quieting their just solicitude
concerning the spiritual condition of _others_, and soothing themselves
in the neglect of friendly endeavours for their improvement.

There can hardly be a stronger proof of the cursory and superficial
views, with which men are apt to satisfy themselves in religious
concerns, than the prevalence of the opinion here in question; the
falsehood and sophistry of which must be acknowledged by any one who,
admitting the authority of Scripture, will examine it with ever so
little seriousness and impartiality of mind.

Appealing indeed to a less strict standard, it would not be difficult to
shew that the moral worth of these sweet and benevolent tempers, and of
these useful lives, is apt to be greatly over-rated. The former
involuntarily gain upon our affections and disarm our severer judgments,
by their kindly, complying, and apparently disinterested nature; by
their prompting men to flatter instead of mortifying our pride, to
sympathize either with our joys or our sorrows, to abound in obliging
attentions and offices of courtesy; by their obvious tendency to produce
and maintain harmony and comfort in social and domestic life. It is not
however unworthy of remark, that from the commendations which are so
generally bestowed on these qualities, and their rendering men
universally acceptable and popular, there is many a false pretender to
them, who gains a credit for them which he by no means deserves; in whom
they are no more than the proprieties of his assumed character, or even
a mask which is worn in public, only the better to conceal an opposite
temper. Would you see this man of courtesy and sweetness stripped of his
false covering, follow him unobserved into his family; and you shall
behold, too plain to be mistaken, selfishness and spleen harassing and
vexing the wretched subjects of their unmanly tyranny; as if being
released at length from their confinement, they were making up to
themselves for the restraint which had been imposed on them in the
world.

But where the benevolent qualities are genuine, they often deserve the
name rather of amiable instincts, than of moral virtues. In many cases,
they imply no mental conflict, no previous discipline: they are apt to
evaporate in barren sensibilities, and transitory sympathies, and
indolent wishes, and unproductive declarations: they possess not that
strength and energy of character, which, in contempt of difficulties and
dangers, produce alacrity in service, vigour and perseverance in action.
Destitute of proper firmness, they often encourage that vice and folly
which it is their especial duty to repress; and it is well if, from
their soft complying humour, they are not often drawn in to participate
in what is wrong, as well as to connive at it. Thus their possessors
are frequently, in the eye of truth and reason, bad magistrates, bad
parents, bad friends; defective in those very qualities, which give to
each of those several relations its chief and appropriate value. And
this, let it be also observed, is a defect which might well bring into
question that freedom from selfishness, which is so often claimed for
them; inasmuch as there is too great reason to fear, that it often
arises in us chiefly from indisposition to submit to a painful effort,
though real good-will commands the sacrifice, or from the fear of
lessening the regard in which we are held, and the good opinion which is
entertained of us.

It should farther also be observed concerning these qualities, when they
are not grounded and rooted in religion, that they are of a sickly and
short-lived nature, and want that hardy and vigorous temperament, which
is requisite for enabling them to bear without injury, or even to
survive, the rude shocks and the variable and churlish seasons, to which
in such a world as this they must ever be exposed. It is only a
_Christian_ love of which it is the character, that "it suffereth long,
and yet is kind;" "that it is not easily provoked, that it beareth all
things, and endureth all things." In the spring of youth indeed, the
blood flows freely through the veins; we are flushed with health and
confidence; hope is young and ardent, our desires are unsated, and
whatever we see has the grace of novelty; we are the more disposed to be
good-natured because we are pleased; pleased, because universally well
received. Wherever we cast our eyes, we see some face of friendship, and
love, and gratulation: All nature smiles around us. Now the amiable
tempers of which we have been speaking naturally spring up. The soil
suits, the climate favours them. They appear to shoot forth vigorously
and blossom in gay luxuriance. To the superficial eye, all is fair and
flourishing; we anticipate the fruits of Autumn, and promise ourselves
an ample produce. But by and by the sun scorches, the frost nips, the
winds rise, the rains descend; our golden dreams are blasted, all our
fond expectations are no more. Our youthful efforts let it be supposed
have been successful; and we rise to wealth or eminence. A kind flexible
temper and popular manners have produced in us, as they are too apt, a
youth of easy social dissipation, and unproductive idleness; and we are
overtaken too late by the consciousness of having wasted that time which
cannot be recalled, and those opportunities which we cannot now recover.
We sink into disregard and obscurity when, there being a call for
qualities of more energy, indolent good nature must fall back. We are
thrust out of notice by accident or misfortunes. We are left behind by
those with whom we started on equal terms, and who, originally perhaps
having less pretensions and fewer advantages, have greatly outstripped
us in the race of honour: and their having got before us is often the
more galling, because it appears to us, and perhaps with reason, to have
been chiefly owing to a generous easy good-natured humour on our part,
which disposed us to allow them at first to pass by us without jealousy,
and led us to give place without a struggle to their more lofty
pretensions. Thus we suffered them quietly to occupy a station to which
originally we had as fair a claim as they; but, this station being once
tamely surrendered, we have forfeited it for ever. Our aukward and vain
endeavours meanwhile to recover it, while they shew that we want
self-knowledge and composure in our riper years, as much as in our
younger we had been destitute of exertion, serve only to make our
inferiority more manifest, and to bring our discontent into the fuller
notice of an ill-natured world, which however not unjustly condemns and
ridicules our misplaced ambition.

It may be sufficient to have hinted at a few of the vicissitudes and
changes of advancing life; let the reader's own mind fill up the
catalogue. Now the bosom is no longer cheerful and placid; and if the
countenance preserve its exterior character, this is no longer the
honest expression of the heart. Prosperity and luxury, gradually
extinguishing sympathy, and puffing up with pride, harden and debase the
soul. In other instances, shame secretly clouds, and remorse begins to
sting, and suspicion to corrode, and jealousy and envy to embitter.
Disappointed hopes, unsuccessful competitions, and frustrated pursuits,
sour and irritate the temper. A little personal experience of the
selfishness of mankind, damps our generous warmth and kind affections;
reproving the prompt sensibility and unsuspecting simplicity of our
earlier years. Above all, ingratitude sickens the heart, and chills and
thickens the very life's-blood of benevolence: till at length our
youthful Nero, soft and susceptible, becomes a hard and cruel tyrant;
and our youthful Timon, the gay, the generous, the beneficent, is
changed into a cold, sour, silent misanthrope.

And as in the case of amiable tempers, so in that also of what are
called useful lives, it must be confessed that their intrinsic worth,
arguing still merely on principles of reason, is apt to be greatly
over-rated. They are often the result of a disposition naturally
bustling and active, which delights in motion, and finds its labour more
than repaid, either by the very pleasure which it takes in its
employments, or by the credit which it derives from them. More than
this; if it be granted that Religion tends in general to produce
usefulness, particularly in the lower orders, who compose a vast
majority of every society; and therefore that these irreligious men of
useful lives are rather exceptions to the general rule; it must at least
be confessed that they are so far useless, or even positively
mischievous, as they either neglect to encourage or actually discourage
that principle, which is the great operative spring of usefulness in the
bulk of mankind.

Thus it might well perhaps be questioned, estimating these men by their
own standard, whether the _particular_ good in this case, is not more
than counterbalanced by the _general_ evil; still more, if their conduct
being brought to a strict account, they should be charged, as they
justly ought, with the loss of the good which, if they had manifestly
and avowedly acted from a higher principle, might have been produced,
not only directly in themselves, but indirectly and remotely in others,
from the extended efficacy of a religious example. They may be compared,
not unaptly, to persons whom some peculiarity of constitution enables to
set at defiance those established rules of living, which must be
observed by the world at large. These healthy debauchees, however they
may plead in their defence that they do themselves no injury, would
probably, but for their excesses, have both enjoyed their health
better, and preserved it longer, as well as have turned it to better
account; and it may at least be urged against them, that they disparage
the laws of temperance, and fatally betray others into the breach of
them, by affording an instance of their being transgressed with
impunity.

But were the merit of the qualities in question greater than it is, and
though it were not liable to the exceptions which have been alleged
against it, yet could they be in no degree admitted, as a compensation
for the want of the supreme love and fear of God, and of a predominant
desire to promote his glory. The observance of one commandment, however
clearly and forcibly enjoined, cannot make up for the neglect of
another, which is enjoined with equal clearness and equal force. To
allow this plea in the present instance, would be to permit men to
abrogate the first table of the law on condition of their obeying the
second. But Religion suffers not any such _composition_ of duties. It is
on the very self same miserable principle, that some have thought to
atone for a life of injustice and rapine by the strictness of their
religious observances. If the former class of men can plead the diligent
discharge of their duties to their fellow-creatures, the latter will
urge that of their's to God. We easily see the falsehood of the plea in
the latter case; and it is only self deceit and partiality which prevent
its being equally visible in the former. Yet so it is; such is the
unequal measure, if I may be allowed the expression, which we deal out
to God, and to each other. It would justly and universally be thought
false confidence in the religious thief or the religious adulterer, (to
admit for the sake of argument such a solecism in terms) to solace
himself with the firm persuasion of the Divine favour: but it will, to
many, appear hard and precise, to deny this firm persuasion of Divine
approbation to the avowedly irreligious man of social and domestic
usefulness.

Will it here be urged, that the writer is not doing justice to his
opponent's argument; which is not, that irreligious men of useful lives
may be excused for neglecting their duties towards God, in consideration
of their exemplary discharge of their duties towards their
fellow-creatures; but that in performing the latter they perform the
former _virtually_, and _substantially_, if not in name?

Can then our opponent deny, that the Holy Scriptures are in nothing more
full, frequent, strong, and unequivocal, than in their injunctions on us
supremely to love and fear God, and to worship and serve him continually
with humble and grateful hearts; habitually regarding him as our
Benefactor, and Sovereign, and Father, and abounding in sentiments of
gratitude and loyalty, and respectful affection? Can he deny that these
positive precepts are rendered, if possible, still more clear, and their
authority still more binding, by illustrations and indirect
confirmations almost innumerable? And who then is that bold intruder
into the counsels of infinite wisdom, who, in palpable contempt of these
precise commands, thus illustrated also and confirmed, will dare to
maintain that, knowing the intention with which they were primarily
given and the ends they were ultimately designed to produce, he may
innocently neglect or violate their plain obligations; on the plea that
he conforms himself, though in a different manner, to this primary
intention, and produces, though by different means, these real and
ultimate ends?

This mode of arguing is one, with which, to say nothing of its insolent
prophaneness, the heart of man, prone to deceive himself and partial in
his own cause, is not fit to be trusted. Here again, more cautious and
jealous in the case of our worldly, than of our religious interests, we
readily discern the fallacy of this reasoning and protest against it,
when it is attempted to be introduced into the commerce of life. We see
clearly that it would afford the means of refining away by turns every
moral obligation. The adulterer might allow himself with a good
conscience, to violate the bed of his unsuspecting friend, whenever he
could assure himself that his crime would escape detection; for then,
where would be the evil and misery, the prevention of which was the real
ultimate object of the prohibition of adultery? The thief, in like
manner, and even the murderer, might find abundant room for the
_innocent_ exercise of their respective occupations, arguing from the
primary intention and real objects of the commands, by which theft and
murder were forbidden. There perhaps exists not a crime, to which this
crooked morality would not furnish some convenient opening.

But this miserable sophistry deserves not that we should spend so much
time in the refutation of it. To discern its fallaciousness, requires
not acuteness of understanding, so much as a little common honesty.
"There is indeed no surer mark of a false and hollow heart, than a
disposition thus to quibble away the clear injunctions of duty and
conscience[81]:" It is the wretched resource of a disingenuous mind,
endeavouring to escape from convictions before which it cannot stand,
and to evade obligations which it dares not disavow.

The arguments which have been adduced would surely be sufficient to
disprove the extravagant pretensions of the qualities under
consideration, though those qualities were _perfect_ in their _nature_.
But they are not perfect. On the contrary, they are radically defective
and corrupt; they are a body without a soul; they want the vital
actuating principle, or rather they are animated and actuated by a false
one. Christianity, let me avail myself of the very words of a friend[82]
in maintaining her argument, is "a Religion of Motives." _That_ only is
Christian practice, which flows from Christian principles; and none else
will be admitted as such by Him, who will be obeyed as well as
worshipped "in spirit and in truth."

This also is a position of which, in our intercourse with our
fellow-creatures, we clearly discern the justice, and universally admit
the force. Though we have received a benefit at the hands of any one, we
scarcely feel grateful, if we do not believe the intention towards us to
have been friendly. Have we served any one from motives of kindness, and
is a return of service made to us? We hardly feel ourselves worthily
requited, except that return be dictated by gratitude. We should think
ourselves rather injured than obliged by it, if it were merely prompted
by a proud unwillingness to continue in our debt[83]. What husband, or
what father, not absolutely dead to every generous feeling, would be
satisfied with a wife or a child; who, though he could not charge them
with any actual breach of their respective obligations, should yet
confessedly perform them from a cold sense of duty, in place of the
quickening energies of conjugal, and filial affection? What an insult
would it be to such an one, to tell him gravely that he had no reason to
complain!

The unfairness, with which we suffer ourselves to reason in matters of
Religion, is no where more striking than in the instance before us. It
were perhaps not unnatural to suppose that, as we cannot see into each
other's bosoms, and have no sure way of judging any one's internal
principles but by his external actions, it would have grown into an
established rule, that when the latter were unobjectionable, the former
were not to be questioned; and on the other hand, that in reference to a
Being who searches the heart, our motives, rather than our external
actions, would be granted to be the just objects of inquiry. But we
exactly reverse these natural principles of reasoning. In the case of
our fellow-creatures, the motive is that which we principally inquire
after and regard. But in the case of our Supreme Judge, from whom no
secrets are hid, we suffer ourselves to believe that internal principles
may be dispensed with, if the external action be performed!

Let us not however be supposed ready to concede, in contradiction to
what has been formerly contended, that where the true motive is wanting,
the external actions themselves will not generally betray the defect.
Who is there that will not confess in the instance so lately put, of a
wife and a child who should discharge their respective obligations
merely from a cold sense of duty, that the inferiority of their
actuating principle would not be confined to its _nature_, but would be
discoverable also in its _effects_? Who is there that does not feel that
these domestic services, thus robbed of their vital spirit, would be so
debased and degraded in our estimation, as to become not barely lifeless
and uninteresting, but even distasteful and loathsome? Who will deny
that these would be performed in fuller measure, with more wakeful and
unwearied attention, as well as with more _heart_; where with the same
sense of duty the enlivening principle of affection should be also
associated?

The enemies of Religion are sometimes apt to compare the irreligious
man, of a temper naturally sweet and amiable, with the religious man of
natural roughness and severity; the irreligious man of natural activity,
with the religious man who is naturally indolent; and thence to draw
their inferences. But this mode of reasoning is surely unjust. If they
would argue the question fairly, they should make their comparisons
between persons of similar natural qualities, and not in one or two
examples, but in a mass of instances. They would then be compelled to
confess the efficacy of Religion, in heightening the benevolence and
increasing the usefulness of men: and to admit that, granting the
occasional but rare existence of genuine and persevering benevolence of
disposition and usefulness of life, where the religious principle is
wanting; yet that experience gives us reason to believe, that true
Religion, while it would have implanted these qualities in persons in
whom before they had no place, would in general have given, to these
very characters in whom they do exist, additional force in the same
direction. It would have rendered the amiable more amiable, the useful
more useful, with fewer inconsistencies, with less abatement.

Let _true Christians_ meanwhile be ever mindful, that _they_ are loudly
called upon to make this argument still more clear, these positions
still less questionable. You are every where commanded to be tender and
sympathetic, diligent and useful; and it is the character of that
"wisdom from above," in which you are to be proficients, that it "is
gentle and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits." Could
the efficacy of Christianity in softening the heart be denied by those,
who saw in the instance of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, that it
was able to transform a bigotted, furious, and cruel persecutor, into an
almost unequalled example of candour, and gentleness, and universal
tenderness and love? Could its spirit of active beneficence be denied by
those, who saw its Divine Author so diligent and unwearied in his
benevolent labours, as to justify the compendious description which was
given of him by a personal witness of his exertions, that he "went about
doing good?" Imitate these blessed examples: so shall you vindicate the
honour of your profession, and "put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men:" so shall you obey those Divine injunctions of adorning the
doctrine of Christ, and of "letting your light shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven." Beat the world at its own best weapons. Let your love be more
affectionate, your mildness less open to irritation, your diligence more
laborious, your activity more wakeful and persevering. Consider
sweetness of temper and activity of mind, if they naturally belong to
you, as talents of special worth and utility, for which you will have to
give account. Carefully watch against whatever might impair them,
cherish them with constant assiduity, keep them in continual exercise,
and direct them to their noblest ends. The latter of these qualities
renders it less difficult, and therefore more incumbent on you, to be
ever abounding in the work of the Lord; and to be copious in the
production of that species of good fruit, of which mankind in general
will be most ready to allow the excellence, because they best understand
its nature. In _your_ instance, the solid substance of Christian
practice is easily susceptible of that high and beautiful polish, which
may attract the attention, and extort the admiration of a careless and
undiscerning world, so slow to notice, and so backward to acknowledge,
intrinsic worth, when concealed under a less sightly exterior. Know
then, and value as ye ought, the honourable office which is especially
devolved on you. Let it be your acceptable service to recommend the
discredited cause, and sustain the fainting interests of Religion, to
furnish to her friends matter of sound and obvious argument, and of
honest triumph; and if your best endeavours cannot conciliate, to refute
at least, and confound her enemies.

If on the other hand, you are conscious that you are naturally rough and
austere, that disappointments have soured, or prosperity has elated you,
or that habits of command have rendered you quick in expression, and
impatient of contradiction; or if, from whatever other cause, you have
contracted an unhappy peevishness of temper, or asperity of manners, or
harshness and severity of language, (remember that these defects are by
no means incompatible with an aptness to perform services of substantial
kindness); if nature has been confirmed by habit till at length your
soul seems thoroughly tinctured with these evil dispositions, yet do not
despair. Remember that the Divine Agency is promised, "to take away the
heart of stone, and give a heart of flesh," of which it is the natural
property to be tender and susceptible. Pray then earnestly and
perseveringly, that the blessed aid of Divine Grace may operate
effectually on your behalf. Beware of acquiescing in the evil tempers in
question, under the idea that they are the ordinary imperfections of the
best of men; that they shew themselves only in little instances; that
they are only occasional, hasty, and transient effusions, when you are
taken off your guard; the passing shade of your mind, and not the
settled colour. Beware of excusing or allowing them in yourself, under
the notion of warm zeal for the cause of Religion and virtue, which you
perhaps own is now and then apt to carry you into somewhat over-great
severity of judgment, or sharpness in reproof. Listen not to these, or
any other such flattering excuses, which your own heart will be but too
ready to suggest to you. Scrutinize yourself rather with rigorous
strictness; and where there is so much room for self-deceit, call in the
aid of some faithful friend, and unbosoming yourself to him without
concealment, ask his impartial and unreserved opinion of your behaviour
and condition. Our unwillingness to do this, often betrays to others,
(not seldom it first discovers to ourselves) that we entertain a secret
distrust of our own character and conduct. Instead also of extenuating
to yourself the criminality of the vicious tempers under consideration,
strive to impress your mind deeply with a sense of it. For this end,
often consider seriously, that these rough and churlish tempers are a
direct contrast to the "meekness and gentleness of Christ;" and that
Christians are strongly and repeatedly enjoined to copy after their
great Model in these particulars, and to be themselves patterns of
"mercy and kindness, and humbleness of mind, and meekness, and long
suffering." They are to "put away all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamour, and evil speaking," not only "being ready to every good
work, but being _gentle_ unto _all_ men," "shewing _all_ meekness unto
_all_ men," "forbearing, forgiving," tender hearted. Remember the
Apostle's declaration, that "if any man bridleth not his tongue, he only
seemeth to be religious, and deceiveth his own heart;" and that it is
one of the characters of that love, without which all pretensions to the
name of Christian are but vain, that "it doth not behave itself
unseemly." Consider how much these acrimonious tempers must break in
upon the peace, and destroy the comfort, of those around you. Remember
also that the honour of your Christian profession is at stake, and be
solicitous not to discredit it: justly dreading lest you should disgust
those whom you ought to conciliate; and by conveying an unfavourable
impression of your principles and character, should incur the guilt of
putting an "offence in your brother's way;" thereby "hindering the
Gospel of Christ," the advancement of which should be your daily and
assiduous care.

Thus having come to the full knowledge of your disease, and to a just
impression of its malignity, strive against it with incessant
watchfulness. Guard with the most jealous circumspection against its
breaking forth into act. Force yourself to abound in little offices of
courtesy and kindness; and you shall gradually experience in the
performance of these a pleasure hitherto unknown, and awaken in yourself
the dormant principles of sensibility. But take not up with external
amendment; guard against a false shew of sweetness of disposition; and
remember that the Christian is not to be satisfied with the world's
superficial courtliness of demeanor, but that his "Love is to be without
dissimulation." Examine carefully, whether the unchristian tempers,
which you would eradicate, are not maintained in vigour by selfishness
and pride; and strive to subdue them effectually, by extirpating the
roots from which they derive their nutriment. Accustom yourself to
endeavour to look attentively upon a careless and inconsiderate world,
which, while it is in such imminent peril, is so ignorant of its danger.
Dwell upon this affecting scene, till it has excited your pity; and this
pity, while it melts the mind to Christian love, shall insensibly
produce a temper of habitual sympathy and softness. By means like these,
perseveringly used in constant dependence on Divine aid, you may
confidentially hope to make continual progress. Among men of the world,
a youth of softness and sweetness will often, as we formerly remarked,
harden into insensibility, and sharpen into moroseness. But it is the
office of Christianity to reverse this order. It is pleasing to witness
this blessed renovation: to see, as life advances, asperities gradually
smoothing down, and roughnesses mellowing away: while the subject of
this happy change experiences within, increasing measures of the comfort
which he diffuses around him; and feeling the genial influences of that
heavenly flame which can thus give life, and warmth, and action, to what
had been hitherto rigid and insensible, looks up with gratitude to him
who has shed abroad this principle of love in his heart;

    Miraturque novas frondes et non sua poma.

Let it not be thought that in the foregoing discussion, the amiable and
useful qualities, where they are not prompted and governed by a
principle of religion, have been spoken of in too disparaging terms. Nor
would I be understood as unwilling to concede to those who are living in
the exercise of them, their proper tribute of commendation: Inest sua
gratia. Of such persons it must be said, in the language of scripture,
"they have their reward." They have it in the inward complacency, which
a sweet temper seldom fails to inspire; in the comforts of the domestic
or social circle; in the pleasure which from the constitution of our
nature accompanies pursuit and action. They are always beloved in
private, and generally respected in public life. But when devoid of
Religion, if the word of God be not a fable, "they cannot enter into the
kingdom of Heaven." True practical Christianity (never let it be
forgotten) consists in devoting the heart and life to God; in being
supremely and habitually governed by a desire to know, and a disposition
to fulfil his will, and in endeavouring under the influence of _these
motives_ to "live to his glory." Where these essential requisites are
wanting, however amiable the character may be, however creditable and
respectable among men; yet as it possesses not the grand distinguishing
essence, it must not be complimented with the name, of Christianity.
This however, when the external decorums of Religion are not violated,
must commonly be a matter between God and a man's own conscience; and we
ought never to forget how strongly we are enjoined to be candid and
liberal in judging of the motives of others, while we are strict in
scrutinizing and severe in questioning our own. And this strict scrutiny
is no where more necessary, because there is no where more room for the
operation of self-deceit. We are all extremely prone to lend ourselves
to the good opinion which, however falsely, is entertained of us by
others; and though we at first confusedly suspect, or even indubitably
know, that their esteem is unfounded, and their praises undeserved, and
that they would have thought and spoken of us very differently, if they
had discerned our secret motives, or had been accurately acquainted with
all the circumstances of our conduct; we gradually suffer ourselves to
adopt their judgment of us, and at length feel that we are in some sort
injured or denied our due, when these false commendations are
contradicted or withheld. Without the most constant watchfulness, and
the most close and impartial self-examination, irreligious people of
amiable tempers, and still more those of useful lives, from the general
popularity of their character, will be particularly liable to become the
dupes of this propensity. Nor is it they only who have here need to be
on their guard: men of real religion will also do well to watch against
this delusion. There is however another danger to which these are still
more exposed, and against which it is the rather necessary to warn them,
because of our having insisted so strongly on their being bound to be
diligent in the discharge of the active duties of life. In their
endeavours to fulfil this obligation, let them specially beware, lest
setting out on right principles, they insensibly lose them in the course
of their progress; lest engaging originally in the business and bustle
of the world, from a sincere and earnest desire to promote the glory of
God, their minds should become so heated and absorbed in the pursuit of
their object, as that the true motive of action should either altogether
cease to be an habitual principle, or should at least lose much of its
life and vigour; lest their thoughts and affections being engrossed by
temporal concerns, their sense of the reality of "unseen things" should
fade away, and they should lose their relish for the employments and
offices of Religion.

The Christian's path is beset with dangers--On the one hand, he justly
dreads an inactive and unprofitable life; on the other, he no less
justly trembles for the loss of that spiritual-mindedness, which is the
very essence and power of his profession. This is not quite the place
for the full discussion of the difficult topic here in question: and if
it were, the writer of these sheets is too conscious of his own
incompetencies, not to be desirous of asking rather than of giving
advice respecting it. Yet, as it is a matter which has often engaged his
most serious consideration, and has been the frequent subject of his
anxious inquiry into the writings and opinions of far better
instructors, he will venture to deliver a few words on it, offering
them with unaffected diffidence.

Does then the Christian discover in himself, judging not from accidental
and occasional feelings, on which little stress is either way to be
laid, but from the permanent and habitual temper of his mind, a settled,
and still more a growing, coldness and indisposition towards the
considerations and offices of Religion? And has he reason to apprehend
that this coldness and indisposition are owing to his being engaged too
much or too earnestly in worldly business, or to his being too keen in
the pursuit of worldly objects? Let him carefully examine the state of
his own heart, and seriously and impartially survey the circumstances of
his situation in life; humbly praying to the Father of light and mercy,
that he may be enabled to see his way clearly in this difficult
emergency. If he finds himself pursuing wealth, or dignity, or
reputation, with earnestness and solicitude; if these things engage many
of his thoughts; if his mind naturally and inadvertently runs out into
contemplations of them; if success in these respects greatly gladdens,
and disappointments dispirit and distress his mind; he has but too plain
grounds for self-condemnation. "No man can serve two masters." The world
is evidently in possession of his heart, and it is no wonder that he
finds himself dull, or rather dead, to the impression and enjoyment of
spiritual things.

But though the marks of predominant estimation and regard for earthly
things be much less clear and determinate; yet if the object which he is
pursuing be one which, by its attainment, would bring him a considerable
accession of riches, station, or honour, let him soberly and fairly
question and examine whether the pursuit be warrantable? here also,
asking the advice of some judicious friend; his backwardness to do
which, in instances like these, should justly lead him, as was before
remarked, to distrust the reasonableness of the schemes which he is
prosecuting. In such a case as this, we have good cause to distrust
ourselves. Though the inward hope, that we are chiefly prompted by a
desire to promote the glory of our Maker, and the happiness of our
fellow-creatures, by increasing our means of usefulness, may suggest
itself to allay, yet let it not altogether remove, our suspicions. It is
not improbable, that beneath this plausible mask we conceal, more
successfully perhaps from ourselves than from others, an inordinate
attachment to the pomps and transitory distinctions of this life; and as
this attachment gains the ascendency, it will ever be found, that our
perception and feeling of the supreme excellence of heavenly things will
proportionably subside.

But when the consequences which would follow from the success of our
worldly pursuits do not render them so questionable, as in the case we
have been just considering; yet, having such good reason to believe that
there is somewhere a flaw, could we but discover it, let us carefully
scrutinize the whole of our conduct, taking that word in its largest
sense; in order to discover whether we may not be living either in the
breach or in the omission of some known duty, and whether it may not
therefore have pleased God to withdraw from us the influence of his Holy
Spirit; particularly inquiring, whether the duties of self-examination,
of secret and public prayer, the reading of the Holy Scriptures, and
the other prescribed means of Grace, have not been either wholly
intermitted at their proper seasons, or at least been performed with
precipitation or distraction? And if we find reason to believe, that the
allotment of time, which it would be most for our spiritual improvement
to assign to our religious offices, is often broken in upon and
curtailed; let us be extremely backward to admit excuses for such
interruptions and abridgments. It is more than probable, for many
obvious reasons, that even our worldly affairs themselves will not on
the long run, go on the better for encroaching upon those hours, which
ought to be dedicated to the more immediate service of God, and to the
cultivation of the inward principles of Religion. Our hearts at least
and our conduct will soon exhibit proofs of the sad effects of this
fatal negligence. They who in a crazy vessel navigate a sea wherein are
shoals and currents innumerable, if they would keep their course or
reach their port in safety, must carefully repair the smallest injuries,
and often throw out their line and take their observations. In the
voyage of life also the Christian who would not make shipwreck of his
faith, while he is habitually watchful and provident, must often make it
his express business to look into his state, and ascertain his progress.

But to resume my subject; let us when engaged in this important
scrutiny, impartially examine ourselves whether the worldly objects
which engross us, are all of them such as properly belong to our
profession, or station, or circumstances in life; which therefore we
could not neglect with a good conscience? If they be, let us consider
whether they do not consume a larger share of our time than they really
require; and whether, by not trifling over our work, by deducting
somewhat which might be spared from our hours of relaxation, or by some
other little management, we might not fully satisfy their just claims,
and yet have an increased overplus of leisure, to be devoted to the
offices of Religion.

But if we deliberately and honestly conclude that we ought not to give
these worldly objects less of our _time_, let us endeavour at least to
give them less of our _hearts_: striving that the settled frame of our
_desires_ and affections may be more spiritual; and that in the motley
intercourses of life we may constantly retain a more lively sense of the
Divine presence, and a stronger impression of the reality of unseen
things; thus corresponding with the Scripture description of true
Christians, "walking by faith and not by sight, and having our
conversation in Heaven."

Above all, let us guard against the temptation, to which we shall
certainly be exposed, of lowering down our views to our state, instead
of endeavouring to rise to the level of our views. Let us rather
determine to know the worst of our case, and strive to be suitably
affected with it; not forward to speak peace to ourselves, but patiently
carrying about with us a deep conviction of our backwardness and
inaptitude to religious duties, and a just sense of our great weakness
and numerous infirmities. This cannot be an unbecoming temper, in those
who are commanded to "work out their salvation with fear and trembling."
It prompts to constant and earnest prayer. It produces that sobriety,
and lowliness and tenderness of mind, that meekness of demeanor and
circumspection in conduct, which are such eminent characteristics of
the true Christian.

Nor is it a state devoid of consolation--"O tarry thou the Lord's
leisure, be strong and he shall comfort thy heart."--"They that wait on
the Lord, shall renew their strength."--"Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted." These Divine assurances sooth and
encourage the Christian's disturbed and dejected mind, and insensibly
diffuse a holy composure. The tint may be solemn, nay even melancholy,
but it is mild and grateful. The tumult of his soul has subsided, and he
is possessed by complacency, and hope, and love. If a sense of
undeserved kindness fill his eyes with tears, they are tears of
reconciliation and joy: while a generous ardour springing up within him
sends him forth to his worldly labours "fervent in spirit;" resolving
through the Divine aid to be henceforth more diligent and exemplary in
living to the Glory of God, and longing meanwhile for that blessed time,
when, "being freed from the bondage of corruption," he shall be enabled
to render to his Heavenly Benefactor more pure and acceptable service.

After having discussed so much at large the whole question concerning
amiable tempers in general, it may be scarcely necessary to dwell upon
that particular class of them which belongs to the head of generous
emotions, or of exquisite sensibility. To these almost all which has
been said above is strictly applicable; to which it may be added, that
the persons in whom the latter qualities most abound, are often far from
conducing to the peace and comfort of their nearest connections. These
qualities indeed may be rendered highly useful instruments, when
enlisted into the service of Religion. But we ought to except against
them the more strongly, when not under her controul; because there is
still greater danger than in the former case, that persons in whom they
abound, may be flattered into a false opinion of themselves by the
excessive commendations often paid to them by others, and by the
beguiling complacencies of their own minds, which are apt to be puffed
up with a proud though secret consciousness of their own superior
acuteness and sensibility. But it is the less requisite to enlarge on
this topic, because it has been well discussed by many, who have
unfolded the real nature of those fascinating qualities; who have well
remarked, that though shewy and apt to catch the eye, they are of a
flimsy and perishable fabric, not of that less gaudy but more
substantial and durable texture, which, imparting permanent warmth and
comfort, will long preserve its more sober honours, and stand the wear
and tear of life, and the vicissitudes of seasons. It has been shewn,
that these qualities often fail us when most we want their aid; that
their possessors can solace themselves with their imaginary exertions in
behalf of ideal misery, and yet shrink from the labours of active
benevolence, or retire with disgust from the homely forms of real
poverty and wretchedness. In fine, the superiority of true Christian
charity and of plain practical beneficence has been ably vindicated; and
the school of Rousseau has been forced to yield to the school of Christ,
when the question has been concerning the best means of promoting the
comfort of family life, or the temporal well-being of society[84].


SECTION V.

_Some other grand defects in the practical system of the Bulk of nominal
Christians._

In the imperfect sketch which has been drawn of the Religion of the bulk
of nominal Christians, their fundamental error respecting the essential
nature of Christianity has been discussed, and traced into some of its
many mischievous consequences. Several of their particular
misconceptions and allowed defects have also been pointed out and
illustrated. It may not be improper to close the survey by noticing
some others, for the existence of which we may now appeal to almost
every part of the preceding delineation.

In the first place, then, there appears throughout, both in the
principles and allowed conduct of the bulk of nominal Christians, a most
inadequate idea of the _guilt and evil of sin_. We every where find
reason to remark, that, as was formerly observed, Religion is suffered
to dwindle away into a mere matter of _police_. Hence the guilt of
actions is estimated, not by the proportion in which, according to
Scripture, they are offensive to God, but by that in which they are
injurious to society. Murder, theft, fraud in all its shapes, and some
species of lying, are manifestly, and in an eminent degree, injurious to
social happiness. How different accordingly, in the moral scale, is the
place they hold, from that which is assigned to idolatry, to general
irreligion, to swearing, drinking, fornication, lasciviousness,
sensuality, excessive dissipation; and in particular circumstances, to
pride, wrath, malice, and revenge!

Indeed, several of the above-mentioned vices are held to be grossly
criminal in the lower ranks, because manifestly ruinous to their
temporal interests: but in the higher, they are represented as "losing
half their evil by losing all their grossness," as flowing naturally
from great prosperity, from the excess of gaiety and good humour; and
they are accordingly "regarded with but a small degree of
disapprobation, and censured very slightly or not at all[85]."--"Non
meus hic sermo est." These are the remarks of authors, who have
surveyed the stage of human life with more than ordinary observation;
one of whom in particular cannot be suspected of having been misled by
religious prejudices, to form a judgment of the superior orders too
unfavourable and severe.

Will these positions however be denied? Will it be maintained that there
is not the difference already stated, in the moral estimation of these
different classes of vices? Will it be said, that the one class is
indeed more generally restrained, and more severely punished by human
laws, because more properly cognizable by human judicatures, and more
directly at war with the well-being of society; but that when brought
before the tribunal of internal opinion they are condemned with equal
rigour?

Facts may be denied, and charges laughed out of countenance: but where
the general sentiment and feeling of mankind are in question, our common
language is often the clearest and most impartial witness; and the
conclusions thus furnished, are not to be parried by wit, or eluded by
sophistry. In the present case, our ordinary modes of speech furnish
sufficient matter for the determination of the argument; and abundantly
prove our disposition to consider as matters of small account, such sins
as are not held to be injurious to the community. We invent for them
diminutive and qualifying terms, which, if not, as in the common uses of
language[86], to be admitted as signs of approbation and good will, must
at least be confessed to be proofs of our tendency to regard them with
palliation and indulgence. Free-thinking, gallantry, jollity[87], and a
thousand similar phrases might be adduced as instances. But it is worthy
of remark, that no such soft and qualifying terms are in use, for
expressing the smaller degrees of theft, or fraud, or forgery, or any
other of those offences, which are committed by men against their
fellow-creatures, and in the suppression of which we are interested by
our regard to our temporal concerns.

The charge which we are urging is indeed undeniable. In the case of any
question of honour, or of moral honesty, we are sagacious in discerning
and inexorable in judging the offence. No allowance is made for the
suddenness of surprise, or the strength of temptations. One single
failure is presumed to imply the absence of the moral or honourable
principle. The memory is retentive on these occasions, and the man's
character is blasted for life. Here, even the mere suspicion of having
once offended can scarcely be got over: "There is an aukward story about
that man, which must be explained before he and I can become
acquainted." But in the case of sins against God, there is no such
watchful jealousy, none of this rigorous logic. A man may go on in the
frequent commission of known sins, yet no such inference is drawn
respecting the absence of the religious principle. On the contrary, we
say of him, that "though his _conduct_ be a little incorrect, his
_principles_ are untouched;"--that he has _a good heart_: and such a man
may go quietly through life, with the titles of a _mighty worthy
creature_, and a _very good Christian_.

But in the Word of God actions are estimated by a far less accommodating
standard. There we read of no little sins. Much of our Saviour's sermon
on the mount, which many of the class we are condemning affect highly to
admire, is expressly pointed against so dangerous a misconception.
_There_, no such distinction is made between the rich and the poor. No
notices are to be traced of one scale of morals for the higher, and of
another for the lower classes of society. Nay, the former are expressly
guarded against any such vain imagination; and are distinctly warned,
that their condition in life is the more dangerous, because of the more
abundant temptations to which it exposes them. Idolatry, fornication,
lasciviousness, drunkenness, revellings, inordinate affection, are, by
the apostle likewise classed with theft and murder, and with what we
hold in even still greater abomination; and concerning them all it is
pronounced alike, that "they which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God[88]."

In truth, the instance which we have lately specified, of the loose
system of these nominal Christians, betrays a fatal absence of the
principle which is the very foundation of all Religion. Their slight
notions of the guilt and evil of sin discover an utter want of all
suitable reverence for the Divine Majesty. This principle is justly
termed in Scripture, "the beginning of wisdom," and there is perhaps no
one quality which it is so much the studious endeavour of the sacred
writers to impress upon the human heart[89].

Sin is considered in Scripture as rebellion against the sovereignty of
God, and every different act of it equally violates his law, and, if
persevered in, disclaims his supremacy. To the inconsiderate and the gay
this doctrine may seem harsh, while, vainly fluttering in the sunshine
of worldly prosperity, they lull themselves into a fond security. "But
the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein shall
be burnt up"--"Seeing then, that all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
Godliness?"[90] We are but an atom in the universe.--Worlds upon worlds
surround us, all probably full of intelligent creatures, to whom, now or
hereafter, we may be a spectacle, and afford an example of the Divine
procedure. Who then shall take upon him to pronounce what might be the
issue, if sin were suffered to pass unpunished in one corner of this
universal empire? Who shall say what confusion might be the consequence,
what disorder it might spread through the creation of God? Be this
however as it may, the language of Scripture is clear and
decisive;--"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people
that forget God."

It should be carefully observed too, that these awful denunciations of
the future punishment of sin derive additional weight from this
consideration, that they are represented, not merely as a judicial
sentence which, without violence to the settled order of things, might
be remitted through the mere mercy of our Almighty Governor, but as
arising out of the established course of nature; as happening in the way
of natural consequence, just as a cause is necessarily connected with
its effect; as resulting from certain connections and relations which
rendered them suitable and becoming. It is stated, that the kingdom of
God and the kingdom of Satan are both set up in the world, and that to
the one or the other of these we must belong. "The righteous have
_passed_ from death unto life"--"they are delivered from the power of
darkness, and are translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son[91]."
They are become "the children," and "the subjects of God." While on
earth, they love his day, his service, his people; they "speak good of
his name;" they abound in his works. Even here they are in some degree
possessed of his image, by and by it shall be perfected; they shall
awake up after his "likeness," and being "heirs of eternal life," they
shall receive "an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that
fadeth not away."

Of sinners, on the other hand, it is declared, that "they are of their
father the devil;" while on earth, they are styled "his children," "his
servants;" they are said "to do his works," "to hold of his side," to
be, "subjects of his kingdom:" at length "they shall partake his
portion," when the merciful Saviour shall be changed into an avenging
Judge, and shall pronounce that dreadful sentence, "depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels."

Is it possible that these declarations should not strike terror, or at
least excite serious and fearful apprehension in the lightest and most
inconsiderate mind? But the imaginations of men are fatally prone to
suggest to them fallacious hopes in the very face of these positive
declarations. "We cannot persuade ourselves that God will in fact prove
so severe." It was the very delusion to which our first parents
listened; "Ye shall not surely die."

Let me ask these rash men, who are thus disposed to trifle with their
immortal interests, had they lived in the antediluvian world, would they
have conceived it possible that God would then execute his predicted
threatening? Yet the event took place at the appointed time; the flood
came and swept them all away: and this awful instance of the anger of
God against sin is related in the inspired writings for our instruction.
Still more to rouse us to attention, the record is impressed in
indelible characters on the solid substance of the very globe we
inhabit; which thus, in every country upon earth, furnishes practical
attestations to the truth of the sacred writings, and to the actual
accomplishment of their awful predictions. For myself I must declare,
that I never can read without awe the passage, in which our Saviour is
speaking of the state of the world at the time of this memorable event.
The wickedness of men is represented to have been great and prevalent;
yet not as we are ready to conceive, such as to interrupt the course,
and shake the very frame of society. The general face of things was,
perhaps, not very different from that which is exhibited in many of the
European nations. It was a selfish, a luxurious, an irreligious, and an
inconsiderate world. They were called, but they would not hearken; they
were warned, but they would not believe--"They did eat, they drank, they
married wives, they were given in marriage:" such is the account of one
of the Evangelists; in that of another it is stated nearly in the same
words; "They were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
and knew not until the flood came and swept them all away."

Again, we see throughout, in the system which we have been describing a
most inadequate conception of the difficulty of becoming true
Christians; and an utter forgetfulness of its being the great business
of life to secure our admission into Heaven, and to prepare our hearts
for its service and enjoyments. The general notion appears to be, that,
if born in a country of which Christianity is the established religion,
we are born Christians. We do not therefore look out for positive
evidence of our really being of that number; but putting the _onus
probandi_, (if it may be so expressed) on the wrong side, we conceive
ourselves such _of course_, except our title be disproved by positive
evidence to the contrary. And we are so slow in giving ear to what
conscience urges to us on this side; so dexterous in justifying what is
clearly wrong, in palliating what we cannot justify, in magnifying the
merit of what is fairly commendable, in flattering ourselves that our
habits of vice are only occasional acts, and in multiplying our single
acts into habits of virtue, that we must be bad indeed, to be compelled
to give a verdict against ourselves. Besides, having no suspicion of our
state, we do not set ourselves in earnest to the work of
self-examination; but only receive in a confused and hasty way some
occasional notices of our danger, when sickness, or the loss of a
friend, or the recent commission of some act of vice of greater size
than ordinary, has awakened in our consciences a more than usual degree
of sensibility.

Thus, by the generality, it is altogether forgotten, that the Christian
has a great work to execute; that of forming himself after the pattern
of his Lord and Master, through the operation of the Holy Spirit of God,
which is promised to our fervent prayers and diligent endeavours.
Unconscious of the obstacles which impede, and of the enemies which
resist their advancement; they are naturally forgetful also of the ample
provision which is in store, for enabling them to surmount the one, and
to conquer the other. The scriptural representations of the state of the
Christian on earth, by the images of "a race," and "a warfare;" of its
being necessary to rid himself of every encumbrance which might retard
him in the one, and to furnish himself with the whole armour of God for
being victorious in the other, are, so far as these nominal Christians
are concerned, figures of no propriety or meaning. As little (as was
formerly shewn) have they, in correspondence with the Scripture
descriptions of the feelings and language of real Christians, any idea
of acquiring a relish while on earth, for the worship and service of
Heaven. If the truth must be told, their notion is rather a confused
idea of future gratification in Heaven, in return for having put a force
upon their inclinations, and endured so much religion while on earth.

But all this is only _nominal_ Christianity, which exhibits a more
inadequate image of her real excellencies, than the cold copyings, by
some insipid pencil, convey of the force and grace of Nature, or of
Raphael. In the language of Scripture, Christianity is not a
geographical, but a moral term. It is not the being a native of a
Christian country: it is _a condition, a state_; the possession of a
_peculiar nature_, with the _qualities_ and _properties_ which belong to
it.

Farther than this, it is a state into which we are not _born_, but into
which we must be _translated_; a nature which we do not _inherit_, but
into which we are to be _created anew_. To the undeserved grace of God,
which is promised on our use of the appointed means, we must be indebted
for the attainment of this nature; and, to acquire and make sure of it,
is that great "work of our salvation," which we are commanded to "work
out with fear and trembling." We are every where reminded, that this is
a matter of labour and difficulty, requiring continual watchfulness, and
unceasing effort, and unwearied patience. Even to the very last, towards
the close of a long life consumed in active service, or in cheerful
suffering, we find St. Paul himself declaring, that he conceived bodily
self-denial and mental discipline to be indispensably necessary to his
very safety. Christians, who are really worthy of the name, are
represented as being "made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in
light;" as "waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ;" as
"looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of God." It is
stated as being enough to make them happy, that "Christ should receive
them to himself;" and the songs of the blessed spirits in Heaven are
described to be the same, as those in which the servants of God on earth
pour forth their gratitude and adoration.

Conscious therefore of the indispensable necessity, and of the arduous
nature of the service in which he is engaged, the true Christian sets
himself to the work with vigour, and prosecutes it with diligence. His
motto is that of the painter; "_nullus dies sine linea_." Fled as it
were from a country in which the plague is raging, he thinks it not
enough just to pass the boundary line, but would put out of doubt his
escape beyond the limbs of infection. Prepared to meet with
difficulties, he is not discouraged when they occur; warned of his
numerous adversaries, he is not alarmed on their approach, or unprovided
for encountering them. He knows that the beginnings of every new course
may be expected to be rough and painful; but he is assured that the
paths on which he is entering will ere long seem smoother, and become
indeed "paths of pleasantness and peace."

Now of the state of such an one the expressions of Pilgrim and Stranger
are a lively description; and all the other figures and images, by which
Christians are represented in Scripture, have in his case a determinate
meaning and a just application. There is indeed none, by which the
Christian's state on earth is in the word of God more frequently imaged,
or more happily illustrated, than by that of a journey: and it may not
be amiss to pause for a while in order to survey it under that
resemblance. The Christian is travelling on business through a strange
country, in which he is commanded to execute his work with diligence,
and pursue his course homeward with alacrity. The fruits which he sees
by the way-side he gathers with caution; he drinks of the streams with
moderation; he is thankful when the sun shines, and his way is
pleasant; but if it be rough and rainy, he cares not much, he is but a
traveller. He is prepared for vicissitudes; he knows that he must expect
to meet with them in the stormy and uncertain climate of this world. But
he is travelling to "a better country," a country of unclouded light and
undisturbed serenity. He finds also by experience, that when he has had
the least of external comforts, he has always been least disposed to
loiter; and if for the time it be a little disagreeable, he can solace
himself with the idea of his being thereby forwarded in his course. In a
less unfavourable season, he looks round him with an eye of observation;
he admires what is beautiful; he examines what is curious; he receives
with complacency the refreshments which are set before him, and enjoys
them with thankfulness. Nor does he churlishly refuse to associate with
the inhabitants of the country through which he is passing; nor, so far
as he may, to speak their language, and adopt their fashions. But he
neither suffers pleasure, nor curiosity, nor society, to take up too
much of his time, and is still intent on transacting the business which
he has to execute, and on prosecuting the journey which he is ordered to
pursue. He knows also that, to the very end of life, his journey will be
through a country in which he has many enemies; that his way is beset
with snares; that temptations throng around him, to seduce him from his
course or check his advancement in it; that the very air disposes to
drowsiness, and that therefore to the very last it will be requisite for
him to be circumspect and collected. Often therefore he examines
whereabouts he is, how he has got forward, and whether or not he is
travelling in the right direction. Sometimes he seems to himself to
make considerable progress, sometimes he advances but slowly, too often
he finds reason to fear that he has fallen backward in his course. Now
he is cheered with hope, and gladdened by success; now he is disquieted
with doubts, and damped by disappointments. Thus while in nominal
Christians, Religion is a dull uniform thing, and they have no
conception of the desires and disappointments, the hopes and fears, the
joys and sorrows, which it is calculated to bring into exercise; in the
true Christian all is life and motion, and his great work calls forth
alternately the various passions of the soul. Let it not therefore be
imagined that his is a state of unenlivened toil and hardship. His very
labours are "the labours of love;" if "he has need of patience," it is
"the patience of hope;" and he is cheered in his work by the constant
assurance of present support, and of final victory. Let it not be
forgotten, that this is the very idea given us of happiness by one of
the ablest examiners of the human mind; "a constant employment for a
desired end, with the consciousness of continual progress." So true is
the Scripture declaration, that "Godliness has the promise of the life
that now is, as well as of that which is to come."

Our review of the character of the bulk of nominal Christians has
exhibited abundant proofs of their allowed defectiveness in that great
constituent of the true Christian character, _the love of God_. Many
instances, in proof of this assertion, have been incidentally pointed
out, and the charge is in itself so obvious, that it were superfluous to
spend much time in endeavouring to establish it. Put the question fairly
to the test. Concerning the proper marks and evidences of affection,
there can be little dispute. Let the most candid investigator examine
the character, and conduct, and language of the persons of whom we have
been speaking; and he will be compelled to acknowledge, that so far as
love towards the Supreme Being is in question, these marks and evidences
are no where to be met with. It is in itself a decisive evidence of a
contrary feeling in those nominal Christians, that they find no pleasure
in the service and worship of God. Their devotional acts resemble less
the free-will offerings of a grateful heart, than that constrained and
reluctant homage, which is exacted by some hard master from his
oppressed dependents, and paid with cold sullenness, and slavish
apprehension. It was the very charge brought by God against his
ungrateful people of old, that, while they called him Sovereign and
Father, they withheld from him the regards which severally belong to
those respected and endearing appellations. Thus we likewise think it
enough to offer to the most excellent and amiable of Beings, to our
supreme and unwearied Benefactor, a dull, artificial, heartless
gratitude, of which we should be ashamed in the case of a
fellow-creature, who had ever so small a claim on our regard and
thankfulness!

It may be of infinite use to establish in our minds a strong and
habitual sense of that first and great commandment--"Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength." This passion, operative and vigorous
in its very nature, like a master spring, would put and maintain in
action all the complicated movements of the human soul. Soon also would
it terminate many practical questions concerning the allowableness of
certain compliances; questions which, with other similar difficulties,
are often only the cold offspring of a spirit of reluctant submission,
and cannot stand the encounter of this trying principle. If, for
example, it were disputed, whether or not the law of God were _so_
strict as had been stated, in condemning the slightest infraction of its
precepts; yet, when, from the precise demands of justice, the appeal
should be made to the more generous principle of love, there would be at
once an end of the discussion. Fear will deter from acknowledged crimes,
and self-interest will bribe to laborious services: but it is the
peculiar glory, and the very characteristic, of this more generous
passion, to shew itself in ten thousand little and undefinable acts of
sedulous attention, which love alone can pay, and of which, when paid,
love alone can estimate the value. Love outruns the deductions of
reasoning; it scorns the refuge of casuistry; it requires not the slow
process of laborious and undeniable proof that an action would be
injurious and offensive, or another beneficial or gratifying, to the
object of affection. The least hint, the slightest surmise, is
sufficient to make it start from the former, and fly with eagerness to
the latter.

I am well aware that I am now about to tread on very tender ground; but
it would be an improper deference to the opinions and manners of the age
altogether to avoid it. There has been much argument concerning the
lawfulness of theatrical amusements[92]. Let it be sufficient to
remark, that the controversy would be short indeed, if the question were
to be tried by this criterion of love to the Supreme Being. If there
were any thing of that sensibility for the honour of God, and of that
zeal in his service, which we shew in behalf of our earthly friends, or
of our political connections, should we seek our pleasure in that place
which the debauchee, inflamed with wine, or bent on the gratification of
other licentious appetites, finds most congenial to his state and temper
of mind? In that place, from the neighbourhood of which, (how justly
termed a school of morals might hence alone be inferred) decorum, and
modesty, and regularity retire, while riot and lewdness are invited to
the spot, and invariably select it for their chosen residence! where the
sacred name of God is often prophaned! where sentiments are often heard
with delight, and motions and gestures often applauded, which would not
be tolerated in private company, but which may far exceed the utmost
licence allowed in the social circle, without at all transgressing the
large bounds of theatrical decorum! where, when moral principles are
inculcated, they are not such as a Christian ought to cherish in his
bosom, but such as it must be his daily endeavour to extirpate; not
those which Scripture warrants, but those which it condemns as false and
spurious, being founded in pride and ambition, and the over-valuation of
human favour! where surely, if a Christian should trust himself at all,
it would be requisite for him to prepare himself with a double portion
of watchfulness and seriousness of mind, instead of selecting it as the
place in which he may throw off his guard, and unbend without danger!
The justness of this last remark, and the general tendency of
theatrical amusements, is attested by the same well instructed master in
the science of human life, to whom we had before occasion to refer. By
him they are recommended as the most efficacious expedient for relaxing,
among any people, that "_preciseness and austerity_ of morals," to use
his own phrase, which, under the name of holiness, it is the business of
Scripture to inculcate and enforce. Nor is this position merely
theoretical. The experiment was tried, and tried successfully, in a city
upon the continent[93], in which it was wished to corrupt the simple
morality of purer times.

Let us try the question by a parallel instance.

What judgment should we form of the warmth of that man's attachment to
his Sovereign, who, at seasons of recreation, should seek his pleasures
in scenes as ill accordant with the principle of loyalty, as those of
which we have been speaking are with the genius of religion? If for this
purpose he were to select the place, and frequent the amusements, to
which Democrats and Jacobins[94] should love to resort for
entertainment, and in which they should find themselves so much at home,
as invariably to select the spot for their abiding habitation; where
dialogue, and song, and the intelligible language of gesticulation,
should be used to convey ideas and sentiments, not perhaps palpably
treasonable, or directly falling within the strict precision of any
legal limits, but yet palpably contrary to the spirit of monarchical
government; which, further, the highest authorities had recommended as
sovereign specifics for cooling the warmth, and enlarging the narrowness
of an excessive loyalty! What opinion should we form of the delicacy of
that friendship, or of the fidelity of that love, which, in relation to
their respective objects, should exhibit the same contradictions?

In truth, the _hard measure_, if the phrase may be pardoned, which, as
has been before remarked, we give to God; and the very different way in
which we allow ourselves to act, and speak, and feel, where he is
concerned, from that which we require, or even practise in the case of
our fellow-creatures, is in itself the most decisive proof that the
principle of the love of God, if not altogether extinct in us, is at
least in the lowest possible degree of languor.

From examining the degree in which the bulk of nominal Christians are
defective in the love of God, if we proceed to inquire concerning the
strength of their love towards their fellow-creatures, the writer is
well aware of its being generally held, that here at least they may
rather challenge praise than submit to censure. And the many beneficent
institutions in which this country abounds, probably above every other,
whether in ancient or modern times, may be perhaps appealed to in proof
of the opinion. Much of what might have been otherwise urged in the
discussion of this topic, has been anticipated in the inquiry into the
grounds of the extravagant estimation, assigned to amiable tempers and
useful lives, when unconnected with religious principle. What was then
stated may serve in many cases to lower, in the present instance, the
loftiness of the pretensions of these nominal Christians; and we shall
hereafter have occasion to mention another consideration, of which the
effect must be, still further to reduce their claims. Meanwhile, let it
suffice to remark, that we must not rest satisfied with merely
superficial appearances, if we would form a fair estimate of the degree
of purity and vigour, in which the principle of good will towards men
warms the bosoms of the generality of professed Christians in the higher
and more opulent classes in this country. In a highly polished state of
society, for instance, we do not expect to find moroseness; and in an
age of great profusion, though we may reflect with pleasure on those
numerous charitable institutions, which are justly the honour of Great
Britain; we are not too hastily to infer a strong principle of internal
benevolence, from liberal contributions to the relief of indigence and
misery. When these contributions indeed are equally abundant in frugal
times, or from individuals personally oeconomical, the source from
which they originate becomes less questionable. But a vigorous principle
of philanthropy must not be at once conceded, on the ground of liberal
benefactions to the poor, in the case of one who by his liberality in
this respect is curtailed in no necessary, is abridged of no luxury, is
put to no trouble either of thought or of action; who, not to impute a
desire of being praised for his benevolence, is injured in no man's
estimation; in whom also familiarity with large sums has produced that
freedom in the expenditure of money, which (thereby affording a fresh
illustration of the justice of the old proverb, "Familiarity breeds
contempt,") it never fails to operate, except in minds under the
influence of a strong principle of avarice.

Our conclusion, perhaps, would be less favourable, but not less fair, if
we were to try the characters in question by those surer tests, which
are stated by the Apostle to be less ambiguous marks of a real spirit of
philanthropy. The strength of every passion is to be estimated by its
victory over passions of an opposite nature. What judgment then shall we
form of the force of the benevolence of the age, when measured by this
standard? How does it stand the shock, when it comes into encounter with
our pride, our vanity, our self-love, our self-interest, our love of
ease or of pleasure, with our ambition, with our desire of worldly
estimation? Does it make us self-denying, that we may be liberal in
relieving others? Does it make us persevere in doing good in spite of
ingratitude; and only pity the ignorance, or prejudice, or malice, which
misrepresents our conduct, or misconstrues our motives? Does it make us
forbear from what we conceive may probably prove the occasion of harm
to a fellow-creature; though the harm should not seem naturally or even
fairly to flow from our conduct, but to be the result only of his own
obstinacy or weakness? Are we slow to believe any thing to our
neighbour's disadvantage? and when we cannot but credit it, are we
disposed rather to cover, and as far as we justly can, to palliate, than
to divulge or aggravate it? Suppose an opportunity to occur of
performing a kindness, to one who from pride or vanity should be loth to
receive, or to be known to receive, a favour from us; should we honestly
endeavour, so far as we could with truth, to lessen in his own mind and
in that of others the merit of our good offices, and by so doing dispose
him to receive them with diminished reluctance, and a less painful
weight of obligation? This end, however, must be accomplished, if to be
accomplished at all, by a simple and fair explanation of the
circumstances, which may render the action in no wise inconvenient to
ourselves, though highly beneficial to another; not by speeches of
affected disparagement, which we might easily foresee, and in fact do
foresee, must produce the contrary effect. Can we, from motives of
kindness, incur or risk the charge of being deficient in spirit, in
penetration, or in foresight? Do we tell another of his faults, when the
communication, though probably beneficial to _him_, cannot be made
without embarrassment or pain to ourselves, and may probably lessen his
regard for our person, or his opinion of our judgment? Can we stifle a
repartee which would wound another; though the utterance of it would
gratify our vanity, and the suppression of it may disparage our
character for wit? If any one advance a mistaken proposition, in an
instance wherein the error may be mischievous to him; can we, to the
prejudice perhaps of our credit for discernment, forbear to contradict
him in public, if it be probable that in so doing, by piquing his pride
we might only harden him in his error? and can we reserve our counsel
for some more favourable season, the "mollia tempora fandi," when it may
be communicated without offence? If we have recommended to any one a
particular line of conduct, or have pointed out the probable mischiefs
of the opposite course, and if our admonitions have been neglected, are
we _really hurt_ when our predictions of evil are accomplished? Is our
love superior to envy, and jealousy, and emulation? Are we acute to
discern and forward to embrace any fair opportunity of promoting the
interests of another; if it be in a line wherein we ourselves also are
moving, and in which we think our progress has not been proportioned to
our desert? Can we take pleasure in bringing his merits into notice, and
in obviating the prejudices which may have damped his efforts, or in
removing the obstacles which may have retarded his advancement? If even
to this extent we should be able to stand the scrutiny, let it be
farther asked how, in the case of our enemies, do we correspond with the
Scripture representations of love? Are we meek under provocations, ready
to forgive, and apt to forget injuries? Can we, with sincerity, "bless
them that curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them
which despitefully use us, and persecute us?" Do we prove to the
Searcher of hearts a real spirit of forgiveness, by our forbearing not
only from avenging an injury when it is in our power, but even from
telling to any one how ill we have been used; and that too when we are
not kept silent by a consciousness that we should lose credit by
divulging the circumstance? And lastly, can we not only be content to
return our enemies good for evil, (for this return, as has been remarked
by one of the greatest of uninspired authorities,[95] may be prompted by
pride and repaid by self-complacency) but, when they are successful or
unsuccessful without our having contributed to their good or ill
fortune, can we not only be content, but cordially rejoice in their
prosperity, or sympathize with their distresses?

These are but a few specimens of the characteristic marks which might be
stated, of a true predominant benevolence; yet even these may serve to
convince us how far the bulk of nominal Christians fall short of the
requisitions of Scripture, even in that particular, which exhibits their
character in the most favourable point of view. The truth is, we do not
enough call to mind the exalted tone of Scripture morality; and are
therefore apt to value ourselves on the heights to which we attain, when
a better acquaintance with our standard would have convinced us of our
falling far short of the elevation prescribed to us. It is in the very
instance of the most difficult of the duties lately specified, the
forgiveness and love of enemies, that our Saviour points out to our
imitation the example of our Supreme Benefactor. After stating that, by
being kind and courteous to those who, even in the world's opinion, had
a title to our good offices and good will, we should in vain set up a
claim to _Christian_ benevolence, he emphatically adds, "Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

We must here again resort to a topic which was lately touched on, that
of theatrical amusements; and recommend it to their advocates to
consider them in connection with the duty, of which we have now been
exhibiting some of the leading characters.

It is an undeniable fact, for the truth of which we may safely appeal to
every age and nation, that the situation of the performers, particularly
of those of the female sex, is remarkably unfavourable to the
maintenance and growth of the religious and moral principle, and of
course highly dangerous to their eternal interests. Might it not then be
fairly asked, how far, in all who confess the truth of this position, it
is consistent with the sensibility of Christian benevolence, merely for
the entertainment of an idle hour, to encourage the continuance of any
of their fellow-creatures in such a way of life, and to take a part in
tempting any others to enter into it? how far, considering that, by
their own concession, they are employing whatever they spend in this
way, in sustaining and advancing the cause of vice, and consequently in
promoting misery; they are herein bestowing this share of their wealth
in a manner agreeable to the intentions of their holy and benevolent
Benefactor? how far also they are not in this instance the rather
criminal, from there being so many sources of innocent pleasure open to
their enjoyment? how far they are acting conformably to that golden
principle of doing to others as we would they should do to us? how far
they harmonize with the spirit of the Apostle's affectionate
declaration, that he would deny himself for his whole life the most
innocent indulgence, nay, what might seem almost an absolute necessary,
rather than cause his weak fellow Christian to offend? or lastly, how
far they are influenced by the solemn language of our Saviour himself;
"It must needs be that offences come, but woe to that man by whom the
offence cometh; it were better for him that a mill-stone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were cast into the depths of the sea?" The
present instance is perhaps another example of our taking greater
concern in the temporal, than in the spiritual interests of our fellow
creatures. That man would be deemed, and justly deemed, of an inhuman
temper, who in these days were to seek his amusement in the combats of
gladiators and prize fighters: yet _Christians_ appear conscious of no
inconsistency, in finding their pleasure in spectacles maintained at the
risk at least, if not the ruin, of the eternal happiness of those who
perform in them!


SECT. VI.

_Grand defect.--Neglect of the peculiar Doctrines of Christianity._

But the grand radical defect in the practical system of these nominal
Christians, is their forgetfulness of all the peculiar doctrines of the
Religion which they profess--the corruption of human nature--the
atonement of the Saviour--and the sanctifying influence of the Holy
Spirit.

Here then we come again to the grand distinction, between the Religion
of Christ and that of the bulk of nominal Christians in the present
day. The point is of the utmost _practical importance_, and we would
therefore trace it into its actual effects.

There are, it is to be apprehended, not a few, who having been for some
time hurried down the stream of dissipation in the indulgence of all
their natural appetites, (except, perhaps, that they were restrained
from very gross vice by a regard to character, or by the yet unsubdued
voice of conscience); and who, having all the while thought little, or
scarcely at all about Religion, "living," to use the emphatical language
of Scripture, "without God in the world," become in some degree
impressed with a sense of the infinite importance of Religion. A fit of
sickness, perhaps, or the loss of some friend or much loved relative, or
some other stroke of adverse fortune, damps their spirits, awakens them
to a practical conviction of the precariousness of all human things, and
turns them to seek for some more stable foundation of happiness than
this world can afford. Looking into themselves ever so little, they
become sensible that they must have offended God. They resolve
accordingly to set about the work of reformation.--Here it is that we
shall recognize the fatal effects of the prevailing ignorance of the
real nature of Christianity, and the general forgetfulness of its grand
peculiarities. These men _wish_ to reform, but they know neither the
real _nature_ of their distemper nor its true remedy. They are aware,
indeed, that they must "cease to do evil, and learn to do well;" that
they must relinquish their habits of vice, and attend more or less to
the duties of Religion: but having no conception of the actual
malignity of the disease under which they labour, or of the perfect cure
which the Gospel has provided for it, or of the manner in which that
cure is to be effected,

    "They do but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    While rank corruption, mining all within,
    Infects unseen."

It often happens therefore but too naturally in this case, that where
they do not soon desist from their attempt at reformation, and relapse
into their old habits of sin; they take up with a partial and scanty
amendment, and fondly flatter themselves that it is a thorough change.
They now conceive that they have a right to take to themselves the
comforts of Christianity. Not being able to raise their practice up to
their standard of right, they lower their standard to their practice:
they sit down for life contented with their present attainments,
beguiled by the complacencies of their own minds, and by the favourable
testimony of surrounding friends; and it often happens, particularly
where there is any degree of strictness in formal and ceremonial
observances, that there are no people more jealous of their character
for Religion.

Others perhaps go farther than this. The dread of the wrath to come has
sunk deeper into their hearts; and for a while they strive with all
their might to resist their evil propensities, and to walk without
stumbling in the path of duty. Again and again they resolve; again and
again they break their resolutions[96]: All their endeavours are
foiled, and they become more and more convinced of their own moral
weakness, and of the strength of their indwelling corruption. Thus
groaning under the enslaving power of sin, and experiencing the futility
of the utmost efforts which they can use for effecting their
deliverance, they are tempted (sometimes it is to be feared they yield
to the temptation) to give up all in despair, and to acquiesce under
their wretched captivity, conceiving it impossible to break their
chains. Sometimes, probably, it even happens that they are driven to
seek for refuge from their disquietude in the suggestions of infidelity;
and to quiet their troublesome consciences by arguments which they
themselves scarcely believe, at the very moment in which they suffer
themselves to be lulled asleep by them. In the mean time while this
conflict has been going on, their walk is sad and comfortless, and their
couch is nightly watered with tears. These men are pursuing the right
object, but they mistake the way in which it is to be obtained. _The
path in which they are now treading is not that which the Gospel has
provided for conducting them to true holiness, nor will they find in it
any solid peace._

Persons under these circumstances naturally seek for religious
instruction. They turn over the works of our modern Religionists, and
as well as they can collect the advice addressed to men in their
situation: the substance of it is, at the best, of this sort; "Be sorry
indeed for your sins, and discontinue the practice of them, but do not
make yourselves so uneasy. Christ died for the sins of the whole world.
Do your utmost; discharge with fidelity the duties of your stations, not
neglecting your religious offices; and fear not but that in the end all
will go well; and that having thus performed the conditions required on
your part, you will at last obtain forgiveness of our merciful Creator
through the merits of Jesus Christ, and be aided, where your own
strength shall be insufficient, by the assistance of his Holy Spirit.
Meanwhile you cannot do better than read carefully such books of
practical divinity, as will instruct you in the principles of a
Christian life. We are excellently furnished with works of this nature;
and it is by the diligent study of them that you will gradually become a
proficient in the lessons of the Gospel."

But the holy Scriptures, and with them the Church of England, call upon
those who are in the circumstances above-stated, to _lay afresh the
whole foundation of their Religion_. In concurrence with the Scripture,
that Church calls upon them, in the first place, gratefully to adore
that undeserved goodness which has awakened them from the sleep of
death; to prostrate themselves before the Cross of Christ with humble
penitence and deep self-abhorrence; solemnly resolving to forsake all
their sins, but relying on the Grace of God alone for power to keep
their resolution. Thus, and thus only, she assures them that all their
crimes will be blotted out, and that they will receive from above a new
living principle of holiness. She produces from the Word of God the
ground and warrant of her counsel; "Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shalt be saved."--"No man," says our blessed Saviour, "cometh
unto the Father but by me."--"I am the true Vine. As the branch cannot
bear fruit of itself except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except
ye abide in me."--"He that abideth in me and I in him, the same bringeth
forth much fruit; for without" (or severed from) "me ye can do
nothing,"--"By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should
boast: for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works."

Let us not be thought tedious, or be accused of running into needless
repetitions, in pressing this point with so much earnestness. It is in
fact a point which can never be too much insisted on. It is the cardinal
point on which the whole of Christianity turns; on which it is
peculiarly proper in this place to be perfectly distinct. There have
been some who have imagined that the wrath of God was to be deprecated,
or his favour conciliated, by austerities and penances, or even by forms
and ceremonies, and external observances. But all men of enlightened
understandings, who acknowledge the moral government of God, must also
acknowledge, that vice must offend and virtue delight him. In short they
must, more or less, assent to the Scripture declaration, "without
holiness no man shall see the Lord." But the grand distinction, which
subsists between the true Christian and all other Religionists, (the
class of persons in particular whom it is our object to address) is
concerning the _nature_ of this holiness, and the _way in which it is to
be obtained_. The views entertained by the latter, of the _nature_ of
holiness, are of all degrees of inadequateness; and they conceive it is
to be _obtained_ by their own natural unassisted efforts: or if they
admit some vague indistinct notion of the assistance of the Holy Spirit,
it is unquestionably obvious, on conversing with them, that this does
not constitute the _main practical_ ground of their dependence. _But the
nature of the holiness, to which the desires of the true Christian are
directed, is no other than the restoration of the image of God: and as
to the manner of acquiring it, disclaiming with indignation every idea
of attaining it by his own strength, all his hopes of possessing it rest
altogether on the divine assurances of the operation of the Holy Spirit,
in those who cordially embrace the Gospel of Christ. He knows therefore
that this holiness is not to_ PRECEDE _his reconciliation to God, and be
its_ CAUSE; _but to_ FOLLOW _it, and be its_ EFFECT. _That in short it
is by_ FAITH IN CHRIST _only[97] that he is to be justified in the sight
of God; to be delivered from the condition of a child of wrath, and a
slave of Satan; to be adopted into the family of God; to become an heir
of God and a joint heir with Christ, entitled to all the privileges
which belong to this high relation; here, to the Spirit of Grace, and a
partial renewal after the image of his Creator; hereafter, to the more
perfect possession of the Divine likeness, and an inheritance of eternal
glory._

And as it is in this way, that, in obedience to the dictates of the
Gospel, the true Christian must originally become possessed of the vital
spirit and living principle of universal holiness; so, in order to grow
in grace, he must also study in the same school; finding in the
consideration of the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel, and in the
contemplation of the life, and character, and sufferings of our blessed
Saviour, the elements of all practical wisdom, and an inexhaustible
storehouse of instructions and motives, no otherwise to be so well
supplied. From the neglect of these peculiar doctrines arise the main
practical errors of the bulk of professed Christians. These gigantic
truths retained in view, would put to shame the littleness of their
dwarfish morality. It would be impossible for them to make these
harmonize with their low conceptions, of the wretchedness and danger of
their natural state, which is represented in Scripture as having so
powerfully called forth the compassion of God, that he sent his only
begotten Son to rescue us. Where _now_ are their low conceptions of the
worth of the soul, when means like these were taken to redeem it? Where
_now_ their inadequate conceptions of the guilt of sin, for which in the
divine counsels it seemed requisite that an atonement no less costly
should be made, than that of the blood of the only begotten Son of God?
How can they reconcile their low standard of Christian practice with the
representation of our being "temples of the Holy Ghost?" Their cold
sense of obligation, and scanty grudged returns of service, with the
glowing gratitude of those who, having been "delivered from the power of
darkness, and translated into the kingdom of God's dear Son," may well
conceive that the labours of a whole life will be but an imperfect
expression of their thankfulness.

The peculiar doctrines of the Gospel being once admitted, the
conclusions which have been now suggested are clear and obvious
deductions of reason. But our neglect of these important truths is still
less pardonable, because they are distinctly and repeatedly applied in
Scripture to the very purposes in question, and the whole superstructure
of Christian morals is grounded on their deep and ample basis. Sometimes
these truths are represented in Scripture, _generally_, as furnishing
Christians with a vigorous and ever present principle of universal
obedience. And our slowness in learning the lessons of heavenly wisdom
is still further stimulated, by almost every particular Christian duty
being occasionally traced to them as to its proper source. They are
every where represented as warming the hearts of the people of God on
earth with continual admiration, and thankfulness, and love, and joy; as
triumphing over the attack of the last great enemy, and as calling forth
afresh in Heaven the ardent effusions of their unexhausted gratitude.

If then we would indeed be "filled with wisdom and spiritual
understanding;" if we would "walk worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God;" here let us fix our eyes! "Laying aside every weight,
and the sin that does so easily beset us; let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, LOOKING UNTO JESUS, the Author and Finisher
of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the
cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the
throne of God[98]."

Here best we may learn the infinite _importance_ of Christianity. How
little it can deserve to be treated in that slight and superficial way,
in which it is in these days regarded by the bulk of nominal Christians,
who are apt to think it may be enough, and almost equally pleasing to
God, to be religious _in any way_, and upon _any_ system. What exquisite
folly it must be to risk the soul on such a venture, in direct
contradiction to the dictates of reason, and the express declaration of
the word of God! "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation?"


LOOKING UNTO JESUS!

Here we shall best learn the duty and reasonableness of an absolute and
unconditional surrender of soul and body to the will and service of
God.--"We are not our own; for we are bought with a price," and must
"therefore" make it our grand concern to "glorify God with our bodies
and our spirits, which are God's." Should we be base enough, even if we
could do it with safety, to make any reserves in our returns of service
to that gracious Saviour, who "gave up _himself_ for us?" If we have
formerly talked of compounding by the performance of some commands for
the breach of others; can we now bear the mention of a _composition_ of
duties, or of retaining to ourselves the right of practising _little_
sins! The very suggestion of such an idea fills us with indignation and
shame, if our hearts be not dead to every sense of gratitude.


LOOKING UNTO JESUS!

Here we find displayed, in the most lively colours, the guilt of sin,
and how hateful it must be to the perfect holiness of that Being, "who
is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity." When we see that, rather than
sin should go unpunished, "God spared not his own Son," but "was
_pleased_[99], to bruise him and put him to grief" for our sakes; how
vainly must impenitent sinners flatter themselves with the hope of
escaping the vengeance of Heaven, and buoy themselves up with I know not
what desperate dreams of the Divine benignity!

Here too we may anticipate the dreadful sufferings of that state, "where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth;" when rather than that we should
undergo them, "the Son of God" himself, who "thought it no robbery to be
equal with God," consented to take upon him our degraded nature with all
its weaknesses and infirmities; to be "a man of sorrows," "to hide not
his face from shame and spitting," "to be wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities," and at length to endure
the sharpness of death, "even the death of the Cross," that he might
"deliver us from the wrath to come," and open the kingdom of Heaven to
all believers.


LOOKING UNTO JESUS!

_Here_ best we may learn to grow in the love of God! The certainty of
his pity and love towards repenting sinners, thus irrefragably
demonstrated, chases away the sense of tormenting fear, and best lays
the ground in us of a reciprocal affection. And while we steadily
contemplate this wonderful transaction, and consider in its several
relations the amazing truth, that "God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all;" if our minds be not utterly dead to every
impulse of sensibility, the emotions of admiration, of preference, of
hope, and trust, and joy, cannot but spring up within us, chastened with
reverential fear, and softened and quickened by overflowing
gratitude[100]. _Here_ we shall become animated by an abiding
disposition to endeavour to please our great Benefactor; and by a humble
persuasion, that the weakest endeavours of this nature will not be
despised by a Being, who has already proved himself so kindly affected
towards us[101]. _Here_ we cannot fail to imbibe an earnest desire of
possessing his favour, and a conviction, founded on his own declarations
thus unquestionably confirmed, that the desire shall not be
disappointed. Whenever we are conscious that we have offended this
gracious Being, a single thought of the great work of Redemption will be
enough to fill us with compunction. We shall feel a deep concern, grief
mingled with indignant shame, for having conducted ourselves so
unworthily towards one who to us has been infinite in kindness: we shall
not rest till we have reason to hope that he is reconciled to us; and we
shall watch over our hearts and conduct in future with a renewed
jealousy, lest we should again offend him. To those who are ever so
little acquainted with the nature of the human mind, it were superfluous
to remark, that the affections and tempers which have been enumerated,
are the infallible marks and the constituent properties of Love. Let
_him_ then who would abound and grow in this Christian principle, be
much conversant with the great doctrines of the Gospel.

It is obvious, that the attentive and frequent consideration of these
great doctrines, must have a still more direct tendency to produce and
cherish in our minds the principle of the love of Christ. But on this
head, so much was said in a former chapter, as to render any farther
observations unnecessary.

Much also has been already observed concerning the love of our
fellow-creatures, and it has been distinctly stated to be the
indispensable, and indeed the characteristic duty of Christians. It
remains, however to be here farther remarked, that this grace can no
where be cultivated with more advantage than at the foot of the cross.
No where can our Saviour's dying injunction to the exercise of this
virtue be recollected with more effect; "This is my commandment, that ye
love one another as I have loved you." No where can the admonition of
the Apostle more powerfully affect us; "Be ye kind one to another,
tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake,
hath forgiven you." The view of mankind which is here presented to us,
as having been all involved in one common ruin; and the offer of
deliverance held out to all, by the Son of God's giving of himself up to
pay the price of our reconciliation, produce that sympathy towards our
fellow-creatures, which, by the constitution of our nature, seldom
fails to result from the consciousness of an identity of interests and a
similarity of fortunes. Pity for an unthinking world assists this
impression. Our enmities soften and melt away: we are ashamed of
thinking much of the _petty injuries_ which we may have suffered, when
we consider what the Son of God, "who did no wrong, neither was guile
found in his mouth," patiently underwent. Our hearts become tender while
we contemplate this signal act of loving-kindness. We grow desirous of
imitating what we cannot but admire. A vigorous principle of enlarged
and active charity springs up within us; and we go forth with alacrity,
desirous of treading in the steps of our blessed Master, and of
manifesting our gratitude for his unmerited goodness, by bearing each
others burdens, and abounding in the disinterested labours of
benevolence.


LOOKING UNTO JESUS!

_He_ was meek and lowly of heart, and from the study of _his_ character
we shall best learn the lessons of humility. Contemplating the work of
Redemption, we become more and more impressed with the sense of our
natural darkness, and helplessness, and misery, from which it was
requisite to ransom us at such a price; more and more conscious that we
are utterly unworthy of all the amazing condescension and love which
have been manifested towards us; ashamed of the callousness of our
tenderest sensibility, and of the poor returns of our most active
services. Considerations like these, abating our pride and reducing our
opinion of _ourselves_, naturally moderate our pretensions towards
_others_. We become less disposed to exact that respect for our persons,
and that deference for our authority, which we naturally covet; we less
sensibly feel a slight, and less hotly resent it; we grow less
irritable, less prone to be dissatisfied; more soft, and meek, and
courteous, and placable, and condescending. We are not literally
required to practise the same humiliating submissions, to which our
blessed Saviour himself was not ashamed to stoop[102]; but the _spirit_
of the remark applies to us, "the servant is not greater than his Lord:"
and we should especially bear this truth in mind, when the occasion
calls upon us to discharge some duty, or patiently to suffer some ill
treatment, whereby our pride will be wounded, and we are likely to be in
some degree degraded from the rank we had possessed in the world's
estimation. At the same time the Sacred Scriptures assuring us, that to
the powerful operations of the Holy Spirit, purchased for us by the
death of Christ, we must be indebted for the success of all our
endeavours after improvement in virtue; the conviction of this truth
tends to render us diffident of our own powers, and to suppress the
first risings of vanity. Thus, while we are conducted to heights of
virtue no otherwise attainable, due care is taken to prevent our
becoming giddy from our elevation[103]. It is the Scripture
characteristic of the Gospel system, that by it all disposition to
exalt ourselves is excluded; and if we really grow in grace, we shall
grow also in humility.


LOOKING UNTO JESUS!

"He endured the cross, despising the shame."--While we steadily
contemplate this solemn scene, that sober frame of spirit is produced
within us, which best befits the Christian, militant here on earth. We
become impressed with a sense of the shortness and uncertainty of time,
and that it behoves us to be diligent in making provision for eternity.
In such a temper of mind, the pomps and vanities of life are cast behind
us as the baubles of children.--We lose our relish for the frolics of
gaiety, the race of ambition, or the grosser gratifications of
voluptuousness. In the case even of those objects, which may more justly
claim the attention of reasonable and immortal beings; in our family
arrangements, in our plans of life, in our schemes of business, we
become, without relinquishing the path of duty, more moderate in
pursuit, and more indifferent about the issue. Here also we learn to
correct the world's false estimate of things, and to "look through the
shallowness of earthly grandeur[104];" to venerate what is truly
excellent and noble, though under a despised and degraded form; and to
cultivate within ourselves that true magnanimity, which can make us rise
superior to the smiles or frowns of this world; that dignified composure
of soul which no earthly incidents can destroy or ruffle. Instead of
repining at any of the little occasional inconveniences we may meet with
in our passage through life; we are almost ashamed of the multiplied
comforts and enjoyments of our condition, when we think of him, who,
though "the Lord of glory," "had not where to lay his head." And if it
be our lot to undergo evils of more than ordinary magnitude, we are
animated under them by reflecting, that we are hereby more conformed to
the example of our blessed Master: though we must ever recollect one
important difference, that the sufferings of Christ were voluntarily
borne for _our_ benefit, and were probably far more exquisitely
agonizing than any which we are called upon to undergo. Besides, it must
be a solid support to us amidst all our troubles to know, that they do
not happen to us by chance; that they are not even merely the punishment
of sin; but that they are the dispensations of a kind Providence, and
sent on messages of mercy.--"The cup that our Father hath given us,
shall we not drink it?"--"Blessed Saviour! by the bitterness of thy
pains we may estimate the force of thy love; we are _sure_ of thy
kindness and compassion; thou wouldst not willingly call on us to
suffer; thou hast declared unto us, that all things shall finally work
together for good to them that love thee; and therefore, if thou so
ordainest it, welcome disappointment and poverty, welcome sickness and
pain, welcome even shame, and contempt, and calumny. If this be a rough
and thorny path, it is one in which thou hast gone before us. Where we
see thy footsteps we cannot repine. Meanwhile, thou wilt support us with
the consolations of thy grace; and even here thou canst more than
compensate to us for any temporal sufferings, by the possession of that
peace, which the world can neither give nor take away."


LOOKING UNTO JESUS!

"The Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of God." From the scene of our Saviour's weakness and
degradation, we follow him, in idea, into the realms of glory, where "he
is on the right hand of God; angels, and principalities, and powers
being made subject unto him."--But though changed in place, yet not in
nature, he is still full of sympathy and love; and having died "to save
his people from their sins," "he ever _liveth_ to make intercession for
them." Cheered by this animating view, the Christian's fainting spirits
revive. Under the heaviest burdens he feels his strength recruited; and
when all around him is dark and stormy, he can lift up an eye to Heaven,
radiant with hope, and glistening with gratitude. At such a season, no
dangers can alarm, no opposition can move, no provocations can irritate.
He may almost adopt, as the language of his sober exultation, what in
the philosopher was but an idle rant: and, considering that it is only
the garment of mortality which is subject to the rents of fortune; while
his spirit, cheered with the divine support, keeps its place within,
secure and unassailable, he can sometimes almost triumph at the stake,
or on the scaffold, and cry out amidst the severest buffets of
adversity, "Thou beatest but the case of Anaxarchus." But it is rarely
that the Christian is elevated with this "joy unspeakable and full of
glory:" he even lends himself to these views with moderation and
reserve. Often, alas! emotions of another kind fill him with grief and
confusion: and conscious of having acted unworthy of his high calling,
perhaps of having exposed himself to the just censure of a world ready
enough to spy out his infirmities, he seems to himself almost "to have
crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame." But let
neither his joys intoxicate, nor his sorrows too much depress him. Let
him still remember that his _chief_ business while on earth is not to
meditate, but to act; that the seeds of moral corruption are apt to
spring up within him, and that it is requisite for him to watch over his
own heart with incessant care; that he is to discharge with fidelity the
duties of his particular station, and to conduct himself, according to
his measure, after the example of his blessed Master, whose meat and
drink it was to do the work of his heavenly Father; that he is
diligently to cultivate the talents with which God has entrusted him,
and assiduously to employ them in doing justice and shewing mercy, while
he guards against the assaults of any internal enemy. In short, he is to
demean himself, in all the common affairs of life, like an _accountable_
creature, who, in correspondence with the Scripture character of
Christians, is "waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ." Often
therefore he questions himself, "Am I employing my time, my fortune, my
bodily and mental powers, so as to be able to 'render up my account with
joy, and not with grief?' Am I 'adorning the doctrine of God my Saviour
in all things;' and proving that the servants of Christ, animated by a
principle of filial affection, which renders their work a service of
perfect freedom, are capable of as active and as persevering exertions,
as the votaries of fame, or the slaves of ambition, or the drudges of
avarice?"

Thus, without interruption to his labours, he may interpose occasional
thoughts of things unseen; and amidst the many little intervals of
business, may calmly look upwards to the heavenly Advocate, who is ever
pleading the cause of his people, and obtaining for them needful
supplies of grace and consolation. It is these realizing views, which
give the Christian a relish for the worship and service of the heavenly
world. And if these blessed images, "seen but through a glass darkly,"
can thus refresh the soul: what must be its state, when on the morning
of the resurrection it shall awake to the unclouded vision of celestial
glory! when, "to them that look for him, the Son of God shall appear a
second time without sin unto salvation!" when "sighing and sorrow being
fled away;" when doubts and fears no more disquieting, and the painful
consciousness of remaining imperfections no longer weighing down the
spirit, they shall enter upon the fruition of "those joys, which eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive;" and shall bear their part in that blessed
anthem--"Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb," for ever and ever!

Thus (never let it be forgotten) the main distinction between real
Christianity, and the system of the bulk of nominal Christians, chiefly
consists in the different place which is assigned in the two schemes to
the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel. These, in the scheme of nominal
Christians, if admitted at all, appear but like the stars of the
firmament to the ordinary eye. Those splendid luminaries draw forth
perhaps occasionally a transient expression of admiration, when we
behold their beauty, or hear of their distances, magnitudes, or
properties: now and then too we are led, perhaps, to muse upon their
possible uses: but however curious as subjects of speculation, after
all, it must be confessed, they twinkle to the common observer with a
vain and "idle" lustre; and except in the dreams of the astrologer, have
no influence on human happiness, or any concern with the course and
order of the world. But to the _real_ Christian, on the contrary, THESE
_peculiar doctrines constitute the center to which he gravitates! the
very sun of his system! the soul of the world! the origin of all that is
excellent and lovely! the source of light, and life, and motion, and
genial warmth, and plastic energy!_ Dim is the light of reason, and cold
and comfortless our state, while left to her unassisted guidance. Even
the Old Testament itself, though a revelation from Heaven, shines but
with feeble and scanty rays. But the blessed truths of the Gospel are
now unveiled to _our_ eyes, and _we_ are called upon to behold, and to
enjoy "the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ," in the full radiance of its meridian splendor. The words
of inspiration best express our highly favoured state: "We all, with
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord."

    Thou art the source and center of all minds,
    Their only point of rest, ETERNAL WORD
    From thee departing, they are lost, and rove
    At random, without honour, hope, or peace:
    From thee is all that soothes the life of man;
    His high endeavour, and his glad success;
    His strength to suffer, and his will to serve.
    But O! thou bounteous Giver of all good!
    Thou art of all thy gifts thyself the crown:
    Give what thou canst, without thee we are poor,
    And with thee rich, take what thou wilt away.




