CHAPTER VIII

_THE EMPHASIS OF THE SOCIAL CONSCIOUSNESS UPON THE HISTORICALLY
CHRISTIAN IN RELIGION_


The fact that the social consciousness tends to emphasize in
religion the concretely historically Christian, has been so inevitably
involved in the preceding discussions, that it can be treated very
briefly.


I. THE SOCIAL CONSCIOUSNESS NEEDS HISTORICAL JUSTIFICATION

The justification of the social consciousness, we have seen,[53] must
be preëminently from history. Neither nature nor speculation can
satisfy it. It needs to be able to believe in a living God who is in
living relation to living men. It needs just such a justification as
historical Christianity, and only historical Christianity, can give;
it needs the assurance of an objective divine will in the world,
definitely working in the line of its own ideals. It needs also to be
able to give such definite content to the thought of God as shall be
able to satisfy its own strong insistence upon the rational and the
ethical as historical.


II. CHRISTIANITY'S RESPONSE TO THIS NEED

If religion is to be a reality to the social consciousness, then,
there must be a real revelation of a real God in the real world, in
actual human history, not an imaginary God, nor a dream God, nor a God
of mystic contemplation. This discernment of God in the real world, in
actual history, is the glory even of the Old Testament; and it came,
as we have seen, along the line of the social consciousness. And it is
such a real revelation of the real God that Christianity finds
preëminently in Christ. It can say to the social consciousness: Make
no effort to believe, but simply put yourself in the presence of a
concrete, definite, actual, historical fact, with its perennial
ethical appeal; put yourself in the presence of Christ--the greatest
and realest of the facts of history,--and let that fact make its own
legitimate impression, work its own natural work; that fact alone, of
all the facts of history, gives you full and ample warrant for your
own being.

If this be true, it can hardly be doubted that, so far as the social
consciousness understands itself and influences religion at all, it
will tend to emphasize, not to underestimate, the concretely,
historically Christian.

The natural influence of the social consciousness upon religion, then,
may be said to be fourfold: it tends to draw away from the falsely
mystical; it tends to emphasize the personal in religion, and so to
keep the truly mystical; it tends to emphasize the ethical in
religion; and it needs the concretely, historically Christian.

[53] Cf above, pp. 59 ff.




THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOCIAL CONSCIOUSNESS UPON THEOLOGICAL DOCTRINE




CHAPTER IX

_GENERAL RESULTS_


The question of this third division of our inquiry is this: To what
changed points of view, and to what restatements of doctrine, and so
to what better appreciation of Christian truth, does the social
consciousness of our time lead? The question is raised here, as in the
case of the conception of religion, not as one of exact historical
connection, but rather as a question of sympathetic points of contact.
It means simply: With what changes in theological statements would the
social consciousness naturally find itself most sympathetic?

Certain general results are clear from the start, and might be
anticipated from any one of several points of view.


I. THE CONCEPTION OF THEOLOGY IN PERSONAL TERMS

In the first place, the social consciousness means, we have found,
emphasis on the fully personal--a fresh awakening to the significance
of the person and of personal relations. Its whole activity is in the
sphere of personal relations. Hence, as in the conception of religion,
so here, so far as the social consciousness affects theology at all,
it will tend everywhere to bring the personal into prominence, and it
certainly will be found in harmony ultimately with the attempt to
conceive theology in terms of personal relations. These are for the
social consciousness the realest of realities; and if theology is to
be real to the social consciousness, then it must make much of the
personal. Theology, thus, it is worth while seeing, is not to be
personal _and_ social, but it will be social--it will do justice to
the social consciousness--if it does justice to the fully personal;
for, in the language of another, "man is social, just in so far as he
is personal."[54]

The foreign and unreal seeming of many of the old forms of statement,
it may well be noted in passing, has its probable cause just here.
They were not shaped in the atmosphere of the social consciousness.
They got at things in a way we should not now think of using. The
method of approach was too merely metaphysical and individualistic and
mystical, and the result seems to us to have but slight ethical or
religious significance. The arguments that now move us most, in this
entire realm of spiritual inquiry, are moral and social rather than
metaphysical and mystical. It is interesting to see, for example, how
such arguments for immortality as that of the simplicity of the soul's
being--and most of those used by Plato--and how such arguments even
for the existence of God as those of Samuel Clarke from time and
space, have become for us merely matters of curious inquiry. We can
hardly imagine men having given them real weight. A similar change
seems to be creeping over the laborious attempts metaphysically to
conceive the divinity of Christ. The question is shifting its position
for both radical and conservative to a new ground--from the
metaphysical and mystical to the moral and social; though some
radicals who regard themselves as in the van of progress have not yet
found it out, and so find fault with one for not continually defining
himself in terms of the older metaphysical formulas and shibboleths.
The considerations, in all these questions and in many others, which
really weigh most with us now, are considerations which belong to the
sphere of the personal spiritual life. Ultimately, no doubt, a
metaphysics is involved here too; but it is a metaphysics whose final
reality is spirit, not an unknown substance--Locke's "something, I
know not what."

The unsatisfactoriness of even so honored a symbol as the Apostles'
Creed, as a permanently adequate statement of Christian faith, must
for similar reasons become increasingly clear in the atmosphere of the
social consciousness. One wonders, as he goes carefully over it, that
so many concrete statements could be made concerning the Christian
religion, which yet are so little ethical. The creed seems almost to
exclude the ethical. It has nothing to say, except by rather distant
implication, of the character of God, of the character of Christ, or
of the character of men. The life of Christ between his birth and his
death are untouched. The considerations that really weigh most with
us--as they did with the apostles--in making us Christians, certainly
do not come here to prominent expression. This whole difference of
atmosphere is the striking fact; and were it not that we instinctively
interpret its phrases in accordance with our modern consciousness, we
should feel the difference much more than we do.

What the previous discussion has called the truly mystical--the
recognition of the whole man, of the entire personality--is coming in
increasingly to correct both the falsely mystical and the falsely
metaphysical. We are arguing now, in harmony with the social
consciousness, from the standpoint of the broadly rational, not from
that of the narrowly intellectual.


II. THE FATHERHOOD OF GOD, AS THE DETERMINING PRINCIPLE IN THEOLOGY

One might reach essentially the same general results from the
influence of the social consciousness, by seeing that, so far as it
deepens for us the meaning of the personal, it will deepen immediately
our conception of the Fatherhood of God--the central and dominating
doctrine in all theology--and so affect all theology. For, with a
change in the conception of God, no doctrine can go wholly untouched.
Every step into a deeper feeling for the personal--and the growth of
the modern social consciousness is undoubtedly a long step in that
direction--deepens necessarily religion and theology. Perhaps the
possible results here can be illustrated in no way better than by
recalling Patterson DuBois' putting of the needed change in the
conception of the proper attitude of a father toward his child. We are
not to say, he writes: "I will conquer that child, no matter what it
may cost him," but we are to say, "I will help that child to conquer
himself, no matter what it may cost me." Now that change in point of
view is a well-nigh perfect illustration of the social consciousness
in a given relation, and it cannot be doubted that it is a true
expression of Christ's thought of the Fatherhood of God; but has it
really dominated through and through our theological statements?
Manifestly, what it means to us that God is Father depends on what we
have come to see in fatherhood. And Principal Fairbairn, in the second
part of his _The Place of Christ in Modern Theology_, has given us a
good illustration of how much it means for theology to be in earnest
in making the Fatherhood of God the determining doctrine in theology.


III. CHRIST'S OWN SOCIAL EMPHASES

Again, if the general influence of the social consciousness upon
theological doctrine is to be recognized at all, it is evident that a
Christian theology must take full account of Christ's own social
emphases. By loyalty to these, it will expect best to meet the need of
an enlightened social consciousness. It will strive thus--to use
Professor Peabody's instructive summary of "the social principles of
the teaching of Jesus"--to be true to "the view from above, the
approach from within, and the movement toward a spiritual end; wisdom,
personality, idealism; a social horizon, a social power, a social aim.
The supreme truth that this is God's world gave to Jesus his spirit of
social optimism; the assurance that man is God's instrument gave to
him his method of social opportunism; the faith that in God's world
God's people are to establish God's kingdom gave him his social
idealism. He looks upon the struggling, chaotic, sinning world with
the eye of an unclouded religious faith, and discerns in it the
principle of personality fulfilling the will of God in social
service."[55]

And every one of these three great social principles of Jesus has
obvious theological applications, not yet fully made.

The social consciousness, indeed, well illustrates Fairbairn's
admirable statement of how progress is to be expected in theology.
"The longer the history [of Christ]," he says, "lives in the
[Christian] consciousness and penetrates it, the more does the
consciousness become able to interpret the history in its own terms
and according to its own contents. The old pagan mind into which
Christianity first came could not possibly be the best interpreter of
Christianity, and the more the mind is cleansed of the pagan the more
qualified it becomes to interpret the religion. It is, therefore,
reasonable to expect that the later forms of faith should be the truer
and purer."[56]

Now the social consciousness itself is a genuine manifestation of the
spirit of Christ at work in the world, and the mind permeated with
this social consciousness is consequently better able to turn back to
the teaching of Jesus and give it proper interpretation.


IV. THE REFLECTION IN THEOLOGY OF THE CHANGES IN THE CONCEPTION OF
RELIGION

Once more, theology, as an expression of religion, will at once
reflect any change in the conception of religion. The influence of the
social consciousness upon religion, already traced, will, therefore,
inevitably pass over into theology. This means nothing less than a
changed point of view, in the consideration of each doctrine. For
theology must then recognize clearly that it can build on no falsely
mystical conception of communion with God; but, while keeping the
elements in mysticism which are justified by the social consciousness,
it will require of itself throughout a formulation of doctrine in
terms that shall be thoroughly personal, thoroughly ethical, and
indubitably loyal to the concretely historically Christian. Many
traditional statements quite fail to meet so searching a test; but no
lower standard can give a theology that should fully meet the demands
of the social consciousness.

The general results of the influence of the social consciousness upon
theological doctrine, then, may be said to include: The emphasis upon
the fully personal, and so conceiving theology in terms of personal
relation; the deepening of the conception of the Fatherhood of God,
and making this the determining principle in theology; the application
of the social principles of the teaching of Jesus to theology; the
reflection in theology of the natural changes in the conception of
religion wrought by the social consciousness. Now any one of these
general results indicates the certain influence of the social
consciousness upon theology, and any one might be followed out into
helpful suggestions for the restatement of theological doctrines.

But we shall probably most clearly and definitely answer the question
of our theme, if we ask specifically concerning the several elements
of the social consciousness: How does a deepening sense of the
like-mindedness of men, of the mutual influence of men, of the value
and sacredness of the person, of personal obligation, and of love,
tend to affect our theological point of view and mode of statement?
And our inquiry will follow these separate questions in separate
chapters, except that for the purposes of theological inference, the
last three may be appropriately grouped together.

[54] Nash, _Ethics and Revelation_, p. 259.

[55] Peabody, _Jesus Christ and the Social Question_, p. 104.

[56] Fairbairn, _The Place of Christ in Modern Theology_, p. 186.




