VIII

WHAT IS DARWINISM? [VIII-1]

The Nation, May 28, 1874)


The question which Dr. Hodge asks he promptly and decisively answers: "What
is Darwinism? it is atheism."

Leaving aside all subsidiary and incidental matters, let us consider--1.
What the Darwinian doctrine is, and 2. How it is proved to be atheistic.
Dr. Hodge's own statement of it cannot be very much bettered:


"His [Darwin's] work on the 'Origin of Species' does not purport to be
philosophical. In this aspect it is very different from the cognate works of
Mr. Spencer. Darwin does not speculate on the origin of the universe, on
the nature of matter or of force. He is simply a naturalist, a careful and
laborious observer, skillful in his descriptions, and singularly candid in
dealing with the difficulties in the way of his peculiar doctrine. He set
before himself a single problem--namely, How are the fauna and flora of our
earth to be accounted for? . . . To account for the existence of matter and
life, Mr. Darwin admits a Creator. This is done explicitly and repeatedly. .
. . He assumes the efficiency of physical causes, showing no disposition to
resolve them into mind-force or into the efficiency of the First Cause. . .
. He assumes, also, the existence of life in the form of one or more
primordial germs. . . . How all living things on earth, including the
endless variety of plants and all the diversity of animals, . . . have
descended from the primordial animalcule, he thinks, may be accounted for
by the operation of the following natural laws, viz.: First, the law of
Heredity, or that by which like begets like--the offspring are like the
parent. Second, the law of Variation; that is, while the offspring are in
all essential characteristics like their immediate progenitor, they
nevertheless vary more or less within narrow limits from their parent and
from each other. Some of these variations are indifferent, some
deteriorations, some improvements--that is, such as enable the plant or
animal to exercise its functions to greater advantage. Third, the law of
Over-Production. All plants and animals tend to increase in a geometrical
ratio, and therefore tend to overrun enormously the means of support. If
all the seeds of a plant, all the spawn of a fish, were to arrive at
maturity, in a very short time the world could not contain them. Hence, of
necessity, arises a struggle for life. Only a few of the myriads born can
possibly live. Fourth, here comes in the law of Natural Selection, or the
Survival of the Fittest; that is, if any individual of a given species of
plant or animal happens to have a slight deviation from the normal type
favorable to its success in the struggle for life, it will survive. This
variation, by the law of heredity, will be transmitted to its offspring,
and by them again to theirs. Soon these favored ones gain the ascendency,
and the less favored perish, and the modification becomes established in
the species. After a time, another and another of such favorable variations
occur, with like results. Thus, very gradually, great changes of structure
are introduced, and not only species, but genera, families, and orders, in
the vegetable and animal world, are produced" (pp. 26-29).


Now, the truth or the probability of Darwin's hypothesis is not here the
question, but only its congruity or incongruity with theism. We need take
only one exception to this abstract of it, but that is an important one for
the present investigation. It is to the sentence which we have italicized
in the earlier part of Dr. Hodge's own statement of what Darwinism is. With
it begins our inquiry as to how he proves the doctrine to be atheistic.

First, if we rightly apprehend it, a suggestion of atheism is infused into
the premises in a negative form: Mr. Darwin shows no disposition to resolve
the efficiency of physical causes into the efficiency of the First Cause.
Next (on page 48) comes the positive charge that "Mr. Darwin, although
himself a theist," maintains that "the contrivances manifested in the
organs of plants and animals . . . are not due to the continued cooperation
and control of the divine mind, nor to the original purpose of God in the
constitution of the universe." As to the negative statement, it might
suffice to recall Dr. Hodge's truthful remark that Darwin "is simply a
naturalist," and that "his work on the origin of species does not purport
to be philosophical." In physical and physiological treatises, the most
religious men rarely think it necessary to postulate the First Cause, nor
are they misjudged by the omission. But surely Mr. Darwin does show the
disposition which our author denies him, not only by implication in many
instances, but most explicitly where one would naturally look for it,
namely--at the close of the volume in question: "To my mind, it accords
better with what we know of the laws impressed on matter by the Creator,"
etc. If that does not refer the efficiency of physical causes to the First
Cause, what form of words could do so? The positive charge appears to be
equally gratuitous. In both Dr. Hodge must have overlooked the beginning as
well as the end of the volume which he judges so hardly. Just as
mathematicians and physicists, in their systems, are wont to postulate the
fundamental and undeniable truths they are concerned with, or what they
take for such and require to be taken for granted, so Mr. Darwin
postulates, upon the first page of his notable work, and in the words of
Whewell and Bishop Butler: 1. The establishment by divine power of general
laws, according to which, rather than by insulated interpositions in each
particular case, events are brought about in the material world; and 2.
That by the word ':natural" is meant "stated, fixed, or settled," by this
same power, "since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so--i.e., to effect it continually or at
stated times--as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect it for
once.[VIII-2] So when Mr. Darwin makes such large and free use of "natural
as antithetical to supernatural" causes, we are left in no doubt as to the
ultimate source which he refers them to. Rather let us say there ought to
be no doubt, unless there are other grounds for it to rest upon.

Such ground there must be, or seem to be, to justify or excuse a veteran
divine and scholar like Dr. Hodge in his deduction of pure atheism from a
system produced by a confessed theist, and based, as we have seen, upon
thoroughly orthodox fundamental conceptions. Even if we may not hope to
reconcile the difference between the theologian and the naturalist, it may
be well to ascertain where their real divergence begins, or ought to begin,
and what it amounts to. Seemingly, it is in their proximate, not in their
ultimate, principles, as Dr. Hodge insists when he declares that the whole
drift of Darwinism is to prove that everything "may be accounted for by the
blind operation of natural causes, without any intention, purpose, or
cooperation of God." "Why don't he say," cries the theologian, "that the
complicated organs of plants and animals are the product of the divine
intelligence? If God made them, it makes no difference, so far as the
question of design is concerned, how he made them, whether at once or by
process of evolution." But, as we have seen, Mr. Darwin does say that, and
he over and over implies it when he refers the production of species "to
secondary causes," and likens their origination to the origination of
individuals; species being series of individuals with greater difference.
It is not for the theologian to object that the power which made individual
men and other animals, and all the differences which the races of mankind
exhibit, through secondary causes, could not have originated congeries of
more or less greatly differing individuals through the same causes.

Clearly, then, the difference between the theologian and the naturalist is
not fundamental, and evolution may be as profoundly and as particularly
theistic as it is increasingly probable. The taint of atheism which, in Dr.
Hodge's view, leavens the whole lump, is not inherent in the original grain
of Darwinism--in the principles posited--but has somehow been introduced in
the subsequent treatment. Possibly, when found, it may be eliminated.
Perhaps there is mutual misapprehension growing out of some ambiguity in the
use of terms. "Without any intention, purpose, or cooperation of God."-
These are sweeping and effectual words. How came they to be applied to
natural selection by a divine who professes that God ordained whatsoever
cometh to pass? In this wise: "The point to be proved is, that it is the
distinctive doctrine of Mr. Darwin that species owe their origin--1. Not to
the original intention of the divine mind; 2. Not to special acts of
creation calling new forms into existence at certain epochs; 3. Not to the
constant and everywhere operative efficiency of God guiding physical causes
in the production of intended effects; but 4. To the gradual accumulation
of unintended variations of structure and instinct securing some advantage
to their subjects." Then Dr. Hodge adduces "Darwin's own testimony," to the
purport that natural selection denotes the totality of natural causes and
their interactions, physical and physiological, reproduction, variation,
birth, struggle, extinction--in short, all that is going on in Nature; that
the variations which in this interplay are picked out for survival are not
intentionally guided; that "nothing can be more hopeless than the attempt
to explain this similarity of pattern in members of the same class by
utility or the doctrine of final causes" (which Dr. Hodge takes to be the
denial of any such thing as final causes); and that the interactions and
processes going on which constitute natural selection may suffice to
account for the present diversity of animals and plants (primordial
organisms being postulated and time enough given) with all their structures
and adaptations--that is, to account for them scientifically, as science
accounts for other things.

A good deal may be made of this, but does it sustain the indictment?
Moreover, the counts of the indictment may be demurred to. It seems to us
that only one of the three points which Darwin is said to deny is really
opposed to the fourth, which he is said to maintain, except as concerns the
perhaps ambiguous word unintended. Otherwise, the origin of species through
the gradual accumulation of variations--i.e., by the addition of a series
of small differences--is surely not incongruous with their origin through
"the original intention of the divine mind" or through "the constant and
everywhere operative efficiency of God."- One or both of these Mr. Darwin
(being, as Dr. Hodge says, a theist) must needs hold to in some form or
other; wherefore he may be presumed to hold the fourth proposition in such
wise as not really to contradict the first or the third. The proper
antithesis is with the second proposition only, and the issue comes to
this: Have the multitudinous forms of living creatures, past and present,
been produced by as many special and independent acts of creation at very
numerous epochs? Or have they originated under causes as natural as
reproduction and birth, and no more so, by the variation and change of
preceding into succeeding species?

Those who accept the latter alternative are evolutionists. And Dr. Hodge
fairly allows that their views, although clearly wrong, may be genuinely
theistic. Surely they need not become the less so by the discovery or by
the conjecture of natural operations through which this diversification and
continued adaptation of species to conditions is brought about. Now, Mr.
Darwin thinks--and by this he is distinguished. from most
evolutionists--that he can assign actual natural causes, adequate to the
production of the present out of the preceding state of the animal and
vegetable world, and so on backward--thus uniting, not indeed the beginning
but the far past with the present in one coherent system of Nature. But in
assigning actual natural causes and processes, and applying them to the
explanation of the whole case, Mr. Dar-win assumes the obligation of
maintaining their general sufficiency--a task from which the numerous
advocates and acceptors of evolution on the general concurrence of
probabilities and its usefulness as a working hypothesis (with or without
much conception of the manner how) are happily free. Having hit upon a
modus operandi which all who understand it admit will explain something,
and many that it will explain very much, it is to be expected that Mr.
Darwin will make the most of it. Doubtless he is far from pretending to
know all the causes and operations at work; he has already added some and
restricted the range of others; he probably looks for additions to their
number and new illustrations of their efficiency; but he is bound to expect
them all to fall within the category of what he calls natural selection (a
most expansible principle), or to be congruous with it--that is, that they
shall be natural causes. Also--and this is the critical point--he is bound
to maintain their sufficiency without intervention.

Here, at length, we reach the essential difference between Darwin, as we
understand him, and Dr. Hodge. The terms which Darwin sometimes uses, and
doubtless some of the ideas they represent, are not such as we should adopt
or like to defend; and we may say once for all--aside though it be from the
present issue--that, in our opinion, the adequacy of the assigned causes to
the explanation of the phenomena has not been made out. But we do not
understand him to deny "purpose, intention, or the cooperation of God" in
Nature. This would be as gratuitous as unphilosophical, not to say
unscientific. When he speaks of this or that particular or phase in the
course of events or the procession of organic forms as not intended, he
seems to mean not specially and disjunctively intended and not brought
about by intervention. Purpose in the whole, as we suppose, is not denied
but implied. And when one considers how, under whatever view of the case,
the designed and the contingent lie inextricably commingled in this world
of ours, past man's disentanglement, and into what metaphysical dilemmas
the attempt at unraveling them leads, we cannot greatly blame the
naturalist for relegating such problems to the philosopher and the
theologian. If charitable, these will place the most favorable construction
upon attempts to extend and unify the operation of known secondary causes,
this being the proper business of the naturalist and physicist; if wise,
they will be careful not to predicate or suggest the absence of intention
from what comes about by degrees through the continuous operation of
physical causes, even in the organic world, lest, in their endeavor to
retain a probable excess of supernaturalism in that realm of Nature, they
cut away the grounds for recognizing it at all in inorganic Nature, and so
fall into the same condemnation that some of them award to the Darwinian.

Moreover, it is not certain that Mr. Darwin would very much better his
case, Dr. Hodge being judge, if he did propound some theory of the nexus of
divine causation and natural laws, or even if he explicitly adopted the one
or the other of the views which he is charged with rejecting. Either way he
might meet a procrustean fate; and, although a saving amount of theism
might remain, he would not be sound or comfortable. For, if he predicates
"the constant and everywhere operative efficiency of God," he may "lapse
into the same doctrine" that the Duke of Argyll and Sir John Herschel "seem
inclined to," the latter of whom is blamed for thinking "it but reasonable
to regard the force of gravitation as the direct or indirect result of a
consciousness or will existing somewhere," and the former for regarding "it
unphilosophical 'to think or speak as if the forces of Nature were either
independent of or even separate from the Creator's power' ": while if he
falls back upon an "original intention of the divine mind," endowing matter
with forces which he foresaw and intended should produce such results as
these contrivances in Nature, he is told that this banishes God from the
world, and is inconsistent with obvious facts. And that because of its
implying that "He never interferes to guide the operation of physical
causes. We italicize the word, for interference proves to be the keynote of
Dr. Hodge's system. Interference with a divinely ordained physical Nature
for the accomplishment of natural results! An unorthodox friend has just
imparted to us, with much misgiving and solicitude lest he should be thought
irreverent, his tentative hypothesis, which is, that even the Creator may be
conceived to have improved with time and experience! Never before was this
theory so plainly and barely put before us. We were obliged to say that, in
principle and by implication, it was not wholly original.

But in such matters, which are far too high for us, no one is justly to be
held responsible for the conclusions which another may draw from his
principles or assumptions. Dr. Hodge's particular view should be gathered
from his own statement of it:


"In the external world there is always and everywhere indisputable evidence
of the activity of two kinds of force, the one physical, the other mental.
The physical belongs to matter, and is due to the properties with which it
has been endowed; the other is the everywhere present and ever-acting mind
of God. To the latter are to be referred all the manifestations of design
in Nature, and the ordering of events in Providence. This doctrine does not
ignore the efficiency of second causes; it simply asserts that God
overrules and controls them. Thus the Psalmist says: 'I am fearfully and
wonderfully made. My substance was not hid from Thee when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought (or embroidered) in the lower parts of the
earth. . . . God makes the grass to grow, and herbs for the children of
men.'- He sends rain, frost, and snow. He controls the winds and the waves.
He determines the casting of the lot, the flight of an arrow, and the
falling of a sparrow."


Far be it from us to object to this mode of conceiving divine causation,
although, like the two other theistic conceptions referred to, it has its
difficulties, and perhaps the difficulties of both. But, if we understand
it, it draws an unusually hard and fast line between causation in organic
and inorganic Nature, seems to look for no manifestation of design in the
latter except as "God overrules and controls" second causes, and, finally,
refers to this overruling and controlling (rather than to a normal action
through endowment) all embryonic development, the growth of vegetables, and
the like. He even adds, without break or distinction, the sending of rain,
frost, and snow, the flight of an arrow, and the falling of a sparrow.
Somehow we must have misconceived the bearing of the statement; but so it
stands as one of "the three ways," and the right way, of "accounting for
contrivances in Nature; the other two being--1. Their reference to the
blind operation of natural causes; and, 2. That they were foreseen and
purposed by God, who endowed matter with forces which he foresaw and
intended should produce such results, but never interferes to guide their
operation.

In animadverting upon this latter view, Dr. Hodge brings forward an
argument against evolution, with the examination of which our remarks must
close:


"Paley, indeed, says that if the construction of a watch be an undeniable
evidence of design, it would be a still more wonderful manifestation of
skill if a watch could be made to produce other watches, and, it may be
added, not only other watches, but all kinds of timepieces, in endless
variety. So it has been asked, If a man can make a telescope, why cannot
God make a telescope which produces others like itself? This is simply
asking whether matter can be made to do the work of mind. The idea involves
a contradiction. For a telescope to make a telescope supposes it to select
copper and zinc in due proportions, and fuse them into brass; to fashion
that brass into inter-entering tubes; to collect and combine the requisite
materials for the different kinds of glass needed; to melt them, grind,
fashion, and polish them, adjust their densities, focal distances, etc.,
etc. A man who can believe that brass can do all this might as well believe
in God" (pp. 45, 46).


If Dr. Hodge's meaning is, that matter unconstructed cannot do the work of
mind, he misses the point altogether; for original construction by an
intelligent mind is given in the premises. If he means that the machine
cannot originate the power that operates it, this is conceded by all except
believers in perpetual motion, and it equally misses the point; for the
operating power is given in the case of the watch, and implied in that of
the reproductive telescope. But if he means that matter cannot be made to do
the work of mind in constructions, machines, or organisms, he is surely
wrong. "Sovitur ambulando," vel scribendo; he confuted his argument in the
act of writing the sentence. That is just what machines and organisms are
for; and a consistent Christian theist should maintain that is what all
matter is for. Finally, if, as we freely suppose, he means none of these,
he must mean (unless we are much mistaken) that organisms originated by the
Almighty Creator could not be endowed with the power of producing similar
organisms, or slightly dissimilar organisms, without successive
interventions. Then he begs the very question in dispute, and that, too, in
the face of the primal command, "Be fruitful and multiply," and its
consequences in every natural birth. If the actual facts could be ignored,
how nicely the parallel would run! "The idea involves a contradiction." For
an animal to make an animal, or a plant to make a plant, supposes it to
select carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, to combine these into
cellulose and protoplasm, to join with these some phosphorus, lime, etc.,
to build them into structures and usefully-adjusted organs. A man who can
believe that plants and animals can do this (not, indeed, in the crude way
suggested, but in the appointed way) "might as well believe in God." Yes,
verily, and so he probably will, in spite of all that atheistical
philosophers have to offer, if not harassed and confused by such arguments
and statements as these.

There is a long line of gradually-increasing divergence from the
ultra-orthodox view of Dr. Hodge through those of such men as Sir William
Thomson, Herschel, Argyll, Owen, Mivart, Wallace, and Darwin, down to those
of Strauss, Vogt, and Buchner. To strike the line with telling power and
good effect, it is necessary to aim at the right place. Excellent as the
present volume is in motive and clearly as it shows that Darwinism may bear
an atheistic as well as a theistic interpretation, we fear that it will not
contribute much to the reconcilement of science and religion.

The length of the analysis of the first book on our list precludes the
notices which we intended to take of the three others. They are all the
production of men who are both scientific and religious, one of them a
celebrated divine and writer unusually versed in natural history. They all
look upon theories of evolution either as in the way of being established
or as not unlikely to prevail, and they confidently expect to lose thereby
no solid ground for theism or religion. Mr. St. Clair, a new writer, in his
"Darwinism and Design; or, Creation by Evolution," takes his ground in the
following succinct statement of his preface:


"It is being assumed by our scientific guides that the design-argument has
been driven out of the field by the doctrine of evolution. It seems to be
thought by our theological teachers that the best defense of the faith is
to deny evolution in toto, and denounce it as anti-Biblical. My volume
endeavors to show that, if evolution be true, all is not lost; but, on the
contrary, something is gained: the design-argument remains unshaken, and
the wisdom and beneficence of God receive new illustration."


Of his closing remark, that, so far as he knows, the subject has never
before been handled in the same way for the same purpose, we will only say
that the handling strikes us as mainly sensible rather than as
substantially novel. He traverses the whole ground of evolution, from that
of the solar system to "the origin of moral species." He is clearly a
theistic Darwinian without misgiving, and the arguments for that hypothesis
and for its religious aspects obtain from him their most favorable
presentation, while he combats the dysteleology of Hackel, Buchner, etc.,
not, however, with any remarkable strength.

Dr. Winchell, chancellor of the new university at Syracuse, in his volume
just issued upon the "Doctrine of Evolution," adopts it in the abstract as
"clearly as the law of universal intelligence under which complex results
are brought into existence" (whatever that may mean), accepts it
practically for the inorganic world as a geologist should, hesitates as to
the organic world, and sums up the arguments for the origin of species by
diversification unfavorably for the Darwinians, regarding it mainly from the
geological side. As some of our zoologists and palaeontologists may have
somewhat to say upon this matter, we leave it for their consideration. We
are tempted to develop a point which Dr. Winchell incidentally refers
to--viz., how very modern the idea of the independent creation and fixity
of species is, and how well the old divines got on without it. Dr. Winchell
reminds us that St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas were model
evolutionists; and, where authority is deferred to, this should count for
something.

Mr. Kingsley's eloquent and suggestive "Westminster Sermons," in which he
touches here and there upon many of the topics which evolution brings up,
has incorporated into the preface a paper which he read in 187i to a
meeting of London clergy at Sion College, upon certain problems of natural
theology as affected by modern theories in science. We may hereafter have
occasion to refer to this volume. Meanwhile, perhaps we may usefully
conclude this article with two or three short extracts from it:


"The God who satisfies our conscience ought more or less to satisfy our
reason also. To teach that was Butler's mission; and he fulfilled it well.
But it is a mission which has to be refulfilled again and again, as human
thought changes, and human science develops, For if, in any age or country,
the God who seems to be revealed by Nature seems also different from the
God who is revealed by the then-popular religion, then that God and the
religion which tells of that God will gradually cease to be believed in.

"For the demands of reason--as none knew better than good Bishop
Butler--must be and ought to be satisfied. And, therefore, when a popular
war arises between the reason of any generation and its theology, then it
behooves the ministers of religion to inquire, with all humility and godly
fear, on whose side lies the fault; whether the theology which they expound
is all that it should be, or whether the reason of those who impugn it is
all that it should be."


Pronouncing it to be the duty of the naturalist to find out the how of
things, and of the natural theologian to find out the why, Mr. Kingsley
continues:


"But if it be said, 'After all, there is no why; the doctrine of evolution,
by doing away with the theory of creation, does away with that of final
causes,' let us answer boldly, 'Not in the least.' We might accept all that
Mr. Darwin, all that Prof. Huxley, all that other most able men have so
learnedly and acutely written on physical science, and yet preserve our
natural theology on the same basis as that on which Butler and Paley left
it. That we should have to develop it I do not deny.

"Let us rather look with calmness, and even with hope and good-will, on
these new theories; they surely mark a tendency toward a more, not a less,
Scriptural view of Nature.

"Of old it was said by Him, without whom nothing is made, 'My Father
worketh hitherto, and I work.' Shall we quarrel with Science if she should
show how these words are true? What, in one word, should we have to say but
this: 'We know of old that God was so wise that he could make all things;
but, behold, he is so much wiser than even that, that he can make all
things make themselves?' "



CHARLES DARWIN: A SKETCH

(Nature, June 4, 1874, accompanying a portrait)


Two British naturalists, Robert Brown and Charles Darwin, have, more than
any others, impressed their influence upon science in this nineteenth
century. Unlike as these men and their works were and are, we may most
readily subserve the present purpose in what we are called upon to say of
the latter by briefly comparing and contrasting the two.

Robert Brown died sixteen years ago, full of years and scientific honors,
and he seems to have finished, several years earlier, all the scientific
work that he had undertaken. To the other, Charles Darwin, a fair number of
productive years may yet remain, and are earnestly hoped for. Both enjoyed
the great advantage of being all their lives long free from exacting
professional duties or cares, and so were able in the main to apply
themselves to research without distraction and according to their bent.
Both, at the beginning of their career, were attached to expeditions of
exploration in the southern hemisphere, where they amassed rich stores of
observation and materials, and probably struck out, while in the field,
some of the best ideas which they subsequently developed. They worked in
different fields and upon different methods; only in a single instance, so
far as we know, have they handled the same topic; and in this the more
penetrating insight of the younger naturalist into an interesting general
problem may be appealed to in justification of a comparison which some will
deem presumptuous. Be this as it may, there will probably be little dissent
from the opinion that the characteristic trait common to the two is an
unrivaled scientific sagacity. In this these two naturalists seem to us,
each in his way, preeminent. There is a characteristic likeness,
too--underlying much difference--in their admirable manner of dealing with
facts closely, and at first hand, without the interposition of the formal
laws, vague ideal conceptions, or "glittering generalities" which some
philosophical naturalists make large use of.

A likeness may also be discerned in the way in which the work or
contributions of predecessors and contemporaries are referred to. The brief
historical summaries prefixed to many of Mr. Brown's papers are models of
judicial conscientiousness. And Mr. Darwin's evident delight at discovering
that some one else has "said his good things before him," or has been on
the verge of uttering them, seemingly equals that of making the discovery
himself. It reminds one of Goethe's insisting that his views in morphology
must have been held before him and must be somewhere on record, so obvious
did they appear to him.

Considering the quiet and retired lives led by both these men, and the
prominent place they are likely to occupy in the history of science, the
contrast between them as to contemporary and popular fame is very
remarkable. While Mr. Brown was looked up to with the greatest reverence by
all the learned botanists, he was scarcely heard of by any one else; and
out of botany he was unknown to science except as the discoverer of the
Brownian motion of minute particles, which discovery was promulgated in a
privately-printed pamphlet that few have ever seen. Although Mr. Darwin had
been for twenty years well and widely known for his "Naturalist's Journal,"
his works on "Coral Islands," on "Volcanic Islands, and especially for his
researches on the Barnacles, it was not till about fifteen years ago that
his name became popularly famous. Ever since no scientific name has been so
widely spoken. Many others have had hypotheses or systems named after them,
but no one else that we know of a department of bibliography. The nature of
his latest researches accounts for most of the difference, but not for all,
The Origin of Species is a fascinating topic, having interests and
connections with every branch of science, natural and moral. The
investigation of recondite affinities is very dry and special; its
questions, processes, and results alike--although in part generally
presentable in the shape of morphology--are mainly, like the higher
mathematics, unintelligible except to those who make them a subject of
serious study. They are especially so when presented in Mr. Brown's manner.
Perhaps no naturalist ever recorded the results of his investigations in
fewer words and with greater precision than Robert Brown: certainly no one
ever took more pains to state nothing beyond the precise point in question.
Indeed, we have sometimes fancied that he preferred to enwrap rather than to
explain his meaning; to put it into such a form that, unless you follow
Solomon's injunction and dig for the wisdom as for hid treasure, you may
hardly apprehend it until you have found it all out for yourself, when you
will have the satisfaction of perceiving that Mr. Brown not only knew all
about it, but had put it upon record. Very different from this is the way
in which Mr. Darwin takes his readers into his confidence, freely displays
to them the sources of his information, and the working of his mind, and
even shares with them all his doubts and misgivings, while in a clear
exposition he sets forth the reasons which have guided him to his
conclusions. These you may hesitate or decline to adopt, but you feel sure
that they have been presented with perfect fairness; and if you think of
arguments against them you may be confident that they have all been duly
considered before.

The sagacity which characterizes these two naturalists is seen in their
success in finding decisive instances, and their sure insight into the
meaning of things. As an instance of the latter on Mr. Darwin's part, and a
justification of our venture to compare him with the facile princeps
botanicorum, we will, in conclusion, allude to the single instance in which
they took the same subject in hand. In his papers on the organs and modes
of fecundation in Orchideae and Asclepiadeae, Mr. Brown refers more than
once to C.K. Sprengel's almost forgotten work, shows how the structure of
the flowers in these orders largely requires the agency of insects for
their fecundation, and is aware that "in Asclepiadeae . . . the insect so
readily passes from one corolla to another that it not unfrequently visits
every flower of the umbel." He must also have contemplated the transport of
pollen from plant to plant by wind and insects; and we know from another
source that he looked upon Sprengel's ideas as far from fantastic. Yet,
instead of taking the single forward step which now seems so obvious, he
even hazarded the conjecture that the insect-forms of some orchideous
flowers are intended to deter rather than to attract insects. And so the
explanation of all these and other extraordinary structures, as well as of
the arrangement of blossoms in general, and even the very meaning and need
of sexual propagation, were left to be supplied by Mr. Darwin. The aphorism
"Nature abhors a vacuum" is a characteristic specimen of the science of the
middle ages. The aphorism "Nature abhors close fertilization," and the
demonstration of the principle, belong to our age, and to Mr. Darwin. To
have originated this, and also the principle of natural selection--the
truthfulness and importance of which are evident the moment it is
apprehended--and to have applied these principles to the system of Nature in
such a manner as to make, within a dozen years, a deeper impression upon
natural history than has been made since Linnaeus, is ample title for one
man's fame.

There is no need of our giving any account or of estimating the importance
of such works as the "Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection," the
"Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication," the "Descent of Man,
and Selection in Relation to Sex," and the "Expression of the Emotions in
Men and Animals"--a series to which we may hope other volumes may in due
time be added. We would rather, if space permitted, attempt an analysis of
the less known, but not less masterly, subsidiary essays, upon the various
arrangements for insuring cross-fertilization in flowers, for the climbing
of plants, and the like. These, as we have heard, may before long be
reprinted in a volume, and supplemented by some long-pending but still
unfinished investigations upon the action of Dionaea and Drosera--a capital
subject for Mr. Darwin's handling.

A propos to these papers, which furnish excellent illustrations of it, let
us recognize Darwin's great service to natural science in bringing back to
it Teleology; so that, instead of Morphology versus Teleology, we shall
have Morphology wedded to Teleology. To many, no doubt, evolutionary
Teleology comes in such a questionable shape as to seem shorn of all its
goodness; but they will think better of it in time, when their ideas become
adjusted, and they see what an impetus the new doctrines have given to
investigation. They are much mistaken who suppose that Darwinism is only of
speculative importance, and perhaps transient interest. In its working
applications it has proved to be a new power, eminently practical and
fruitful.

And here, again, we are bound to note a striking contrast to Mr. Brown,
greatly as we revere his memory. He did far less work than was justly to be
expected from him. Mr. Darwin not only points out the road, but labors upon
it indefatigably and unceasingly. A most commendable noblesse oblige
assures us that he will go on while strength (would we could add health)
remains. The vast amount of such work he has already accomplished might
overtax the powers of the strongest. That it could have been done at all
under constant infirm health is most wonderful.



