X

INSECTIVOROUS PLANTS

(The Nation, April 2 and 9, 1874)



That animals should feed upon plants is natural and normal, and the reverse
seems impossible. But the adage, "Natura non agit saltatim," has its
application even here. It is the naturalist, rather than Nature, that draws
hard and fast lines everywhere, and marks out abrupt boundaries where she
shades off with gradations. However opposite the parts which animals and
vegetables play in the economy of the world as the two opposed kingdoms of
organic Nature, it is becoming more and more obvious that they are not only
two contiguous kingdoms, but are parts of one whole--antithetical and
complementary to each other, indeed; but such "thin partitions do the
bounds divide" that no definitions yet framed hold good without exception.
This is a world of transition in more senses than is commonly thought; and
one of the lessons which the philosophical naturalist learns, or has to
learn, is, that differences the most wide and real in the main, and the most
essential, may nevertheless be here and there connected or bridged over by
gradations. There is a limbo filled with organisms which never rise high
enough in the scale to be manifestly either animal or plant, unless it may
be said of some of them that they are each in turn and neither long. There
are undoubted animals which produce the essential material of vegetable
fabric, or build up a part of their structure of it, or elaborate the
characteristic leaf-green which, under solar light, assimilates inorganic
into organic matter, the most distinguishing function of vegetation. On the
other hand, there are plants--microscopic, indeed, but
unquestionable--which move spontaneously and freely around and among
animals that are fixed and rooted. And, to come without further parley to
the matter in hand, while the majority of animals feed directly upon plants,
"for 'tis their nature to," there are plants which turn the tables and feed
upon them. Some, being parasitic upon living animals, feed insidiously and
furtively; these, although really cases in point, are not so extraordinary,
and, as they belong to the lower orders, they are not much regarded, except
for the harm they do. There are others, and those of the highest orders,
which lure or entrap animals in ways which may well excite our special
wonder--all the more so since we are now led to conclude that they not only
capture but consume their prey.

As respects the two or three most notable instances, the conclusions which
have been reached are among the very recent acquisitions of physiological
science. Curiously enough, however, now that they are made out, it appears
that they were in good part long ago attained, recorded, and mainly
forgotten. The earlier observations and surmises shared the common fate of
discoveries made before the time, or by those who were not sagacious enough
to bring out their full meaning or importance. Vegetable morphology, dimly
apprehended by Linnaeus, initiated by Casper Frederick Wolff, and again,
independently in successive generations, by Goethe and by De Candolle,
offers a parallel instance. The botanists of Goethe's day could not see any
sense, advantage, or practical application, to be made of the proposition
that the parts of a blossom answer to leaves; and so the study of
homologies had long to wait. Until lately it appeared to be of no
consequence whatever (except, perhaps, to the insects) whether Drosera and
Sarracenia caught flies or not; and even Dionaea excited only unreflecting
wonder as a vegetable anomaly. As if there were real anomalies in Nature,
and some one plant possessed extraordinary powers denied to all others, and
(as was supposed) of no importance to itself!

That most expert of fly-catchers, Dionaea, of which so much has been
written and so little known until lately, came very near revealing its
secret to Solander and Ellis a hundred years ago, and doubtless to John
Bartram, our botanical pioneer, its C probable discoverer, who sent it to
Europe. Ellis, in his published letter to Linnaeus, with which the history
begins, described the structure and action of the living trap correctly;
noticed that the irritability which called forth the quick movement closing
the trap, entirely resided in the few small bristles of its upper face;
that this whole surface was studded C with glands, which probably secreted
a liquid; and that the trap did not open again when an insect was captured,
even upon the death of the captive, although it opened very soon when
nothing was caught, or when the irritation was caused by a bit of straw, or
any such substance. It was Linnaeus who originated the contrary and
erroneous statement, which has long prevailed in the books, that the trap
reopened when the fatigued captive became quiet, and let it go; as if the
plant caught flies in mere play and pastime! Linnaeus also omitted all
allusion to a secreted liquid--which was justifiable, as. Ellis does not
state that he had actually seen any; and, if he did see it, quite mistook
its use, supposing it to be, like the nectar of flowers, a lure for
insects, a bait for the trap. Whereas, in fact, the lure, if there be any,
must be an odor (although nothing is perceptible to the human olfactories);
for the liquid secreted by the glands never appears until the trap has
closed upon some insect, and held it at least for some hours a prisoner.
Within twenty-four or forty-eight hours this glairy liquid is abundant,
bathing and macerating the body of the perished insect. Its analogue is not
the nectar of flowers, but the saliva or the gastric juice!

The observations which compel such an inference are re-cent, and the
substance of them may be briefly stated. The late Rev. Dr. M. A. Curtis (by
whose death, two years ago, we lost one of our best botanists, and the
master in his especial line, mycology), forty years and more ago resided at
Wilmington, North Carolina, in the midst of the only district to which the
Dionaea is native; and he published, in 1834, in the first volume of the
"Journal of the Boston Society of Natural History," by far the best account
of this singular plant which had then appeared. He remarks that "the little
prisoner is not crushed and suddenly destroyed, as is sometimes supposed,"
for he had often liberated "captive flies and spiders, which sped away as
fast as fear or joy could hasten them." But he neglected to state, although
he must have noticed the fact, that the two sides of the trap, at first
concave to the contained insect, at length flatten and close down firmly
upon the prey, exerting no inconsiderable pressure, and insuring the death
of any soft-bodied insect, if it had not already succumbed to the
confinement and salivation. This last Dr. Curtis noticed, and first
discerned its import, although he hesitated to pronounce upon its
universality. That the captured insects were in some way "made subservient
to the nourishment of the plant" had been conjectured from the first. Dr.
Curtis "at times (and he might have always at the proper time) found them
enveloped in a fluid of mucilaginous consistence, which seems to act as a
solvent, the insects being more or less consumed in it." This was verified
and the digestive character of the liquid well-nigh demonstrated six or
seven years ago by Mr. Canby, of Wilmington, Delaware, who, upon a visit to
the sister-town of North Carolina, and afterward at his home, followed up
Dr. Curtis's suggestions with some capital observations and experiments.
These were published at Philadelphia in the tenth volume of Meehan's
Gardeners' Monthly, August, i868; but they do not appear to have attracted
the attention which they merited.

The points which Mr. Canby made out are, that this fluid is always poured
out around the captured insect in due time, "if the leaf is in good
condition and the prey suitable;" that it comes from the leaf itself, and
not from the decomposing insect (for, when the trap caught a plum-curculio,
the fluid was poured out while he was still alive, though very weak, and
endeavoring, ineffectively, to eat his way out); that bits of raw beef,
although sometimes rejected after a while, were generally acted upon in the
same manner--i.e., closed down upon tightly, salvered with the liquid,
dissolved mainly, and absorbed; so that, in fine, the fluid may well be
said to be analogous to the gastric juice of animals, dissolving the prey
and rendering it fit for absorption by the leaf. Many leaves remain
inactive or slowly die away after one meal; others reopen for a second and
perhaps even a third capture, and are at least capable of digesting a second
meal.

Before Mr. Canby's experiments had been made, we were aware that a similar
series had been made in England by Mr. Darwin, with the same results, and
with a small but highly-curious additional one--namely, that the fluid
secreted in the trap of Dionaea, like the gastric juice, has an acid
reaction. Having begun to mention unpublished results (too long allowed to
remain so), it may be well, under the circumstances, to refer to a still
more remarkable experiment by the same most sagacious investigator. By a
prick with a sharp lancet at a certain point, he has been able to paralyze
one-half of the leaf-trap, so that it remained motionless under the
stimulus to which the other half responded. Such high and sensitive
organization entails corresponding ailments. Mr. Canby tells us that he
gave to one of his Dionaea-subjects a fatal dyspepsia by feeding it with
cheese; and under Mr. Darwin's hands another suffers from paraplegia.

Finally, Dr. Burdon-Sanderson's experiments, detailed at the last meeting
of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, show that the
same electrical currents are developed upon the closing of the Dionaea-trap
as in the contraction of a muscle.

If the Venus's Fly-trap stood alone, it would be doubly marvelous--first,
on account of its carnivorous propensities, and then as constituting a real
anomaly in organic Nature, to which nothing leads up. Before acquiescing in
such a conclusion, the modern naturalist would scrutinize its relatives.
Now, the nearest relatives of our vegetable wonder are the sundews.

While Dionaea is as local in habitation as it is singular in structure and
habits, the Droseras or sundews are widely diffused over the world and
numerous in species. The two whose captivating habits have attracted
attention abound in bogs all around the northern hemisphere. That flies are
caught by them is a matter of common observation; but this was thought to
be purely accidental. They spread out from the root a circle of small
leaves, the upper face of which especially is beset and the margin fringed
with stout bristles (or what seem to be such, although the structure is more
complex), tipped by a secreting gland, which produces, while in vigorous
state, a globule of clear liquid like a drop of dew-- whence the name, both
Greek and English. One expects these seeming dew-drops to be dissipated by
the morning sun; but they remain unaffected. A touch shows that the
glistening drops are glutinous and extremely tenacious, as flies learn to
their cost on alighting, perhaps to sip the tempting liquid, which acts
first as a decoy and then like birdlime. A small fly is held so fast, and
in its struggles comes in contact with so many of these glutinous globules,
that it seldom escapes.

The result is much the same to the insect, whether captured in the trap of
Dionaea or stuck fast to the limed bristles of Drosera. As there are various
plants upon whose glandular hairs or glutinous surfaces small insects are
habitually caught and perish, it might be pure coincidence that the most
effectual arrangement of the kind happens to occur in the nearest relatives
of Dionaea. Roth, a keen German botanist of the eighteenth century, was the
first to detect, or at least to record, some evidence of intention in
Drosera, and to compare its action with that of Dionaea, which, through
Ellis's account, had shortly before been made known in Europe. He noticed
the telling fact that not only the bristles which the unfortunate insect
had come in contact with, but also the surrounding rows, before widely
spreading, curved inward one by one, although they had not been touched, so
as within a few hours to press their glutinous tips likewise against the
body of the captive insect--thus doubling or quadrupling the bonds of the
victim and (as we may now suspect) the surfaces through which some part of
the animal substance may be imbibed. For Roth surmised that both these
plants were, in their way, predaceous. He even observed that the disk of
the Drosera-leaf itself often became concave and enveloped the prey. These
facts, although mentioned now and then in some succeeding works, were
generally forgotten, except that of the adhesion of small insects to the
leaves of sundews, which must have been observed in every generation. Up to
and even within a few years past, if any reference was made to these
asserted movements (as by such eminent physiologists as Meyen and
Treviranus) it was to discredit them. Not because they are difficult to
verify, but because, being naturally thought improbable, it was easier to
deny or ignore them. So completely had the knowledge of almost a century
ago died out in later years that, when the subject was taken up anew in our
days by Mr. Darwin, he had, as we remember, to advertise for it, by sending
a "note and query" to the magazines, asking where any account of the
fly-catching of the leaves of sundew was recorded.

When Mr. Darwin takes a matter of this sort in hand, he is not likely to
leave it where he found it. He not only confirmed all Roth's observations
as to the incurving of the bristles toward and upon an insect entangled on
any part of the disk of the leaf, but also found that they responded
similarly to a bit of muscle or other animal substance, while to any
particles of inorganic matter they were nearly indifferent. To minute
fragments of carbonate of ammonia, however, they were more responsive. As
these remarkable results, attained (as we are able to attest) half a dozen
years ago, remained unpublished (being portions of an investigation not yet
completed), it would have been hardly proper to mention them, were it not
that independent observers were beginning to bring out the same or similar
facts. Mrs. Treat, of New Jersey, noticed the habitual infolding of the
leaf in the longer-leaved species of sundew (American Journal of Science
for November, 1871), as was then thought for the first time--Roth's and
Withering's observations not having been looked up. In recording this, the
next year, in a very little book, entitled "How Plants Behave," the
opportunity was taken to mention, in the briefest way, the capital
discovery of Mr. Darwin that the leaves of Drosera act differently when
different objects are placed upon them, the bristles closing upon a
particle of raw meat as upon a living insect, while to a particle of chalk
or wood they are nearly inactive. The same facts were independently brought
out by Mr. A. W. Bennett at the last year's meeting of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, and have been mentioned in the
journals.

If to these statements, which we may certify, were added some far more
extraordinary ones, communicated to the French Academy of Science in May
last by M. Zeigler, a stranger story of discrimination on the part of
sundew-bristles would be told. But it is safer to wait for the report of
the committee to which these marvels were referred, and conclude this
sufficiently "strange eventful history" with some details of experiments
made last summer by Mrs. Treat, of New Jersey, and published in the December
number of the American Naturalist. It is well to note that Mrs. Treat
selects for publication the observations of one particular day in July,
when the sundew-leaves were unusually active; for their moods vary with
the weather, and also in other unaccountable ways, although in general the
sultrier days are the most appetizing:


"At fifteen minutes past ten of the same day I placed bits of raw beef on
some of the most vigorous leaves of Drosera longifolia. Ten minutes past
twelve, two of the leaves had folded around the beef, hiding it from sight.
Half-past eleven of the same day, I placed living flies on the leaves of D.
longifolia. At 12 and 48 minutes one of the leaves had folded entirely
around its victim, the other leaves had partially folded, and the flies had
ceased to struggle. By 2 and 30 minutes four leaves had each folded around
a fly. . . . I tried mineral substances--bits of dry chalk, magnesia, and
pebbles. In twenty-four hours, neither the leaves nor their bristles had
made any move like clasping these articles. I wet a piece of chalk in
water, and in less than an hour the bristles were curving about it, but
soon unfolded again, leaving the chalk free on the blade of the leaf.
Parallel experiments made on D. rotundifolia, with bits of beef and of
chalk, gave the same results as to the action of the bristles; while with a
piece of raw apple, after eleven hours, "part of the bristles were clasping
it, but not so closely as the beef," and in twenty-four hours "nearly all
the bristles were curved toward it, but not many of the glands were
touching it."


To make such observations is as easy as it is interesting. Throughout the
summer one has only to transfer plants of Drosera from the bogs into pots
or pans filled with wet moss--if need be, allowing them to become
established in the somewhat changed conditions, or even to put out fresh
leaves--and to watch their action or expedite it by placing small flies
upon the disk of the leaves. The more common round-leaved sundew acts as
well as the other by its bristles, and the leaf itself is sometimes almost
equally prehensile, although in a different way, infolding the whole border
instead of the summit only. Very curious, and even somewhat painful, is the
sight when a fly, alighting upon the central dew-tipped bristles, is held
as fast as by a spider's web; while the efforts to escape not only entangle
the insect more hopelessly as they exhaust its strength, but call into
action the surrounding bristles, which, one by one, add to the number of the
bonds, each by itself apparently feeble, but in their combination so
effectual that the fly may be likened to the sleeping Gulliver made fast in
the tiny but multitudinous toils of the Liliputians. Anybody who can
believe that such an apparatus was not intended to capture flies might say
the same of a spider's web.

Is the intention here to be thought any the less real because there are
other species of Drosera which are not so perfectly adapted for
fly-catching, owing to the form of their leaves and the partial or total
want of cooperation of their scattered bristles? One such species, D.
filiformis, the thread-leaved sundew, is not uncommon in this country, both
north and south of the district that Dionaea locally inhabits. Its leaves
are long and thread-shaped, beset throughout with glutinous gland-tipped
bristles, but wholly destitute of a blade. Flies, even large ones, and even
moths and butterflies, as Mrs. Treat and Mr. Canby affirm (in the American
Naturalist), get stuck fast to these bristles, whence they seldom escape.
Accidental as such captures are, even these thread-shaped leaves respond
more or less to the contact, somewhat in the manner of their brethren. In
Mr. Canby's recent and simple experiment, made at Mr. Darwin's suggestion,
when a small fly alights upon a leaf a little below its slender apex, or
when a bit of crushed fly is there affixed, within a few hours the tip of
the leaf bends at the point of contact, and curls over or around the body
in question; and Mrs. Treat even found that when living flies were pinned
at half an inch in distance from the leaves, these in forty minutes had
bent their tips perceptibly toward the flies, and in less than two hours
reached them! If this be confirmed--and such a statement needs ample
confirmation--then it may be suspected that these slender leaves not only
incurve after prolonged contact, just as do the leaf-stalks of many
climbers, but also make free and independent circular sweeps, in the manner
of twining stems and of many tendrils.

Correlated movements like these indicate purpose. When performed by
climbing plants, the object and the advantage are obvious. That the
apparatus and the actions of Dionaea and Drosera are purposeless and
without advantage to the plants themselves, many have been believed in
former days, when it was likewise conceived that abortive and functionless
organs were specially created "for the sake of symmetry" and to display a
plan; but this is not according to the genius of modern science.

In the cases of insecticide next to be considered, such evidence of intent
is wanting, but other and circumstantial evidence may be had, sufficient to
warrant convictions. Sarracenias have hollow leaves in the form of pitchers
or trumpet-shaped tubes, containing water, in which flies and other insects
are habitually drowned. They are all natives of the eastern side of North
America, growing in bogs or low ground, so that they cannot be supposed to
need the water as such. Indeed, they secrete a part if not all of it. The
commonest species, and the only one at the North, which ranges from
Newfoundland to Florida, has a broad-mouthed pitcher with an upright lid,
into which rain must needs fall more or less. The yellow Sarracenia, with
long tubular leaves, called "trumpets in the Southern States, has an
arching or partly upright lid, raised well above the orifice, so that some
water may rain in; but a portion is certainly secreted there, and may be
seen bedewing the sides and collected at the bottom before the mouth opens.
In other species, the orifice is so completely overarched as essentially to
prevent the access of water from without. In these tubes, mainly in the
water, flies and other insects accumulate, perish, and decompose. Flies
thrown into the open-mouthed tube of the yellow Sarracenia, even when free
from water, are unable to get out--one hardly sees why, except that they
cannot fly directly upward; and microscopic chevaux-de-frise of fine,
sharp-pointed bristles which line most of the interior, pointing strictly
downward, may be a more effectual obstacle to crawling up the sides than
one would think possible. On the inside of the lid or hood of the purple
Northern species, the bristles are much stronger; but an insect might
escape by the front without encountering these. In this species, the
pitchers, however, are so well supplied with water that the insects which
somehow are most abundantly attracted thither are effectually drowned, and
the contents all summer long are in the condition of a rich liquid manure.

That the tubes or pitchers of the Southern species are equally attractive
and fatal to flies is well known. Indeed, they are said to be taken into
houses and used as fly-traps. There is no perceptible odor to draw insects,
except what arises from the decomposition of macerated victims; nor is any
kind of lure to be detected at the mouth of the pitcher of the common
purple-flowered species. Some incredulity was therefore natural when it was
stated by a Carolinian correspondent (Mr. B.F. Grady) that in the
long-leaved, yellow-flowered species the lid just above the mouth of the
tubular pitcher habitually secretes drops of a sweet and viscid liquid,
which attracts flies and apparently intoxicates them, since those that sip
it soon become unsteady in gait and mostly fall irretrievably into the well
beneath. But upon cultivating plants of this species, obtained for the
purpose, the existence of this lure was abundantly verified; and, although
we cannot vouch for its inebriating quality, we can no longer regard it as
unlikely.

No sooner was it thus ascertained that at least one species of Sarracenia
allures flies to their ruin than it began to appear that--just as in the
case of Drosera--most of this was a mere revival of obsolete knowledge. The
"insect-destroying process" was known and well described sixty years ago,
the part played by the sweet exudation indicated, and even the intoxication
perhaps hinted at, although evidently little thought of in those
ante-temperance days. Dr. James Macbride, of South Carolina--the early
associate of Elliott in his "Botany of South Carolina and Georgia," and to
whose death, at the age of thirty-three, cutting short a life of remarkable
promise, the latter touchingly alludes in the preface to his second
volume--sent to Sir James Edward Smith an account of his observations upon
this subject, made in 1810 and the following years. This was read to the
Linnaean Society in 1815, and published in the twelfth volume of its
"Transactions." From this forgotten paper (to which attention has lately
been recalled) we cull the following extracts, premising that the
observations mostly relate to a third species, Sarracenia adunca, alias
variolaris, which is said to be the most efficient fly-catcher of the kind:


"If, in the months of May, June, or July, when the leaves of those plants
perform their extraordinary functions in the greatest perfection, some of
them be removed to a house and fixed in an erect position, it will soon be
perceived that flies are attracted by them. These insects immediately
approach the fauces of the leaves, and, leaning over their edges, appear to
sip with eagerness something from their internal surfaces. In this position
they linger; but at length, allured as it would seem by the pleasure of
taste, they enter the tubes. The fly which has thus changed its situation
will be seen to stand unsteadily; it totters for a few seconds, slips, and
falls to the bottom of the tube, where it is either drowned or attempts in
vain to ascend against the points of the hairs. The fly seldom takes wing
in its fall and escapes. . . . in a house much infested with flies, this
entrapment goes on so rapidly that a tube is filled in a few hours, and it
becomes necessary to add water, the natural quantity being insufficient to
drown the imprisoned insects. The leaves of S. adunca and rubra might well
be employed as fly-catchers; indeed, I am credibly informed they are in
some neighborhoods. The leaves of the S. flava [the species to which our
foregoing remarks mainly relate], although they are very capacious, and
often grow to the height of three feet or more, are never found to contain
so many insects as those of the species above mentioned.

"The cause which attracts flies is evidently a sweet, viscid substance
resembling honey, secreted by or exuding from the internal surface of the
tube . . . From the margin, where it commences, it does not extend lower
than one-fourth of an inch.

"The falling of the insect as soon as it enters the tube is wholly
attributable to the downward or inverted position of the hairs of the
internal surface of the leaf. At the bottom of a tube split open, the hairs
are plainly discernible pointing downward; as the eye ranges upward, they
gradually become shorter and attenuated, till at or just below the surface
covered by the bait they are no longer perceptible to the naked eye nor to
the most delicate touch. It is here that the fly cannot take a hold
sufficiently strong to support itself, but falls. The in. ability of
insects to crawl up against the points of the hairs I have often tested in
the most satisfactory manner."


From the last paragraph it may be inferred that Dr. Macbride did not
suspect any inebriating property in the nectar, and in a closing note there
is a conjecture of an impalpable loose powder in S. flava, at the place
where the fly stands so unsteadily, and from which it is supposed to slide.
We incline to take Mr. Grady's view of the case.

The complete oblivion into which this paper and the whole subject had
fallen is the more remarkable when it is seen that both are briefly but
explicitly referred to in Elliott's book, with which botanists are
familiar.

It is not so wonderful that the far earlier allusion to these facts by the
younger Bartram should have been overlooked or disregarded. With the genuine
love of Nature and fondness for exploration, 'William Bartram did not
inherit the simplicity of his father, the earliest native botanist of this
country. Fine writing was his foible; and the preface to his well-known
"Travels" (published at Philadelphia in 1791) is its full-blown
illustration, sometimes perhaps deserving the epithet which he applies to
the palms of Florida--that of pomposity. In this preface he declares that
"all the Sarracenias are insect-catchers, and so is the Drosera
rotundifolia. Whether the insects caught in their leaves, and which
dissolve and mix with the fluid, serve for aliment or support to these kind
of plants is doubtful," he thinks, but he should be credited with the
suggestion. In one sentence he speaks of the quantities of insects which,
"being invited down to sip the mellifluous exuvia from the interior surface
of the tube, where they inevitably perish," being prevented from returning
by the stiff hairs all pointing downward. This, if it refers to the sweet
secretion, would place it below, and not, as it is, above the bristly
surface, while the liquid below, charged with decomposing insects, is
declared in an earlier sentence to be "cool and animating, limpid as the
morning dew." Bartram was evidently writing from memory; and it is very
doubtful if he ever distinctly recognized the sweet exudation which entices
insects.

Why should these plants take to organic food more than others? If we cannot
answer the question, we may make a probable step toward it. For plants that
are not parasitic, these, especially the sundews, have much less than the
ordinary amount of chlorophyll--that is, of the universal leaf-green upon
which the formation of organic matter out of inorganic materials depends.
These take it instead of making it, to a certain extent.

What is the bearing of these remarkable adaptations and operations upon
doctrines of evolution? There seems here to be a field on which the
specific creationist, the evolutionist with design, and the necessary
evolutionist, may fight out an interesting, if not decisive, "triangular
duel."



