XI

INSECTIVOROUS AND

CLIMBING PLANTS [XI-1]

(The Nation, January 6 and 13, 1876)


"Minerals grow; vegetables grow and live; animals grow, live, and feel;"
this is the well-worn, not to say out-worn, diagnosis of the three kingdoms
by Linnaeus. It must be said of it that the agreement indicated in the
first couplet is unreal, and that the distinction declared in the second is
evanescent. Crystals do not grow at all in the sense that plants and
animals grow. On the other hand, if a response to external impressions by
special movements is evidence of feeling, vegetables share this endowment
with animals; while, if conscious feeling is meant, this can be affirmed
only of the higher animals. What appears to remain true is, that the
difference is one of successive addition. That the increment in the organic
world is of many steps; that in the long series no absolute lines separate,
or have always separated, organisms which barely respond to impressions
from those which more actively and variously respond, and even from those
that consciously so respond--this, as we all know, is what the author of the
works before us has undertaken to demonstrate. Without reference here either
to that part of the series with which man is connected, and in some sense
or other forms a part of, or to that lower limbo where the two organic
kingdoms apparently merge--or whence, in evolutionary phrase, they have
emerged--Mr. Darwin, in the present volumes, directs our attention to the
behavior of the highest plants alone. He shows that some (and he might add
that all) of them execute movements for their own advantage, and that some
capture and digest living prey. When plants are seen to move and to devour,
what faculties are left that are distinctively animal?

As to insectivorous or otherwise carnivorous plants, we have so recently
here discussed this subject--before it attained to all this new
popularity--that a brief account of Mr. Darwin's investigation may
suffice.[XI-2] It is full of interest as a physiological research, and is a
model of its kind, as well for the simplicity and directness of the means
employed as for the clearness with which the results are brought
out--results which any one may verify now that the way to them is pointed
out, and which, surprising as they are, lose half their wonder in the ease
and sureness with which they seem to have been reached.

Rather more than half the volume is devoted to one subject, the
round-leaved sundew (Drosera rotundifolia), a rather common plant in the
northern temperate zone. That flies stick fast to its leaves, being limed
by the tenacious seeming dew-drops which stud its upper face and margins,
had long been noticed in Europe and in this country. We have heard hunters
and explorers in our Northern woods refer with satisfaction to the fate
which in this way often befalls one of their plagues, the black fly of early
summer. And it was known to some observant botanists in the last century,
although forgotten or discredited in this, that an insect caught on the
viscid glands it has happened to alight upon is soon fixed by many
more--not merely in consequence of its struggles, but by the spontaneous
incurvation of the stalks of surrounding and untouched glands; and even the
body of the leaf had been observed to incurve or become cup-shaped so as
partly to involve the captive insect.

Mr. Darwin's peculiar investigations not only confirm all this, but add
greater wonders. They relate to the sensitiveness of these tentacles, as he
prefers to call them, and the mode in which it is manifested; their power
of absorption; their astonishing discernment of the presence of animal or
other soluble azotized matter, even in quantities so minute as to rival the
spectroscope--that most exquisite instrument of modern research--in
delicacy; and, finally, they establish the fact of a true digestion, in all
essential respects similar to that of the stomach of animals.

First as to sensitiveness and movement. Sensitiveness is manifested by
movement or change of form in response to an external impression. The
sensitiveness in the sundew is all in the gland which surmounts the
tentacle. To incite movement or other action, it is necessary that the
gland itself should be reached. Anything laid on the surface of the viscid
drop, the spherule of clear, glairy liquid which it secretes, produces no
effect unless it sinks through to the gland; or unless the substance is
soluble and reaches it in solution, which, in the case of certain
substances, has the same effect. But the glands themselves do not move, nor
does any neighboring portion of the tentacle. The outer and longer
tentacles bend inward (toward the centre of the leaf) promptly, when the
gland is irritated or stimulated, sweeping through an arc of 1800 or less,
or more--the quickness and the extent of the inflection depending, in
equally vigorous leaves, upon the amount of irritation or stimulation, and
also upon its kind. A tentacle with a particle of raw meat on its gland
sometimes visibly begins to bend in ten seconds, becomes strongly incurved
in five minutes, and its tip reaches the centre of the leaf in half an
hour; but this is a case of extreme rapidity. A particle of cinder, chalk,
or sand, will also incite the bending, if actually brought in contact with
the gland, not merely resting on the drop; but the inflection is then much
less pronounced and more transient. Even a bit of thin human hair, only
1/8000 of an inch in length, weighing only the 1/78740 of a grain, and
largely supported by the viscid secretion, suffices to induce movement;
but, on the other hand, one or two momentary, although rude, touches with a
hard object produce no effect, although a repeated touch or the slightest
pressure, such as that of a gnat's foot, prolonged for a short time, causes
bending. The seat of the movement is wholly or nearly confined to a portion
of the lower part of the tentacle, above the base, where local irritation
produces not the slightest effect. The movement takes place only in
response to some impression made upon its own gland at the distant
extremity, or upon other glands far more remote. For if one of these members
suffers irritation the others sympathize with it. Very noteworthy is the
correlation between the central tentacles, upon which an insect is most
likely to alight, and these external and larger ones, which, in proportion
to their distance from the centre, take the larger share in the movement.
The shorter central ones do not move at all when a bit of meat, or a
crushed fly, or a particle of a salt of ammonia, or the like, is placed upon
them; but they transmit their excitation across the leaf to the surrounding
tentacles on all sides; and they, although absolutely untouched, as they
successively receive the mysterious impulse, bend strongly inward, just as
they do when their own glands are excited. Whenever a tentacle bends in
obedience to an impulse from its own gland, the movement is always toward
the centre of the leaf; and this also takes place, as we have seen, when an
exciting object is lodged at the centre. But when the object is placed upon
either half of the leaf, the impulse radiating thence causes all the
surrounding untouched tentacles to bend with precision toward the point of
excitement, even the central tentacles, which are motionless when
themselves charged, now responding to the call. The inflection which
follows mechanical irritation or the presence of any inorganic or insoluble
body is transient; that which follows the application of organic matter
lasts longer, more or less, according to its nature and the amount; but
sooner or later the tentacles resume their former position, their glands
glisten anew with fresh secretion, and they are ready to act again.

As to how the impulse is originated and propagated, and how the movements
are made, comparatively simple as the structure is, we know as little as we
do of the nature of nervous impulse and muscular motion. But two things Mr.
Darwin has wellnigh made out, both of them by means and observations so
simple and direct as to command our confidence, although they are contrary
to the prevalent teaching. First, the transmission is through the ordinary
cellular tissue, and not through what are called the fibrous or vascular
bundles. Second, the movement is a vital one, and is effected by contraction
on the side toward which the bending takes place, rather than by turgescent
tension of the opposite side. The tentacle is pulled over rather than
pushed over. So far all accords with muscular action.

The operation of this fly-catching apparatus, in any case, is plain. If the
insect alights upon the disk of the leaf, the viscid secretion holds it
fast--at least, an ordinary fly is unable to escape--its struggles only
increase the number of glands involved and the amount of excitement; this
is telegraphed to the surrounding and successively longer tentacles, which
bent over in succession, so that within ten to thirty hours, if the leaf is
active and the fly large enough, every one of the glands (on the average,
nearly two hundred in number) will be found applied to the body of the
insect. If the insect is small, and the lodgment toward one side, only the
neighboring tentacles may take part in the capture. If two or three of the
strong marginal tentacles are first encountered, their prompt inflection
carries the intruder to the centre, and presses it down upon the glands
which thickly pave the floor; these notify all the surrounding tentacles of
the capture, that they may share the spoil, and the fate of that victim is
even as of the first. A bit of meat or a crushed insect is treated in the
same way.

This language implies that the animal matter is in some way or other
discerned by the tentacles, and is appropriated. Formerly there was only a
presumption of this, on the general ground that such an organization could
hardly be purposeless. Yet, while such expressions were natural, if not
unavoidable, they generally were used by those familiar with the facts in a
half-serious, half-metaphorical sense. Thanks to Mr. Darwin's
investigations, they may now be used in simplicity and seriousness.

That the glands secrete the glairy liquid of the drop is evident, not only
from its nature, but from its persistence through a whole day's exposure to
a summer sun, as also from its renewal after it has been removed, dried up,
or absorbed. That they absorb as well as secrete, and that the whole
tentacle may be profoundly affected thereby, are proved by the different
effects, in kind and degree, which follow the application of different
substances. Drops of rain-water, like single momentary touches of a solid
body, produce no effect, as indeed they could be of no advantage; but a
little carbonate of ammonia in the water, or an infusion of meat, not only
causes inflection, but promptly manifests its action upon the contents of
the cells of which the tentacle is constructed. These cells are
sufficiently transparent to be viewed under the microscope without
dissection or other interference; and the change which takes place in the
fluid contents of these cells, when the gland above has been acted upon, is
often visible through a weak lens, or sometimes even by the naked eye,
although higher powers are required to discern what actually takes place.
This change, which Mr. Darwin discovered, and turns to much account in his
researches, he terms "aggregation of the protoplasm." When untouched and
quiescent, the contents appear as an homogeneous purple fluid. When the
gland is acted upon, minute purple particles appear, suspended in the now
colorless or almost colorless fluid; and this change appears first in the
cells next the gland, and then in those next beneath, traveling down the
whole length of the tentacle. When the action is slight, this appearance
does not last long; the particles of "aggregated protoplasm redissolved, the
process of redissolution traveling upward from the base of the tentacle to
the gland in a reverse direction to that of the aggregation. Whenever the
action is more prolonged or intense, as when a bit of meat or crushed fly,
or a fitting solution, is left upon the gland, the aggregation proceeds
further, so that the whole protoplasm of each cell condenses into one or
two masses, or into a single mass which will often separate into two, which
afterward reunite; indeed, they incessantly change their forms and
positions, being never at rest, although their movements are rather slow.
In appearance and movements they are very like amoebae and the white
corpuscles of the blood. Their motion, along with the streaming movement of
rotation in the layer of white granular protoplasm that flows along the
walls of the cell, under the high powers of the microscope "presents a
wonderful scene of vital activity." This continues while the tentacle is
inflected or the gland fed by animal matter, but vanishes by dissolution
when the work is over and the tentacle straightens. That absorption takes
place, and matter is conveyed from cell to cell, is well made out,
especially by the experiments with carbonate of ammonia. Nevertheless, this
aggregation is not dependent upon absorption, for it equally occurs from
mechanical irritation of the gland, and always accompanies inflection,
however caused, though it may take place without it. This is also apparent
from the astonishingly minute quantity of certain substances which suffices
to produce sensible inflection and aggregation--such, for instance, as the
1/20000000 or even the 1/30000000 of a grain of phosphate or nitrate of
ammonia!

By varied experiments it was found that the nitrate of ammonia was more
powerful than the carbonate, and the phosphate more powerful than the
nitrate, this result being intelligible from the difference in the amount
of nitrogen in the first two salts, and from the presence of phosphorus in
the third. There is nothing surprising in the absorption of such extremely
dilute solutions by a gland. As our author remarks: "All physiologists
admit that the roots of plants absorb the salts of ammonia brought to them
by the rain; and fourteen gallons of rain-water contain a grain of ammonia;
therefore, only a little more than twice as much as in the weakest solution
employed by me. The fact which appears truly wonderful is that the
1/20000000 of a grain of the phosphate of ammonia, including less than
1/30000000 of efficient matter (if the water of crystallization is
deducted), when absorbed by a gland, should induce some change in it which
leads to a motor impulse being transmitted down the whole length of the
tentacle, causing its basal part to bend, often through an angle of 180
degrees." But odoriferous particles which act upon the nerves of animals
must be infinitely smaller, and by these a dog a quarter of a mile to the
leeward of a deer perceives his presence by some change in the olfactory
nerves transmitted through them to the brain.

When Mr. Darwin obtained these results, fourteen years ago, he could claim
for Drosera a power and delicacy in the detection of minute quantities of a
substance far beyond the resources of the most skillful chemist; but in a
foot-note he admits that "now the spectroscope has altogether beaten
Drosera; for, according to Bunsen and Kirchhoff, probably less than the
1/200000000 of a grain of sodium can be thus detected."

Finally, that this highly-sensitive and active living organism absorbs,
will not be doubted when it is proved to digest, that is, to dissolve
otherwise insoluble animal matter by the aid of special secretions. That it
does this is now past doubting. In the first place, when the glands are
excited they pour forth an increased amount of the ropy secretion. This
occurs directly when a bit of meat is laid upon the central glands; and the
influence which they transmit to the long-stalked marginal glands causes
them, while incurving their tentacles, to secrete more copiously long
before they have themselves touched anything. The primary fluid, secreted
without excitation, does not of itself digest. But the secretion under
excitement changes in Nature and becomes acid. So, according to Schiff,
mechanical irritation excites the glands of the stomach to secrete an acid.
In both this acid appears to be necessary to, but of itself insufficient
for, digestion. The requisite solvent, a kind of ferment called pepsin,
which acts only in the presence of the acid, is poured forth by the glands
of the stomach only after they have absorbed certain soluble nutritive
substances of the food; then this pepsin promptly dissolves muscle,
fibrine, coagulated albumen, cartilage, and the like. Similarly it appears
that Drosera-glands, after irritation by particles of glass, did not act
upon little cubes of albumen. But when moistened with saliva, or replaced
by bits of roast-meat or gelatine, or even cartilage, which supply some
soluble peptone-matter to initiate the process, these substances are
promptly acted upon, and dissolved or digested; whence it is inferred that
the analogy with the stomach holds good throughout, and that a ferment
similar to pepsin is poured out under the stimulus of some soluble animal
matter. But the direct evidence of this is furnished only by the related
carnivorous plant, Dionaea, from which the secretions, poured out when
digestion is about to begin, may be collected in quantity sufficient for
chemical examination. In short, the experiments show "that there is a
remarkable accordance in the power of digestion between the gastric juice
of animals, with its pepsin and hydrochloric acid, and the secretion of
Drosera, with its ferment and acid belonging to the acetic series. We can,
therefore, hardly doubt that the ferment in both cases is closely similar,
if not identically the same. That a plant and an animal should pour forth
the same, or nearly the same, complex secretion, adapted for the same
purpose of digestion, is a new and wonderful fact in physiology."

There are one or two other species of sundew--one of them almost as common
in Europe and North America as the ordinary round-leaved species--which act
in the same way, except that, having their leaves longer in proportion to
their breadth, their sides never curl inward, but they are much disposed to
aid the action of their tentacles by incurving the tip of the leaf, as if
to grasp the morsel. There are many others, with variously less efficient
and less advantageously arranged insectivorous apparatus, which, in the
language of the new science, may be either on the way to acquire something
better, or of losing what they may have had, while now adapting themselves
to a proper vegetable life. There is one member of the family (Drosophyllum
Lusitanicum), an almost shrubby plant, which grows on dry and sunny hills
in Portugal and Morocco--which the villagers call "the flycatcher," and
hang up in their cottages for the purpose--the glandular tentacles of which
have wholly lost their powers of movement, if they ever had any, but which
still secrete, digest, and absorb, being roused to great activity by the
contact of any animal matter. A friend of ours once remarked that it was
fearful to contemplate the amount of soul that could be called forth in a
dog by the sight of a piece of meat. Equally wonderful is the avidity for
animal food manifested by these vegetable tentacles, that can "only stand
and wait" for it.

Only a brief chapter is devoted to Dionaea of North Carolina, the Venus's
fly-trap, albeit, "from the rapidity and force of its movements, one of the
most wonderful in the world." It is of the same family as the sundew; but
the action is transferred from tentacles on the leaf to the body of the
leaf itself, which is transformed into a spring-trap, closing with a sudden
movement over the alighted insect. No secretion is provided beforehand
either for allurement or detention; but after the captive is secured,
microscopic glands within the surface of the leaf pour out an abundant
gastric juice to digest it. Mrs. Glass's classical directions in the
cook-book, "first catch your hare," are implicitly followed.

Avoiding here all repetition or recapitulation of our former narrative,
suffice it now to mention two interesting recent additions to our
knowledge, for which we are indebted to Mr. Darwin. One is a research, the
other an inspiration. It is mainly his investigations which have shown that
the glairy liquid, which is poured upon and macerates the captured insect,
accomplishes a true digestion; that, like the gastric juice of animals, it
contains both a free acid and pepsin or its analogue, these two together
dissolving albumen, meat, and the like. The other point relates to the
significance of a peculiarity in the process of capture. When the trap
suddenly incloses an insect which has betrayed its presence by touching one
of the internal sensitive bristles, the closure is at first incomplete. For
the sides approach in an arching way, surrounding a considerable cavity,
and the marginal spine-like bristles merely intercross their tips, leaving
intervening spaces through which one may look into the cavity beneath. A
good idea may be had of it by bringing the two palms near together to
represent the sides of the trap, and loosely interlocking the fingers to
represent the marginal bristles or bars. After remaining some time in this
position the closure is made complete by the margins coming into full
contact, and the sides finally flattening down so as to press firmly upon
the insect within; the secretion excited by contact is now poured out, and
digestion begins. Why these two stages? Why should time be lost by this
preliminary and incomplete closing? The query probably was never distinctly
raised before, no one noticing anything here that needed explanation.
Darwinian teleology, however, raises questions like this, and Mr. Darwin
not only propounded the riddle but solved it. The object of the partial
closing is to permit small insects to escape through the meshes, detaining
only those plump enough to be worth the trouble of digesting. For naturally
only one insect is caught at a time, and digestion is a slow business with
Dionaeas, as with anacondas, requiring ordinarily a fortnight. It is not
worth while to undertake it with a gnat when larger game may be had. To
test this happy conjecture, Mr. Canby was asked, on visiting the Dionaeas
in their native habitat, to collect early in the season a good series of
leaves in the act of digesting naturally-caught insects. Upon opening them
it was found that ten out of fourteen were engaged upon relatively large
prey, and of the remaining four three had insects as large as ants, and one
a rather small fly.

"There be land-rats and water-rats" in this carnivorous sun-dew family.
Aldrovanda, of the warmer parts of Europe and of India, is an aquatic plant,
with bladdery leaves, which were supposed to be useful in rendering the
herbage buoyant in water. But it has recently been found that the bladder
is composed of two lobes, like the trap of its relative Dionaea, or the
valves of a mussel-shell; that these open when the plant is in an active
state, are provided with some sensitive bristles within, and when these are
touched close with a quick movement. These water-traps are manifestly
adapted for catching living creatures; and the few incomplete
investigations that have already been made render it highly probably that
they appropriate their prey for nourishment; whether by digestion or by
mere absorption of decomposing animal matter, is uncertain. It is certainly
most remarkable that this family of plants, wherever met with, and under the
most diverse conditions and modes of life, should always in some way or
other be predaceous and carnivorous.

If it be not only surprising but somewhat confounding to our
classifications that a whole group of plants should subsist partly by
digesting animal matter and partly in the normal way of decomposing
carbonic acid and producing the basis of animal matter, we have, as Mr.
Darwin remarks, a counterpart anomaly in the animal kingdom. While some
plants have stomachs, some animals have roots. "The rhizocephalous
crustaceans do not feed like other animals by their mouths, for they are
destitute of an alimentary canal, but they live by absorbing through
root-like processes the juices of the animals on which they are parasitic."

To a naturalist of our day, imbued with those ideas of the solidarity of
organic Nature which such facts as those we have been considering suggest,
the greatest anomaly of all would be that they are really anomalous or
unique. Reasonably supposing, therefore, that the sundew did not stand
alone, Mr. Darwin turned his attention to other groups of plants; and,
first, to the bladderworts, which have no near kinship with the sundews,
but, like the aquatic representative of that family, are provided with
bladdery sacs, under water. In the common species of Utricularia or
bladderwort, these little sacs, hanging from submerged leaves or branches,
have their orifice closed by a lid which opens inwardly--a veritable
trapdoor. It had been noticed in England and France that they contained
minute crustacean animals. Early in the summer of 1874, Mr. Darwin
ascertained the mechanism for their capture and the great success with
which it is used. But before his account was written out, Prof. Cohn
published an excellent paper on the subject in Germany; and Mrs. Treat, of
Vineland, New Jersey, a still earlier one in this country--in the New York
Tribune in the autumn of 1874. Of the latter, Mr. Darwin remarks that she
"has been more successful than any other observer in witnessing the actual
entrance of these minute creatures." They never come out, but soon perish
in their prison, which receives a continued succession of victims, but
little, if any, fresh air to the contained water. The action of the trap is
purely mechanical, without evident irritability in the opening or shutting.
There is no evidence nor much likelihood of proper digestion; indeed, Mr.
Darwin found evidence to the contrary. But the more or less decomposed and
dissolved animal matter is doubtless absorbed into the plant; for the whole
interior of the sac is lined with peculiar, elongated and four-armed very
thin-walled processes, which contain active protoplasm, and which were
proved by experiment to "have the power of absorbing matter from weak
solutions of certain salts of ammonia and urea, and from a putrid infusion
of raw meat."

Although the bladderworts "prey on garbage," their terrestrial relatives
"live cleanly," as nobler plants should do, and have a good and true
digestion. Pinguicula, or butterwort, is the representative of this family
upon land. It gets both its Latin and its English name from the fatty or
greasy appearance of the upper face of its broad leaves; and this
appearance is due to a dense coat or pile of short-stalked glands, which
secrete a colorless and extremely viscid liquid. By this small flies, or
whatever may alight or fall upon the leaf, are held fast. These waifs might
be useless or even injurious to the plant. Probably Mr. Darwin was the
first to ask whether they might be of advantage. He certainly was the first
to show that they probably are so. The evidence from experiment, shortly
summed up, is, that insects alive or dead, and also other nitrogenous
bodies, excite these glands to increased secretion; the secretion then
becomes acid, and acquires the power of dissolving solid animal
substances--that is, the power of digestion in the manner of Drosera and
Dionaea. And the stalks of their glands under the microscope give the same
ocular evidence of absorption. The leaves of the butterwort are apt to have
their margins folded inward, like a rim or hem. Taking young and vigorous
leaves to which hardly anything had yet adhered, and of which the margins
were still flat, Mr. Darwin set within one margin a row of small flies.
Fifteen hours afterward this edge was neatly turned inward, partly covering
the row of flies, and the surrounding glands were secreting copiously. The
other edge remained flat and unaltered. Then he stuck a fly to the middle
of the leaf just below its tip, and soon both margins infolded, so as to
clasp the object. Many other and varied experiments yielded similar
results. Even pollen, which would not rarely be lodged upon these leaves, as
it falls from surrounding wind-fertilized plants, also small seeds, excited
the same action, and showed signs of being acted upon. "We may therefore
conclude," with Mr. Darwin, "that Pinguicula vulgaris, with its small
roots, is not only supported to a large extent by the extraordinary number
of insects which it habitually captures, but likewise draws some
nourishment from the pollen, leaves, and seeds, of other plants which often
adhere to its leaves. It is, therefore, partly a vegetable as well as an
animal feeder."

What is now to be thought of the ordinary glandular hairs which render the
surface of many and the most various plants extremely viscid? Their number
is legion. The Chinese primrose of common garden and house culture is no
extraordinary instance; but Mr. Francis Darwin, counting those on a small
space measured by the micrometer, estimated them at 65,371 to the square
inch of foliage, taking in both surfaces of the leaf, or two or three
millions on a moderate-sized specimen of this small herb. Glands of this
sort were loosely regarded as organs for excretion, without much
consideration of the  question whether, in vegetable life, there could be
any need to excrete, or any advantage gained by throwing off such products;
and, while the popular name of catch-fly, given to several common species
of Silene, indicates long familiarity with the fact, probably no one ever
imagined that the swarms of small insects which perish upon these sticky
surfaces were ever turned to account by the plant. In many such cases, no
doubt they perish as uselessly as when attracted into the flame of a
candle. In the tobacco-plant, for instance, Mr. Darwin could find no
evidence that the glandular hairs absorb animal matter. But Darwinian
philosophy expects all gradations between casualty and complete adaptation.
It is most probable that any thin-walled vegetable structure which secretes
may also be capable of absorbing under favorable conditions. The myriads of
exquisitely-constructed glands of the Chinese primrose are not likely to be
functionless. Mr. Darwin ascertained by direct experiment that they
promptly absorb carbonate of ammonia, both in watery solution and in vapor.
So, since rain-water usually contains a small percentage of ammonia, a use
for these glands becomes apparent--one completely congruous with that of
absorbing any animal matter, or products of its decomposition, which may
come in their way through the occasional entanglement of insects in their
viscid secretion. In several saxifrages--not very distant relatives of
Drosera--the viscid glands equally manifested the power of absorption.

To trace a gradation between a simply absorbing hair with a glutinous tip,
through which the plant may perchance derive slight contingent advantage,
and the tentacles of a sundew, with their exquisite and associated
adaptations, does not much lessen the wonder nor explain the phenomena.
After all, as Mr. Darwin modestly concludes, "we see how little has been
made out in comparison with what remains unexplained and unknown." But all
this must be allowed to be an important contribution to the doctrine of the
gradual acquirement of uses and functions, and hardly to find conceivable
explanation upon any other hypothesis.

There remains one more mode in which plants of the higher grade are known
to prey upon animals; namely, by means of pitchers, urns, or tubes, in
which insects and the like are drowned or confined, and either macerated or
digested. To this Mr. Darwin barely alludes on the last page of the present
volume. The main facts known respecting the American pitcher-plants have,
as was natural, been ascertained in this country; and we gave an abstract,
two years ago, of our then incipient knowledge. Much has been learned
since, although all the observations have been of a desultory character. If
space permitted, an instructive narrative might be drawn up, as well of the
economy of the Sarracenias as of how we came to know what we do of it. But
the very little we have room for will be strictly supplementary to our
former article.

The pitchers of our familiar Northern Sarracenia, which is likewise
Southern, are open-mouthed; and, although they certainly secrete some
liquid when young, must derive most of the water they ordinarily contain
from rain. How insects are attracted is unknown, but the water abounds with
their drowned bodies and decomposing remains.

In the more southern S. flava, the long and trumpet-shaped pitchers
evidently depend upon the liquid which they themselves secrete, although at
maturity, when the hood becomes erect, rain may somewhat add to it. This
species, as we know, allures insects by a peculiar sweet exudation within
the orifice; they fall in and perish, though seldom by drowning, yet few
are able to escape; and their decomposing remains accumulate in the narrow
bottom of the vessel. Two other long-tubed species of the Southern States
are similar in these respects. There is another, S. psittacina, the
parrot-headed species, remarkable for the cowl-shaped hood so completely
inflexed over the mouth of the small pitcher that no rain can possibly
enter. Little is known, however, of the efficiency of this species as a
fly-catcher; but its conformation has a morphological interest, leading up,
as it does, to the Californian type of pitcher presently to be mentioned.

But the remaining species, S. variolaris, is the most wonderful of our
pitcher-plants in its adaptations for the capture of insects. The inflated
and mottled lid or hood overarches the ample orifice of the tubular pitcher
sufficiently to ward off the rain, but not to obstruct the free access of
flying insects. Flies, ants, and most insects, glide and fall from the
treacherous smooth throat into the deep well below, and never escape. They
are allured by a sweet secretion just within the orifice-- which was
discovered and described long ago, and the knowledge of it wellnigh
forgotten until recently. And, finally, Dr. Mellichamp, of South Carolina,
two years ago made the capital discovery that, during the height of the
season, this lure extends from the orifice down nearly to the ground, a
length of a foot or two, in the form of a honeyed line or narrow trail on
the edge of the wing-like border which is conspicuous in all these species,
although only in this one, so far as known, turned to such account. Here,
one would say, is a special adaptation to ants and such terrestrial and
creeping insects. Well, long before this sweet trail was known, it was
remarked by the late Prof. Wyman and others that the pitchers of this
species, in the savannahs of Georgia and Florida, contain far more ants
than they do of all other insects put together.

Finally, all this is essentially repeated in the peculiar Californian
pitcher-plant (Darlingtonia), a genus of the same natural family, which
captures insects in great variety, enticing them by a sweetish secretion
over the whole inside of the inflated hood and that of a curious forked
appendage, resembling a fish-tail, which overhangs the orifice. This
orifice is so concealed that it can be seen and approached only from below,
as if--the casual observer might infer--to escape visitation. But dead
insects of all kinds, and their decomposing remains, crowd the cavity and
saturate the liquid therein contained, enticed, it is said, by a peculiar
odor, as well as by the sweet lure which is at some stages so abundant as
to drip from the tips of the overhanging appendage. The principal
observations upon this pitcher-plant in its native habitat have been made
by Mrs. Austin, and only some of the earlier ones have thus far been
published by Mr. Canby. But we are assured that in this, as in the
Sarracenia variolaris, the sweet exudation extends at the proper season
from the orifice down the wing nearly to the ground, and that ants follow
this honeyed pathway to their destruction. Also, that the watery liquid in
the pitcher, which must be wholly a secretion, is much increased in
quantity after the capture of insects.

It cannot now well be doubted that the animal matter is utilized by the
plant in all these cases, although most probably only after maceration or
decomposition. In some of them even digestion, or at least the absorption
of undecomposed soluble animal juices, may be suspected; but there is no
proof of it. But, if pitchers of the Sarracenia family are only macerating
vessels, those of Nepenthes--the pitchers of the Indian Archipelago,
familiar in conservatories--seem to be stomachs. The investigations of the
President of the Royal Society, Dr. Hooker, although incomplete, wellnigh
demonstrate that these not only allure insects by a sweet secretion at the
rim and upon the lid of the cup, but also that their capture, or the
presence of other partly soluble animal matter, produces an increase and an
acidulation of the contained watery liquid, which thereupon becomes capable
of acting in the manner of that of Drosera and Dionaea, dissolving flesh,
albumen, and the like.

After all, there never was just ground for denying to vegetables the use of
animal food. The fungi are by far the most numerous family of plants, and
they all live upon organic matter, some upon dead and decomposing, some
upon living, some upon both; and the number of those that feed upon living
animals is large. Whether these carnivorous propensities of higher plants
which so excite our wonder be regarded as survivals of ancestral habits, or
as comparatively late acquirements, or even as special endowments, in any
case what we have now learned of them goes to strengthen the conclusion that
the whole organic world is akin.

The volume upon "The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants" is a revised
and enlarged edition of a memoir communicated to the Linnaean Society in
1865, and published in the ninth volume of its Journal. There was an extra
impression, but, beyond the circle of naturalists, it can hardly have been
much known at first-hand. Even now, when it is made a part of the general
Darwinian literature, it is unlikely to be as widely read as the companion
volume which we have been reviewing; although it is really a more readable
book, and well worthy of far more extended notice at our hands than it can
now receive. The reason is obvious. It seems as natural that plants should
climb as it does unnatural that any should take animal food. Most people,
knowing that some plants "twine with the sun," and others "against the
sun," have an idea that the sun in some way causes the twining; indeed, the
notion is still fixed in the popular mind that the same species twines in
opposite directions north and south of the equator.

Readers of this fascinating treatise will learn, first of all, that the sun
has no influence over such movements directly, and that its indirect
influence is commonly adverse or disturbing, except the heat, which
quickens vegetable as it does animal life. Also, that climbing is
accomplished by powers and actions as unlike those generally predicated of
the vegetable kingdom as any which have been brought to view in the
preceding volume. Climbing plants "feel" as well as "grow and live;" and
they also manifest an automatism which is perhaps more wonderful than a
response by visible movement to an external irritation. Nor do plants grow
up their supports, as is unthinkingly supposed; for, although only growing
or newly-grown parts act in climbing, the climbing and the growth are
entirely distinct. To this there is one exception--an instructive one, as
showing how one action passes into another, and how the same result may be
brought about in different ways--that of stems which climb by rootlets, such
as of ivy and trumpet-creeper. Here the stem ascends by growth alone,
taking upward direction, and is fixed by root-lets as it grows. There is no
better way of climbing walls, precipices, and large tree-trunks.

But small stems and similar supports are best ascended by twining; and this
calls out powers of another and higher order. The twining stem does not
grow around its support, but winds around it, and it does this by a
movement the nature of which is best observed in stems which have not yet
reached their support, or have overtopped it and stretched out beyond it.
Then it may be seen that the extending summit, reaching farther and farther
as it grows, is making free circular sweeps, by night as well as by day, and
irrespective of external circumstances, except that warmth accelerates the
movement, and that the general tendency of young stems to bend toward the
light may, in case of lateral illumination, accelerate one-half the circuit
while it equally retards the other. The arrest of the revolution where the
supporting body is struck, while the portion beyond continues its movement,
brings about the twining. As to the proximate cause of this sweeping
motion, a few simple experiments prove that it results from the bowing or
bending of the free summit of the stem into a more or less horizontal
position (this bending being successively to every point of the compass,
through an action which circulates around the stem in the direction of the
sweep), and of the consequent twining, i.e., "with the sun," or with the
movement of the hands of a watch, in the hop, or in the opposite direction
in pole-beans and most twiners.     Twining plants, therefore, ascend trees or
other stems by an action and a movement of their own, from which they derive
advantage. To plants liable to be overshadowed by more robust companions,
climbing is an economical method of obtaining a freer exposure to light and
air with the smallest possible expenditure of material. But twiners have
one disadvantage: to rise ten feet they must produce fifteen feet of stem
or thereabouts, according to the diameter of the support, and the openness
or closeness of the coil. A rootlet-climber saves much in this respect, but
has a restricted range of action, and other disadvantages.

There are two other modes, which combine the utmost economy of material
with freer range of action. There are, in the first place, leaf-climbers of
various sorts, agreeing only in this, that the duty of laying hold is
transferred to the leaves, so that the stem may rise in a direct line.
Sometimes the blade or leaflets, or some of them, but more commonly their
slender stalks, undertake the work, and the plant rises as a boy ascends a
tree, grasping first with one hand or arm, then with the other. Indeed, the
comparison, like the leaf-stalk, holds better than would be supposed; for
the grasping of the latter is not the result of a blind groping in all
directions by a continuous movement, but of a definite sensitiveness which
acts only upon the occasion. Most leaves make no regular sweeps; but when
the stalks of a leaf-climbing species come into prolonged contact with any
fitting extraneous body, they slowly incurve and make a turn around it, and
then commonly thicken and harden until they attain a strength which may
equal that of the stem itself. Here we have the faculty of movement to a
definite end, upon external irritation, of the same nature with that
displayed by Dionaea and Drosera, although slower for the most part than
even in the latter. But the movement of the hour-hand of the clock is not
different in nature or cause from that of the second-hand.

Finally--distribution of office being, on the whole, most advantageous and
economical, and this, in the vegetable kingdom, being led up to by
degrees--we reach, through numerous gradations, the highest style of
climbing plants in the tendril-climber. A tendril morphologically, is
either a leaf or branch of stem, or a portion of one, specially organized
for climbing. Some tendrils simply turn away from light, as do those of
grape-vines, thus taking the direction in which some supporting object is
likely to be encountered; most are indifferent to light; and many revolve
in the manner of the summit of twining stems. As the stems which bear these
highly-endowed tendrils in many cases themselves also revolve more or less,
though they seldom twine, their reach is the more extensive; and to this
endowment of automatic movement most tendrils add the other faculty, that
of incurving and coiling upon prolonged touch, or even brief contact, in
the highest degree. Some long tendrils, when in their best condition,
revolve so rapidly that the sweeping movement may be plainly seen; indeed,
we have seen a quarter-circuit in a Passiflora sicyoides accomplished in
less than a minute, and the half-circuit in ten minutes; but the other half
(for a reason alluded to in the next paragraph) takes a much longer time.
Then, as to the coiling upon contact, in the case first noticed in this
country,[XI-3] in the year 1858, which Mr. Darwin mentions as having led him
into this investigation, the tendril of Sicyos was seen to coil within half
a minute after a stroke with the hand, and to make a full turn or more
within the next minute; furnishing ocular evidence that tendrils grasp and
coil in virtue of sensitiveness to contact, and, one would suppose,
negativing Sachs's recent hypothesis that all these movements are owing "to
rapid growth on the side opposite to that which becomes concave"--a view to
which Mr. Darwin objects, but not so strongly as he might. The tendril of
this sort, on striking some fitting object, quickly curls round and firmly
grasps it; then, after some hours, one side shortening or remaining short
in proportion to the other, it coils into a spire, dragging the stem up to
its support, and enabling the next tendril above to secure a readier hold.

In revolving tendrils perhaps the most wonderful adaptation is that by
which they avoid attachment to, or winding themselves upon, the ascending
summit of the stem that bears them. This they would inevitably do if they
continued their sweep horizontally. But when in its course it nears the
parent

    stem the tendril moves slowly, as if to gather strength, then C.~ stiffens
and rises into an erect position parallel with it, and C so passes by the
dangerous point; after which it comes rapidly down to the horizontal
position, in which it moves until it again approaches and again avoids the
impending obstacle.

Climbing plants are distributed throughout almost all the natural orders.
In some orders climbing is the rule, in most it is the exception, occurring
only in certain genera. The tendency of stems to move in circuits--upon
which climbing more commonly depends, and out of which it is conceived to
have been educed--is manifested incipiently by many a plant which does not
climb. Of those that do there are all degrees, from the feeblest to the
most efficient, from those which have no special adaptation to those which
have exquisitely-endowed special organs for climbing. The conclusion reached
is, that the power "is inherent, though undeveloped, in almost every
plant;" "that climbing plants have utilized and perfected a
widely-distributed and incipient capacity, which, as far as we can see, is
of no service to ordinary plants."

Inherent powers and incipient manifestations, useless to their possessors
but useful to their successors--this, doubtless, is according to the order
of Nature; but it seems to need something more than natural selection to
account for it.



