III

NATURAL SELECTION

NOT INCONSISTENT WITH

NATURAL THEOLOGY

(Atlantic Monthly for July, August, and October, 1860, reprinted in 1861)


I


Novelties are enticing to most people; to us they are simply annoying. We
cling to a long-accepted theory, just as we cling to an old suit of
clothes. A new theory, like a new pair of breeches (the Atlantic still
affects the older type of nether garment), is sure to have hard-fitting
places; or, even when no particular fault can be found with the article, it
oppresses with a sense of general discomfort. New notions and new styles
worry us, till we get well used to them, which is only by slow degrees.

Wherefore, in Galileo's time, we might have helped to proscribe, or to
burn--had he been stubborn enough to warrant cremation--even the great
pioneer of inductive research; although, when we had fairly recovered our
composure, and bad leisurely excogitated the matter, we might have come to
conclude that the new doctrine was better than the old one, after all, at
least for those who had nothing to unlearn.

Such being our habitual state of mind, it may well be believed that the
perusal of the new book "On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection" left an uncomfortable impression, in spite of its plausible and
winning ways. We were not wholly unprepared for it, as many of our
contemporaries seem to have been. The scientific reading in which we
indulge as a relaxation from severer studies had raised dim forebodings.
Investigations about the succession of species in time, and their actual
geographical distribution over the earth's surface, were leading up from all
sides and in various ways to the question of their origin. Now and then we
encountered a sentence, like Prof. Owen's "axiom of the continuous
operation of the ordained becoming of living things," which haunted us like
an apparition. For, dim as our conception must needs be as to what such
oracular and grandiloquent phrases might really mean, we felt confident that
they presaged no good to old beliefs. Foreseeing, yet deprecating, the
coming time of trouble, we still hoped that, with some repairs and
makeshifts, the old views might last out our days. Apres nous le deluge.
Still, not to lag behind the rest of the world, we read the book in which
the new theory is promulgated. We took it up, like our neighbors, and, as
was natural, in a somewhat captious frame of mind.

Well, we found no cause of quarrel with the first chapter. Here the author
takes us directly to the barn-yard and the kitchen-garden. Like an
honorable rural member of our General Court, who sat silent until, near the
close of a long session, a bill requiring all swine at large to wear pokes
was introduced, when he claimed the privilege of addressing the house, on
the proper ground that he had been "brought up among the pigs, and knew all
about them"--so we were brought up among cows and cabbages; and the lowing
of cattle, the cackle of hens, and the cooing of pigeons, were sounds native
and pleasant to our ears. So "Variation under Domestication" dealt with
familiar subjects in a natural way, and gently introduced "Variation under
Nature," which seemed likely enough. Then follows "Struggle for
Existence"--a principle which we experimentally know to be true and
cogent--bringing the comfortable assurance, that man, even upon Leviathan
Hobbes's theory of society, is no worse than the rest of creation, since all
Nature is at war, one species with another, and the nearer kindred the more
internecine--bringing in thousandfold confirmation and extension of the
Malthusian doctrine that population tends far to outrun means of
subsistence throughout the animal and vegetable world, and has to be kept
down by sharp preventive checks; so that not more than one of a hundred or a
thousand of the individuals whose existence is so wonderfully and so
sedulously provided for ever comes to anything, under ordinary
circumstances; so the lucky and the strong must prevail, and the weaker and
ill-favored must perish; and then follows, as naturally as one sheep
follows another, the chapter on "Natural Selection," Darwin's cheval de
bataille, which is very much the Napoleonic doctrine that Providence favors
the strongest battalions--that, since many more individuals are born than
can possibly survive, those individuals and those variations which possess
any advantage, however slight, over the rest, are in the long-run sure to
survive, to propagate, and to occupy the limited field, to the exclusion or
destruction of the weaker brethren. All this we pondered, and could not
much object to. In fact, we began to contract a liking for a system which at
the outset illustrates the advantages of good breeding, and which makes the
most "of every creature's best."

Could we "let by-gones be by-gones," and, beginning now, go on improving
and diversifying for the future by natural selection, could we even take up
the theory at the introduction of the actually existing species, we should
be well content; and so, perhaps, would most naturalists be. It is by no
means difficult to believe that varieties are incipient or possible
species, when we see what trouble naturalists, especially botanists, have
to distinguish between them--one regarding as a true species what another
regards as a variety; when the progress of knowledge continually increases,
rather than diminishes, the number of doubtful instances; and when there is
less agreement than ever among naturalists as to what is the basis in
Nature upon which our idea of species reposes, or how the word is to be
defined. Indeed, when we consider the endless disputes of naturalists and
ethnologists over the human races, as to whether they belong to one species
or to more, and, if to more, whether to three, or five, or fifty, we can
hardly help fancying that both may be right--or rather, that the
uni-humanitarians would have been right many thousand years ago, and the
multi-humanitarians will be several thousand years later; while at present
the safe thing to say is, that probably there is some truth on both sides.

"Natural selection," Darwin remarks, "leads to divergence of character; for
the more living beings can be supported on the same area, the more they
diverge in structure, habits, and constitution" (a principle which,
by-the-way, is paralleled and illustrated by the diversification of human
labor); and also leads to much extinction of intermediate or unimproved
forms. Now, though this divergence may "steadily tend to increase," yet
this is evidently a slow process in Nature, and liable to much counteraction
wherever man does not interpose, and so not likely to work much harm for
the future. And if natural selection, with artificial to help it, will
produce better animals and better men than the present, and fit them better
to the conditions of existence, why, let it work, say we, to the top of its
bent There is still room enough for improvement. Only let us hope that it
always works for good: if not, the divergent lines on Darwin's lithographic
diagram of "Transmutation made Easy," ominously show what small deviations
from the straight path may come to in the end.

The prospect of the future, accordingly, is on the whole pleasant and
encouraging. It is only the backward glance, the gaze up the long vista of
the past, that reveals anything alarming. Here the lines converge as they
recede into the geological ages, and point to conclusions which, upon the
theory, are inevitable, but hardly welcome. The very first step backward
makes the negro and the Hottentot our blood-relations--not that reason or
Scripture objects to that, though pride may. The next suggests a closer
association of our ancestors of the olden time with "our poor relations" of
the quadrumanous family than we like to acknowledge. Fortunately,
however--even if we must account for him scientifically --man with his two
feet stands upon a foundation of his own. Intermediate links between the
Bimana and the Quadrumana are lacking altogether; so that, put the
genealogy of the brutes upon what footing you will, the four-handed races
will not serve for our forerunners--at least, not until some monkey, live
or fossil, is producible with great-toes, instead of thumbs, upon his nether
extremities; or until some lucky geologist turns up the bones of his
ancestor and prototype in France or England, who was so busy "napping the
chuckie-stanes" and chipping out flint knives and arrow-heads in the time
of the drift, very many ages ago--before the British Channel existed, says
Lyell [III-1]--and until these men of the olden time are shown to have worn
their great-toes in the divergent and thumblike fashion. That would be
evidence indeed: but, until some testimony of the sort is produced, we must
needs believe in the separate and special creation of man, however it may
have been with the lower animals and with plants.

No doubt, the full development and symmetry of Darwin's hypothesis strongly
suggest the evolution of the human no less than the lower animal races out
of some simple primordial animal--that all are equally "lineal descendants
of some few beings which lived long before the first bed of the Silurian
system was deposited." But, as the author speaks disrespectfully of
spontaneous generation, and accepts a supernatural beginning of life on
earth, in some form or forms of being which included potentially all that
have since existed and are yet to be, he is thereby not warranted to extend
his inferences beyond the evidence or the fair probability. There seems as
great likelihood that one special origination should be followed by another
upon fitting occasion (such as the introduction of man), as that one form
should be transmuted into another upon fitting occasion, as, for instance,
in the succession of species which differ from each other only in some
details. To compare small things with great in a homely illustration: man
alters from time to time his instruments or machines, as new circumstances
or conditions may require and his wit suggest. Minor alterations and
improvements he adds to the machine he possesses; he adapts a new rig or a
new rudder to an old boat: this answers to Variation. "Like begets like,"
being the great rule in Nature, if boats could engender, the variations
would doubtless be propagated, like those of domestic cattle. In course of
time the old ones would be worn out or wrecked; the best sorts would be
chosen for each particular use, and further improved upon; and so the
primordial boat be developed into the scow, the skiff, the sloop, and other
species of water-craft--the very diversification, as well as the successive
improvements, entailing the disappearance of intermediate forms, less
adapted to any one particular purpose; wherefore these go slowly out of
use, and become extinct species: this is Natural Selection. Now, let a great
and important advance be made, like that of steam navigation: here, though
the engine might be added to the old vessel, yet the wiser and therefore
the actual way is to make a new vessel on a modified plan: this may answer
to Specific Creation. Anyhow, the one does not necessarily exclude the
other. Variation and natural selection may play their part, and so may
specific creation also. Why not?

This leads us to ask for the reasons which call for this new theory of
transmutation. The beginning of things must needs lie in obscurity, beyond
the bounds of proof, though within those of conjecture or of analogical
inference. Why not hold fast to the customary view, that all species were
directly, instead of indirectly, created after their respective kinds, as
we now behold them--and that in a manner which, passing our comprehension,
we intuitively refer to the supernatural? Why this continual striving after
"the unattained and dim?" why these anxious endeavors, especially of late
years, by naturalists and philosophers of various schools and different
tendencies, to penetrate what one of them calls "that mystery of
mysteries," the origin of species?

To this, in general, sufficient answer may be found in the activity of the
human intellect, "the delirious yet divine desire to know," stimulated as
it has been by its own success in unveiling the laws and processes of
inorganic Nature; in the fact that the principal triumphs of our age in
physical science have consisted in tracing connections where none were
known before, in reducing heterogeneous phenomena to a common cause or
origin, in a manner quite analogous to that of the reduction of supposed
independently originated species to a common ultimate origin--thus, and in
various other ways, largely and legitimately extending the domain of
secondary causes. Surely the scientific mind of an age which contemplates
the solar system as evolved from a common revolving fluid mass--which,
through experimental research, has come to regard light, heat, electricity,
magnetism, chemical affinity, and mechanical power as varieties or
derivative and convertible forms of one force, instead of independent
species--which has brought the so-called elementary kinds of matter, such
as the metals, into kindred groups, and pertinently raised the question,
whether the members of each group may not be mere varieties of one
species--and which speculates steadily in the direction of the ultimate
unity of matter, of a sort of prototype or simple element which may be to
the ordinary species of matter what the Protozoa or what the component
cells of an organism are to the higher sorts of animals and plants--the
mind of such an age cannot be expected to let the old belief about species
pass unquestioned. It will raise the question, how the diverse sorts of
plants and animals came to be as they are and where they are and will allow
that the whole inquiry transcends its powers only when all endeavors have
failed Granting the origin to be super natural or miraculous even, will not
arrest the inquiry All real origination the philosophers will say, is
supernatural, their very question is, whether we have yet gone back to the
origin and can affirm that the present forms of plants and animals are the
primordial, the miraculously created ones. And, even if they admit that,
they will still inquire into the order of the phenomena, into the form of
the miracle You might as well expect the child to grow up content with what
it is told about the advent of its infant brother Indeed, to learn that the
new comer is the gift of God, far from lulling inquiry, only stimulates
speculation as to how the precious gift was bestowed That questioning child
is father to the man--is philosopher in short-clothes.

Since, then questions about the origin of species will be raised, and have
been raised--and since the theorizings, however different in particulars,
all proceed upon the notion that one species of plant or animal is somehow
derived from another, that the different sorts which now flourish are
lineal (or unlineal) descendants of other and earlier sorts--it now
concerns us to ask, What are the grounds in Nature, the admitted facts,
which suggest hypotheses of derivation in some :shape or other? Reasons
there must be, and plausible ones, for the persistent recurrence of
theories upon this genetic basis. A study of Darwin's book, and a general
glance at the present state of the natural sciences, enable us to gather
the following as among the most suggestive and influential. We can only
enumerate them here, without much indication of their particular bearing.
There is--

1. The general fact of variability, and the general tendency of the variety
to propagate its like--the patent facts that all species vary more or less;
that domesticated plants and animals, being in conditions favorable to the
production and preservation of varieties, are apt to vary widely; and that,
by interbreeding, any variety may be fixed into a race, that is, into a
variety which comes true from seed. Many such races, it is allowed, differ
from each other in structure and appearance as widely as do many admitted
species; and it is practically very difficult, even impossible, to draw a
clear line between races and species. Witness the human races, for
instance. Wild species also vary, perhaps about as widely as those of
domestication, though in different ways. Some of them apparently vary
little, others moderately, others immoderately, to the great bewilderment
of systematic botanists and zoologists, and increasing disagreement as to
whether various forms shall be held to be original species or strong
varieties. Moreover, the degree to which the descendants of the same stock,
varying in different directions, may at length diverge, is unknown. All we
know is, that varieties are themselves variable, and that very diverse
forms have been educed from one stock.

2. Species of the same genus are not distinguished from each other by equal
amounts of difference. There is diversity in this respect analogous to that
of the varieties of a polymorphous species, some of them slight, others
extreme. And in large genera the unequal resemblance shows itself in the
clustering of the species around several types or central species, like
satellites around their respective planets. Obviously suggestive this of
the hypothesis that they were satellites, not thrown off by revolution,
like the moons of Jupiter, Saturn, and our own solitary moon, but gradually
and peacefully detached by divergent variation. That such closely-related
species may be only varieties of higher grade, earlier origin, or more
favored evolution, is not a very violent supposition. Anyhow, it was a
supposition sure to be made.

3. The actual geographical distribution of species upon the earth's surface
tends to suggest the same notion. For, as a general thing, all or most of
the species of a peculiar genus or other type are grouped in the same
country, or occupy continuous, proximate, or accessible areas. So well does
this rule hold, so general is the implication that kindred species are or
were associated geographically, that most trustworthy naturalists, quite
free from hypotheses of transmutation, are constantly inferring former
geographical continuity between parts of the world now widely disjoined, in
order to account thereby for certain generic similarities among their
inhabitants; just as philologists infer former connection of races, and a
parent language, to account for generic similarities among existing
languages. Yet no scientific explanation has been offered to account for
the geographical association of kindred species, except the hypothesis of a
common origin.

4. Here the fact of the antiquity of creation, and in particular of the
present kinds of the earth's inhabitants, or of a large part of them, comes
in to rebut the objection that there has not been time enough for any
marked diversification of living things through divergent variation--not
time enough for varieties to have diverged into what we call species.

So long as the existing species of plants and animals were thought to have
originated a few thousand years ago, and without predecessors, there was no
room for a theory of derivation of one sort from another, nor time enough
even to account for the establishment of the races which are generally
believed to have diverged from a common stock. Not so much that five or six
thousand years was a short allowance for this; but because some of our
familiar domesticated varieties of grain, of fowls, and of other animals,
were pictured and mummified by the old Egyptians more than half that number
of years ago, if not earlier. Indeed, perhaps the strongest argument for
the original plurality of human species was drawn from the identification
of some of the present races of men upon these early historical monuments
and records.

But this very extension of the current chronology, if we may rely upon the
archaeologists, removes the difficulty by opening up a longer vista. So does
the discovery in Europe of remains and implements of prehistoric races of
men, to whom the use of metals was unknown--men of the stone age, as the
Scandinavian archaeologists designate them. And now, "axes and knives of
flint, evidently wrought by human skill, are found in beds of the drift at
Amiens (also in other places, both in France and England), associated with
the bones of extinct species of animals." These implements, indeed, were
noticed twenty years ago; at a place in Suffolk they have been exhumed from
time to time for more than a century; but the full confirmation, the
recognition of the age of the deposit in which the implements occur, their
abundance, and the appreciation of their bearings upon most interesting
questions, belong to the present time. To complete the connection of these
primitive people with the fossil ages, the French geologists, we are told,
have now "found these axes in Picardy associated with remains of Elephas
primigenius, Rhinoceros tichorhinus, Equus fossilis, and an extinct species
of Bos."[III-2] In plain language, these workers in flint lived in the time
of the mammoth, of a rhinoceros now extinct, and along with horses and
cattle unlike any now existing--specifically different, as naturalists say,
from those with which man is now associated.  Their connection with
existing human races may perhaps be traced through the intervening people
of the stone age, who were succeeded by the people of the bronze age, and
these by workers in iron.[III-3] Now, various evidence carries back the
existence of many of the present lower species of animals, and probably of a
larger number of plants, to the same drift period. All agree that this was
very many thousand years ago. Agassiz tells us that the same species of
polyps which are now building coral walls around the present peninsula of
Florida actually made that peninsula, and have been building there for many
thousand centuries.

5. The overlapping of existing and extinct species, and the seemingly
gradual transition of the life of the drift period into that of the present,
may be turned to the same account. Mammoths, mastodons, and Irish elks, now
extinct, must have lived down to human, if not almost to historic times.
Perhaps the last dodo did not long outlive his huge New Zealand kindred.
The aurochs, once the companion of mammoths, still survives, but owes his
present and precarious existence to man's care. Now, nothing that we know
of forbids the hypothesis that some new species have been independently and
supernaturally created within the period which other species have survived.
Some may even believe that man was created in the days of the mammoth,
became extinct, and was recreated at a later date. But why not say the same
of the aurochs, contemporary both of the old man and of the new? Still it
is more natural, if not inevitable, to infer that, if the aurochs of that
olden time were the ancestors of the aurochs of the Lithuanian forests, so
likewise were the men of that age the ancestors of the present human races.
Then, whoever concludes that these primitive makers of rude flint axes and
knives were the ancestors of the better workmen of the succeeding stone
age, and these again of the succeeding artificers in brass and iron, will
also be likely to suppose that the Equus and Bos of that time, different
though they be, were the remote progenitors of our own horses and cattle.
In all candor we must at least concede that such considerations suggest a
genetic descent from the drift period down to the present, and allow time
enough--if time is of any account-- for variation and natural selection to
work out some appreciable results in the way of divergence into races, or
even into so-called species. Whatever might have been thought, when
geological time was supposed to be separated from the present era by a
clear line, it is now certain that a gradual replacement of old forms by
new ones is strongly suggestive of some mode of origination which may still
be operative. When species, like individuals, were found to die out one by
one, and apparently to come in one by one, a theory for what Owen
sonorously calls "the continuous operation of the ordained becoming of
living things" could not be far off.

That all such theories should take the form of a derivation of the new from
the old seems to be inevitable, perhaps from our inability to conceive of
any other line of secondary causes in this connection. Owen himself is
apparently in travail with some transmutation theory of his own conceiving,
which may yet see the light, although Darwin's came first to the birth.
Different as the two theories will probably be, they cannot fail to exhibit
that fundamental resemblance in this respect which betokens a community of
origin, a common foundation on the general facts and the obvious suggestions
of modern science. Indeed--to turn the point of a pungent simile directed
against Darwin--the difference between the Darwinian and the Owenian
hypotheses may, after all, be only that between homoeopathic and heroic
doses of the same drug.

If theories of derivation could only stop here, content with explaining the
diversification and succession of species between the teritiary period and
the present time, through natural agencies or secondary causes still in
operation, we fancy they would not be generally or violently objected to by
the savants of the present day. But it is hard, if not impossible, to find
a stopping-place. Some of the facts or accepted conclusions already
referred to, and several others, of a more general character, which must be
taken into the account, impel the theory onward with accumulated force.
Vires (not to say virus) acquirit eundo. The theory hitches on wonderfully
well to Lyell's uniformitarian theory in geology--that the thing that has
been is the thing that is and shall be--that the natural operations now
going on will account for all geological changes in a quiet and easy way,
only give them time enough, so connecting the present and the proximate
with the farthest past by almost imperceptible gradations--a view which
finds large and increasing, if not general, acceptance in physical geology,
and of which Darwin's theory is the natural complement.

So the Darwinian theory, once getting a foothold, marches; boldly on,
follows the supposed near ancestors of our present species farther and yet
farther back into the dim past, and ends with an analogical inference which
"makes the whole world kin." As we said at the beginning, this upshot
discomposes us. Several features of the theory have an uncanny look. They
may prove to be innocent: but their first aspect is suspicious, and high
authorities pronounce the whole thing to be positively mischievous. In this
dilemma we are going to take advice. Following the bent of our prejudices,
and hoping to fortify these by new and strong arguments, we are going now
to read the principal reviews which undertake to demolish the theory--with
what result our readers shall be duly informed.


II


"I can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and
dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most
naturalists entertain, and which I formerly entertained, namely, that each
species has been independently created, is erroneous. I am fully convinced
that species are not immutable; but that those belonging to what are called
the same genera are lineal descendants of some other and generally extinct
species, in the same manner as the acknowledged varieties of any one species
are the descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am convinced that
Natural Selection has been the main, but not exclusive, means of
modification."


This is the kernel of the new theory, the Darwinian creed, as recited at
the close of the introduction to the remarkable book under consideration.
The questions, "What will he do with it?" and "How far will he carry it?"
the author answers at the close of the volume:


"I cannot doubt that the theory of descent with modification embraces all
the members of the same class." Furthermore, "I believe that all animals
have descended from at most only four or five progenitors, and plants from
an equal or lesser number."


Seeing that analogy as strongly suggests a further step in the same
direction, while he protests that "analogy may be a deceitful guide," yet
he follows its inexorable leading to the inference that--

"Probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this ear have
descended from some one primordial form, into which life was first
breathed."[III-4]


In the first extract we have the thin end of the wedge driven a little way;
in the last, the wedge driven home.

We have already sketched some of the reasons suggestive of such a theory of
derivation of species, reasons which gave it plausibility, and even no small
probability, as applied to our actual world and to changes occurring since
the latest tertiary period. We are well pleased at this moment to find that
the conclusions we were arriving at in this respect are sustained by the
very high authority and impartial judgment of Pictet, the Swiss
paleontologist. In his review of Darwin's book[III-5] -- the fairest and
most admirable opposing one that has appeared--he freely accepts that
ensemble of natural operations which Darwin impersonates under the now
familiar name of Natural Selection, allows that the exposition throughout
the first chapters seems "a la fois prudent et fort," and is disposed to
accept the whole argument in its foundations, that is, so far as it relates
to what is now going on, or has taken place in the present geological
period--which period he carries back through the diluvial epoch to the
borders of the tertiary.[III-6] Pictet accordingly admits that the theory
will very well account for the origination by divergence of nearly-related
species, whether within the present period or in remoter geological times;
a very natural view for him to take, since he appears to have reached and
published, several years ago, the pregnant conclusion that there most
probably was some material connection between the closely-related species of
two successive faunas, and that the numerous close species, whose limits are
so difficult to determine, were not all created distinct and independent.
But while thus accepting, or ready to accept, the basis of Darwin's theory,
and all its legitimate direct inferences, he rejects the ultimate
conclusions, brings some weighty arguments to bear against them, and is
evidently convinced that he can draw a clear line between the sound
inferences, which he favors, and the unsound or unwarranted theoretical
deductions, which he rejects. We hope he can.

This raises the question, Why does Darwin press his theory to these extreme
conclusions? Why do all hypotheses of derivation converge so inevitably to
one ultimate point? Having already considered some of the reasons which
suggest or support the theory at its outset--which may carry it as far as
such sound and experienced naturalists as Pictet allow that it may be
true--perhaps as far as Darwin himself unfolds it in the introductory
proposition cited at the beginning of this article--we may now inquire after
the motives which impel the theorist so much farther. Here proofs, in the
proper sense of the word, are not to be had. We are beyond the region of
demonstration, and have only probabilities to consider. What are these
probabilities? What work will this hypothesis do to establish a claim to be
adopted in its completeness? Why should a theory which may plausibly enough
account for the diversification of the species of each special type or
genus be expanded into a general system for the origination or successive
diversification of all species, and all special types or forms, from four
or five remote primordial forms, or perhaps from one? We accept the theory
of gravitation because it explains all the facts we know, and bears all the
tests that we can put it to. We incline to accept the nebular hypothesis,
for similar reasons; not because it is proved--thus far it is incapable of
proof--but because it is a natural theoretical deduction from accepted
physical laws, is thoroughly congruous with the facts, and because its
assumption serves to connect and harmonize these into one probable and
consistent whole. Can the derivative hypothesis be maintained and carried
out into a system on similar grounds? If so, however unproved, it would
appear to be a tenable hypothesis, which is all that its author ought now
to claim. Such hypotheses as, from the conditions of the case, can neither
be proved nor disproved by direct evidence or experiment, are to be tested
only indirectly, and therefore imperfectly, by trying their power to
harmonize the known facts, and to account for what is otherwise
unaccountable. So the question comes to this: What will an hypothesis of
the derivation of species explain which the opposing view leaves
unexplained?

Questions these which ought to be entertained before we take up the
arguments which have been advanced against this theory. We can barely
glance at some of the considerations which Darwin adduces, or will be sure
to adduce in the future and fuller exposition which is promised. To display
them in such wise as to indoctrinate the unscientific reader would require
a volume. Merely to refer to them in the most general terms would suffice
for those familiar with scientific matters, but would scarcely enlighten
those who are not. Wherefore let these trust the impartial Pictet, who
freely admits that, "in the absence of sufficient direct proofs to justify
the possibility of his hypothesis, Mr. Darwin relies upon indirect proofs,
the bearing of which is real and incontestable;" who concedes that "his
theory accords very well with the great facts of comparative anatomy and
zoology--comes in admirably to explain unity of composition of organisms,
also to explain rudimentary and representative organs, and the natural
series of genera and species--equally corresponds with many paleontological
data--agrees well with the specific resemblances which exist between two
successive faunas, with the parallelism which is sometimes observed between
the series of paleontological succession and of embryonal development,"
etc.; and finally, although he does not accept the theory in these results,
he allows that "it appears to offer the best means of explaining the manner
in which organized beings were produced in epochs anterior to our own."

What more than this could be said for such an hypothesis? Here, probably,
is its charm, and its strong hold upon the speculative mind. Unproven
though it be, and cumbered prima facie with cumulative improbabilities as
it proceeds, yet it singularly accords with great classes of facts
otherwise insulated and enigmatic, and explains many things which are thus
far utterly inexplicable upon any other scientific assumption.

We have said that Darwin's hypothesis is the natural complement to Lyell's
uniformitarian theory in physical geology. It is for the organic world what
that is for the inorganic; and the accepters of the latter stand in a
position from which to regard the former in the most favorable light.
Wherefore the rumor that the cautious Lyell himself has adopted the
Darwinian hypothesis need not surprise us. The two views are made for each
other, and, like the two counterpart pictures for the stereoscope, when
brought together, combine into one apparently solid whole.

If we allow, with Pictet, that Darwin's theory will very well serve for all
that concerns the present epoch of the world's history--an epoch in which
this renowned paleontologist includes the diluvial or quaternary
period--then Darwin's first and foremost need in his onward course is a
practicable road from this into and through the tertiary period, the
intervening region between the comparatively near and the far remote past.
Here Lyell's doctrine paves the way, by showing that in the physical geology
there is no general or absolute break between the two, probably no greater
between the latest tertiary and the quaternary period than between the
latter and the present time. So far, the Lyellian view is, we suppose,
generally concurred in. It is largely admitted that numerous tertiary
species have continued down into the quaternary, and many of them to the
present time. A goodly percentage of the earlier and nearly half of the
later tertiary mollusca, according to Des Hayes, Lye!!, and, if we mistake
not, Bronn, still live. This identification, however, is now questioned by
a naturalist of the very highest authority. But, in its bearings on the new
theory, the point here turns not upon absolute identity so much as upon
close resemblance. For those who, with Agassiz, doubt the specific identity
in any of these cases, and those who say, with Pictet, that "the later
tertiary deposits contain in general the debris of species very nearly
related to those which still exist, belonging to the same genera, but
specifically different," may also agree with Pictet, that the
nearly-related species of successive faunas must or may have had "a
material connection." But the only material connection that we have an idea
of in such a case is a genealogical one. And the supposition of a
genealogical connection is surely not unnatural in such cases--is
demonstrably the natural one as respects all those tertiary species which
experienced naturalists have pronounced to be identical with existing ones,
but which others now deem distinct For to identify the two is the same
thing as to conclude the one to be the ancestor of the other No doubt there
are differences between the tertiary and the present individuals,
differences equally noticed by both classes of naturalists, but differently
estimated By the one these are deemed quite compatible, by the other
incompatible, with community of origin But who can tell us what amount of
difference is compatible with community of origin? This is the very
question at issue, and one to be settled by observation alone Who would have
thought that the peach and the nectarine came from one stock? But, this
being proved is it now very improbable that both were derived from the
almond, or from some common amygdaline progenitor? Who would have thought
that the cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli kale, and kohlrabi are derivatives
of one species, and rape or colza, turnip, and probably ruta-baga, of
another species? And who that is convinced of this can long undoubtingly
hold the original distinctness of turnips from cabbages as an article of
faith? On scientific grounds may not a primordial cabbage or rape be
assumed as the ancestor of all the cabbage races, on much the same ground
that we assume a common ancestry for the diversified human races? If all
Our breeds of cattle came from one stock why not this stock  from the
auroch, which has had all the time between the diluvial and the historic
periods in which to set off a variation perhaps no greater than the
difference between some sorts of domestic cattle?

That considerable differences are often discernible between tertiary
individuals and their supposed descendants of the present day affords no
argument against Darwin's theory, as has been rashly thought, but is
decidedly in its favor. If the identification were so perfect that no more
differences were observable between the tertiary and the recent shells than
between various individuals of either, then Darwin's opponents, who argue
the immutability of species from the ibises and cats preserved by the
ancient Egyptians being just like those of the present day, could
triumphantly add a few hundred thousand years more to the length of the
experiment and to the force of their argument.

As the facts stand, it appears that, while some tertiary forms are
essentially undistinguishable from existing ones, others are the same with
a difference, which is judged not to be specific or aboriginal; and yet
others show somewhat greater differences, such as are scientifically
expressed by calling them marked varieties, or else doubtful species; while
others, differing a little more, are confidently termed distinct, but
nearly-related species. Now, is not all this a question of degree, of mere
gradation of difference? And is it at all likely that these several
gradations came to be established in two totally different ways--some of
them (though naturalists can't agree which) through natural variation, or
other secondary cause, and some by original creation, without secondary
cause? We have seen that the judicious Pictet answers such questions as
Darwin would have him do, in affirming that, in all probability, the
nearly-related species of two successive faunas were materially connected,
and that contemporaneous species, similarly resembling each other, were not
all created so, but have become so. This is equivalent to saying that
species (using the term as all naturalists do, and must continue to employ
the word) have only a relative, not an absolute fixity; that differences
fully equivalent to what are held to be specific may arise in the course of
time, so that one species may at length be naturally replaced by another
species a good deal like it, or may be diversified into two, three, or more
species, or forms as different as species. This concedes all that Darwin has
a right to ask, all that he can directly infer from evidence. We must add
that it affords a locus standi, more or less tenable, for inferring more.

Here another geological consideration comes in to help on this inference.
The species of the later tertiary period for the most part not only
resembled those of our days--many of them so closely as to suggest an
absolute continuity--but also occupied in general the same regions that
their relatives occupy now. The same may be said, though less specially, of
the earlier tertiary and of the later secondary; but there is less and less
localization of forms as we recede, yet some localization even in palaeozoic
times. While in the secondary period one is struck with the similarity of
forms and the identity of many of the species which flourished apparently
at the same time in all or in the most widely-separated parts of the world,
in the tertiary epoch, on the contrary, along with the increasing
specialization of climates and their approximation to the present state, we
find abundant evidence of increasing localization of orders, genera and
species, and this localization strikingly accords with the present
geographical distribution of the same groups of species Where the imputed
forefathers lived their relatives and supposed descendants now flourish All
the actual classes of the animal and vegetable kingdoms were represented in
the tertiary faunas and floras and in nearly the same proportions and the
same diversities as at present The faunas of what is now Europe, Asia
America and Australia, differed from each other much as they now differ: in
fact--according to Adolphe Brongniart, whose statements we here
condense[III-7]--the inhabitants of these different regions appear for the
most part to have acquired, before the close of the tertiary period, the
characters which essentially distinguish their existing faunas. The Eastern
Continent had then, as now, its great pachyderms, elephants, rhinoceros,
hippopotamus; South America, its armadillos, sloths, and anteaters;
Australia, a crowd of marsupials; and the very strange birds of New Zealand
had predecessors of similar strangeness.

Everywhere the same geographical distribution as now, with a difference in
the particular area, as respects the northern portion of the continents,
answering to a warmer climate then than ours, such as allowed species of
hippopotamus, rhinoceros, and elephant, to range even to the regions now
inhabited by the reindeer and the musk-ox, and with the serious disturbing
intervention of the glacial period within a comparatively recent time. Let
it be noted also that those tertiary species which have continued with
little change down to our days are the marine animals of the lower grades,
especially mollusca. Their low organization, moderate sensibility, and the
simple conditions of an existence in a medium like the ocean, not subject
to great variation and incapable of sudden change, may well account for
their continuance; while, on the other hand, the more intense, however
gradual, climatic vicissitudes on land, which have driven all tropical and
subtropical forms out of the higher latitudes and assigned to them their
actual limits, would be almost sure to extinguish such huge and unwieldy
animals as mastodons, mammoths, and the like, whose power of enduring
altered circumstances must have been small.

This general replacement of the tertiary species of a country by others so
much like them is a noteworthy fact. The hypothesis of the independent
creation of all species, irrespective of their antecedents, leaves this
fact just as mysterious as is creation itself; that of derivation
undertakes to account for it. Whether it satisfactorily does so or not, it
must be allowed that the facts well accord with that hypothesis. The same
may be said of another conclusion, namely, that the geological succession
of animals and plants appears to correspond in a general way with their
relative standing or rank in a natural system of classification. It seems
clear that, though no one of the grand types of the animal kingdom can be
traced back farther than the rest, yet the lower classes long preceded the
higher; that there has been on the whole a steady progression within each
class and order; and that the highest plants and animals have appeared only
in relatively modern times. It is only, however, in a broad sense that this
generalization is now thought to hold good. It encounters many apparent
exceptions, and sundry real ones. So far as the rule holds, all is as it
should be upon an hypothesis of derivation.

The rule has its exceptions. But, curiously enough, the most striking class
of exceptions, if such they be, seems to us even more favorable to the
doctrine of derivation than is the general rule of a pure and simple
ascending gradation. We refer to what Agassiz calls prophetic and synthetic
types; for which the former name may suffice, as the difference between the
two is evanescent.


"It has been noticed," writes our great zoologist, "that certain types,
which are frequently prominent among the representatives of past ages,
combine in their structure peculiarities which at later periods are only
observed separately in different, distinct types. Sauroid fishes before
reptiles, Pterodactyles before birds, Ichthyosauri before dolphins, etc.
There are entire families, of nearly every class of animals, which in the
state of their perfect development exemplify such prophetic relations.

The sauroid fishes of the past geological ages are an example of this kind
These fishes which preceded the appearance of reptiles present a
combination of ichthyic and reptilian characters not to be found in the
true members of this class, which form its bulk at present. The
Pterodactyles, which preceded the class of birds, and the Ichthyosauri,
which preceded the Cetacea, are other examples of such prophetic
types."--(Agassiz, "Contributions, Essay on Classification," p. 117.)


Now, these reptile-like fishes, of which gar-pikes are the living
representatives, though of earlier appearance, are admittedly of higher rank
than common fishes. They dominated until reptiles appeared, when they
mostly gave place to (or, as the derivationists will insist, were resolved
by divergent variation and natural selection into) common fishes, destitute
of reptilian characters, and saurian reptiles--the intermediate grades,
which, according to a familiar piscine saying, are "neither fish, flesh,
nor good red-herring," being eliminated and extinguished by natural
consequence of the struggle for existence which Darwin so aptly portrays.
And so, perhaps, of the other prophetic types. Here type and antitype
correspond. If these are true prophecies, we need not wonder that some who
read them in Agassiz's book will read their fulfillment in Darwin's.

Note also, in this connection, that along with a wonderful persistence of
type, with change of species, genera, orders, etc., from formation to
formation, no species and no higher group which has once unequivocally died
out ever afterward reappears. Why is this, but that the link of generation
has been sundered? Why, on the hypothesis of independent originations, were
not failing species recreated, either identically or with a difference, in
regions eminently adapted to their well-being? To take a striking case.
That no part of the world now offers more suitable conditions for wild
horses and cattle than the pampas and other plains of South America, is
shown by the facility with which they have there run wild and enormously
multiplied, since introduced from the Old World not long ago. There was no
wild American stock. Yet in the times of the mastodon and megatherium, at
the dawn of the present period, wild-horses--certainly very much like the
existing horse--roamed over those plains in abundance. On the principle of
original and direct created adaptation of species to climate and other
conditions, why were they not reproduced, when, after the colder
intervening era, those regions became again eminently adapted to such
animals? Why, but because, by their complete extinction in South America,
the line of descent was there utterly broken? Upon the ordinary hypothesis,
there is no scientific explanation possible of this series of facts, and of
many others like them. Upon the new hypothesis, "the succession of the same
types of structure within the same areas during the later geological
periods ceases to be mysterious, and is simply explained by inheritance."
Their cessation is failure of issue.

Along with these considerations the fact (alluded to on page 98) should be
remembered that, as a general thing, related species of the present age are
geographically associated. The larger part of the plants, and still more of
the animals, of each separate country are peculiar to it; and, as most
species now flourish over the graves of their by-gone relatives of former
ages, so they now dwell among or accessibly near their kindred species.

Here also comes in that general "parallelism between the order of
succession of animals and plants in geological times, and the gradation
among their living representatives" from low to highly organized, from
simple and general to complex and specialized forms; also "the parallelism
between the order of succession of animals in geological times and the
changes their living representatives undergo during their embryological
growth," as if the world were one prolonged gestation. Modern science has
much insisted on this parallelism, and to a certain extent is allowed to
have made it out. All these things, which conspire to prove that the
ancient and the recent forms of life "are somehow intimately connected
together in one grand system," equally conspire to suggest that the
connection is one similar or analogous to generation. Surely no naturalist
can be blamed for entering somewhat confidently upon a field of speculative
inquiry which here opens so invitingly; nor need former premature endeavors
and failures utterly dishearten him.

All these things, it may naturally be said, go to explain the order, not
the mode, of the incoming of species. But they all do tend to bring out the
generalization expressed by Mr. Wallace in the formula that "every species
has come into existence coincident both in time and space with preexisting
closely-allied species." Not, however, that this is proved even of existing
species as a matter of general fact. It is obviously impossible to prove
anything of the kind. But we must concede that the known facts strongly
suggest such an inference. And--since species are only congeries of
individuals, since every individual came into existence in consequence of
preexisting individuals of the same sort, so leading up to the individuals
with which the species began, and since the only material sequence we know
of among plants and animals is that from parent to progeny--the presumption
becomes exceedingly strong that the connection of the incoming with the
preexisting species is a genealogical one.

Here, however, all depends upon the probability that Mr. Wallace's
inference is really true. Certainly it is not yet generally accepted; but a
strong current is setting toward its acceptance.

So long as universal cataclysms were in vogue, and all life upon the earth
was thought to have been suddenly destroyed and renewed many times in
succession, such a view could not be thought of. So the equivalent view
maintained by Agassiz, and formerly, we believe, by D'Orbigny, that
irrespectively of general and sudden catastrophes, or any known adequate
physical cause, there has been a total depopulation at the close of each
geological period or formation, say forty or fifty times or more, followed
by as many independent great acts of creation, at which alone have species
been originated, and at each of which a vegetable and an animal kingdom
were produced entire and complete, full-fledged, as flourishing, as
wide-spread, and populous, as varied and mutually adapted from the
beginning as ever afterward--such a view, of course, supersedes all
material connection between successive species, and removes even the
association and geographical range of species entirely out of the domain of
physical causes and of natural science. This is the extreme opposite of
Wallace's and Darwin's view, and is quite as hypothetical. The nearly
universal opinion, if we rightly gather it, manifestly is, that the
replacement of the species of successive formations was not complete and
simultaneous, but partial and successive; and that along the course of each
epoch some species probably were introduced, and some, doubtless, became
extinct. If all since the tertiary belongs to our present epoch, this is
certainly true of it: if to two or more epochs, then the hypothesis of a
total change is not true of them.

Geology makes huge demands upon time; and we regret to find that it has
exhausted ours--that what we meant for the briefest and most general sketch
of some geological considerations in favor of Darwin's hypothesis has so
extended as to leave no room for considering "the great facts of
comparative anatomy and zoology" with which Darwin's theory "very well
accords," nor for indicating how "it admirably serves for explaining the
unity of composition of all organisms, the existence of representative and
rudimentary organs, and the natural series which genera and species
compose." Suffice it to say that these are the real strongholds of the new
system on its theoretical side; that it goes far toward explaining both the
physiological and the structural gradations and relations between the two
kingdoms, and the arrangement of all their   forms in groups subordinate to
groups, all within a few great types; that it reads the riddle of abortive
organs and of morphological conformity, of which no other theory has ever
offered a scientific explanation, and supplies a ground for harmonizing the
two fundamental ideas which naturalists and philosophers conceive to have
ruled the organic world, though they could not reconcile them; namely,
Adaptation to Purpose and Conditions of Existence, and Unity of Type. To
reconcile these two undeniable principles is the capital problem in the
philosophy of natural history; and the hypothesis which consistently does
so thereby secures a great advantage.

We all know that the arm and hand of a monkey, the foreleg and foot of a
dog and of a horse, the wing of a bat, and the fin of a porpoise, are
fundamentally identical; that the long neck of the giraffe has the same and
no more bones than the short one of the elephant; that the eggs of Surinam
frogs hatch into tadpoles with as good tails for swimming as any of their
kindred, although as tadpoles they never enter the water; that the
Guinea-pig is furnished with incisor teeth which it never uses, as it sheds
them before birth; that embryos of mammals and birds have branchial slits
and arteries running in loops, in imitation or reminiscence of the
arrangement which is permanent in fishes; and that thousands of animals and
plants have rudimentary organs which, at least in numerous cases, are
wholly useless to their possessors, etc., etc. Upon a derivative theory
this morphological conformity is explained by community of descent; and it
has not been explained in any other way.

Naturalists are constantly speaking of "related species," of the "affinity"
of a genus or other group, and of "family resemblance"--vaguely conscious
that these terms of kinship are something more than mere metaphors, but
unaware of the grounds of their aptness. Mr. Darwin assures them that they
have been talking derivative doctrine all their lives--as M. Jourdain
talked prose--without knowing it.

If it is difficult and in many cases practically impossible to fix the
limits of species, it is still more so to fix those of genera; and those of
tribes and families are still less susceptible of exact natural
circumscription. Intermediate forms occur, connecting one group with
another in a manner sadly perplexing to systematists, except to those who
have ceased to expect absolute limitations in Nature. All this blending
could hardly fail to suggest a former material connection among allied
forms, such as that which the hypothesis of derivation demands.

Here it would not be amiss to consider the general principle of gradation
throughout organic Nature--a principle which answers in a general way to the
Law of Continuity in the inorganic world, or rather is so analogous to it
that both may fairly be expressed by the Leibnitzian axiom, Natura non agit
saltatim. As an axiom or philosophical principle, used to test modal laws
or hypotheses, this in strictness belongs only to physics. In the
investigation of Nature at large, at least in the organic world, nobody
would undertake to apply this principle as a test of the validity of any
theory or supposed law. But naturalists of enlarged views will not fail to
infer the principle from the phenomena they investigate--to perceive that
the rule holds, under due qualifications and altered forms, throughout the
realm of Nature; although we do not suppose that Nature in the organic
world makes no distinct steps, but only short and serial steps--not
infinitely fine gradations, but no long leaps, or few of them.

To glance at a few illustrations out of many that present themselves. It
would be thought that the distinction between the two organic kingdoms was
broad and absolute.  Plants and animals belong to two very different
categories, fulfill opposite offices and, as to the mass of them are so
unlike that the difficulty of the ordinary observer would be to find points
of comparison Without entering into details which would fill an article, we
may safely say that the difficulty with the naturalist is all the other
way--that all these broad differences vanish one by one as we approach the
lower confines of the two kingdoms, and that no absolute distinction
whatever is now known between them. It is quite possible that the same
organism may be both vegetable and animal, or may be first the one and then
the other. If some organisms may be said to be at first vegetables and then
animals, others, like the spores and other reproductive bodies of many of
the lower Algae, may equally claim to have first a characteristically
animal, and then an unequivocally vegetable existence. Nor is the gradation
restricted to these simple organisms. It appears in general functions, as
in that of reproduction, which is reducible to the same formula in both
kingdoms, while it exhibits close approximations in the lower forms; also
in a common or similar ground of sensibility in the lowest forms of both, a
common faculty of effecting movements tending to a determinate end, traces
of which pervade the vegetable kingdom--while, on the other hand, this
indefinable principle, this vegetable

"Animula vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,"

graduates into the higher sensitiveness of the lower class of animals. Nor
need we hesitate to recognize the fine gradations from simple sensitiveness
and volition to the higher instinctive and to the other psychical
manifestations of the higher brute animals. The gradation is undoubted,
however we may explain it.

Again, propagation is of one mode in the higher animals, of two in all
plants; but vegetative propagation, by budding or offshoots, extends
through the lower grades of animals. In both kingdoms there may be
separation of the offshoots, or indifference in this respect, or continued
and organic union with the parent stock; and this either with essential
independence of the offshoots, or with a subordination of these to a common
whole; or finally with such subordination and amalgamation, along with
specialization of function, that the same parts, which in other cases can
be regarded only as progeny, in these become only members of an individual.

This leads to the question of individuality, a subject quite too large and
too recondite for present discussion. The conclusion of the whole matter,
however, is, that individuality--that very ground of being as distinguished
from thing--is not attained in Nature at one leap. If anywhere truly
exemplified in plants, it is only in the lowest and simplest, where the
being is a structural unit, a single cell, member-less and organless,
though organic--the same thing as those cells of which all the more complex
plants are built up, and with which every plant and (structurally) every
animal began its development. In the ascending gradation of the vegetable
kingdom individuality is, so to say, striven after, but never attained; in
the lower animals it is striven after with greater though incomplete
success; it is realized only in animals of so high a rank that vegetative
multiplication or offshoots are out of the question, where all parts are
strictly members and nothing else, and all subordinated to a common nervous
centre--is fully realized only in a conscious person.

So, also, the broad distinction between reproduction by seeds or ova and
propagation by buds, though perfect in some of the lowest forms of life,
becomes evanescent in others; and even the most absolute law we know in the
physiology of genuine reproduction--that of sexual cooperation--has its
exceptions in both kingdoms in parthenogenesis, to which in the vegetable
kingdom a most curious and intimate series of gradations leads. In plants,
likewise, a long and finely graduated series of transitions leads from
bisexual to unisexual blossoms; and so in various other respects. Everywhere
we may perceive that Nature secures her ends, and makes her distinctions on
the whole manifest and real but everywhere without abrupt breaks We need
not wonder therefore that gradations between species and varieties should
occur; the more so, since genera, tribes, and other groups into which the
naturalist collocates species, are far from being always absolutely limited
in Nature, though they are necessarily represented to be so in systems.
>From the necessity of the case, the classifications of the naturalist
abruptly define where Nature more or less blends. Our systems are nothing,
if not definite. They express differences, and some of the coarser
gradations. But this evinces not their perfection, but their imperfection.
Even the best of them are to the system of Nature what consecutive patches
of the seven colors are to the rainbow.

Now the principle of gradation throughout organic Nature may, of course, be
interpreted upon other assumptions than those of Darwin's
hypothesis--certainly upon quite other than those of a materialistic
philosophy, with which we ourselves have no sympathy. Still we conceive it
not only possible, but probable, that this gradation, as it has its natural
ground, may yet have its scientific explanation. In any case, there is no
need to deny that the general facts correspond well with an hypothesis like
Darwin's, which is built upon fine gradations.

We have contemplated quite long enough the general presumptions in favor of
an hypothesis of the derivation of species. We cannot forget, however,
while for the moment we overlook, the formidable difficulties which all
hypotheses of this class have to encounter, and the serious implications
which they seem to involve. We feel, moreover, that Darwin's particular
hypothesis is exposed to some special objections. It requires no small
strength of nerve steadily to conceive, not only of the diversification, but
of the formation of the organs of an animal through cumulative variation
and natural selection. Think of such an organ as the eye, that most perfect
of optical instruments, as so produced in the lower animals and perfected
in the higher! A friend of ours, who accepts the new doctrine, confesses
that for a long while a cold chill came over him whenever he thought of the
eye. He has at length got over that stage of the complaint, and is now in
the fever of belief, perchance to be succeeded by the sweating stage, during
which sundry peccant humors may be eliminated from the system. For
ourselves, we dread the chill, and have some misgivings about the
consequences of the reaction. We find ourselves in the "singular position"
acknowledged by Pictet--that is, confronted with a theory which, although
it can really explain much, seems inadequate to the heavy task it so boldly
assumes, but which, nevertheless, appears better fitted than any other that
has been broached to explain, if it be possible to explain, somewhat of the
manner in which organized beings may have arisen and succeeded each other.
In this dilemma we might take advantage of Mr. Darwin's candid admission,
that he by no means expects to convince old and experienced people, whose
minds are stocked with a multitude of facts all regarded during a long
course of years from the old point of view. This is nearly our case. So,
owning no call to a larger faith than is expected of us, but not prepared to
pronounce the whole hypothesis untenable, under such construction as we
should put upon it, we naturally sought to attain a settled conviction
through a perusal of several proffered refutations of the theory. At least,
this course seemed to offer the readiest way of bringing to a head the
various objections to which the theory is exposed. On several accounts some
of these opposed reviews especially invite examination. We propose,
accordingly, to conclude our task with an article upon "Darwin and his
Reviewers."


III


The origin of species, like all origination, like the institution of any
other natural state or order, is beyond our immediate ken. We see or may
learn how things go on; we can only frame hypotheses as to how they began.

Two hypotheses divide the scientific world, very unequally, upon the origin
of the existing diversity of the plants and animals which surround us. One
assumes that the actual kinds are primordial; the other, that they are
derivative. One, that all kinds originated supernaturally and directly as
such, and have continued unchanged in the order of Nature; the other, that
the present kinds appeared in some sort of genealogical connection with
other and earlier kinds, that they became what they now are in the course
of time and in the order of Nature.

Or, bringing in the word species, which is well defined as "the perennial
succession of individuals," commonly of very like individuals--as a close
corporation of individuals perpetuated by generation, instead of
election--and reducing the question to mathematical simplicity of
statement: species are lines of individuals coming down from the past and
running on to the future; lines receding, therefore, from our view in either
direction. Within our limited observation they appear to be parallel lines,
as a general thing neither approaching to nor diverging from each other.

The first hypothesis assumes that they were parallel from the unknown
beginning and will be to the unknown end. The second hypothesis assumes
that the apparent parallelism is not real and complete, at least
aboriginally, but approximate or temporary; that we should find the lines
convergent in the past, if we could trace them far enough; that some of
them, if produced back, would fall into certain fragments of lines, which
have left traces in the past, lying not exactly in the same direction, and
these farther back into others to which they are equally unparallel. It will
also claim that the present lines, whether on the whole really or only
approximately parallel, sometimes fork or send off branches on one side or
the other, producing new lines (varieties), which run for a while, and for
aught we know indefinitely when not interfered with, near and approximately
parallel to the parent line. This claim it can establish; and it may also
show that these close subsidiary lines may branch or vary again, and that
those branches or varieties which are best adapted to the existing
conditions may be continued, while others stop or die out. And so we may
have the basis of a real theory of the diversification of species and here
indeed, there is a real, though a narrow, established ground to build upon
But as systems of organic Nature, both doctrines are equally hypotheses,
are suppositions of what there is no proof of from experience, assumed in
order to account for the observed phenomena, and supported by such indirect
evidence as can be had.

Even when the upholders of the former and more popular system mix up
revelation with scientific discussion--which we decline to do--they by no
means thereby render their view other than hypothetical. Agreeing that
plants and animals were produced by Omnipotent fiat does not exclude the
idea of natural order and what we call secondary causes. The record of the
fiat--"Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed," etc., "and
it was so;" "let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind,
cattle and creeping thing and beast of the earth after his kind, and it was
so"--seems even to imply them. Agreeing that they were formed of "the dust
of the ground," and of thin air, only leads to the conclusion that the
pristine individuals were corporeally constituted like existing
individuals, produced through natural agencies. To agree that they were
created "after their kinds" determines nothing as to what were the original
kinds, nor in what mode, during what time, and in what connections it
pleased the Almighty to introduce the first individuals of each sort upon
the earth. Scientifically considered, the two opposing doctrines are
equally hypothetical.

The two views very unequally divide the scientific world; so that believers
in "the divine right of majorities" need not hesitate which side to take,
at least for the present. Up to a time quite within the memory of a
generation still on the stage, two hypotheses about the nature of light
very unequally divided the scientific world. But the small minority has
already prevailed: the emission theory has gone out; the undulatory or wave
theory, after some fluctuation, has reached high tide, and is now the
pervading, the fully-established system. There was an intervening time
during which most physicists held their opinions in suspense.

The adoption of the undulatory theory of light called for the extension of
the same theory to heat, and this promptly suggested the hypothesis of a
correlation, material connection, and transmutability of heat, light,
electricity, magnetism, etc.; which hypothesis the physicists held in
absolute suspense until very lately, but are now generally adopting. If not
already established as a system, it promises soon to become so. At least,
it is generally received as a tenable and probably true hypothesis.

Parallel to this, however less cogent the reasons, Darwin and others,
having shown it likely that some varieties of plants or animals have
diverged in time into cognate species, or into forms as different as
species, are led to infer that all species of a genus may have thus
diverged from a common stock, and thence to suppose a higher community of
origin in ages still farther back, and so on. Following the safe example of
the physicists, and acknowledging the fact of the diversification of a once
homogeneous species into varieties, we may receive the theory of the
evolution of these into species, even while for the present we hold the
hypothesis of a further evolution in cool suspense or in grave suspicion.
In respect to very many questions a wise man's mind rests long in a state
neither of belief nor unbelief. But your intellectually short-sighted people
are apt to be preternaturally clear-sighted, and to find their way very
plain to positive conclusions upon one side or the other of every mooted
question.

In fact, most people, and some philosophers, refuse to hold questions in
abeyance, however incompetent they may be to decide them. And, curiously
enough, the more difficult, recondite, and perplexing, the questions or
hypotheses are--such, for instance, as those about organic Nature--the more
impatient they are of suspense. Sometimes, and evidently in the present
case, this impatience grows out of a fear that a new hypothesis may
endanger cherished and most important beliefs. Impatience under such
circumstances is not unnatural, though perhaps needless, and, if so, unwise.

To us the present revival of the derivative hypothesis, in a more winning
shape than it ever before had, was not unexpected. We wonder that any
thoughtful observer of the course of investigation and of speculation in
science should not have foreseen it, and have learned at length to take its
inevitable coming patiently; the more so, as in Darwin's treatise it comes
in a purely scientific form, addressed only to scientific men. The
notoriety and wide popular perusal of this treatise appear to have
astonished the author even more than the book itself has astonished the
reading world Coming as the new presentation does from a naturalist of
acknowledged character and ability and marked by a conscientiousness and
candor which have not always been reciprocated we have thought it simply
right to set forth the doctrine as fairly and as favorably as we could There
are plenty to decry it and the whole theory is widely exposed to attack For
the arguments on the other side we may look to the numerous adverse
publications which Darwin s volume has already called out and especially to
those reviews which propose directly to refute it. Taking various lines and
reflecting very diverse modes of thought, these hostile critics may be
expected to concentrate and enforce the principal objections which can be
brought to bear against the derivative hypothesis in general, and Darwin's
new exposition of it in particular.

Upon the opposing side of the question we have read with attention--1. An
article in the North American Review for April last; 2. One in the
Christian Examiner, Boston, for May; 3. M. Pictet's article in the
Bibliotheque Universelle, which we have already made considerable use of,
which seems throughout most able and correct, and which in tone and
fairness is admirably in contrast with--4. The article in the Edinburgh
Review for May, attributed--although against a large amount of internal
presumptive evidence--to the most distinguished British comparative
anatomist; 5. An article in the North British Review for May; 6. Prof.
Agassiz has afforded an early opportunity to peruse the criticisms he makes
in the forthcoming third volume of his great work, by a publication of them
in advance in the American Journal of Science for July.

In our survey of the lively discussion which has been raised, it matters
little how our own particular opinions may incline. But we may confess to
an impression, thus far, that the doctrine of the permanent and complete
immutability of species has not been established, and may fairly be
doubted. We believe that species vary, and that "Natural Selection"   works;
but we suspect that its operation, like every analogous natural operation,
may be limited by something else. Just as every species by its natural rate
of reproduction would soon completely fill any country it could live in,
but does not, being checked by some other species or some other
condition--so it may be surmised that variation and natural selection have
their struggle and consequent check, or are limited by something inherent
in the constitution of organic beings.

We are disposed to rank the derivative hypothesis in its fullness with the
nebular hypothesis, and to regard both as allowable, as not unlikely to
prove tenable in spite of some strong objections, but as not therefore
demonstrably true. Those, if any there be, who regard the derivative
hypothesis as satisfactorily proved, must have loose notions as to what
proof is. Those who imagine it can be easily refuted and cast aside, must,
we think, have imperfect or very prejudiced conceptions of the facts
concerned and of the questions at issue.

We are not disposed nor prepared to take sides for or against the new
hypothesis, and so, perhaps, occupy a good position from which to watch the
discussion and criticise those objections which are seemingly inconclusive.
On surveying the arguments urged by those who have undertaken to demolish
the theory, we have been most impressed with a sense of their great
inequality. Some strike us as excellent and perhaps unanswerable; some, as
incongruous with other views of the same writers; others, when carried out,
as incompatible with general experience or general beliefs, and therefore
as proving too much; still others, as proving nothing at all; so that, on
the whole, the effect is rather confusing and disappointing. We certainly
expected a stronger adverse case than any which the thoroughgoing opposers
of Darwin appear to have made out. Wherefore, if it be found that the new
hypothesis has grown upon our favor as we proceeded, this must be
attributed not so much to the force of the arguments of the book itself as
to the want of force of several of those by which it has been assailed.
Darwin's arguments we might resist or adjourn; but some of the refutations
of it give us more concern than the book itself did.

These remarks apply mainly to the philosophical and theological objections
which have been elaborately urged, almost exclusively by the American
reviewers. The North British reviewer, indeed, roundly denounces the book
as atheistical, but evidently deems the case too clear for argument. The
Edinburgh reviewer, on the contrary, scouts all such objections--as well he
may, since he records his belief in "a continuous creative operation," a
constantly operating secondary creational law," through which species are
successively produced; and he emits faint, but not indistinct, glimmerings
of a transmutation theory of his own;[III-8] so that he is equally exposed
to all the philosophical objections advanced by Agassiz, and to most of
those urged by the other American critics, against Darwin himself.

Proposing now to criticise the critics, so far as to see what their most
general and comprehensive objections amount to, we must needs begin with
the American reviewers, and with their arguments adduced to prove that a
derivative hypothesis ought not to be true, or is not possible,
philosophical, or theistic.

It must not be forgotten that on former occasions very confident judgments
have been pronounced by very competent persons, which have not been finally
ratified. Of the two great minds of the seventeenth century, Newton and
Leibnitz, both profoundly religious as well as philosophical, one produced
the theory of gravitation, the other objected to that theory that it was
subversive of natural religion. The nebular hypothesis--a natural
consequence of the theory of gravitation and of the subsequent progress of
physical and astronomical discovery--has been denounced as atheistical even
down to our own day. But it is now largely adopted by the most theistical
natural philosophers as a tenable and perhaps sufficient hypothesis, and
where not accepted is no longer objected to, so far as we know, on
philosophical or religious grounds.

The gist of the philosophical objections urged by the two Boston reviewers
against an hypothesis of the derivation of species--or at least against
Darwin's particular hypothesis-- is, that it is incompatible with the idea
of any manifestation of design in the universe, that it denies final
causes. A serious objection this, and one that demands very serious
attention.

The proposition, that things and events in Nature were not designed to be
so, if logically carried out, is doubtless tantamount to atheism. Yet most
people believe that some were designed and others were not, although they
fall into a hopeless maze whenever they undertake to define their position.
So we should not like to stigmatize as atheistically disposed a person who
regards certain things and events as being what they are through designed
laws (whatever that expression means), but as not themselves specially
ordained, or who, in another connection, believes in general, but not in
particular Providence. We could sadly puzzle him with questions; but in
return he might equally puzzle us. Then, to deny that anything was
specially designed to be what it is, is one proposition; while to deny that
the Designer supernaturally or immediately made it so, is another: though
the reviewers appear not to recognize the distinction.

Also, "scornfully to repudiate" or to "sneer at the idea of any
manifestation of design in the material universe,"[III-9] is one thing;
while to consider, and perhaps to exaggerate, the difficulties which attend
the practical application of the doctrine of final causes to certain
instances, is quite another thing: yet the Boston reviewers, we regret to
say, have not been duly regardful of the difference. Whatever be thought of
Darwin's doctrine, we are surprised that he should be charged with scorning
or sneering at the opinions of others, upon such a subject. Perhaps Darwin'
s view is incompatible with final causes--we will consider that question
presently-- but as to the Examiner's charge, that he "sneers at the idea of
any manifestation of design in the material universe," though we are
confident that no misrepresentation was intended, we are equally confident
that it is not at all warranted by the two passages cited in support of it.
Here are the passages:


"If green woodpeckers alone had existed, or we did not know that there were
many black and pied kinds, I dare say that we should have thought that the
green color was a beautiful adaptation to hide this tree-frequenting bird
from its enemies."

"If our reason leads us to admire with enthusiasm a multitude of inimitable
contrivances in Nature, this same reason tells us, though we may easily err
on both sides, that some contrivances are less perfect. Can we consider the
sting of the wasp or of the bee as perfect, which, when used against many
attacking animals, cannot be withdrawn, owing to the backward serratures,
and so inevitably causes the death of the insect by tearing out its
viscera?"


If the sneer here escapes ordinary vision in the detached extracts (one of
them wanting the end of the sentence), it is, if possible, more
imperceptible when read with the context. Moreover, this perusal inclines
us to think that the Examiner has misapprehended the particular argument or
object, as well as the spirit, of the author in these passages. The whole
reads more naturally as a caution against the inconsiderate use of final
causes in science, and an illustration of some of the manifold errors and
absurdities which their hasty assumption is apt to involve--considerations
probably equivalent to those which induced Lord Bacon to liken final causes
to "vestal virgins." So, if any one, it is here Bacon that "sitteth in the
seat of the scornful." As to Darwin, in the section from which the extracts
were made, he is considering a subsidiary question, and trying to obviate a
particular difficulty, but, we suppose, is wholly unconscious of denying
"any manifestation of design in the material universe." He concludes the
first sentence:


    --"and consequently that it was a character of importance, and might have
been acquired through natural selection; as it is, I have no doubt that the
color is due to some quite distinct cause, probably to sexual selection."


After an illustration from the vegetable creation, Darwin adds:


"The naked skin on the head of a vulture is generally looked at as a direct
adaptation for wallowing in putridity; and so it may be, or it may possibly
be due to the direct action of putrid matter; but we should be very
cautious in drawing any such inference, when we see that the skin on the
head of the clean-feeding male turkey is likewise naked. The sutures in the
skulls of young mammals have been advanced as a beautiful adaptation for
aiding parturition, and no doubt they facilitate or may be indispensable
for this act; but as sutures occur in the skulls of young birds and
reptiles, which have only to escape from a broken egg, we may infer that
this structure has arisen from the laws of growth, and has been taken
advantage of in the parturition of the higher animals."


All this, simply taken, is beyond cavil, unless the attempt to explain
scientifically how any designed result is accomplished savors of
impropriety.

In the other place, Darwin is contemplating the patent fact that
"perfection here below" is relative, not absolute--and illustrating this by
the circumstance that European animals, and especially plants, are now
proving to be better adapted for New Zealand than many of the indigenous
ones--that "the correction for the aberration of light is said, on high
authority, not to be quite perfect even in that most perfect organ, the
eye." And then follows the second extract of the reviewer. But what is the
position of the reviewer upon his own interpretation of these passages? If
he insists that green woodpeckers were specifically created so in order
that they might be less liable to capture, must he not equally hold that
the black and pied ones were specifically made of these colors in order
that they might be more liable to be caught? And would an explanation of the
mode in which those woodpeckers came to be green, however complete,
convince him that the color was undesigned?

As to the other illustration, is the reviewer so complete an optimist as to
insist that the arrangement and the weapon are wholly perfect (quoad the
insect) the normal use of which often causes the animal fatally to injure
or to disembowel itself? Either way it seems to us that the argument here,
as well as the insect, performs hari-kari. The Examiner adds:


"We should in like manner object to the word favorable, as implying that
some species are placed by the Creator under unfavorable circumstances, at
least under such as might be advantageously modified."


But are not many individuals and some races of men placed by the Creator
"under unfavorable circumstances, at least under such as might be
advantageously modified?" Surely these reviewers must be living in an ideal
world, surrounded by "the faultless monsters which our world ne'er saw," in
some elysium where imperfection and distress were never heard of! Such
arguments resemble some which we often hear against the Bible, holding that
book responsible as if it originated certain facts on the shady side of
human nature or the apparently darker lines of Providential dealing, though
the facts are facts of common observation and have to be confronted upon
any theory.

The North American reviewer also has a world of his own--just such a one as
an idealizing philosopher would be apt to devise--that is, full of sharp
and absolute distinctions: such, for instance, as the "absolute
invariableness of instinct;" an absolute want of intelligence in any brute
animal; and a complete monopoly of instinct by the brute animals, so that
this "instinct is a great matter" for them only, since it sharply and
perfectly distinguishes this portion of organic Nature from the vegetable
kingdom on the one hand and from man on the other: most convenient views for
argumentative purposes, but we suppose not borne out in fact.

In their scientific objections the two reviewers take somewhat different
lines; but their philosophical and theological arguments strikingly
coincide. They agree in emphatically asserting that Darwin's hypothesis of
the origination of species through variation and natural selection
"repudiates the whole doctrine of final causes," and "all indication of
design or purpose in the organic world . . . is neither more nor less than
a formal denial of any agency beyond that of a blind chance in the
developing or perfecting of the organs or instincts of created beings. . .
. It is in vain that the apologists of this hypothesis might say that it
merely attributes a different mode and time to the Divine agency--that all
the qualities subsequently appearing in their descendants must have been
implanted, and have remained latent in the original pair." Such a view, the
Examiner declares, "is nowhere stated in this book, and would be, we are
sure, disclaimed by the author."

We should like to be informed of the grounds of this sureness. The marked
rejection of spontaneous generation--the statement of a belief that all
animals have descended from four or five progenitors, and plants from an
equal or lesser number, or, perhaps, if constrained to it by analogy, "from
some one primordial form into which life was first breathed"--coupled with
the expression, "To my mind it accords better with what we know of the laws
impressed on matter by the Creator, that the production and extinction of
the past and present inhabitants of the world should have been due to
secondary causes," than "that each species has been independently
created"--these and similar expressions lead us to suppose that the author
probably does accept the kind of view which the Examiner is sure he would
disclaim. At least, we charitably see nothing in his scientific theory to
hinder his adoption of Lord Bacon's "Confession of Faith" in this regard--
"That, notwithstanding God hath rested and ceased from creating, yet,
nevertheless, he doth accomplish and fulfill his divine will in all things,
great and small, singular and general, as fully and exactly by providence
as he could by miracle and new creation, though his working be not
immediate and direct, but by compass; not violating Nature, which is his
own law upon the creature."


However that may be, it is undeniable that Mr. Darwin has purposely been
silent upon the philosophical and theological applications of his theory.
This reticence, under the circumstances, argues design, and raises inquiry
as to the final cause or reason why. Here, as in higher instances,
confident as we are that there is a final cause, we must not be
overconfident that we can infer the particular or true one. Perhaps the
author is more familiar with natural-historical than with philosophical
inquiries, and, not having decided which particular theory about efficient
cause is best founded, he meanwhile argues the scientific questions
concerned--all that relates to secondary causes--upon purely scientific
grounds, as he must do in any case. Perhaps, confident, as he evidently is,
that his view will finally be adopted, he may enjoy a sort of satisfaction
in hearing it denounced as sheer atheism by the inconsiderate, and
afterward, when it takes its place with the nebular hypothesis and the
like, see this judgment reversed, as we suppose it would be in such event.

Whatever Mr. Darwin's philosophy may be, or whether he has any, is a matter
of no consequence at all, compared with the important questions, whether a
theory to account for the origination and diversification of animal and
vegetable forms through the operation of secondary causes does or does not
exclude design; and whether the establishment by adequate evidence of
Darwin's particular theory of diversification through variation and natural
selection would essentially alter the present scientific and philosophical
grounds for theistic views of Nature. The unqualified affirmative judgment
rendered by the two Boston reviewers, evidently able and practised
reasoners, "must give us pause." We hesitate to advance our conclusions in
opposition to theirs. But, after full and serious consideration, we are
constrained to say that, in our opinion, the adoption of a derivative
hypothesis, and of Darwin's particular hypothesis, if we understand it,
would leave the doctrines of final causes, utility, and special design,
just where they were before. We do not pretend that the subject is not
environed with difficulties. Every view is so environed; and every shifting
of the view is likely, if it removes some difficulties, to bring others
into prominence. But we cannot perceive that Darwin's theory brings in any
new kind of scientific difficulty, that is, any with which philosophical
naturalists were not already familiar.

Since natural science deals only with secondary or natural causes, the
scientific terms of a theory of derivation of species--no less than of a
theory of dynamics--must needs be the same to the theist as to the atheist.
The difference appears only when the inquiry is carried up to the question
of primary cause--a question which belongs to philosophy. Wherefore, Darwin
's reticence about efficient cause does not disturb us. He considers only
the scientific questions. As already stated, we think that a theistic view
of Nature is implied in his book, and we must charitably refrain from
suggesting the contrary until the contrary is logically deduced from his
premises. If, however, he anywhere maintains that the natural causes
through which species are diversified operate without an ordaining and
directing intelligence, and that the orderly arrangements and admirable
adaptations we see all around us are fortuitous or blind, undesigned
results--that the eye, though it came to see, was not designed for seeing,
nor the hand for handling--then, we suppose, he is justly chargeable with
denying, and very needlessly denying, all design in organic Nature;
otherwise, we suppose not. Why, if Darwin's well-known passage about the
eye[III-10] equivocal though some of the language be--does not imply
ordaining and directing intelligence, then he refutes his own theory as
effectually as any of his opponents are likely to do. He asks:

"May we not believe that [under variation proceeding long enough,
generation multiplying the better variations times enough, and natural
selection securing the improvements] a living optical instrument might be
thus formed as superior to one of glass as the works of the Creator are to
those of man?"

This must mean one of two things: either that the living instrument was
made and perfected under (which is the same thing as by) an intelligent
First Cause, or that it was not. If it was, then theism is asserted; and as
to the mode of operation, how do we know, and why must we believe, that,
fitting precedent forms being in existence, a living instrument (so
different from a lifeless manufacture) would be originated and perfected in
any other way, or that this is not the fitting way? If it means that it was
not, if he so misuses words that by the Creator he intends an unintelligent
power, undirected force, or necessity, then he has put his case so as to
invite disbelief in it. For then blind forces have produced not only
manifest adaptions of means to specific ends--which is absurd enough--but
better adjusted and more perfect instruments or machines than intellect
(that is, human intellect) can contrive and human skill execute--which no
sane person will believe.

On the other hand, if Darwin even admits--we will not say adopts--the
theistic view, he may save himself much needless trouble in the endeavor to
account for the absence of every sort of intermediate form. Those in the
line between one species and another supposed to be derived from it he may
be bound to provide; but as to "an infinite number of other varieties not
intermediate, gross, rude, and purposeless, the unmeaning creations of an
unconscious cause," born only to perish, which a relentless reviewer has
imposed upon his theory--rightly enough upon the atheistic alternative--the
theistic view rids him at once of this "scum of creation." For, as species
do not now vary at all times and places and in all directions, nor produce
crude, vague, imperfect, and useless forms, there is no reason for
supposing that they ever did. Good-for-nothing monstrosities, failures of
purpose rather than purposeless, indeed, sometimes occur; but these are just
as anomalous and unlikely upon Darwin's theory as upon any other. For his
particular theory is based, and even over-strictly insists, upon the most
universal of physiological laws, namely, that successive generations shall
differ only slightly, if at all, from their parents; and this effectively
excludes crude and impotent forms. Wherefore, if we believe that the
species were designed, and that natural propagation was designed, how can
we say that the actual varieties of the species were not equally designed?
Have we not similar grounds for inferring design in the supposed varieties
of species, that we have in the case of the supposed species of a genus?
When a naturalist comes to regard as three closely related species what
he before took to be so many varieties of one species how has he thereby
strengthened our conviction that the three forms are designed to have
the differences which they actually exhibit? Wherefore so long as
gradatory, orderly, and adapted forms in Nature argue design, and at
least while the physical cause of variation is utterly unknown and
mysterious, we should advise Mr. Darwin to assume in the philosophy of
his hypothesis that variation has been led along certain beneficial
lines. Streams flowing over a sloping plain by gravitation (here the
counterpart of natural selection) may have worn their actual channels as
they flowed; yet their particular courses may have been assigned; and
where we see them forming definite and useful lines of irrigation, after
a manner unaccountable on the laws of gravitation and dynamics, we
should believe that the distribution was designed.

To insist, therefore, that the new hypothesis of the derivative origin of
the actual species is incompatible with final causes and design, is to take
a position which we must consider philosophically untenable. We must also
regard it as highly unwise and dangerous, in the present state and present
prospects of physical and physiological science. We should expect the
philosophical atheist or skeptic to take this ground; also, until better
informed, the unlearned and unphilosophical believer; but we should think
that the thoughtful theistic philosopher would take the other side. Not to
do so seems to concede that only supernatural events can be shown to be
designed, which no theist can admit--seems also to misconceive the scope
and meaning of all ordinary arguments for design in Nature. This
misconception is shared both by the reviewers and the reviewed. At least,
Mr. Darwin uses expressions which imply that the natural forms which
surround us, because they have a history or natural sequence, could have
been only generally, but not particularly designed--a view at once
superficial and contradictory; whereas his true line should be, that his
hypothesis concerns the order and not the cause, the how and not the why of
the phenomena, and so leaves the question of design just where it was
before.

To illustrate this from the theist's point of view: Transfer the question
for a moment from the origination of species to the origination of
individuals, which occurs, as we say, naturally. Because natural, that is,
"stated, fixed, or settled," is it any the less designed on that account?
We acknowledge that God is our maker--not merely the originator of the
race, but our maker as individuals--and none the less so because it pleased
him to make us in the way of ordinary generation. If any of us were born
unlike our parents and grandparents, in a slight degree, or in whatever
degree, would the case be altered in this regard?

The whole argument in natural theology proceeds upon the ground that the
inference for a final cause of the structure of the hand and of the valves
in the veins is just as valid now, in individuals produced through natural
generation, as it would have been in the case of the first man,
supernaturally created. Why not, then, just as good even on the supposition
of the descent of men from chimpanzees and gorillas, since those animals
possess these same contrivances? Or, to take a more supposable case: If the
argument from structure to design is convincing when drawn from a particular
animal, say a Newfoundland dog, and is not weakened by the knowledge that
this dog came from similar parents, would it be at all weakened if, in
tracing his genealogy, it were ascertained that he was a remote descendant
of the mastiff or some other breed, or that both these and other breeds
came (as is suspected) from some wolf? If not, how is the argument for
design in the structure of our particular dog affected by the supposition
that his wolfish progenitor came from a post-tertiary wolf, perhaps less
unlike an existing one than the dog in question is to some other of the
numerous existing races of dogs, and that this post-tertiary came from an
equally or more different tertiary wolf? And if the argument from structure
to design is not invalidated by our present knowledge that our
individual dog was developed from a single organic cell, how is it
invalidated by the supposition of an analogous natural descent, through a
long line of connected forms, from such a cell, or from some simple animal,
existing ages before there were any dogs?

Again, suppose we have two well-known and apparently most decidedly
different animals or plants, A and D, both presenting, in their structure
and in their adaptations to the conditions of existence, as valid and clear
evidence of design as any animal or plant ever presented: suppose we have
now discovered two intermediate species, B and C, which make up a series
with equable differences from A to D. Is the proof of design or final cause
in A and D, whatever it amounted to, at all weakened by the discovery of the
intermediate forms? Rather does not the proof extend to the intermediate
species, and go to show that all four were equally designed? Suppose, now,
the number of intermediate forms to be much increased, and therefore the
gradations to be closer yet--as close as those between the various sorts of
dogs, or races of men, or of horned cattle: would the evidence of design,
as shown in the structure of any of the members of the series, be any
weaker than it was in the case of A and D? Whoever contends that it would
be, should likewise maintain that the origination of individuals by
generation is incompatible with design, or an impossibility in Nature. We
might all have confidently thought the latter, antecedently to experience
of the fact of reproduction. Let our experience teach us wisdom.

These illustrations make it clear that the evidence of design from
structure and adaptation is furnished complete by the individual animal or
plant itself, and that our knowledge or our ignorance of the history of its
formation or mode of production adds nothing to it and takes nothing away.
We infer design from certain arrangements and results; and we have no other
way of ascertaining it. Testimony, unless infallible, cannot prove it, and
is out of the question here. Testimony is not the appropriate proof of
design: adaptation to purpose is. Some arrangements in Nature appear to be
contrivances, but may leave us in doubt. Many others, of which the eye and
the hand are notable examples, compel belief with a force not appreciably
short of demonstration. Clearly to settle that such as these must have been
designed goes far toward proving that other organs and other seemingly less
explicit adaptations in Nature must also have been designed, and clinches
our belief, from manifold considerations, that all Nature is a preconcerted
arrangement, a manifested design. A strange contradiction would it be to
insist that the shape and markings of certain rude pieces of flint, lately
found in drift-deposits, prove design, but that nicer and thousand-fold
more complex adaptations to use in animals and vegetables do not a fortiori
argue design.

We could not affirm that the arguments for design in Nature are conclusive
to all minds. But we may insist, upon grounds already intimated, that,
whatever they were good for before Darwin's book appeared, they are good
for now. To our minds the argument from design always appeared conclusive
of the being and continued operation of an intelligent First Cause, the
Ordainer of Nature; and we do not see that the grounds of such belief would
be disturbed or shifted by the adoption of Darwin's hypothesis. We are not
blind to the philosophical difficulties which the thoroughgoing implication
of design in Nature has to encounter, nor is it our vocation to obviate
them It suffices us to know that they are not new nor peculiar
difficulties--that, as Darwin's theory and our reasonings upon it did not
raise these perturbing spirits, they are not bound to lay them. Meanwhile,
that the doctrine of design encounters the very same difficulties in the
material that it does in the moral world is Just what ought to be expected.

So the issue between the skeptic and the theist is only the old one, long
ago argued out--namely, whether organic Nature is a result of design or of
chance. Variation and natural selection open no third alternative; they
concern only the question how the results, whether fortuitous or designed,
may have been brought about. Organic Nature abounds with unmistakable and
irresistible indications of design, and, being a connected and consistent
system, this evidence carries the implication of design throughout the
whole. On the other hand, chance carries no probabilities with it, can never
be developed into a consistent system, but, when applied to the explanation
of orderly or beneficial results, heaps up improbabilities at every step
beyond all computation. To us, a fortuitous Cosmos is simply inconceivable.
The alternative is a designed Cosmos.

It is very easy to assume that, because events in Nature are in one sense
accidental, and the operative forces which bring them to pass are themselves
blind and unintelligent (physically considered, all forces are), therefore
they are undirected, or that he who describes these events as the results
of such forces thereby assumes that they are undirected. This is the
assumption of the Boston reviewers, and of Mr. Agassiz, who insists that
the only alternative to the doctrine, that all organized beings were
supernaturally created just as they are, is, that they have arisen
spontaneously through the omnipotence of matter.[III-11]

As to all this, nothing is easier than to bring out in the conclusion what
you introduce in the premises. If you import atheism into your conception
of variation and natural selection, you can readily exhibit it in the
result. If you do not put it in, perhaps there need be none to come out.
While the mechanician is considering a steamboat or locomotive-engine as a
material organism, and contemplating the fuel, water, and steam, the source
of the mechanical forces, and how they operate, he may not have occasion to
mention the engineer. But, the orderly and special results accomplished, the
why the movements are in this or that particular direction, etc., is
inexplicable without him. If Mr. Darwin believes that the events which he
supposes to have occurred and the results we behold were undirected and
undesigned, or if the physicist believes that the natural forces to which
he refers phenomena are uncaused and undirected, no argument is needed to
show that such belief is atheism. But the admission of the phenomena and of
these natural processes and forces does not necessitate any such belief, nor
even render it one whit less improbable than before.

Surely, too, the accidental element may play its part in Nature without
negativing design in the theist's view. He believes that the earth's surface
has been very gradually prepared for man and the existing animal races,
that vegetable matter has through a long series of generations imparted
fertility to the soil in order that it may support its present occupants,
that even beds of coal have been stored up for man's benefit Yet what is
more accidental, and more simply the consequence of physical agencies than
the accumulation of vegetable matter in a peat bog and its transformation
into coal? No scientific person at this day doubts that our solar system is
a progressive development, whether in his conception he begins with molten
masses, or aeriform or nebulous masses, or with a fluid revolving mass of
vast extent, from which the specific existing worlds have been developed
one by one What theist doubts that the actual results of the development in
the inorganic worlds are not merely compatible with design but are in the
truest sense designed re suits? Not Mr. Agassiz, certainly, who adopts a
remarkable illustration of design directly founded on the nebular hypothesis
drawing from the position and times of the revolution of the world, so
originated direct evidence that the physical world has been ordained in
conformity with laws which obtain also among living beings But the reader
of the interesting exposition[III-12] will notice that the designed result
has been brought to pass through what, speaking after the manner of men,
might be called a chapter of accidents.

A natural corollary of this demonstration would seem to be, that a material
connection between a series of created things--such as the development of
one of them from another, or of all from a common stock--is highly
compatible with their intellectual connection, namely, with their being
designed and directed by one mind. Yet upon some ground which is not
explained, and which we are unable to conjecture, Mr. Agassiz concludes to
the contrary in the organic kingdoms, and insists that, because the members
of such a series have an intellectual connection, "they cannot be the result
of a material differentiation of the objects themselves,"[III-13] that is,
they cannot have had a genealogical connection. But is there not as much
intellectual connection between the successive generations of any species
as there is between the several species of a genus, or the several genera
of an order? As the intellectual connection here is realized through the
material connection, why may it not be so in the case of species and genera?
On all sides, therefore, the implication seems to be quite the other way.


Returning to the accidental element, it is evident that the strongest point
against the compatibility of Darwin's hypothesis with design in Nature is
made when natural selection is referred to as picking out those variations
which are improvements from a vast number which are not improvements, but
perhaps the contrary, and therefore useless or purposeless, and born to
perish. But even here the difficulty is not peculiar; for Nature abounds
with analogous instances. Some of our race are useless, or worse, as
regards the improvement of mankind; yet the race may be designed to improve,
and may be actually improving. Or, to avoid the complication with free
agency--the whole animate life of a country depends absolutely upon the
vegetation, the vegetation upon the rain. The moisture is furnished by the
ocean, is raised by the sun's heat from the ocean's surface, and is wafted
inland by the winds. But what multitudes of raindrops fall back into the
ocean--are as much without a final cause as the incipient varieties which
come to nothing! Does it therefore follow that the rains which are bestowed
upon the soil with such rule and average regularity were not designed to
support vegetable and animal life? Consider, likewise, the vast proportion
of seeds and pollen, of ova and young--a thousand or more to one--which
come to nothing, and are therefore purposeless in the same sense, and only
in the same sense, as are Darwin's unimproved and unused slight variations.
The world is full of such cases; and these must answer the argument--for we
cannot, except by thus showing that it proves too much.

Finally, it is worth noticing that, though natural selection is
scientifically explicable, variation is not. Thus far the cause of
variation, or the reason why the offspring is sometimes unlike the parents,
is just as mysterious as the reason why it is generally like the parents.
It is now as inexplicable as any other origination; and, if ever explained,
the explanation will only carry up the sequence of secondary causes one
step farther, and bring us in face of a somewhat different problem, but
which will have the same element of mystery that the problem of variation
has now. Circumstances may preserve or may destroy the variations man may
use or direct them but selection whether artificial or natural no more
originates them than man originates the power which turns a wheel when he
dams a stream and lets the water fall upon it The origination of this power
is a question about efficient cause. The tendency of science in respect to
this obviously is not toward the omnipotence of matter, as some suppose,
but to ward the omnipotence of spirit.

So the real question we come to is as to the way in which we are to
conceive intelligent and efficient cause to be exerted, and upon what
exerted. Are we bound to suppose efficient cause in all cases exerted upon
nothing to evoke something into existence--and this thousands of times
repeated, when a slight change in the details would make all the difference
between successive species? Why may not the new species, or some of them,
be designed diversifications of the old?

There are, perhaps, only three views of efficient cause which may claim to
be both philosophical and theistic:

    1.   The view of its exertion at the beginning of time, endowing matter and
created things with forces which do the work and produce the phenomena.

    2.   This same view, with the theory of insulated interpositions, or
occasional direct action, engrafted upon it--the view that events and
operations in general go on in virtue simply of forces communicated at the
first, but that now and then, and only now and then, the Deity puts his
hand directly to the work.

    3.   The theory of the immediate, orderly, and constant, however infinitely
diversified, action of the intelligent efficient Cause.

It must be allowed that, while the third is preeminently the Christian
view, all three are philosophically compatible with design in Nature. The
second is probably the popular conception. Perhaps most thoughtful people
oscillate from the middle view toward the first or the third--adopting the
first on some occasions, the third on others. Those philosophers who like
and expect to settle all mooted questions will take one or the other
extreme. The Examiner inclines toward, the North American reviewer fully
adopts, the third view, to the logical extent of maintaining that "the
origin of an individual, as well as the origin of a species or a genus, can
be explained only by the direct action of an intelligent creative cause."
To silence his critics, this is the line for Mr. Darwin to take; for it at
once and completely relieves his scientific theory from every theological
objection which his reviewers have urged against it.

At present we suspect that our author prefers the first conception,
though he might contend that his hypothesis is compatible with either of
the three. That it is also compatible with an atheistic or pantheistic
conception of the universe, is an objection which, being shared by all
physical, and some ethical or moral science, cannot specially be urged
against Darwin's system. As he rejects spontaneous generation, and admits of
intervention at the beginning of organic life, and probably in more than one
instance, he is not wholly excluded from adopting the middle view, although
the interventions he would allow are few and far back. Yet one
interposition admits the principle as well as more. Interposition
presupposes particular necessity or reason for it, and raises the question,
when and how often it may have been necessary. It might be the natural
supposition, if we had only one set of species to account for, or if the
successive inhabitants of the earth had no other connections or
resemblances than those which adaptation to similar conditions, which final
causes in the narrower sense, might explain. But if this explanation of
organic Nature requires one to "believe that, at innumerable periods in the
earth's history, certain elemental atoms have been commanded suddenly to
flash into living tissues," and this when the results are seen to be
strictly connected and systematic, we cannot wonder that such interventions
should at length be considered, not as interpositions or interferences, but
rather--to use the reviewer's own language--as "exertions so frequent and
beneficent that we come to regard them as the ordinary action of Him who
laid the foundation of the earth, and without whom not a sparrow falleth to
the ground."[III-14] What does the difference between Mr. Darwin and his
reviewer now amount to? If we say that according to one view the
origination of species is natural, according to the other miraculous, Mr.
Darwin agrees that "what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent mind to render it so-- that is, to effect it continually or at
stated times--as what is supernatural does to effect it for once."[III-15]
He merely inquires into the form of the miracle, may remind us that all
recorded miracles (except the primal creation of matter) were
transformations or actions in and upon natural things, and will ask how
many times and how frequently may the origination of successive species be
repeated before the supernatural merges in the natural.

In short, Darwin maintains that the origination of a species, no less than
that of an individual, is natural; the reviewer, that the natural
origination of an individual, no less than the origination of a species,
requires and presupposes Divine power. A fortiori, then, the origination of
a variety requires and presupposes Divine power. And so between the
scientific hypothesis of the one and the philosophical conception of the
other no contrariety remains. And so, concludes the North American
reviewer, "a proper view of the nature of causation places the vital
doctrine of the being and the providence of a God on ground that can never
be shaken."[III-16] A worthy conclusion, and a sufficient answer to the
denunciations and arguments of the rest of the article, so far as
philosophy and natural theology are concerned. If a writer must needs use
his own favorite dogma as a weapon with which to give coup de grace to a
pernicious theory, he should be careful to seize his edge-tool by the
handle, and not by the blade.

We can barely glance at a subsidiary philosophical objection of the North
American reviewer, which the Examiner also raises, though less explicitly.
Like all geologists, Mr. Darwin draws upon time in the most unlimited
manner. He is not peculiar in this regard. Mr. Agassiz tells us that the
conviction is "now universal, among well-informed naturalists, that this
globe has been in existence for innumerable ages, and that the length of
time elapsed since it first became inhabited cannot be counted in years;"
Pictet, that the imagination refuses to calculate the immense number of
years and of ages during which the faunas of thirty or more epochs have
succeeded one another, and developed their long succession of generations.
Now, the reviewer declares that such indefinite succession of ages is
"virtually infinite," "lacks no characteristic of eternity except its
name," at least, that "the difference between such a conception and that of
the strictly infinite, if any, is not appreciable." But infinity belongs to
metaphysics. Therefore, he concludes, Darwin supports his theory, not by
scientific but by metaphysical evidence; his theory is "essentially and
completely metaphysical in character, resting altogether upon that idea of
'the infinite' which the human mind can neither put aside nor
comprehend."[III-17] And so a theory which will be generally regarded as
much too physical is transferred by a single syllogism to metaphysics.

Well, physical geology must go with it: for, even on the soberest view, it
demands an indefinitely long time antecedent to the introduction of organic
life upon our earth. A fortiori is physical astronomy a branch of
metaphysics, demanding, as it does, still larger "instalments of infinity,"
as the reviewer calls them, both as to time and number. Moreover, far the
greater part of physical inquiries now relate to molecular actions, which,
a distinguished natural philosopher informs us, "we have to regard as the
results of an infinite number of in finitely small material particles,
acting on each other at infinitely small distances"--a triad of
infinities--and so physics becomes the most metaphysical of sciences.
Verily, if this style of reasoning is to prevail--

"Thinking is but an idle waste of thought,

     And naught is everything, and everything is naught."


The leading objection of Mr. Agassiz is likewise of a philosophical
character. It is, that species exist only "as categories of thought"--that,
having no material existence, they can have had no material variation, and
no material community of origin. Here the predication is of species in the
subjective sense, the inference in the objective sense. Reduced to plain
terms, the argument seems to be: Species are ideas; therefore the objects
from which the idea is derived cannot vary or blend, and cannot have had a
genealogical connection.

The common view of species is, that, although they are generalizations, yet
they have a direct objective ground in Nature, which genera, orders, etc.,
have not. According to the succinct definition of Jussieu--and that of
Linnaeus is identical in meaning--a species is the perennial succession of
similar individuals in continued generations. The species is the chain of
which the individuals are the links. The sum of the
genealogically-connected similar individuals constitutes the species, which
thus has an actuality and ground of distinction not shared by genera and
other groups which were not supposed to be genealogically connected. How a
derivative hypothesis would modify this view, in assigning to species only
a temporary fixity, is obvious. Yet, if naturalists adopt that hypothesis,
they will still retain Jussieu's definition, which leaves untouched the
question as to how and when the "perennial successions" were established.
The practical question will only be, How much difference between two sets of
individuals entitles them to rank under distinct species? and that is the
practical question now, on whatever theory. The theoretical question is--as
stated at the beginning of this article--whether these specific lines were
always as distinct as now.

Mr. Agassiz has "lost no opportunity of urging the idea that, while species
have no material existence, they yet exist as categories of thought in the
same way [and only in the same way] as genera, families, orders, classes,"
etc. He

"has taken the ground that all the natural divisions in the animal kingdom
are primarily distinct, founded upon different categories of characters,
and that all exist in the same way, that is, as categories of thought,
embodied in individual living forms. I have attempted to show that branches
in the animal kingdom are founded upon different plans of structure, and
for that very reason have embraced from the beginning representatives
between which there could be no community of origin; that classes are
founded upon different modes of execution of these plans, and therefore
they also embrace representatives which could have no community of origin;
that orders represent the different degrees of complication in the mode of
execution of each class, and therefore embrace representatives which could
not have a community of origin any more than the members of different
classes or branches; that families are founded upon different patterns of
form, and embrace, representatives equally independent in their origin; that
genera are founded upon ultimate peculiarities of structure, embracing
representatives which, from the very nature of their peculiarities, could
have no community of origin; and that, finally, species are based upon
relations--and proportions that exclude, as much as all the preceding
distinctions, the idea of a common descent.

"As the community of characters among the beings belonging to these
different categories arises from the intellectual connection which shows
them to be categories of thought, they cannot be the result of a gradual

    material differentiation of the objects themselves. The argument on which
these views are founded may be summed up in the following few words:
Species, genera, families, etc., exist as thoughts, individuals as
facts."[III-18]

An ingenious dilemma caps the argument:


"It seems to me that there is much confusion of ideas in the general
statement of the variability of species so often repeated lately. If
species do not exist at all, as the supporters of the transmutation theory
maintain, how can they vary? And if individuals alone exist, how can the
differences which may be observed among them prove the variability of
species?"


Now, we imagine that Mr. Darwin need not be dangerously gored by either
horn of this curious dilemma. Although we ourselves cherish old-fashioned
prejudices in favor of the probable permanence, and therefore of a more
stable objective ground of species, yet we agree--and Mr. Darwin will agree
fully with Mr. Agassiz--that species, and he will add varieties, "exist as
categories of thought," that is, as cognizable distinctions--which is all
that we can make of the phrase here, whatever it may mean in the
Aristotelian metaphysics. Admitting that species are only categories of
thought, and not facts or things, how does this prevent the individuals,
which are material things, from having varied in the course of time, so as
to exemplify the present almost innumerable categories of thought, or
embodiments of Divine thought in material forms, or--viewed on the human
side--in forms marked with such orderly and graduated resemblances and
differences as to suggest to our minds the idea of species, genera, orders,
etc., and to our reason the inference of a Divine Original? We have no
clear idea how Mr. Agassiz intends to answer this question, in saying that
branches are founded upon different plans of structure, classes upon
different mode of execution of these plans, orders on different degrees of
complication in the mode of execution, families upon different patterns of
form, genera upon ultimate peculiarities of structure, and species upon
relations and proportions. That is, we do not perceive how these several
"categories of thought" exclude the possibility or the probability that the
individuals which manifest or suggest the thoughts had an ultimate
community of origin.

Moreover, Mr. Darwin might insinuate that the particular philosophy of
classification upon which this whole argument reposes is as purely
hypothetical and as little accepted as is his own doctrine. If both are
pure hypotheses, it is hardly fair or satisfactory to extinguish the one by
the other. If there is no real contradiction between them, nothing is
gained by the attempt.

As to the dilemma propounded, suppose we try it upon that category of
thought which we call chair. This is a genus, comprising a common chair
(Sella vulgaris), arm or easy chair (S. cathedra), the rocking-chair (S.
oscillans)--widely distributed in the United States--and some others, each
of which has sported, as the gardeners say, into many varieties. But now,
as the genus and the species have no material existence, how can they vary?
If only individual chairs exist, how can the differences which may be
observed among them prove the variability of the species? To which we reply
by asking, Which does the question refer to, the category of thought, or
the individual embodiment? If the former, then we would remark that our
categories of thought vary from time to time in the readiest manner. And,
although the Divine thoughts are eternal, yet they are manifested to us in
time and succession, and by their manifestation only can we know them, how
imperfectly! Allowing that what has no material existence can have had no
material connection or variation, we should yet infer that what has
intellectual existence and connection might have intellectual variation;
and, turning to the individuals, which represent the species, we do not see
how all this shows that they may not vary. Observation shows us that they
do. Wherefore, taught by fact that successive individuals do vary, we
safely infer that the idea must have varied, and that this variation of the
individual representatives proves the variability of the species, whether
objectively or subjectively regarded.

Each species or sort of chair, as we have said, has its varieties, and one
species shades off by gradations into another. And--note it well--these
numerous and successively slight variations and gradations, far from
suggesting an accidental origin to chairs and to their forms, are very
proofs of design.

Again, edifice is a generic category of thought. Egyptian, Grecian,
Byzantine, and Gothic buildings are well-marked species, of which each
individual building of the sort is a material embodiment. Now, the question
is, whether these categories or ideas may not have been evolved, one from
another in succession, or from some primal, less specialized, edificial
category. What better evidence for such hypothesis could we have than the
variations and grades which connect these species with each other? We might
extend the parallel, and get some good illustrations of natural selection
from the history of architecture, and the origin of the different styles
under different climates and conditions. Two considerations may qualify or
limit the comparison. One, that houses do not propagate, so as to produce
continuing lines of each sort and variety; but this is of small moment on
Agassiz's view, he holding that genealogical connection is not of the
essence of a species at all. The other, that the formation and development
of the ideas upon which human works proceed are gradual; or, as the same
great naturalist well states it, "while human thought is consecutive,
Divine thought is simultaneous." But we have no right to affirm this of
Divine action.

We must close here. We meant to review some of the more general scientific
objections which we thought not altogether tenable. But, after all, we are
not so anxious just now to know whether the new theory is well founded on
facts, as whether it would be harmless if it were. Besides, we feel quite
unable to answer some of these objections, and it is pleasanter to take up
those which one thinks he can.

Among the unanswerable, perhaps the weightiest of the objections, is that
of the absence, in geological deposits, of vestiges of the intermediate
forms which the theory requires to have existed. Here all that Mr. Darwin
can do is to insist upon the extreme imperfection of the geological record
and the uncertainty of negative evidence. But, withal, he allows the force
of the objection almost as much as his opponents urge it--so much so,
indeed, that two of his English critics turn the concession unfairly upon
him, and charge him with actually basing his hypothesis upon these and
similar difficulties--as if he held it because of the difficulties, and not
in spite of them; a handsome return for his candor!

As to this imperfection of the geological record, perhaps we should get a
fair and intelligible illustration of it by imagining the existing animals
and plants of New England, with all their remains and products since the
arrival of the Mayflower, to be annihilated; and that, in the coming time,
the geologists of a new colony, dropped by the New Zealand fleet on its way
to explore the ruins of London, undertake, after fifty years of
examination, to reconstruct in a catalogue the flora and fauna of our day,
that is, from the close of the glacial period to the present time. With all
the advantages of a surface exploration, what a beggarly account it would
be! How many of the land animals and plants which are enumerated in the
Massachusetts official reports would it be likely to contain?

Another unanswerable question asked by the Boston reviewers is, Why, when
structure and instinct or habit vary-- as they must have varied, on Darwin's
hypothesis--they vary together and harmoniously, instead of vaguely? We
cannot tell, because we cannot tell why either varies at all. Yet, as they
both do vary in successive generations--as is seen under domestication--and
are correlated, we can only adduce the fact. Darwin may be precluded from
our answer, but we may say that they vary together because designed to do
so. A reviewer says that the chance of their varying together is
inconceivably small; yet, if they do not, the variant individuals must all
perish. Then it is well that it is not left to chance. To refer to a
parallel case: before we were born, nourishment and the equivalent to
respiration took place in a certain way. But the moment we were ushered
into this breathing world, our actions promptly conformed, both as to
respiration and nourishment, to the before unused structure and to the new
surroundings.

"Now," says the Examiner, "suppose, for instance, the gills of an aquatic
animal converted into lungs, while instinct still compelled a continuance
under water, would not drowning ensue?" No doubt. But--simply contemplating
the facts, instead of theorizing--we notice that young frogs do not keep
their heads under water after ceasing to be tadpoles. The instinct promptly
changes with the structure, without supernatural interposition--just as
Darwin would have it, if the development of a variety or incipient species,
though rare, were as natural as a metamorphosis.

"Or if a quadruped, not yet furnished with wings, were suddenly inspired
with the instinct of a bird, and precipitated itself from a cliff, would
not the descent be hazardously rapid?" Doubtless the animal would be no
better supported than the objection. But Darwin makes very little indeed of
voluntary efforts as a cause of change, and even poor Lamarck need not be
caricatured. He never supposed that an elephant would take such a notion
into his wise head, or that a squirrel would begin with other than short and
easy leaps; yet might not the length of the leap be increased by practice?

The North American reviewer's position, that the higher brute animals have
comparatively little instinct and no intelligence, is a heavy blow and great
discouragement to dogs, horses, elephants, and monkeys. Thus stripped of
their all, and left to shift for themselves as they may in this hard world,
their pursuit and seeming attainment of knowledge under such peculiar
difficulties are interesting to contemplate. However, we are not so sure as
is the critic that instinct regularly increases downward and decreases
upward in the scale of being. Now that the case of the bee is reduced to
moderate proportions,[III-19] we know of nothing in instinct surpassing that
of an animal so high as a bird, the talegal, the male of which plumes
himself upon making a hot-bed in which to batch his partner's eggs--which
he tends and regulates the beat of about as carefully and skillfully as the
unplumed biped does an eccaleobion.[III-20]

As to the real intelligence of the higher brutes, it has been ably defended
by a far more competent observer, Mr. Agassiz, to whose conclusions we
yield a general assent, although we cannot quite place the best of dogs "in
that respect upon a level with a considerable proportion of poor humanity,"
nor indulge the hope, or indeed the desire, of a renewed acquaintance with
the whole animal kingdom in a future life.

The assertion that acquired habitudes or instincts, and acquired
structures, are not heritable, any breeder or good observer can refute.

   That "the human mind has become what it is out of a developed
instinct," is a statement which Mr. Darwin nowhere makes, and, we presume,
would not accept. That he would have us believe that individual animals
acquire their instincts gradually,[III-21] is a statement which must have
been penned in inadvertence both of the very definition of instinct, and of
everything we know of in Mr. Darwin's book.

It has been attempted to destroy the very foundation of Darwin's hypothesis
by denying that there are any wild varieties, to speak of, for natural
selection to operate upon. We cannot gravely sit down to prove that wild
varieties abound. We should think it just as necessary to prove that snow
falls in winter. That variation among plants cannot be largely due to
hybridism, and that their variation in Nature is not essentially different
from much that occurs in domestication, and, in the long-run, probably
hardly less in amount, we could show if our space permitted.

As to the sterility of hybrids, that can no longer be insisted upon as
absolutely true, nor be practically used as a test between species and
varieties, unless we allow that hares and rabbits are of one species. That
such sterility, whether total or partial, subserves a purpose in keeping
species apart, and was so designed, we do not doubt. But the critics fail
to perceive that this sterility proves nothing whatever against the
derivative origin of the actual species; for it may as well have been
intended to keep separate those forms which have reached a certain amount
of divergence, as those which were always thus distinct.

The argument for the permanence of species, drawn from the identity with
those now living of cats, birds, and other animals preserved in Egyptian
catacombs, was good enough as used by Cuvier against St.-Hilaire, that is,
against the supposition that time brings about a gradual alteration of
whole species; but it goes for little against Darwin, unless it be proved
that species never vary, or that the perpetuation of a variety necessitates
the extinction of the parent breed. For Darwin clearly maintains--what the
facts warrant--that the mass of a species remains fixed so long as it
exists at all, though it may set off a variety now and then. The variety may
finally supersede the parent form, or it may coexist with it; yet it does
not in the least hinder the unvaried stock from continuing true to the
breed, unless it crosses with it. The common law of inheritance may be
expected to keep both the original and the variety mainly true as long as
they last, and none the less so because they have given rise to occasional
varieties. The tailless Manx cats, like the curtailed fox in the fable, have
not induced the normal breeds to dispense with their tails, nor have the
Dorkings (apparently known to Pliny) affected the permanence of the common
sort of fowl.

As to the objection that the lower forms of life ought, on Darwin's theory,
to have been long ago improved out of existence, and replaced by higher
forms, the objectors forget what a vacuum that would leave below, and what
a vast field there is to which a simple organization is best adapted, and
where an advance would be no improvement, but the contrary. To accumulate
the greatest amount of being upon a given space, and to provide as much
enjoyment of life as can be under the conditions, is what Nature seems to
aim at; and this is effected by diversification.

Finally, we advise nobody to accept Darwin's or any other derivative theory
as true. The time has not come for that, and perhaps never will. We also
advise against a similar credulity on the other side, in a blind faith that
species--that the manifold sorts and forms of existing animals and
vegetables--"have no secondary cause." The contrary is already not
unlikely, and we suppose will hereafter become more and more probable. But
we are confident that, if a derivative hypothesis ever is established, it
will be so on a solid theistic ground.

Meanwhile an inevitable and legitimate hypothesis is on trial--an
hypothesis thus far not untenable--a trial just now very useful to science,
and, we conclude, not harmful to religion, unless injudicious assailants
temporarily make it so.

One good effect is already manifest; its enabling the advocates of the
hypothesis of a multiplicity of human species to perceive the double
insecurity of their ground. When the races of men are admitted to be of one
species, the corollary, that they are of one origin, may be expected to
follow. Those who allow them to be of one species must admit an actual
diversification into strongly-marked and persistent varieties, and so admit
the basis of fact upon which the Darwinian hypothesis is built; while those,
on the other hand, who recognize several or numerous human species, will
hardly be able to maintain that such species were primordial and
supernatural in the ordinary sense of the word.

The English mind is prone to positivism and kindred forms of materialistic
philosophy, and we must expect the derivative theory to be taken up in that
interest. We have no predilection for that school, but the contrary. If we
had, we might have looked complacently upon a line of criticism which would
indirectly, but effectively, play into the hands of positivists and
materialistic atheists generally. The wiser and stronger ground to take is,
that the derivative hypothesis leaves the argument for design, and
therefore for a designer, as valid as it ever was; that to do any work by an
instrument must require, and therefore presuppose, the exertion rather of
more than of less power than to do it directly; that whoever would be a
consistent theist should believe that Design in the natural world is
coextensive with Providence, and hold as firmly to the one as he does to
the other, in spite of the wholly similar and apparently insuperable
difficulties which the mind encounters whenever it endeavors to develop the
idea into a system, either in the material and organic, or in the moral
world. It is enough, in the way of obviating objections, to show that the
philosophical difficulties of the one are the same, and only the same, as
of the other. IV

SPECIES AS TO VARIATION,

GEOGRAPHICAL

DISTRIBUTION,

AND SUCCESSION

(American Journal of Science and Arts, May, 1863)



Etude sur l'Espece, a l'Occasion d'une Revision de la Famille des
Cupuliferes, par M. ALPHONSE DE CANDOLLE.-- This is the title of a paper by
M. Alph. De Candolle, growing out of his study of the oaks. It was
published in the November number of the Bibliotheque Universelle, and
separately issued as a pamphlet. A less inspiring task could hardly be
assigned to a botanist than the systematic elaboration of the genus Quercus
and its allies. The vast materials assembled under De Candolle's hands,
while disheartening for their bulk, offered small hope of novelty. The
subject was both extremely trite and extremely difficult. Happily it
occurred to De Candolle that an interest might be imparted to an onerous
undertaking, and a work of necessity be turned to good account for science,
by studying the oaks in view of the question of species.     What this term
species means, or should mean, in natural history, what the limits of
species, inter se or chronologically, or in geographical distribution, their
modifications, actual or probable, their origin, and their destiny--these
are questions which surge up from time to time; and now and then in the
progress of science they come to assume a new and hopeful interest. Botany
and zoology, geology, and what our author, feeling the want of a new term
proposes to name epiontology, [IV-1] all lead up to and converge into this
class of questions, while recent theories shape and point the discussion So
we look with eager interest to see what light the study of oaks by a very
careful experienced and conservative botanist, particularly conversant with
the geographical relations of plants may throw upon the subject.

The course of investigation in this instance does not differ from that
ordinarily pursued by working botanists nor, in deed are the theoretical
conclusions other than those to which a similar study of other orders might
not have equally led. The oaks afford a very good occasion for the
discussion of questions which press upon our attention, and perhaps they
offer peculiarly good materials on account of the number of fossil species.

Preconceived notions about species being laid aside, the specimens in hand
were distributed, according to their obvious resemblances, into groups of
apparently identical or nearly identical forms, which were severally
examined and compared. Where specimens were few, as from countries little
explored, the work was easy, but the conclusions, as will be seen, of small
value. The fewer the materials, the smaller the likelihood of forms
intermediate between any two, and--what does not appear being treated upon
the old law-maxim as non-existent--species are readily enough defined.
Where, however, specimens abound, as in the case of the oaks of Europe, of
the Orient, and of the United States, of which the specimens amounted to
hundreds, collected at different ages, in varied localities, by botanists
of all sorts of views and predilections--here alone were data fit to draw
useful conclusions from. Here, as De Candolle remarks, he had every
advantage, being furnished with materials more complete than any one person
could have procured from his own herborizations, more varied than if he had
observed a hundred times over the same forms in the same district, and more
impartial than if they had all been amassed by one person with his own
ideas or predispositions. So that vast herbaria, into which contributions
from every source have flowed for years, furnish the best possible data--at
least are far better than any practicable amount of personal
herborization--or the comparative study of related forms occurring over
wide tracts of territory. But as the materials increase, so do the
difficulties. Forms, which appeared totally distinct, approach or blend
through intermediate gradations; characters, stable in a limited number of
instances or in a limited district, prove unstable occasionally, or when
observed over a wider area; and the practical question is forced upon the
investigator, What here is probably fixed and specific, and what is
variant, pertaining to individual, variety, or race?

In the examination of these rich materials, certain characters were found
to vary upon the same branch, or upon the same tree, sometimes according to
age or development, sometimes irrespective of such relations or of any
assignable reasons. Such characters, of course, are not specific, although
many of them are such as would have been expected to be constant in the
same species, and are such as generally enter into specific definitions.
Variations of this sort, De Candolle, with his usual painstaking, classifies
and tabulates, and even expresses numerically their frequency in certain
species. The results are brought well to view in a systematic enumeration:

    1.   Of characters which frequently vary upon the same branch: over a dozen
such are mentioned.

    2.   Of those which sometimes vary upon the same branch: a smaller number of
these are mentioned.

    3.   Those so rare that they might be called monstrosities.
Then he enumerates characters, ten in number, which he has never found to
vary on the same branch, and which, therefore, may better claim to be
employed as specific. But, as among them he includes the duration of the
leaves, the size of the cupule, and the form and size of its scales, which
are by no means quite uniform in different trees of the same species, even
these characters must be taken with allowance. In fact, having first
brought together, as groups of the lowest order, those forms which varied
upon the same stock, he next had to combine similarly various forms which,
though not found associated upon the same branch, were thoroughly blended
by intermediate degrees:


"The lower groups (varieties or races) being thus constituted, I have given
the rank of species to the groups next above these, which differ in other
respects, i.e., either in characters which were not found united upon
certain individuals, or in those which do not show transitions from one
individual to another. For the oaks of regions sufficiently known, the
species thus formed rest upon satisfactory bases, of which the proof can be
furnished. It is quite otherwise with those which are represented in our
herbaria by single or few specimens. These are provisional species--species
which may hereafter fall to the rank of simple varieties. I have not been
inclined to prejudge such questions; indeed, in this regard, I am not
disposed to follow those authors whose tendency is, as they say, to reunite
species. I never reunite them without proof in each particular case; while
the botanists to whom I refer do so on the ground of analogous variations
or transitions occurring in the same genus or in the same family. For
example resting on the fact that Quercus hex, Q. coccifera, Q. acutifolia,
etc., have the leaves sometimes entire and sometimes toothed upon the same
branch, or present transitions from one tree to another, I might readily
have united my Q. Tlapuxahuensis to Q. Sartorii of Liebmann, since these
two differ only in their entire or their toothed leaves. From the fact that
the length of the peduncle varies in Q. Robur and many other oaks, I might
have combined Q. Seemannii Liebm. with Q. salicifolia Nee. I have not
admitted these inductions, but have demanded visible proof in each
particular case. Many species are thus left as provisional; but, in
proceeding thus, the progress of the science will be more regular, and the
synonymy less dependent upon the caprice or the theoretical opinions of
each author."


This is safe and to a certain degree judicious, no doubt, as respects
published species. Once admitted, they may stand until they are put down by
evidence, direct or circumstantial. Doubtless a species may rightfully be
condemned on good circumstantial evidence. But what course does De Candolle
pursue in the case--of every-day occurrence to most working botanists,
having to elaborate collections from countries not so well explored as
Europe--when the forms in question, or one of the two, are as yet unnamed?
Does he introduce as a new species every form which he cannot connect by
ocular proof with a near relative, from which it differs only in
particulars which he sees are inconstant in better known species of the
same group? We suppose not. But, if he does, little improvement for the
future upon the state of things revealed in the following quotation can be
expected:

"In the actual state of our knowledge, after having seen nearly all the
original specimens, and in some species as many as two hundred
representatives from different localities, I estimate that, out of the
three hundred species of Cupuliferae which will be enumerated in the
Prodromus, two-thirds at least are provisional species. In general, when we
consider what a multitude of species were described from a single specimen,
or from the forms of a single locality, of a single country, or are badly
described, it is difficult to believe that above one-third of the actual
species in botanical works will remain unchanged."


Such being the results of the want of adequate knowledge, how is it likely
to be when our knowledge is largely increased? The judgment of so practised
a botanist as De Candolle is important in this regard, and it accords with
that of other botanists of equal experience.

"They are mistaken," he pointedly asserts, "who repeat that the greater
part of our species are clearly limited, and that the doubtful species are
in a feeble minority. This seemed to be true, so long as a genus was
imperfectly known, and its species were founded upon few specimens, that is
to say, were provisional. Just as we come to know them better, intermediate
forms flow in, and doubts as to specific limits augment."

De Candolle insists, indeed, in this connection, that the higher the rank
of the groups the more definite their limitation, or, in other terms, the
fewer the ambiguous or doubtful forms, that genera are more strictly
limited than species tribes than genera, orders than tribes, etc. We are
not convinced of this Often where it has appeared to be so, advancing
discovery has brought intermediate forms to light, perplexing to the
systematist. "They are mistaken, we think more than one systematic botanist
will say, "who repeat that the greater part of our natural orders and
tribes are absolutely limited," however we may agree that we will limit
them. Provisional genera we suppose are proportionally hardly less common
than provisional species; and hundreds of genera are kept up on
considerations of general propriety or general convenience, although well
known to shade off into adjacent ones by complete gradations. Somewhat of
this greater fixity of higher groups, therefore, is rather apparent than
real. On the other hand, that varieties should be less definite than
species, follows from the very terms employed. They are ranked as
varieties, rather than species, just because of their less definiteness.

Singular as it may appear, we have heard it denied that spontaneous
varieties occur. De Candolle makes the important announcement that, in the
oak genus, the best known species are just those which present the greatest
number of spontaneous varieties and sub-varieties. The maximum is found in
Q. Robur, with twenty-eight varieties, all spontaneous. Of Q. Lusitanica
eleven varieties are enumerated, of Q. Calliprinos ten, of Q. coccifera
eight, * etc. And he significantly adds that "these very species which offer
such numerous modifications are themselves ordinarily surrounded by other
forms, provisionally called species, because of the absence of known
transitions or variations, but to which some of these will probably have to
be joined hereafter." The inference is natural, if not inevitable, that the
difference between such species and such varieties is only one of degree,
either as to amount of divergence, or of hereditary fixity, or as to the
frequency or rarity at the present time of intermediate forms.

This brings us to the second section of De Candolle's article, in which he
passes on, from the observation of the present forms and affinities of
cupuliferous plants, to the consideration of their probable history and
origin. Suffice it to say, that he frankly accepts the inferences derived
from the whole course of observation, and contemplates a probable
historical connection between congeneric species. He accepts and, by
various considerations drawn from the geographical distribution of European
Cupuliferae, fortifies the conclusion--long ago arrived at by Edward
Forbes--that the present species, and even some of their varieties, date
back to about the close of the Tertiary epoch, since which time they have
been subject to frequent and great changes of habitation or limitation, but
without appreciable change of specific form or character; that is, without
profounder changes than those within which a species at the present time is
known to vary. Moreover, he is careful to state that he is far from
concluding that the time of the appearance of a species in Europe at all
indicates the time of its origin. Looking back still further into the
Tertiary epoch, of which the vegetable remains indicate many analogous, but
few, if any, identical forms, he concludes, with Heer and others, that
specific changes of form, as well as changes of station, are to be
presumed; and, finally, that "the theory of a succession of forms through
the deviation of anterior forms is the most natural hypothesis, and the
most accordant with the known facts in palaeontology, geographical botany
and zoology, of anatomical structure and classification: but direct proof
of it is wanting, and moreover, if true, it must have taken place very
slowly; so slowly, indeed, that its effects are discernible only after a
lapse of time far longer than our historic epoch."
In contemplating the present state of the species of Cupuliferae in Europe,
De Candolle comes to the conclusion that, while the beech is increasing,
and extending its limits southward and westward (at the expense of
Coniferae and birches), the common oak, to some extent, and the Turkey oak
decidedly, are diminishing and retreating, and this wholly irrespective of
man's agency. This is inferred of the Turkey oak from the great gaps found
in its present geographical area, which are otherwise inexplicable, and
which he regards as plain indications of a partial extinction. Community of
descent of all the individuals of species is of course implied in these and
all similar reasonings.

An obvious result of such partial extinction is clearly enough brought to
view The European oaks (like the American species) greatly tend to vary
that is they manifest an active disposition to produce new forms Every form
tends to become hereditary and so to pass from the state of mere variation
to that of race and of these competing incipient races some only will
survive. Quercus Robur offers a familiar illustration of the manner in
which one form may in the course of time become separated into two or more
distinct ones.

To Linnaeus this common oak of Europe was all of one species. But of late
years the greater number of European botanists have regarded it as
including three species, Q. pedunculata, Q. sessiliflora, and Q. pubescens.
De Candolle looks with satisfaction to the independent conclusion which he
reached from a long and patient study of the forms (and which Webb, Gay,
Bentham, and others, had equally reached), that the view of Linnaeus was
correct, inasmuch as it goes to show that the idea and the practical
application of the term species have remained unchanged during the century
which has elapsed since the publication of the "Species Plantarum." But,
the idea remaining unchanged, the facts might appear under a different
aspect, and the conclusion be different, under a slight and very supposable
change of circumstances. Of the twenty-eight spontaneous varieties of Q.
Robur, which De Candolle recognizes, all but six, he remarks, fall
naturally under the three sub-species, pedunculata, sessiliflora, and
pubescens, and are therefore forms grouped around these as centres; and,
moreover, the few connecting forms are by no means the most common. Were
these to die out, it is clear that the three forms which have already been
so frequently taken for species would be what the group of four or five
provisionally admitted species which closely surround Q. Robur now are. The
best example of such a case, as having in all probability occurred through
geographical segregation and partial extinction, is that of the cedar, thus
separated into the Deodar, the Lebanon, and the Atlantic cedars--a case
admirably worked out by Dr. Hooker two or three years ago. [IV-2]
A special advantage of the Cupuliferae for determining the probable
antiquity of existing species in Europe, De Candolle finds in the size and
character of their fruits. However it may be with other plants (and he
comes to the conclusion generally that marine currents and all other means
of distant transport have played only a very small part in the actual
dispersion of species), the transport of acorns and chestnuts by natural
causes across an arm of the sea in a condition to germinate, and much more
the spontaneous establishment of a forest of oaks or chestnuts in this way,
De Candolle conceives to be fairly impossible in itself, and contrary to
all experience. From such considerations, i.e., from the actual dispersion
of the existing species (with occasional aid from post-tertiary deposits),
it is thought to be shown that the principal Cupuliferae of the Old World
attained their actual extension before the present separation of Sicily,
Sardinia and Corsica, and of Britain, from the European Continent.

This view once adopted, and this course once entered upon, has to be
pursued farther. Quercus Robur of Europe with its bevy of admitted
derivatives, and its attending species only provisionally admitted to that
rank, is very closely related to certain species of Eastern Asia, and of
Oregon and California--so closely that "a view of the specimens by no means
forbids the idea that they have all originated from Q. Robur, or have
originated, with the latter, from one or more preceding forms so like the
present ones that a naturalist could hardly know whether to call them
species or varieties." Moreover, there are fossil leaves from diluvian
deposits in Italy, figured by Gaudin, which are hardly distinguishable from
those of Q. Robur on the one hand, and from those of Q. Douglasii, etc., of
California, on the other. No such leaves are found in any tertiary deposit
in Europe; but such are found of that age, it appears, in Northwest
America, where their remote descendants still flourish. So that the probable
genealogy of Q. Robur, traceable in Europe up to the commencement of the
present epoch, looks eastward and far into the past on far-distant shores.

Quercus Ilex, the evergreen oak of Southern Europe and Northern Africa,
reveals a similar archaeology; but its presence in Algeria leads De
Candolle to regard it as a much more ancient denizen of Europe than Q.
Robur; and a Tertiary oak, Q. ilicoides, from a very old Miocene bed in
Switzerland, is thought to be one of its ancestral forms. This high
antiquity once established, it follows almost of course that the very
nearly-related species in Central Asia, in Japan, in California, and even
our own live-oak with its Mexican relatives, may probably enough be
regarded as early offshoots from the same stock with Q. hex.

In brief--not to continue these abstracts and remarks, and without
reference to Darwin's particular theory (which De Candolle at the close
very fairly considers)--if existing species, or many of them, are as
ancient as they are now generally thought to be, and were subject to the
physical and geographical changes (among them the coming and the going of
the glacial epoch) which this antiquity implies; if in former times they
were as liable to variation as they now are; and if the individuals of the
same species may claim a common local origin, then we cannot wonder that
"the theory of a succession of forms by deviations of anterior forms"
should be regarded as "the most natural hypothesis," nor at the general
advance made toward its acceptance.

The question being, not, how plants and animals originated, but, how came
the existing animals and plants to be just where they are and what they
are, it is plain that naturalists interested in such inquiries are mostly
looking for the answer in one direction. The general drift of opinion, or
at least of expectation, is exemplified by this essay of De Candolle; and
the set and force of the current are seen by noticing how it carries along
naturalists of widely different views and prepossessions--some faster and
farther than others--but all in one way. The tendency is, we may say, to
extend the law of continuity, or something analogous to it, from inorganic
to organic Nature, and in the latter to connect the present with the past
in some sort of material connection. The generalization may indeed be
expressed so as not to assert that the connection is genetic, as in Mr.
Wallace's formula: "Every species has come into existence coincident both
in time and space with preexisting closely-allied species." Edward Forbes,
who may be called the originator of this whole line of inquiry, long ago
expressed a similar view. But the only material sequence we know, or can
clearly conceive, in plants and animals, is that from parent to progeny;
and, as De Candolle implies, the origin of species and that of races can
hardly be much unlike, nor governed by other than the same laws, whatever
these may be.

The progress of opinion upon this subject in one generation is not badly
represented by that of De Candolle himself, who is by no means prone to
adopt new views without much consideration. In an elementary treatise
published in the year 1835, he adopted and, if we rightly remember,
vigorously maintained, Schouw's idea of the double or multiple origin of
species, at least of some species--a view which has been carried out to its
ultimate development only perhaps by Agassiz, in the denial of any necessary
genetic connection among the individuals of the same species, or of any
original localization more restricted than the area now occupied by the
species. But in i855, in his "Geographic Botanique," the multiple
hypothesis, although in principle not abandoned, loses its point, in view
of the probable high antiquity of existing species. The actual vegetation
of the world being now regarded as a continuation, through numerous
geological, geographical, and more recently historical changes, of anterior
vegetations, the actual distribution of plants is seen to be a consequence
of preceding conditions; and geological considerations, and these alone,
may be expected to explain all the facts--many of them so curious and
extraordinary--of the actual geographical distribution of the species. In
the present essay, not only the distribution but the origin of congeneric
species is regarded as something derivative; whether derived by slow and
very gradual changes in the course of ages, according to Darwin, or by a
sudden, inexplicable change of their tertiary ancestors, as conceived by
Heer, De Candolle hazards no opinion. It may, however, be inferred that he
looks upon "natural selection" as a real, but insufficient cause; while
some curious remarks upon the number of monstrosities annually produced,
and the possibility of their enduring, may be regarded as favorable to
Heer's view.

As an index to the progress of opinion in the direction referred to, it
will be interesting to compare Sir Charles Lyell's well-known chapters of
twenty or thirty years ago, in which the permanence of species was ably
maintained, with his treatment of the same subject in a work just issued in
England, which, however, has not yet reached us.

A belief of the derivation of species may be maintained along with a
conviction of great persistence of specific characters. This is the idea of
the excellent Swiss vegetable palaeontologist, Heer, who imagines a sudden
change of specific type at certain periods, and perhaps is that of Pictet.
Falconer adheres to somewhat similar views in his elaborate paper on
elephants, living and fossil, in the Natural History Review for January
last. Noting that "there is clear evidence of the true mammoth having
existed in America long after the period of the northern drift, when the
surface of the country had settled down into its present form, and also in
Europe so late as to have been a contemporary of the Irish elk, and on the
other hand that it existed in England so far back as before the deposition
of the bowlder clay; also that four well-defined species of fossil elephant
are known to have existed in Europe; that "a vast number of the remains of
three of these species have been exhumed over a large area in Europe; and,
even in the geological sense, an enormous interval of time has elapsed
between the formation of the most ancient and the most recent of these
deposits, quite sufficient to test the persistence of specific characters
in an elephant," he presents the question, "Do, then, the successive
elephants occurring in these strata show any signs of a passage from the
older form into the newer?"

To which the reply is: "If there is one fact which is impressed on the
conviction of the observer with more force than any other, it is the
persistence and uniformity of the characters of the molar teeth in the
earliest known mammoth and his most modern successor . . . Assuming the
observation to be correct, what strong proof does it not afford of the
persistence and constancy, throughout vast intervals of time, of the
distinctive characters of those organs which arc most concerned in the
existence and habits of the species? If we cast a glance back on the long
vista of physical changes which our planet has undergone since the Neozoic
epoch, we can nowhere detect signs of a revolution more sudden and
pronounced, or more important in its results, than the intercalation and
sudden disappearance of the glacial period. Yet the 'dicyclotherian'
mammoth lived before it, and passed through the ordeal of all the hard
extremities it involved, bearing his organs of locomotion and digestion all
but unchanged. Taking the group of four European fossil species above
enumerated, do they show any signs in the successive deposits of a
transition from the one form into the other? Here again the result of my
observation, in so far as it has extended over the European area, is, that
the specific characters of the molars are constant in each, within a
moderate range of variation, and that we nowhere meet with intermediate
forms." . . .

Dr. Falconer continues (page 80):


"The inferences which I draw from these facts are not opposed to one of the
leading propositions of Darwin's theory. With him, I have no faith in the
opinion that the mammoth and other extinct elephants made their appearance
suddenly, after the type in which their fossil remains are presented to us.
The most rational view seems to be, that they are in some shape the
modified descendants of earlier progenitors. But if the asserted facts be
correct, they seem clearly to indicate that the older elephants of Europe,
such as E. meridionalis and E. antiguus, were not the stocks from which the
later species, E. primigenius and E. Africanus sprung, and that we must
look elsewhere for their origin. The nearest affinity, and that a very
close one, of the European E. meridionalis is with the Miocene E.
planifrons of India; and of E. primigenius, with the existing India
species.

"Another reflection is equally strong in my mind--that the means which have
been adduced to explain the origin of the species by 'natural selection,'
or a process of variation from external influences, are inadequate to
account for the phenomena. The law of phyllotaxis, which governs the
evolution of leaves around the axis of a plant, is as nearly constant in
its manifestation as any of the physical laws connected with the material
world. Each instance, however different from another, can be shown to be a
term of some series of continued fractions. When this is coupled with the
geometrical law governing the evolution of form, so manifest in some
departments of the animal kingdom, e. g., the spiral shells of the
Mollusca, it is difficult to believe that there is not, in Nature, a
deeper-seated and innate principle, to the operation of which natural
selection is merely an adjunct. The whole range of the Mammalia, fossil and
recent, cannot furnish a species which has had a wider geographical
distribution, and passed through a longer term of time, and through more
extreme changes of climatal conditions, than the mammoth. If species are so
unstable, and so susceptible of mutation through such influences, why does
that extinct form stand out so signally a monument of stability? By his
admirable researches and earnest writings, Darwin has, beyond all his
contemporaries, given an impulse to the philosophical investigation of the
most backward and obscure branch of the biological sciences of his day; he
has laid the foundations of a great edifice; but he need not be surprised
if, in the progress of erection, the superstructure is altered by his
successors, like the Duomo of Milan from the Roman to a different style of
architecture."


Entertaining ourselves the opinion that something more than natural
selection is requisite to account for the orderly production and succession
of species, we offer two incidental remarks upon the above extract.

    1. We find in it--in the phrase "natural selection, or a process of
variation from external influences"--an example of the very common
confusion of two distinct things, viz., variation and natural selection.
The former has never yet been shown to have its cause in "external
influences," nor to occur at random. As we have elsewhere insisted, if not
inexplicable, it has never been explained; all we can yet say is, that
plants and animals are prone to vary, and that some conditions favor
variation. Perhaps in this Dr. Falconer may yet find what he seeks: for "it
is difficult to believe that there is not in nature a deeper-seated and
innate principle, to the operation of which natural selection is merely an
adjunct." The latter, which is the ensemble of the external influences,
including the competition of the individuals them selves, picks out certain
variations as they arise, but in no proper sense can be said to originate
them

    2. Although we are not quite sure how Dr Falconer in tends to apply the law
of phyllotaxis to illustrate his idea, we fancy that a pertinent
illustration may be drawn from it in this way. There are two species of
phyllotaxis, perfectly distinct, and we suppose, not mathematically
reducible the one to the other, viz.: (1.) That of alternate leaves, with
its vane ties and (2.) That of verticillate leaves, of which opposite leaves
present the simplest case That although generally constant a change from one
variety of alternate phyllotaxis to an other should occur on the same axis,
or on successive axes, is not surprising, the different sorts being terms
of a regular series--although indeed we have not the least idea as to how
the change from the one to the other comes to pass But it is interesting
and in this connection perhaps instructive, to remark that while some
dicotyledonous plants hold to the verticillate, i.e., opposite-leaved
phyllotaxis throughout, a larger number--through the operation of some deep
seated and innate principle which we cannot fathom--change abruptly into
the other species at the second or third node, and change back again in the
flower, or else effect a synthesis of the two species in a manner which is
puzzling to understand. Here is a change from one fixed law to another, as
unaccountable, if not as great, as from one specific form to another.

An elaborate paper on the vegetation of the Tertiary period in the
southeast of France, by Count Gaston de Saporta, published in the Annales
des Sciences Naturelles in 1862, vol. xvi., pp. 309-344--which we have not
space to analyze--is worthy of attention from the general inquirer, on
account of its analysis of the Tertiary flora into its separate types,
Cretaceous, Austral, Tropical, and Boreal, each of which has its separate
and different history--and for the announcement that "the hiatus, which, in
the idea of most geologists, intervened between the close of the Cretaceous
and the beginning of the Tertiary, appears to have had no existence, so far
as concerns the vegetation; that in general it was not by means of a total
overthrow, followed by a complete new emission of species, that the flora
has been renewed at each successive period; and that while the plants of
Southern Europe inherited from the Cretaceous period more or less rapidly
disappeared, as also the austral forms, and later the tropical types (except
the laurel, the myrtle, and the Chamaerops humilis), the boreal types,
coming later, survived all the others, and now compose, either in Europe,
or in the north of Asia, or in North America, the basis of the actual
arborescent vegetation. Especially "a very considerable number of forms
nearly identical with tertiary forms now exist in America, where they have
found, more easily than in our soil--less vast and less extended
southward--refuge from ulterior revolutions," The extinction of species is
attributed to two kinds of causes; the one material or physical, whether
slow or rapid; the other inherent in the nature of organic beings,
incessant, but slow, in a manner latent, but somehow assigning to the
species, as to the individuals, a limited period of existence, and, in some
equally mysterious but wholly natural way, connected with the development
of organic types: "By type meaning a collection of vegetable forms
constructed upon the same plan of organization, of which they reproduce the
essential lineaments with certain secondary modifications, and which appear
to run back to a common point of departure."

In this community of types, no less than in the community of certain
existing species, Saporta recognizes a prolonged material union between
North America and Europe in former times. Most naturalists and geologists
reason in the same way--some more cautiously than others--yet perhaps most
of them seem not to perceive how far such inferences imply the doctrine of
the common origin of related species.

For obvious reasons such doctrines are likely to find more favor with
botanists than with zoologists. But with both the advance in this direction
is seen to have been rapid and great; yet to us not unexpected. We note,
also, an evident disposition, notwithstanding some endeavors to the
contrary, to allow derivative hypotheses to stand or fall upon their own
merits--to have indeed upon philosophical grounds certain presumptions in
their favor--and to be, perhaps, quite as capable of being turned to good
account as to bad account in natural theology.[IV-3]

Among the leading naturalists, indeed, such views--taken in the widest
sense--have one and, so far as we are now aware, only one thoroughgoing and
thoroughly consistent opponent, viz., Mr. Agassiz.

Most naturalists take into their very conception of a species, explicitly
or by implication, the notion of a material connection resulting from the
descent of the individuals composing it from a common stock, of local
origin. Agassiz wholly eliminates community of descent from his idea of
species, and even conceives a species to have been as numerous in
individuals and as wide-spread over space, or as segregated in
discontinuous spaces, from the first as at the later period.

The station which it inhabits, therefore, is with other naturalists in no
wise essential to the species, and may not have been the region of its
origin. In Agassiz's view the habitat is supposed to mark the origin, and
to be a part of the character of the species. The habitat is not merely the
place where it is, but a part of what it is.

Most naturalists recognize varieties of species; and many, like De
Candolle, have come to conclude that varieties of the highest grade, or
races, so far partake of the characteristics of species, and are so far
governed by the same laws, that it is often very difficult to draw a clear
and certain distinction between the two. Agassiz will not allow that
varieties or races exist in Nature, apart from man's agency.

Most naturalists believe that the origin of species is supernatural, their
dispersion or particular geographical area, natural, and their extinction,
when they disappear, also the result of physical causes. In the view of
Agassiz, if rightly understood, all three are equally independent of
physical cause and effect, are equally supernatural.

In comparing preceding periods with the present and with each other, most
naturalists and palaeontologists now appear to recognize a certain number of
species as having survived from one epoch to the next, or even through more
than one formation, especially from the Tertiary into the post-Tertiary
period, and from that to the present age. Agassiz is understood to believe
in total extinctions and total new creations at each successive epoch, and
even to recognize no existing species as ever contemporary with extinct
ones, except in the case of recent exterminations.

These peculiar views if sustained will effectually dispose of every form of
derivative hypothesis.

Returning for a moment to De Candolle's article, we are disposed to notice
his criticism of Linnaeus's "definition" of the term species (Philosophia
Botanica, No. 157): "Species tot numeramus quot diversae formae in
principio sunt creatae"-- which he declares illogical, inapplicable, and
the worst that has been propounded. "So, to determine if a form is
specific, it is necessary to go back to its origin which is impossible A
definition by a character which can never be verified is no definition at
all."

Now as Linnaeus practically applied the idea of species with a sagacity
which has never been surpassed and rarely equaled and indeed may be said to
have fixed its received meaning in natural history, it may well be inferred
that in the phrase above cited he did not so much undertake to frame a
logical definition, as to set forth the idea which, in his opinion, lay at
the foundation of species; on which basis A.L. Jussieu did construct a
logical definition--"Nunc rectius definitur perennis individuorum similium
successio continuata generatione renascentium." The fundamental idea of
species, we would still maintain, is that of a chain of which
genetically-connected individuals are the links. That, in the practical
recognition of species, the essential characteristic has to be inferred, is
no great objection--the general fact that like engenders like being an
induction from a vast number of instances, and the only assumption being
that of the uniformity of Nature. The idea of gravitation, that of the
atomic constitution of matter, and the like, equally have to be verified
inferentially. If we still hold to the idea of Linnaeus, and of Agassiz,
that existing species were created independently and essentially all at
once at the beginning of the present era, we could not better the
propositions of Linnaeus and of Jussieu. If; on the other hand, the time has
come in which we may accept, with De Candolle, their successive
origination, at the commencement of the present era or before, and even by
derivation from other forms, then the "in principio" of Linnaeus will refer
to that time, whenever it was, and his proposition be as sound and wise as
ever.

In his "Geographie Botanique" (ii., 1068-1077) De Candolle discusses this
subject at length, and in the same interest. Remarking that of the two
great facts of species, viz., likeness among the individuals, and
genealogical connection, zoologists have generally preferred the
latter,[IV-4] while botanists have been divided in opinion, he pronounces
for the former as the essential thing, in the following argumentative
statement:


"Quant a moi, j'ai ete conduit, dans ma definition de l'espece, a mettre
decidement la ressemblance au-dessus de caracteres de succession. Ce n'est
pas seulement a cause des circonstances propres au regne vegetal, dont je
m'occupe exclusivement; ce n'est pas non plus afin de sortir ma definition
des theories et de la rendre le plus possible utile aux naturalistes
descripteurs et nomenclateurs, c'est aussi par un motif philosophique. En
toute chose il faut aller au fond des questions, quand on le peut. Or,
pourquoi la reproduction est-elle possible, habituelle, feconde
indefiniment, entre des etres organises que nous dirons de la meme espece?
Parce qu'ils se ressemblent et uniquement a cause de cela. Lorsque deux
especes ne peuvent, ou, s'il s'agit d'animaux superieurs, ne peuvent et ne
veulent se croiser, c'est qu'elles sont tres differentes. Si l'on obtient
des croisements, c'est que les individus sont analogues; si ces croisements
donnent des produits feconds, c'est que les individus etaient plus
analogues; si ces produits euxmemes sont feconds, c'est que la ressemblance
etait plus grande; s'ils sont fecond habituellement et indefiniment, c'est
que la ressemblance interieure et exterieure etait tres grande. Ainsi le
degre de ressemblance est le fond; la reproduction en est seulement la
manifestation et la mesure, et il est logique de placer la cause au-dessus
de l'effet."


We are not yet convinced. We still hold that genealogical connection,
rather than mutual resemblance, is the fundamental thing--first on the
ground of fact, and then from the philosophy of the case. Practically, no
botanist can say what amount of dissimilarity is compatible with unity of
species; in wild plants it is sometimes very great, in cultivated races
often enormous. De Candolle himself informs us that the different
variations which the same oak-tree exhibits arc significant indications of a
disposition to set up separate varieties, which becoming hereditary may
constitute a race; he evidently looks upon the extreme forms, say of
Quercus Robur, as having thus originated; and on this ground, inferred from
transitional forms, and not from their mutual resemblance, he includes them
in that species. This will be more apparent should the discovery of
transitions, which he leads us to expect, hereafter cause the four
provisional species which attend Q. Robur to be merged in that species. It
may rightly be replied that this conclusion would be arrived at from the
likeness step by step in the series of forms; but the cause of the likeness
here is obvious. And this brings in our "motif philosophique."

Not to insist that the likeness is after all the variable, not the
constant, element--to learn which is the essential thing, resemblance among
individuals or their genetic connection--we have only to ask which can be
the cause of the other.

In hermaphrodite plants (the normal case), and even as the question is
ingeniously put by De Candolle in the above extract, the former surely
cannot be the cause of the latter, though it may, in case of crossing,
offer occasion. But, on the ground of the most fundamental of all things in
the constitution of plants and animals--the fact incapable of further
analysis, that individuals reproduce their like, that characteristics are
inheritable--the likeness is a direct natural consequence of the genetic
succession; "and it is logical to place the cause above the effect."

We are equally disposed to combat a proposition of De Candolle's about
genera, elaborately argued in the "Geographie Botanique," and incidentally
reaffirmed in his present article, viz., that genera are more natural than
species, and more correctly distinguished by people in general, as is shown
by vernacular names. But we have no space left in which to present some
evidence to the contrary.


     V

SEQUOIA AND ITS HISTORY

THE RELATIONS OF NORTH AMERICAN

TO NORTHEAST ASIAN AND TO

TERTIARY VEGETATION

(A Presidential Address to the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, at Dubuque, August, 1872)



The session being now happily inaugurated, your presiding officer of the
last year has only one duty to perform before he surrenders the chair to
his successor. If allowed to borrow a simile from the language of my own
profession, I might liken the President of this Association to a biennial
plant. He flourishes for the year in which he comes into existence, and
performs his appropriate functions as presiding officer. When the second
year comes round, he is expected to blossom out in an address and disappear.
Each president, as he retires, is naturally expected to contribute something
from his own investigations or his own line of study, usually to discuss
some particular scientific topic.

Now, although I have cultivated the field of North American botany, with
some assiduity, for more than forty years, have reviewed our vegetable
hosts, and assigned to no small number of them their names and their place
in the ranks, yet, so far as our own wide country is concerned, I have been
to a great extent a closet botanist. Until this summer I had not seen the
Mississippi, nor set foot upon a prairie.

To gratify a natural interest, and to gain some title for addressing a body
of practical naturalists and explorers, I have made a pilgrimage across the
continent. I have sought and viewed in their native haunts many a plant and
flower which for me had long bloomed unseen, or only in the hortus siccus.
I have been able to see for myself what species and what forms constitute
the main features of the vegetation of each successive region, and
record--as the vegetation unerringly does--the permanent characteristics of
its climate.

Passing on from the eastern district, marked by its equably distributed
rainfall, and therefore naturally forest-clad, I have seen the trees
diminish in number, give place to wide prairies, restrict their growth to
the borders of streams, and then disappear from the boundless drier plains;
have seen grassy plains change into a brown and sere desert--desert in the
common sense, but hardly anywhere botanically so--have seen a fair growth
of coniferous trees adorning the more favored slopes of a mountain-range
high enough to compel summer showers; have traversed that broad and bare
elevated region shut off on both sides by high mountains from the moisture
supplied by either ocean, and longitudinally intersected by sierras which
seemingly remain as naked as they were born; and have reached at length the
westward slopes of that high mountain-barrier which, refreshed by the
Pacific, bears the noble forests of the Sierra Nevada and the Coast Ranges,
and among them trees which are the wonder of the world. As I stood in their
shade, in the groves of Mariposa and Calaveras, and again under the canopy
of the commoner redwood, raised on columns of such majestic height and
ample girth, it occurred to me that I could not do better than to share
with you, upon this occasion, some of the thoughts which possessed my mind.
In their development they may, perhaps, lead us up to questions of
considerable scientific interest.

I shall not detain you with any remarks--which would now be trite--upon the
size or longevity of these far-famed Sequoia-trees, or of the sugar-pines,
incense-cedar, and firs associated with them, of which even the prodigious
bulk of the dominating Sequoia does not sensibly diminish the grandeur.
Although no account and no photographic representation of either species of
the far-famed Sequoia-trees gives any adequate impression of their singular
majesty--still less of their beauty--yet my interest in them did not
culminate merely or mainly in considerations of their size and age. Other
trees, in other parts of the world, may claim to be older. Certain
Australian gumtrees (Eucalypti) are said to be taller. Some, we are told,
rise so high that they might even cast a flicker of shadow upon the summit
of the Pyramid of Cheops. Yet the oldest of them doubtless grew from seed
which was shed long after the names of the pyramid-builders had been
forgotten. So far as we can judge from the actual counting of the layers of
several trees, no Sequoia now alive sensibly antedates the Christian era.

Nor was I much impressed with an attraction of man's adding. That the more
remarkable of these trees should bear distinguishing appellations seems
proper enough; but the tablets of personal names which are affixed to many
of them


172

in the most visited groves--as if the memory of more or less notable people
of our day might be made enduring by the juxtaposition--do suggest some
incongruity. When we consider that a hand's breadth at the circumference of
any one of the venerable trunks so placarded has recorded in annual lines
the lifetime of the individual thus associated with it, one may question
whether the next hand's breadth may not measure the fame of some of the
names thus ticketed for adventitious immortality. Whether it be the man or
the tree that is honored in the connection, probably either would live as
long, in fact and in memory, without it.

One notable thing about the Sequoia-trees is their isolation. Most of the
trees associated with them are of peculiar species, and some of them are
nearly as local. Yet every pine, fir, and cypress of California is in some
sort familiar, because it has near relatives in other parts of the world.
But the redwoods have none. The redwood--including in that name the two
species of "big-trees"--belongs to the general Cypress family, but is sui
generis. Thus isolated systematically, and extremely isolated
geographically, and so wonderful in size and port, they more than other
trees suggest questions.

Were they created thus local and lonely, denizens of California only; one
in limited numbers in a few choice spots on the Sierra Nevada, the other
along the Coast Range from the Bay of Monterey to the frontiers of Oregon?
Are they veritable Melchizedeks, without pedigree or early relationship,
and possibly fated to be without descent?
Or are they now coming upon the stage--or rather were they coming but for
man's interference--to play a part in the future?
Or are they remnants, sole and scanty survivors of a race that has played a
grander part in the past, but is now verging to extinction? Have they had a
career, and can that career be ascertained or surmised, so that we may at
least guess whence they came, and how, and when?

SEQUOIA AND ITS HISTORY 173

Time was, and not long ago, when such questions as these were regarded as
useless and vain--when students of natural history, unmindful of what the
name denotes, were content with a knowledge of things as they now are, but
gave little heed as to how they came to be so. Now such questions are held
to be legitimate, and perhaps not wholly unanswerable. It cannot now be
said that these trees inhabit their present restricted areas simply because
they are there placed in the climate and soil of all the world most
congenial to them. These must indeed be congenial, or they would not
survive. But when we see how the Australian Eucalyptus-trees thrive upon
the Californian coast, and how these very redwoods flourish upon another
continent; how the so-called wild-oat (Avena sterilis of the Old World) has
taken full possession of California; how that cattle and horses, introduced
by the Spaniard, have spread as widely and made themselves as much at home
on the plains of La Plata as on those of Tartary; and that the
cardoon-thistle-seeds, and others they brought with them, have multiplied
there into numbers probably much exceeding those extant in their native
lands; indeed, when we contemplate our own race, and our particular stock,
taking such recent but dominating possession of this New World; when we
consider how the indigenous flora of islands generally succumbs to the
foreigners which come in the train of man; and that most weeds (i.e., the
prepotent plants in open soil) of all temperate climates are not "to the
manner born," but are self-invited intruders--we must needs abandon the
notion of any primordial and absolute adaptation of plants and animals to
their habitats, which may stand in lieu of explanation, and so preclude our
inquiring any further. The harmony of Nature and its admirable perfection
need not be regarded as inflexible and changeless. Nor need Nature be
likened to a statue, or a cast in rigid bronze, but rather to an organism,
with play and adaptability of parts, and life and even soul informing the
whole. Under the former view Nature


174

would be "the faultless monster which the world ne'er saw," but inscrutable
as the Sphinx, whom it were vain, or worse, to question of the whence and
whither. Under the other, the perfection of Nature, if relative, is
multifarious and ever renewed; and much that is enigmatical now may find
explanation in some record of the past.

That the two species of redwood we are contemplating originated as they are
and where they are, and for the part they are now playing, is, to say the
least, not a scientific supposition, nor in any sense a probable one. Nor
is it more likely that they are destined to play a conspicuous part in the
future, or that they would have done so, even if the Indian's fires and the
white man's axe had spared them. The redwood of the coast (Sequoia
sempervirens) had the stronger hold upon existence, forming as it did large
forests throughout a narrow belt about three hundred miles in length, and
being so tenacious of life that every large stump sprouts into a copse. But
it does not pass the bay of Monterey, nor cross the line of Oregon,
although so grandly developed not far below it. The more remarkable Sequoia
gigantea of the Sierra exists in numbers so limited that the separate
groves may be reckoned upon the fingers, and the trees of most of them have
been counted, except near their southern limit, where they are said to be
more copious. A species limited in individuals holds its existence by a
precarious tenure; and this has a foothold only in a few sheltered spots,
of a happy mean in temperature, and locally favored with moisture in
summer. Even there, for some reason or other, the pines with which they are
associated (Pinus Lambertiana and P. ponderosa), the firs (Abies grandis
and A. amabilis), and even the incense-cedar (Libocedrus decurrens), possess
a great advantage, and, though they strive in vain to emulate their size,
wholly overpower the Sequoias in numbers. "To him that hath shall be
given." The force of numbers eventually wins. At least in the
commonly-visited groves Sequoia gigantea is invested in its

SEQUOIA AND ITS HISTORY  175

last stronghold, can neither advance into more exposed positions above, nor
fall back into drier and barer ground below, nor hold its own in the
long-run where it is, under present conditions; and a little further drying
of the climate, which must once have been much moister than now, would
precipitate its doom. Whatever the individual longevity, certain if not
speedy is the decline of a race in which a high death-rate afflicts the
young. Seedlings of the big trees occur not rarely, indeed, but in meagre
proportion to those of associated trees; T small indeed is the chance that
any of these will attain to "the days of the years of their fathers." "Few
and evil" are .: the days of all the forest likely to be, while man, both
bar-barian and civilized, torments them with fires, fatal at once to
seedlings, and at length to the aged also. The forests of California, proud
as the State may be of them, are already too scanty and insufficient for her
uses. Two lines, such as may be drawn with one sweep of a brush over the
map, would cover them all. The coast redwood--the most important tree in
California, although a million times more numerous than its relative of the
Sierra--is too good to live long. Such is its value for lumber and its
accessibility, that, judging the future by the past, it is not likely, in
its primeval growth, to outlast its rarer fellow-species.

Happily man preserves and disseminates as well as destroys. The species
will doubtless be preserved to science, and for ornamental and other uses,
in its own and other lands; and the more remarkable individuals of the
present day are likely to be sedulously cared for, all the more so as they
become scarce.

Our third question remains to be answered: Have these famous Sequoias
played in former times and upon a larger stage a more imposing part, of
which the present is but the epilogue? We cannot gaze high up the huge and
venerable trunks, which one crosses the continent to behold, without
wishing that these patriarchs of the grove were able, like the


176

long-lived antediluvians of Scripture, to hand down to us, through a few
generations, the traditions of centuries, and so tell us somewhat of the
history of their race. Fifteen hundred annual layers have been counted, or
satisfactorily made out, upon one or two fallen trunks. It is probable that
close to the heart of some of the living trees may be found the circle that
records the year of our Saviour's nativity. A few generations of such trees
might carry the history a long way back. But the ground they stand upon, and
the marks of very recent geological change and vicissitude in the region
around, testify that not very many such generations can have flourished
just there, at least in an unbroken series. When their site was covered by
glaciers, these Sequoias must have occupied other stations, if, as there is
reason to believe, they then existed in the land.

I have said that the redwoods have no near relatives in the country of
their abode, and none of their genus anywhere else. Perhaps something may
be learned of their genealogy by inquiring of such relatives as they have.
There are only two of any particular nearness of kin; and they are far
away. One is the bald cypress, our Southern cypress, Taxodium, inhabiting
the swamps of the Atlantic coast from Maryland to Texas, thence
extending--with, probably, a specific difference--into Mexico. It is well
known as one of the largest trees of our Atlantic forest-district, and,
although it never--except perhaps in Mexico, and in rare instances--attains
the portliness of its Western relatives, yet it may equal them in
longevity. The other relative is Glyptostrobus, a sort of modified
Taxodium, being about as much like our bald cypress as one species of
redwood is like the other.

Now, species of the same type, especially when few, and the type peculiar,
are, in a general way, associated geographically, i.e., inhabit the same
country, or (in a large sense) the same region. Where it is not so, where
near relatives are separated, there is usually something to be explained.
Here is an instance.  stance. These four trees, sole representatives of
their tribe, dwell almost in three separate quarters of the world: the two
redwoods in California, the bald cypress in Atlantic North America, its
near relative, Glyptostrobus, in China.

It was not always so. In the Tertiary period, the geological botanists
assure us, our own very Taxodium or bald cypress, and a Glyptostrobus,
exceedingly like the present Chinese tree, and more than one Sequoia,
coexisted in a fourth quarter of the globe, viz., in Europe! This brings up
the question, Is it possible to bridge over these four wide intervals of
space and the much vaster interval of time, so as to bring these
extraordinarily separated relatives into connection? The evidence which may
be brought to bear upon this question is various and widely scattered. I
bespeak your patience while I endeavor to bring together, in an abstract,
the most important points of it.

Some interesting facts may come out by comparing generally the botany of
the three remote regions, each of which is the sole home of one of these
genera, i.e., Sequoia in California, Taxodium in the Atlantic United
States,[V-1] and Glyptostrobus in China, which compose the whole of the
peculiar tribe under consideration.

Note then, first, that there is another set of three or four peculiar
trees, in this case of the yew family, which has just the same peculiar
distribution, and which therefore may have the same explanation, whatever
that explanation be. The genus Torreya, which commemorates our botanical
Nestor and a former president of this Association, Dr. Torrey, was founded
upon a tree rather lately discovered (that is, about thirty-five years ago)
in Northern Florida. It is a noble, yew like tree, and very local, being, so
far as known, nearly confined to a few miles along the shores of a single
river. It seems as if it had somehow been crowded down out of the
Alleghanies into its present limited southern quarters; for in cultivation
it evinces a northern hardiness. Now, another species of Torreya is a
characteristic tree of Japan; and one very like it, if not the same,
inhabits the mountains of Northern China--belongs, therefore, to the Eastern
Asiatic temperate region, of which Northern China is a part, and Japan, as
we shall see, the portion most interesting to us. There is only one more
species of Torreya, and that is a companion of the redwoods in California.
It is the tree locally known under the name of the California nutmeg. Here
are three or four near brethren, species of the same genus, known nowhere
else than in these three habitats.

Moreover, the Torreya of Florida is associated with a yew; and the trees of
this grove are the only yew-trees of Eastern North America; for the yew of
our Northern woods is a decumbent shrub. A yew-tree, perhaps the same, is
found with Taxodium in the temperate parts of Mexico. The only other yews
in America grow with the redwoods and the other Torreya in California, and
extend northward into Oregon. Yews are also associated with Torreya in
Japan; and they extend westward through Mantchooria and the Himalayas to
Western Europe, and even to the Azores Islands, where occurs the common yew
of the Old World.

So we have three groups of coniferous trees which agree in this peculiar
geographical distribution, with, however, a notable extension of range in
the case of the yew: 1. The redwoods, and their relatives, Taxodium and
Glyptostrobus, which differ so as to constitute a genus for each of the
three regions; 2. The Torreyas, more nearly akin, merely a different
species in each region; 3. The yews, still more closely related while more
widely disseminated, of which it is yet uncertain whether they constitute
seven, five, three, or only one species.  Opinions differ, and can hardly
be brought to any decisive test. However it be determined, it may still be
said that the extreme differences among the yews do not surpass those of
the recognized variations of the European yew, the cultivated races
included.

It appears to me that these several instances all raise the very same
question, only with different degrees of emphasis, and, if to be explained
at all, will have the same kind of explanation.

Continuing the comparison between the three regions with which we are
concerned, we note that each has its own species of pines, firs, larches,
etc., and of a few deciduous-leaved trees, such as oaks and maples; all of
which have no peculiar significance for the present purpose, because they
are of genera which are common all round the northern hemisphere. Leaving
these out of view, the noticeable point is that the vegetation of
California is most strikingly unlike that of the Atlantic United States.
They possess some plants, and some peculiarly American plants, in
common--enough to show, as I imagine, that the difficulty was not in the
getting from the one district to the other, or into both from a common
source, but in abiding there. The primordially unbroken forest of Atlantic
North America, nourished by rainfall distributed throughout the year, is
widely separated from the western region of sparse and discontinuous
tree-belts of the same latitude on the western side of the continent (where
summer rain is wanting, or nearly so), by immense treeless plains and
plateaux of more or less aridity, traversed by longitudinal mountain-ranges
of a similar character. Their nearest approach is at the north, in the
latitude of Lake Superior, where, on a more rainy line, trees of the
Atlantic forest and that of Oregon may be said to intermix. The change of
species and of the aspect of vegetation in crossing, say on the
forty-seventh parallel, is slight in comparison with that on the
thirty-seventh or near it. Confining our attention to the lower latitude,
and under the exceptions already specially noted, we may say that almost
every characteristic form in the vegetation of the Atlantic States is
wanting in California, and the characteristic plants and trees of California
are wanting here.

California has no magnolia nor tulip trees, nor star-anise tree; no
so-called papaw (Asimina); no barberry of the common single-leaved sort; no
Podophyllum or other of the peculiar associated genera; no nelumbo nor
white water-lily; no prickly ash nor sumach; no loblolly-bay nor Stuartia;
no basswood nor linden-trees; neither locust, honey-locust, coffeetrees
(Gymnocladus) nor yellow-wood (Cladrastis); nothing answering to Hydrangea
or witch-hazel, to gum-trees (Nyssa and Liquidambar), Viburnum or Diervilla;
it has few asters and golden-rods; no lobelias; no huckleberries and hardly
any blueberries; no Epigaea, charm of our earliest Eastern spring,
tempering an icy April wind with a delicious wild fragrance; no Kalmia nor
Clethra, nor holly, nor persimmon; no catalpa-tree, nor trumpet-creeper
(Tecoma); nothing answering to sassafras, nor to benzoin-tree, nor to
hickory; neither mulberry nor elm; no beech, true chestnut, hornbeam, nor
iron-wood, nor a proper birch-tree; and the enumeration might be continued
very much further by naming herbaceous plants and others familiar only to
botanists.

In their place California is filled with plants of other types--trees,
shrubs, and herbs, of which I will only remark that they are, with one or
two exceptions, as different from the plants of the Eastern Asiatic region
with which we are concerned (Japan, China, and Mantchooria), as they are
from those of Atlantic North America. Their near relatives, when they have
any in other lands, are mostly southward, on the Mexican plateau, or many
as far south as Chili. The same may be said of the plants of the
intervening great Plains, except that northward in the subsaline vegetation
there are some close alliances with the flora of the steppes of Siberia.
And


181

along the crests of high mountain-ranges the Arctic-Alpine . flora has sent
southward more or less numerous representatives through the whole length of
the country.

If we now compare, as to their flora generally, the Atlantic United States
with Japan, Mantchooria, and Northern China--i.e., Eastern North America
with Eastern North Asia, half the earth's circumference apart--we find an
astonishing similarity. The larger part of the genera of our own region,
which I have enumerated as wanting in California, are present in Japan or
Mantchooria, along with many other peculiar plants, divided between the
two. There are plants enough of the one region which have no representatives
in the other. There are types which appear to have reached the Atlantic
States from the south; and there is a larger infusion of subtropical
Asiatic types into temperate China and Japan; among these there is no
relationship between the two countries to speak of. There are also, as I
have already said, no small number of genera and some species which, being
common all round or partly round the northern temperate zone, have no
special significance because of their occurrence in these two antipodal
floras, although they have testimony to bear upon the general question of
geographical distribution. The point to be remarked is, that many, or even
most, of the genera and species which are peculiar to North America as
compared with Europe, and largely peculiar to Atlantic North America as
compared with the Californian region, are also represented in Japan and
Mantchooria, either by identical or by closely-similar forms! The same rule
holds on a more northward line, although not so strikingly. If we compare
the plants, say of New England and Pennsylvania (latitude 450_470), with
those of Oregon, and then with those of Northeastern Asia, we shall find
many of our own curiously repeated in the latter, while only a small number
of them can be traced along the route even so far as the western slope of
the Rocky Mountains. And these repetitions of East American types in Japan


182

and neighboring districts are in all degrees of likeness. Sometimes the one
is undistinguishable from the other; sometimes there is a difference of
aspect, but hardly of tangible character; sometimes the two would be termed
marked varieties if they grew naturally in the same forest or in the same
region; sometimes they are what the botanist calls representative species,
the one answering closely to the other, but with some differences regarded
as specific; sometimes the two are merely of the same genus, or not quite
that, but of a single or very few species in each country; in which case the
point which interests us is, that this peculiar limited type should occur
in two antipodal places, and nowhere else.

It would be tedious, and, except to botanists, abstruse, to enumerate
instances; yet the whole strength of the case depends upon the number of
such instances. I propose therefore, if the Association does me the honor
to print this discourse, to append in a note a list of the more remarkable
ones.[V-2] But I would here mention certain cases as specimens.

Our Rhus Toxicodendron, or poison-ivy, is very exactly repeated in Japan,
but is found in no other part of the world, although a species much like it
abounds in California. Our other poisonous Rhus (R. venenata), commonly
called poison-dogwood, is in no way represented in Western America, but has
so close an analogue in Japan that the two were taken for the same by
Thunberg and Linnaeus, who called them both R. vernix.

Our northern fox-grape, Vitis Labrusca, is wholly confined to the Atlantic
States, except that it reappears in Japan and that region.
The original Wistaria is a woody leguminous climber with showy blossoms,
native to the middle Atlantic States; the other species, which we so much
prize in cultivation, W. Sinensis, is from China, as its name denotes, or
perhaps only from Japan, where it is certainly indigenous.

Our yellow-wood (Cladrastis) inhabits a very limited district on the
western slope of the Alleghanies. Its only and very near relative, Maackia,
is confined to Mantchooria.

The Hydrangeas have some species in our Alleghany region: all the rest
belong to the Chino-Japanese region and its continuation westward. The same
may be said of Philadelphus, except that there are one or two mostly very
similar species in California and Oregon.

Our May-flower (Epigaea) and our creeping snowberry, otherwise peculiar to
Atlantic North America, recur in Japan.

Our blue cohosh (Caulophyllum) is confined to the woods of the Atlantic
States, but has lately been discovered in Japan. A peculiar relative of it,
Diphylleia, confined to the higher Alleghanies, is also repeated in Japan,
with a slight difference, so that it may barely be distinguished as another
: species. Another relative is our twin-leaf (Jeffersonia) of the Alleghany
region alone: a second species has lately turned up in Mantchooria. A
relative of this is Podophyllum, our mandrake, a common inhabitant of the
Atlantic United States, but found nowhere else. There is one other species
of it, and that is in the Himalayas. Here are four most peculiar genera of
one family, each of a single species in the Atlantic United States, which
are duplicated on the other side of the world, either in identical or
almost identical species, or in an analogous species, while nothing else of
the kind is known in any other part of the world.

I ought not to omit ginseng, the root so prized by the Chinese, which they
obtain from their northern provinces and Mantchooria, and which is now
known to inhabit Corea and Northern Japan. The Jesuit Fathers identified
the plant in Canada and the Atlantic States, brought over the Chinese name
by which we know it, and established the trade in it, which was for many
years most profitable. The exportation of ginseng to China probably has not
yet entirely ceased. Whether the Asiatic and the Atlantic American ginsengs
are to be regarded as of the same species or not is somewhat uncertain, but
they are hardly, if at all, distinguishable.

There is a shrub, Elliottia, which is so rare and local that it is known
only at two stations on the Savannah River in Georgia. It is of peculiar
structure, and was without near relative until one was lately discovered in
Japan (Tripetaleia), so like it as hardly to be distinguishable except by
having the parts of the blossom in threes instead of fours--a difference
not uncommon in the same genus, or even in the same species.

Suppose Elliottia had happened to be collected only once, a good while ago,
and all knowledge of the limited and obscure locality were lost; and
meanwhile the Japanese form came to be known. Such a case would be parallel
with an actual one. A specimen of a peculiar plant (Shortia galacifolia)
was detected in the herbarium of the elder Michaux, who collected it (as
his autograph ticket shows) somewhere in the high Alleghany Mountains, more
than eighty years ago. No one has seen the living plant since or knows
where to find it, if haply it still flourishes in some secluded spot. At
length it is found in Japan; and I had the satisfaction of making the
identification.[V-3] A relative is also known in Japan; and a less near one
has just been detected in Thibet.

Whether the Japanese and the Alleghanian plants are exactly the same or
not, it needs complete specimens of the two to settle. So far as we know,
they are just alike; and, even if some difference were discerned between
them, it would not appreciably alter the question as to how such a result
came to pass. Each and every one of the analogous cases I have been
detailing--and very many more could be mentioned--raises the same question,
and would be satisfied with the same answer.

These singular relations attracted my curiosity early in the course of my
botanical studies, when comparatively few of them were known, and my serious
attention in later years, when I had numerous and new Japanese plants to
study in the collections made, by Messrs. Williams and Morrow, during
Commodore Perry's visit in 1853, and especially, by Mr. Charles Wright, of
Commodore Rodgers's expedition in 1855. I then discussed this subject
somewhat fully, and tabulated the facts within my reach.[V-4]

This was before Heer had developed the rich fossil botany of the arctic
zone, before the immense antiquity of existing species of plants was
recognized, and before the publication of Darwin's now famous volume on the
"Origin of Species" had introduced and familiarized the scientific world
with those now current ideas respecting the history and vicissitudes of
species with which I attempted to deal in a moderate and feeble way.

My speculation was based upon the former glaciation of the northern
temperate zone, and the inference of a warmer period preceding and perhaps
following. I considered that our own present vegetation, or its proximate
ancestry, must have occupied the arctic and subarctic regions in pliocene
times, and that it had been gradually pushed southward as the temperature
lowered and the glaciation advanced, even beyond its present habitation;
that plants of the same stock and kindred, probably ranging round the arctic
zone as the present arctic species do, made their forced migration southward
upon widely different longitudes, and receded more or less as the climate
grew warmer; that the general difference of climate which marks the eastern
and the western sides of the continents--the one extreme, the other
mean--was doubtless even then established, so that the same species and the
same sorts of species would be likely to secure and retain foothold in the
similar climates of Japan and the Atlantic United States, but not in
intermediate regions of different distribution of heat and moisture; so that
different species of the same genus, as in Torreya, or different genera of
the same group, as redwood, Taxodium, and Glyptostrobus, or different
associations of forest-trees, might establish themselves each in the region
best suited to the particular requirements, while they would fail to do so
in any other. These views implied that the sources of our actual vegetation
and the explanation of these peculiarities were to be sought in, and
presupposed, an ancestry in pliocene or earlier times, occupying the higher
northern regions. And it was thought that the occurrence of peculiar North
American genera in Europe in the Tertiary period (such as Taxodium, Carya,
Liquidambar, sassafras, Negundo, etc.) might be best explained on the
assumption of early interchange and diffusion through North Asia, rather
than by that of the fabled Atlantis.

The hypothesis supposed a gradual modification of species in different
directions under altering conditions, at least to the extent of producing
varieties, sub-species, and representative species, as they may be
variously regarded; likewise the single and local origination of each type,
which is now almost universally taken for granted.

The remarkable facts in regard to the Eastern American and Asiatic floras
which these speculations were to explain have since increased in number,
especially through the admirable collections of Dr. Maximowicz in Japan and
adjacent countries, and the critical comparisons he has made and is still
engaged upon.

I am bound to state that, in a recent general work[V-5] by a distinguished
European botanist, Prof. Grisebach, of Jotting, these facts have been
emptied of all special significance, and the relations between the Japanese
and the Atlantic United States flora declared to be no more intimate than
might be expected from the situation, climate, and present opportunity of
interchange. This extraordinary conclusion is reached by regarding as
distinct species all the plants common to both countries between which any
differences have been discerned, although such differences would probably
count for little if the two inhabited the same country, thus transferring
many of my list of identical to that of representative species; and then by
simply eliminating from consideration the whole array of representative
species, i.e., all cases in which the Japanese and the American plant are
not exactly alike. As if, by pronouncing the cabalistic word species, the
question were settled, or rather the greater part of it remanded out of the
domain of science; as if, while complete identity of forms implied
community of origin, anything short of it carried no presumption of the
kind; so leaving all these singular duplicates to be wondered at, indeed,
but wholly beyond the reach of inquiry.

Now, the only known cause of such likeness is inheritance; and as all
transmission of likeness is with some difference in individuals, and as
changed conditions have resulted, as is well known, in very considerable
differences, it seems to me that, if the high antiquity of our actual
vegetation could be rendered probable, not to say certain, and the former
habitation of any of our species or of very near relatives of them in high
northern regions could be ascertained, my whole case would be made out. The
needful facts, of which I was ignorant when my essay was published, have now
been for some years made known--thanks, mainly, to the researches of Heer
upon ample collections of arctic fossil plants. These are confirmed and
extended by new investigations, by Heer and Lesquereux, the results of
which have been indicated to me by the latter.[V-6]
The Taxodium, which everywhere abounds in the miocene formations in Europe,
has been specifically identified, first by Goeppert, then by Heer, with our
common cypress of the Southern States. It has been found fossil in
Spitzbergen, Greenland, and Alaska--in the latter country along with the
remains of another form, distinguishable, but very like the common species;
and this has been identified by Lesquereux in the miocene of the Rocky
Mountains. So there is one species of tree which has come down essentially
unchanged from the Tertiary period, which for a long while inhabited both
Europe and North America, and also, at some part of the period, the region
which geographically connects the two (once doubtless much more closely
than now), but which has survived only in the Atlantic United States and
Mexico.

The same Sequoia which abounds in the same miocene formations in Northern
Europe has been abundantly found in those of Iceland, Spitzbergen,
Greenland, Mackenzie River, and Alaska. It is named S. Langsdorfii, but is
pronounced to be very much like S. sempervirens, our living redwood of the
Californian coast, and to be the ancient representative of it. Fossil
specimens of a similar, if not the same, species have recently been
detected in the Rocky Mountains by Hayden, and determined by our eminent
palaeontological botanist, Lesquereux; and he assures me that he has the
common redwood itself from Oregon in a deposit of tertiary age. Another
Sequoia (S. Sternbergii), discovered in miocene deposits in Greenland, is
pronounced to be the representative of S. gigantea, the big tree of the
Californian Sierra. If the Taxodium of the tertiary time in Europe and
throughout the arctic regions is the ancestor of our present bald
cypress--which is assumed in regarding them as specifically identical-- then
I think we may, with our present light, fairly assume that the two redwoods
of California are the direct or collateral descendants of the two ancient
species which so closely resemble them.

The forests of the arctic zone in tertiary times contained at least three
other species of Sequoia, as determined by their remains, one of which,
from Spitzbergen, also much resembles the common redwood of California.
Another, "which appears to have been the commonest coniferous tree on
Disco," was common in England and some other parts of Europe. So the
Sequoias, now remarkable for their restricted station and numbers, as well
as for their extraordinary size, are of an ancient stock; their ancestors
and kindred formed a large part of the forests which flourished throughout
the polar regions, now desolate and ice-clad, and which extended into low
latitudes in Europe. On this continent one species, at least, had reached
to the vicinity of its present habitat before the glaciation of the region.
Among the fossil specimens already found in California, but which our
trustworthy palaeontological botanist has not yet had time to examine, we
may expect to find evidence of the early arrival of these two redwoods upon
the ground which they now, after much vicissitude, scantily occupy.

Differences of climate, or circumstances of migration, or both, must have
determined the survival of Sequoia upon the Pacific, and of Taxodium upon
the Atlantic coast. And still the redwoods will not stand in the east, nor
could our Taxodium find a congenial station in California. Both have
probably had their opportunity in the olden time, and failed.

As to the remaining near relative of Sequoia, the Chinese Glyptostrobus, a
species of it, and its veritable representative, was contemporaneous with
Sequoia and Taxodium, not only in temperate Europe, but throughout the
arctic regions from Greenland to Alaska. According to Newberry, it was
abundantly represented in the miocene flora of the temperate zone of our
own continent, from Nebraska to the Pacific.

Very similar would seem to have been the fate of a more familiar
gymnospermous tree, the Gingko or Salisburia. It is now indigenous to Japan
only. Its ancestor, as we may fairly call it--since, according to Heer, "it
corresponds so entirely with the living species that it can scarcely be
separated from it"--once inhabited Northern Europe and the whole arctic
region round to Alaska, and had even a representative farther south, in our
Rocky Mountain district. For some reason, this and Glyptostrobus survive
only on the shores of Eastern Asia.

Libocedrus, on the other hand, appears to have cast in its lot with the
Sequoias. Two species, according to Heer, were with them in Spitzbergen. L.
decurrens, the incense cedar, is one of the noblest associates of the
present redwoods. But all the rest are in the southern hemisphere, two at
the southern extremity of the Andes, two in the South-Sea Islands. It is
only by bold and far-reaching suppositions that they can be geographically
associated.

The genealogy of the Torreyas is still wholly obscure; yet it is not
unlikely that the yew-like trees, named Taxites, which flourished with the
Sequoias in the tertiary arctic forests, are the remote ancestors of the
three species of Torreya, now severally in Florida, in California, and in
Japan.

As to the pines and firs, these were more numerously associated with the
ancient Sequoias of the polar forests than with their present
representatives, but in different species, apparently more like those of
Eastern than of Western North America. They must have encircled the polar
zone then, as they encircle the present temperate zone now.

I must refrain from all enumeration of the angiospermous or ordinary
deciduous trees and shrubs, which are now known, by their fossil remains,
to have flourished throughout the polar regions when Greenland better
deserved its name and enjoyed the present climate of New England and New
Jersey. Then Greenland and the rest of the north abounded with oaks,
representing the several groups of species which now inhabit both our
Eastern and Western forest districts; several poplars, one very like our
balsam poplar or balm-of-Gilead tree; more beeches than there are now, a
hornbeam, and a hop-hornbeam, some birches, a persimmon, and a planer-tree,
near representatives of those of the Old World, at least of Asia, as well
as of Atlantic North America, but all wanting in California; one Juglans
like the walnut of the Old World, and another like our black walnut; two or
three grapevines, one near our Southern fox grape or muscadine, another
near our Northern frostgrape; a Tilia, very like our basswood of the
Atlantic States only; a Liquidambar; a magnolia, which recalls our M.
grandiflora; a Liriodendron, sole representative of our tulip-tree; and a
sassafras, very like the living tree.

Most of these, it will be noticed, have their nearest or their only living
representatives in the Atlantic States, and when elsewhere, mainly in
Eastern Asia. Several of them, or of species like them, have been detected
in our tertiary deposits, west of the Mississippi, by Newberry and
Lesquereux. Herbaceous plants, as it happens, are rarely preserved in a
fossil state, else they would probably supply additional testimony to the
antiquity of our existing vegetation, its wide diffusion over the northern
and now frigid zone, and its enforced migration under changes of
climate.[V-7] Concluding, then, as we must, that our existing vegetation is
a continuation of that of the tertiary period, may we suppose that it
absolutely originated then? Evidently not. The preceding Cretaceous period
has furnished to Carruthers in Europe a fossil fruit like that of the
Sequoia gigantea of the famous groves, associated with pines of the same
character as those that accompany the present tree; has furnished to Heer,
from Greenland, two more Sequoias, one of them identical with a tertiary
species, and one nearly allied to Sequoia Langsdorfii, which in turn is a
probable ancestor of the common California redwood; has furnished to
Newberry and Lesquereux in North America the remains of another ancient
Sequoia, a Glyptostrobus, a Liquidambar which well represents our
sweet-gum-tree, oaks analogous to living ones, leaves of a plane-tree, which
are also in the Tertiary, and are scarcely distinguishable from our own
Platanus occidentalis, of a magnolia and a tulip-tree, and "of a sassafras
undistinguishable from our living species." I need not continue the
enumeration. Suffice it to say that the facts justify the conclusion which
Lesquereux--a scrupulous investigator--has already announced: that "the
essential types of our actual flora are marked in the Cretaceous period, and
have come to us after passing, without notable changes, through the
Tertiary formations of our continent."

According to these views, as regards plants at least, the adaptation to
successive times and changed conditions has been maintained, not by absolute
renewals, but by gradual modifications. I, for one, cannot doubt that the
present existing species are the lineal successors of those that garnished
the earth in the old time before them, and that they were as well adapted
to their surroundings then, as those which flourish and bloom around us are
to their conditions now. Order and exquisite adaptation did not wait for
man's coming, nor were they ever stereotyped. Organic Nature--by which I
mean the system and totality of living things, and their adaptation to each
other and to the world--with all its apparent and indeed real stability,
should be likened, not to the ocean, which varies only by tidal
oscillations from a fixed level to which it is always returning, but rather
to a river, so vast that we can neither discern its shores nor reach its
sources, whose onward flow is not less actual because too slow to be
observed by the ephemerae which hover over its surface, or are borne upon
its bosom.

Such ideas as these, though still repugnant to some, and not long since to
many, have so possessed the minds of the naturalists of the present day
that hardly a discourse can be pronounced or an investigation prosecuted
without reference to them. I suppose that the views here taken are little,
if at all, in advance of the average scientific mind of the day. I cannot
regard them as less noble than those which they are succeeding. An able
philosophical writer, Miss Frances Power Cobbe, has recently and truthfully
said:[V-8]


"It is a singular fact that, when we can find out how anything is done, our
first conclusion seems to be that God did not do it. No matter how
wonderful, how beautiful, how intimately complex and delicate has been the
machinery which has worked, perhaps for centuries, perhaps for millions of
ages, to bring about some beneficent result, if we can but catch a glimpse
of the wheels its divine character disappears."


I agree with the writer that this first conclusion is premature and
unworthy--I will add, deplorable. Through what faults or infirmities of
dogmatism on the one hand, and skepticism on the other, it came to be so
thought, we need not here consider. Let us hope, and I confidently expect,
that it is not to last; that the religious faith which survived without a
shock the notion of the fixity of the earth itself may equally outlast the
notion of the fixity of the species which inhabit it; that, in the future
even more than in the past, faith in an order, which is the basis of
science, will not--as it cannot reasonably--be dissevered from faith in an
Ordainer, which is the basis of religion.



 VI

THE ATTITUDE OF

WORKING NATURALISTS

TOWARD DARWINISM [VI-1]

(The Nation, October 16, 1873)



That homely adage, "What is one man's meat is another man's poison," comes
to mind when we consider with what different eyes different naturalists
look upon the hypothesis of the derivative origin of actual specific forms,
since Mr. Darwin gave it vogue and vigor and a raison d'être for the
present day. This latter he did, not only by bringing forward a vera causa
in the survival of the fittest under changing circumstances--about which
the question among naturalists mainly is how much it will explain, some
allowing it a restricted, others an unlimited operation--but also by
showing that the theory may be made to do work, may shape and direct
investigations, the results of which must in time tell us whether the
theory is likely to hold good or not. If the hypothesis of natural
selection and the things thereto appertaining had not been capable of being
put to useful work, although, like the "Vestiges of the Natural History of
Creation," it might have made no little noise in the world, it would hardly
have engaged the attention of working naturalists as it has done. We have
no idea even of opening the question as to what work the Darwinian theory
has incited, and in what way the work done has reacted upon the theory; and
least of all do we like to meddle with the polemical literature of the
subject, already so voluminous that the German bibliographers and
booksellers make a separate class of it. But two or three treatises before
us, of a minor or incidental sort, suggest a remark or two upon the
attitude of mind toward evolutionary theories taken by some of the working
naturalists.

Mr. Darwin's own expectation, that his new presentation of the subject
would have little or no effect upon those who had already reached
middle-age, has--out of Paris--not been fulfilled. There are, indeed, one
or two who have thought it their duty to denounce the theory as morally
dangerous, as well as scientifically baseless; a recent instance of the
sort we may have to consider further on. Others, like the youth at the
river's bank, have been waiting in confident expectation of seeing the
current run itself dry. On the other hand, a notable proportion of the more
active-minded naturalists had already come to doubt the received doctrine
of the entire fixity of species, and still more that of their independent
and supernatural origination. While their systematic work all proceeded
implicitly upon the hypothesis of the independence and entire permanence of
species, they were perceiving more or less clearly that the whole question
was inevitably to be mooted again, and so were prepared to give the
alternative hypothesis a dispassionate consideration. The veteran Lyell set
an early example, and, on a reconsideration of the whole question, wrote
anew his famous chapter and reversed his former and weighty opinion. Owen,
still earlier, signified his adhesion to the doctrine of derivation in some
form, but apparently upon general, speculative grounds; for he repudiated
natural selection, and offered no other natural solution of the mystery of
the orderly incoming of cognate forms. As examples of the effect of
Darwin's "Origin of Species" upon the minds of naturalists who are no
longer young, and whose prepossessions, even more than Lyell's, were likely
to bias them against the new doctrine, two from the botanical side are
brought to our notice through recent miscellaneous writings which are now
before us.[VI-2]

Before the publication of Darwin's first volume, M. Alphonse de Candolle
had summed up the result of his studies in this regard, in the final
chapter of his classical "Geographie Botanique Raisonnee," in the
conclusion, that existing vegetation must be regarded as the continuation,
through many geological and geographical changes, of the anterior
vegetations of the world; and that, consequently, the present distribution
of species is explicable only in the light of their geological history. He
surmised that, notwithstanding the general stability of forms, certain
species or quasi-species might have originated through diversification
under geographical isolation. But, on the other hand, he was still disposed
to admit that even the same species might have originated independently in
two or more different regions of the world; and he declined, as unpractical
and unavailing, all attempts to apply hypotheses to the elucidation of the
origin of species. Soon after Darwin's book appeared, De Candolle had
occasion to study systematically a large and wide-spread genus-- that of
the oak. Investigating it under the new light of natural selection, he came
to the conclusion that the existing oaks are all descendants of earlier
forms, and that no clear line can be drawn between the diversification whic
h has resulted in species and that which is exhibited in races and minor
varieties.

And now, in the introductory chapter of the volume of essays before us, he
informs us that the idea which pervades them all, and in some sort connects
very diverse topics, is that of considering this principle of selection. Of
the principle itself, he remarks that it is neither a theory nor an
hypothesis, but the expression of a necessary fact; that to deny it is very
much like denying that round stones will roll downhill faster and farther
than flat ones; and that the question of the present day in natural history
is not whether there be natural selection, or even whether forms are derived
from other forms, but to comprehend how, in what proportions, and by what
means hereditary deviations take place, and in what ways an inevitable
selection takes effect upon these. In two of these essays natural selection
is directly discussed in its application to the human race; the larger one
dealing ably with the whole subject, and with results at first view
seemingly in a great degree negative, but yet showing that the supposed
"failure of natural selection in the case of man" was an unwarrantable
conclusion from too limited a view of a very complicated question. The
article abounds in acute and fertile suggestions, and its closing chapter,
"on the probable future of the human species" under the laws of selection,
is highly interesting and noteworthy. The other and shorter essay discusses
a special point, and brings out a corollary of the law of heredity which may
not have been thought of before, but which is perfectly clear as soon as it
is stated. It explains at once why contagious or epidemic diseases are most
fatal at their first appearance, and less so afterward: not by the dying
out of a virus--for, when the disease reaches a new population, it is as
virulent as ever (as, for instance, the smallpox among the Indians)--but by
the selection of a race less subject to attack through the destruction of
those that were more so, and the inheritance of the comparative immunity by
the children and the grandchildren of the survivors; and how this immunity
itself, causing the particular disease to become rare, paves the way to a
return of the original fatality; for the mass of such population, both in
the present and the immediately preceding generation, not having been
exposed to the infection, or but little exposed, has not undergone
selection, and so in time the proportion liable to attack, or to fatal
attack, gets to be as large as ever. The greater the fatality, especially in
the population under marriageable age, the more favorable the condition of
the survivors; and, by the law of heredity, their children should share in
the immunity. This explanation of the cause, or of one cause, of the return
of pests at intervals no less applies to the diminution of the efficacy of
remedies, and of preventive means, such as vaccination. When Jenner
introduced vaccination, the small-pox in Europe and European colonies must
have lost somewhat of its primitive intensity by the vigorous weeding out
of the more susceptible through many generations. Upon the residue,
vaccination was almost complete protection, and, being generally practised,
small-pox consequently became rare. Selection thus ceasing to operate, a
population arises which has not been exposed to the contagion, and of which
a considerable proportion, under the common law of atavism, comes to be
very much in the condition of a people invaded for the first time by the
disease. To these, as we might expect, vaccination would prove a less
safeguard than to their progenitors three or four generations before.

Mr. Bentham is a veteran systematic botanist of the highest rank and widest
knowledge. He had not, so far as we know, touched upon questions of
origination in the ante-Darwinian era. The dozen of presidential addresses
delivered at anniversary meetings of the Linnean Society, from his
assumption of the chair in the year 1862 down to the current year--each
devoted to some topic of interest--and his recent "Memoir on Compositae,"
summing up the general results of a revision of an order to which a full
tenth of all higher plants belong, furnish apt examples both of cautious
criticism, conditional assent (as becomes the inaugurator of the
quantification of the predicate), and of fruitful application of the new
views to various problems concerning the classification and geographical
distribution of plants. In his hands the hypothesis is turned at once to
practical use as an instrument of investigation, as a means of
interrogating Nature. In the result, no doubt seems to be left upon the
author's mind that the existing species of plants are the result of the
differentiation of previous species, or at least that the derivative
hypothesis is to be adopted as that which offers the most natural, if not
the only, explanation of the problems concerned. Similar conclusions
reached in this country, from a study of the relations of its present flora
with that which in earlier ages occupied the arctic zone, might also be
referred to. (See preceding article.)

An excellent instance of the way in which the derivative hypothesis is
practically applied in these days, by a zoologist, is before us in Prof.
Flower's modest and admirable paper on the Ungulata, or hoofed animals, and
their geological history. We  refer to it here, not so much for the
conclusions it reaches or suggests, as to commend the clearness and the
impartiality of the handling, and the sobriety and moderation of the
deductions. Confining himself "within the region of the known, it is shown
that, at least in one group of animals, the facts which we have as yet
acquired point to the former existence of various intermediate forms, so
numerous that they go far to discredit the view of the sudden introduction
of new species. . . . The modern forms are placed along lines which
converge toward a common centre." The gaps between the existing forms of
the odd-toed group of ungulates (of which horses, rhinoceroses, and tapirs,
are the principal representatives) are most bridged over by palaeontology,
and somewhat the same may be said of the even-toed group, to which the
ruminants and the porcine genus belong. "Moreover, the lines of both groups
to a certain extent approximate, but, within the limits of our knowledge,
they do not meet. . - . Was the order according to which the introduction
of new forms seems to have taken place since the Eocene then entirely
changed, or did it continue as far back as the period when these lines would
have been gradually fused in a common centre?"

Facts like these, which suggest grave diversification under long lapse of
time, are well supplemented by those which essentially demonstrate a
slighter diversification of many species over a wide range of space;
whether into species or races depends partly upon how the naturalist uses
these terms, partly upon the extent of the observations, or luck in getting
together intermediate forms. The researches of Prof. Baird upon the birds
of this continent afford a good illustration. A great number of our birds
which have been, and must needs have been, regarded as very distinct
species, each mainly with its own geographical area, are found to mingle
their characters along bordering lines; and the same kinds of differences
(of coloration, form, or other) are found to prevail through the species of
each region, thus impressing upon them a geographical facies. Upon a
submergence of the continent, reducing these several regions to islands
sufficiently separated, these forms would be unquestioned species.

Considerations such as these, of which a few specimens have now been
adduced (not general speculations, as the unscientific are apt to suppose),
and trials of the new views to see how far they will explain the problems
or collocate the facts they are severally dealing with, are what have
mainly influenced working naturalists in the direction of the provisional
acceptance of the derivative hypothesis. They leave to polemical
speculators the fruitless discussion of the question whether all species
came from one or two, or more; they are trying to grasp the thing by the
near, not by the farther end, and to ascertain, first of all, whether it is
probable or provable that present species are descendants of former ones
which were like them, but less and less like them the farther back we go.

And it is worth noting that they all seem to be utterly unconscious of
wrong-doing. Their repugnance to novel hypotheses is only the natural and
healthy one. A change of a wonted line of thought is not made without an
effort, nor need be made without adequate occasion. Some courage was
required of the man who first swallowed an oyster from its shell; and of
most of us the snail would still demand more. As the unaccustomed food
proves to be good and satisfying, and also harmless, we may come to like
it. That, however, which many good and eminent naturalists find to be
healthful and reasonable, and others innocuous, a few still regard as most
unreasonable and harmful. At present, we call to mind only two who not only
hold to the entire fixity of species as an axiom or a confirmed principle,
but also as a dogma, and who maintain, either expressly or implicitly, that
the logical antithesis to the creation of species as they are, is not by
law (which implies intention), but by chance. A recent book by one of these
naturalists, or rather, by a geologist of eminence, the "Story of the Earth
and Man," by Dr. Dawson,4 is now before us. The title is too near that of
Guyot's "Earth and Man," with the publication of which popular volume that
distinguished physical naturalist commenced his career in this country; and
such catch-titles are a sort of trade-mark. As to the nature and merits of
Dr. Dawson's work, we have left ourselves space only to say: 1. That it is
addressed ad populum, which renders it rather the more than less amenable
to the criticisms we may be disposed to make upon it. 2. That the author is
thoroughly convinced that no species or form deserving the name was ever
derived from another, or originated from natural causes; and he maintains
this doctrine with earnestness, much variety of argument and illustration,
and no small ability; so that he may be taken as a representative of the
view exactly opposed to that which is favored by those naturalists whose
essays we have been considering--to whom, indeed, he stands in marked
contrast in spirit and method, being greatly disposed to argue the question
from the remote rather than the near end. 3. And finally, he has a
conviction that the evolutionary doctrines of the day are not only untrue,
but thoroughly bad and irreligious. This belief, and the natural anxiety
with which he contemplates their prevalence, may excuse a certain vehemence
and looseness of statement which were better avoided, as where the
geologists of the day are said to be "broken up into bands of specialists,
little better than scientific banditti, liable to be beaten in detail, and
prone to commit outrages on common-sense and good taste which bring their
otherwise good cause into disrepute;" and where he despairingly suggests
that the prevalence of the doctrines he deprecates "seems to indicate that
the accumulated facts of our age have gone altogether beyond its capacity
for generalization, and, but for the vigor which one sees everywhere, might
be taken as an indication that the human mind has fallen into a state of
senility."

This is droll reading, when one considers that the "evolutionist" is the
only sort of naturalist who has much occasion to employ his "capacity for
generalization" upon "the accumulated facts" in their bearing upon the
problem of the origin of species; since the "special creationist," who
maintains that they were supernaturally originated just as they are, by the
very terms of his doctrine places them out of the reach of scientific
explanation. Again, when one reflects upon the new impetus which the
derivative hypothesis has given to systematic natural history, and reads
the declaration of a master in this department (the President of the
Linnean Society) that Mr. Darwin "has in this nineteenth century brought
about as great a revolution in the philosophic study of organic Nature as
that which was effected in the previous century by the immortal Swede," it
sounds oddly to hear from Dr. Dawson that "it obliterates the fine
perception of differences from the mind of the naturalist, . . . . destroys
the possibility of a philosophical classification, reducing all things to a
mere series, and leads to a rapid decay in systematic zoology and botany,
which is already very manifest among the disciples of Spencer and Darwin in
England." So, also, "it removes from the study of Nature the ideas of final
cause and purpose"--a sentence which reads curiously in the light of
Darwin's special investigations, such as those upon the climbing of plants,
the agency of insects in the fertilization of blossoms, and the like, which
have brought back teleology to natural science, wedded to morphology and
already fruitful of discoveries.     The difficulty with Dr. Dawson here is
(and it need not be underrated) that apparently he cannot as yet believe an
adaptation, act, or result, to be purposed the apparatus of which is
perfected or evolved in the course of Nature--a common but a crude state of
mind on the part of those who believe that there is any originating purpose
in the universe, and one which, we are sure, Dr. Dawson does not share as
respects the material world until he reaches the organic kingdoms, and
there, possibly, because he sees man at the head of them--of them, while
above them. However that may be, the position which Dr. Dawson chooses to
occupy is not left uncertain. After concluding, substantially, that those
"evolutionists" who exclude design from Nature thereby exclude theism, which
nobody will deny, he proceeds (on page 348) to give his opinion that the
"evolutionism which professes to have a creator somewhere behind it . . . .
is practically atheistic," and, "if possible, more unphilosophical than
that which professes to set out from absolute and eternal nonentity," etc.

There are some sentences which might lead one to suppose that Dr. Dawson
himself admitted of an evolution "with a creator somewhere behind it." He
offers it (page 320) as a permissible alternative that even man "has been
created mediately by the operation of forces also concerned in the
production of other animals;" concedes that a just theory "does not even
exclude evolution or derivation, to a certain extent" (page 341); and that
"a modern man of science" may safely hold "that all things have been
produced by the Supreme Creative Will, acting either directly or through
the agency of the forces and materials of his own production." Well, if
this be so, why denounce the modern man of science so severely upon the
other page merely for accepting the permission? At first sight, it might be
thought that our author is exposing himself in one paragraph to a share of
the condemnation which he deals out in the other. But the permitted views
are nowhere adopted as his own; the evolution is elsewhere restricted
within specific limits; and as to "mediate creation," although we cannot
divine what is here meant by the term, there is reason to think it does not
imply that the several species of a genus were mediately created, in a
natural way, through the supernatural creation of a remote common ancestor.
So that his own judgment in the matter is probably more correctly gathered
from the extract above referred to and other similar deliverances, such as
that in which he warns those who "endeavor to steer a middle course, and to
maintain that the Creator has proceeded by way of evolution," that "the
bare, hard logic of Spencer, the greatest English authority on evolution,
leaves no place for this compromise, and shows that the theory, carried out
to its legitimate consequences, excludes the knowledge of a Creator and the
possibility of his work."

Now, this is a dangerous line to take. Those defenders of the faith are
more zealous than wise who must needs fire away in their catapults the very
bastions of the citadel, in the defense of outposts that have become
untenable. It has been and always will be possible to take an atheistic
view of Nature, but far more reasonable from science and philosophy only to
take a theistic view. Voltaire's saying here holds true: that if there were
no God known, it would be necessary to invent one. It is the best, if not
the only, hypothesis for the explanation of the facts. Whether the
philosophy of Herbert Spencer (which is not to our liking) is here fairly
presented, we have little occasion and no time to consider. In this regard,
the close of his article No. 12 in the Contemporary Review shows, at least,
his expectation of the entire permanence of our ideas of cause, origin, and
religion, and predicts the futility of the expectation that the "religion
of humanity" will be the religion of the future, or "can ever more than
temporarily shut out the thought of a Power, of which humanity is but a
small and fugitive product, which was in its course of ever-changing
manifestation before humanity was, and will continue through other
manifestations when humanity has ceased to be." If, on the one hand, the
philosophy of the unknowable of the Infinite may be held in a merely
quasi-theistic or even atheistic way, were not its ablest expounders and
defenders Hamilton and Dean Mansel? One would sup-pose that Dr. Dawson
might discern at least as much of a divine foundation to Nature as Herbert
Spencer and Matthew Arnold; might recognize in this power that "something
not ourselves that makes" for order as well as "for righteousness," and
which he fitly terms supreme creative will; and, resting in this, endure
with more complacency and faith the inevitable prevalence of evolutionary
views which he is powerless to hinder. Although he cannot arrest the stream,
he might do something toward keeping it in safe channels.

We wished to say something about the way in which scientific men, worthy of
the name, hold hypotheses and theories, using them for the purpose of
investigation and the collocation of facts, yielding or withholding assent
in degrees or provisionally, according to the amount of verification or
likelihood, or holding it long in suspense; which is quite in contrast to
that of amateurs and general speculators (not that we reckon Dr. Dawson in
this class), whose assent or denial seldom waits, or endures qualification.
With them it must on all occasions be yea or nay only, according to the
letter of the Scriptural injunction, and whatsoever is less than this, or
between the two, cometh of evil.



