XIII

EVOLUTIONARY TELEOLOGY


When Cuvier spoke of the "combination of organs in such order that they may
be in consistence with the part which the animal has to play in Nature,"
his opponent, Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, rejoined, "I know nothing of animals
which have to play a part in Nature." The discussion was a notable one in
its day. From that time to this, the reaction of morphology against "final
causes" has not rarely gone to the extent of denying the need and the
propriety of assuming ends in the study of animal and vegetable
organizations. Especially in our day, when it became apparent that the
actual use of an organ might not be the fundamental reason of its
existence-- that one and the same organ, morphologically considered, was
modified in different cases to the most diverse uses, while intrinsically
different organs subserved identical functions, and consequently that use
was a fallacious and homology the surer guide to correct classification--it
was not surprising that teleological ideas nearly disappeared from natural
history. Probably it is still generally thought that the school of Cuvier
and that of St.-Hilaire have neither common ground nor capability of
reconcilement.

In a review of Darwin's volume on the "Fertilization of Orchids" * (too
technical and too detailed for reproduction here), and later in a brief
sketch of the character of his scientific work (art. IX, p. 234), we
expressed our sense of the great gain to science from his having brought
back teleology to natural history. In Darwinism, usefulness and purpose
come to the front again as working principles of the first order; upon
them, indeed, the whole system rests.

To most, this restoration of teleology has come from an unexpected quarter,
and in an unwonted guise; so that the first look of it is by no means
reassuring to the minds of those who cherish theistic views of Nature.
Adaptations irresistibly suggesting purpose had their supreme application
in natural theology. Being manifold, particular, and exquisite, and
evidently inwrought into the whole system of the organic world, they were
held to furnish irrefragable as well as independent proof of a personal
designer, a divine originator of Nature. By a confusion of thought, now
obvious, but at the time not unnatural, they were also regarded as proof of
a direct execution of the contriver's purpose in the creation of each organ
and organism, as it were, in the manner man contrives and puts together a
machine--an idea which has been set up as the orthodox doctrine, but which
to St. Augustine and other learned Christian fathers would have savored of
heterodoxy.

In the doctrine of the origination of species through natural selection,
these adaptations appear as the outcome rather than as the motive, as final
results rather than final causes. Adaptation to use, although the very
essence of Darwinism, is not a fixed and inflexible adaptation, realized
once for all at the outset; it includes a long progression and succession
of modifications, adjusting themselves to changing circumstances, under
which they may be more and more diversified, specialized, and in a just
sense perfected. Now, the question is, Does this involve the destruction or
only the reconstruction of our consecrated ideas of teleology? Is it
compatible with our seemingly inbore conception of Nature as an ordered
system? Furthermore, and above all, can the Darwinian theory itself
dispense with the idea of purpose, in the ordinary sense of the word, as
tantamount to design?

From two opposing sides we hear the first two questions answered in the
negative. And an affirmative response to the third is directly implied in
the following citation:


"The word purpose has been used in a sense to which it is, perhaps, worth
while to call attention. Adaptation of means to an end may be provided in
two ways that we at present know of: by processes of natural selection, and
by the agency of an intelligence in which an image or idea of the end
preceded the use of the means. In both cases the existence of the
adaptation is accounted for by the necessity or utility of the end. It
seems to me convenient to use the word purpose as meaning generally the end
to which certain means are adapted, both in these two cases and in any
other that may hereafter become known, provided only that the adaptation is
accounted for by the necessity or utility of the end. And there seems no
objection to the use of the phrase 'final cause' in this wider sense, if it
is to be kept at all. The word 'design' might then be kept for the special
case of adaptation by an intelligence. And we may then say that, since the
process of natural selection has been understood, purpose has ceased to
suggest design to instructed people, except in cases where the agency of
man is independently probable."--P.C.W., in the Contemporary Review for
September, 1875, p. 657.


The distinction made by this anonymous writer is convenient and useful, and
his statement clear. We propose to adopt this use of the terms purpose and
design, and to examine the allegation. The latter comes to this: "Processes
of natural selection" exclude "the agency of an intelligence in which the
image or idea of the end precedes the use of the means;" and since the
former have been understood "purpose has ceased to suggest design to
instructed people, except in cases where the agency of man is independently
probable." The maxim "L'homme propose, Dieu dispose," under this reading
means that the former has the monopoly of design, while the latter
accomplishes without designing. Man's works alone suggest design.

But it is clear to us that this monopoly is shared with certain beings of
inferior grade. Granting that quite possibly the capture of flies for food
by Dionaea and the sundews may be attributed to purpose apart from design
(if it be practicable in the last resort to maintain this now convenient
distinction), still their capture by a spider's-web, and by a swallow on
the wing, can hardly "cease to suggest design to instructed people." And
surely, in coming at his master's call, the dog fulfills his own design as
well as that of his master; and so of other actions and constructions of
brute animals.

Without doubt so acute a writer has a clear and sensible meaning; so we
conclude that he regards brutes as automata, and was thinking of design as
coextensive merely with general conceptions. Not concerning ourselves with
the difficulty he may have in drawing a line between the simpler judgments
and affections of man and those of the highest-endowed brutes, we subserve
our immediate ends by remarking that the automatic theory would seem to be
one which can least of all dispense with design, since, either in the
literal or current sense of the word, undesigned automatism is, as near as
may be, a contradiction in terms. As the automaton man constructs manifests
the designs of its maker and mover, so the more efficient automata which
man did not construct would not legitimately suggest less than human
intelligence. And so all adaptations in the animal and vegetable world
which irresistibly suggest purpose (in the sense now accepted) would also
suggest design, and, under the law of parsimony, claim to be thus
interpreted, unless some other hypothesis will better account for the
facts. We will consider, presently, if any other does so.

We here claim only that some beings other than men design, and that the
adaptations of means to ends in the structure of animals and plants, in so
far as they carry the marks of purpose, carry also the implication of
having been designed. Also, that the idea or hypothesis of a designing
mind, as the author of Nature--however we came by it--having possession of
the field, and being one which man, himself a designer, seemingly must
needs form, cannot be rivaled except by some other equally adequate for
explanation, or displaced except by showing the illegitimacy of the
inference. As to the latter, is the common apprehension and sense of
mankind in this regard well grounded? Can we rightly reason from our own
intelligence and powers to a higher or a supreme intelligence ordering and
shaping the system of Nature?

A very able and ingenious writer upon "The Evidences of Design in Nature,"
in the Westminster Review for July, 1875, maintains the negative. His
article may be taken as the argument in support of the position assumed by
"P.C.W.," in the Contemporary Review above cited. It opens with the
admission that the orthodox view is the most simple and apparently
convincing, has had for centuries the unhesitating assent of an immense
majority of thinkers, and that the latest master-writer upon the subject
disposed to reject it, namely, Mill, comes to the conclusion that, "in the
present state of our knowledge, the adaptations in Nature afford a large
balance of probability in favor of creation by intelligence." It proceeds
to attack not so much the evidence in favor of design as the foundation
upon which the whole doctrine rests, and closes with the prediction that
sooner or later the superstructure must fall. And, truly, if his reasonings
are legitimate, and his conclusions just, "Science has laid the axe to the
tree."


"Given a set of marks which we look upon in human productions as unfailing
indications of design," he asks, "is not the inference equally legitimate
when we recognize these marks in Nature? To gaze on such a universe as
this, to feel our hearts exult within us in the fullness of existence, and
to offer in explanation of such beneficent provision no other word but
Chance, seems as unthankful and iniquitous as it seems absurd. Chance
produces nothing in the human sphere; nothing, at least, that can be relied
upon for good. Design alone engenders harmony, consistency; and Chance not
only never is the parent, but is constantly the enemy of these. How, then,
can we suppose Chance to be the author of a system in which everything is
as regular as clockwork? . . . The hypothesis of Chance is inadmissible."


There is, then, in Nature, an order; and, in "P.C.W.'s" sense of the word,
a manifest purpose. Some sort of conception as to the cause of it is
inevitable, that of design first and foremost. "Why"--the Westminster
Reviewer repeats the question--"why, if the marks of utility and adaptation
are conclusive in the works of man, should they not be considered equally
conclusive in the works of Nature?" His answer appears to us more ingenious
than sound. Because, referring to Paley's watch,--


"The watch-finder is not guided solely in his inference by marks of
adaptation and utility; he would recognize design in half a watch, in a
mere fragment of a watch, just as surely as in a whole time-keeper . . .
Two cog-wheels, grasping each other, will be thought conclusive evidence of
design, quite independently of any use attaching to them. And the
inference, indeed, is perfectly correct; only it is an inference, not from
a mark of design, properly so called, but from a mark of human workmanship .
. . No more is needed for the watch-finder, since all the works of man are,
at the same time, products of design; but a great deal more is requisite
for us, who are called upon by Paley to recognize design in works in which
this stamp, this label of human workmanship, is wanting. The mental
operation required in the one case is radically different from that
performed in the other; there is no parallel, and Paley's demonstration is
totally irrelevant."[XIII-2]  But, surely, all human doings are not
"products of design;" many are contingent or accidental. And why not
suppose that the finder of the watch, or of the watch-wheel, infers both
design and human workmanship? The two are mutually exclusive only on the
supposition that man alone is a designer, which is simply begging the
question in discussion. If the watch-finder's attention had been arrested by
a different object, such as a spider's web, he would have inferred both
design and non-human workmanship. Of some objects he might be uncertain
whether they were of human origin or not, with-out ever doubting they were
designed, while of others this might remain doubtful. Nor is man's
recognition of human workmanship, or of any other, dependent upon his
comprehending how it was done, or what particular ends it subserves. Such
considerations make it clear that "the label of human workmanship" is not
the generic stamp from which man infers design. It seems equally clear that
"the mental operation required in the one case" is not so radically or
materially "different from that performed in the other" as this writer
would have us suppose. The judgment respecting a spider's web, or a
trap-door spider's dwelling, would be the very same in this regard if it
preceded, as it occasionally might, all knowledge of whether the object met
with were of human or animal origin. A dam across a stream, and the
appearance of the stumps of trees which entered into its formation, would
suggest design quite irrespective of and antecedent to the considerable
knowledge or experience which would enable the beholder to decide whether
this was the work of men or of beavers. Why, then, should the judgment that
any particular structure is a designed work be thought illegitimate when
attributed to a higher instead of a lower intelligence than that of man? It
might, indeed, be so if the supposed observer had no conception of a power
and intelligence superior to his own. But it would then be more than
"irrelevant;" it would be impossible, except on the supposition that the
phenomena would of themselves give rise to such an inference. That it is
now possible to make the inference, and, indeed, hardly possible not to make
it, is sufficient warrant of its relevancy.

It may, of course, be rejoined that, if this important factor is given, the
inference yields no independent argument of a divine creator; and it may
also be reasonably urged that the difference between things that are made
under our observation and comprehension, and things that grow, but have
originated beyond our comprehension, is too wide for a sure inference from
the one to the other. But the present question involves neither of these.
It is simply whether the argument for design from adaptations in Nature is
relevant, not whether it is independent or sure. It is conceded that the
argument is analogical, and the parallel incomplete. But the gist is in the
points that are parallel or similar. Pulleys, valves, and suchlike
elaborate mechanical adaptations, cannot differ greatly in meaning,
wherever met with.

The opposing argument is repeated and passed in another form:


"The evidence of design afforded by the marks of adaptation in works of
human competence is null and void in the case of creation itself . . .
Nature is full of adaptations; but these are valueless to us as traces of
design, unless we know something of the rival adaptations among which an
intelligent being might have chosen. To assert that in Nature no such rival
adaptations existed, and that in every case the useful function in question
could be established by no other instrument but one, is simply to reason in
a circle, since it is solely from what we find existing that our notions of
possibility and impossibility are drawn. . . . We cannot imagine ourselves
in the position of the Creator before his work began, nor examine the
materials among which he had to choose, nor count the laws which limited
his operations. Here all is dark, and the inference we draw from the
seeming perfections of the existing instruments or means is a measure of
nothing but our ignorance."


But the question is not about the perfection of these adaptations, or
whether others might have been instituted in their place. It is simply
whether observed adaptations of intricate sorts, admirably subserving uses,
do or do not legitimately suggest to one designing mind that they are the
product of some other. If so, no amount of ignorance, or even
inconceivability, of the conditions and mode of production could affect the
validity of the inference, nor could it be affected by any misunderstanding
on our part as to what the particular use or function was; a statement
which would have been deemed superfluous, except for the following:


"There is not an organ in our bodies but what has passed, and is still
passing, through a series of different and often contradictory
interpretations. Our lungs, for instance, were anciently conceived to be a
kind of cooling apparatus, a refrigerator; at the close of the last century
they were supposed to be a centre of combustion; and nowadays both these
theories have been abandoned for a third . . . Have these changes modified
in the slightest degree the supposed evidence of design?"


We have not the least idea why they should. So, also, of complicated
processes, such as human digestion, being replaced by other and simpler
ones in lower animals, or even in certain plants. If "we argue the
necessity of every adaptation solely from the fact that it exists," and
that "we cannot mutilate it grossly without injury to the function," we do
not "announce triumphantly that digestion is impossible in any way but
this," etc., but see equal wisdom and no impugnment of design in any number
of simpler adaptations accomplishing equivalent purposes in lower animals.

Finally, adaptation and utility being the only marks of design in Nature
which we possess, and adaptation only as subservient to usefulness, the
Westminster Reviewer shows us how:


"The argument from utility may be equally refuted another way. We found in
our discussion of the mark of adaptation that the positive evidence of
design afforded by the mechanisms of the human frame was never accompanied
by the possibility of negative evidence. We regarded this as a suspicious
circumstance, just as the fox, invited to attend the lion in his den, was
deterred from his visit by observing that all the foottracks lay in one
direction. The same suspicious circumstance warns us now. If positive
evidence of design be afforded by the presence of a faculty, negative
evidence of design ought to be afforded by the absence of a faculty. This,
however, is not the case." [Then follows the account of a butterfly, which,
from the wonderful power of the males to find the females at a great
distance, is conceived to possess a sixth sense.] "Do we consider the
deficiency of this sixth sense in man as the slightest evidence against
design? Should we be less apt to infer creative wisdom if we had only four
senses instead of five, or three instead of four? No, the case would stand
precisely as it does now. We value our senses simply because we have them,
and because our conception of life as we desire it is drawn from them. But
to reason from such value to the origin of our endowment, to argue that our
senses must have been given to us by a deity because we prize them, is
evidently to move round and round in a vicious circle.

"The same rejoinder is easily applicable to the argument from beauty, which
indeed is only a particular aspect of the argument from utility. It is
certainly improbable that a random daubing of colors on a canvas will
produce a tolerable painting, even should the experiment be continued for
thousands of years. Our conception of beauty being given, it is utterly
improbable that chance should select, out of the infinity of combinations
which form and color may afford, the precise combination which that
conception will approve. But the universe is not posterior to our sense of
beauty, but antecedent to it: our sense of beauty grows out of what we see;
and hence the conformance of our world to our aesthetical conceptions is
evidence, not of the world's origin, but of our own."


We are accustomed to hear design doubted on account of certain failures of
provision, waste of resources, or functionless condition of organs; but it
is refreshingly new to have the very harmony itself of man with his
surroundings, and the completeness of provision for his wants and desires,
brought up as a refutation of the validity of the argument for design. It
is hard, indeed, if man must be out of harmony with Nature in order to
judge anything respecting it, or his relations with it; if he must have
experience of chaos before he can predicate anything of order.

But is it true that man has all that he conceives of, or thinks would be
useful, and has no "negative evidence of design afforded by the absence of
a faculty" to set against the positive evidence afforded by its presence?
He notes that he lacks the faculty of flight, sometimes wants it, and in
dreams imagines that he has it, yet as thoroughly believes that he was
designed not to have it as that he was designed to have the faculties and
organs which he possesses. He notes that some animals lack sight, and so,
with this negative side of the testimony to the value of vision, he is "apt
to infer creative wisdom" both in what he enjoys and in what the lower
animal neither needs nor wants. That man does not miss that which he has no
conception of, and is by this limitation disqualified from judging rightly
of what he can conceive and know, is what the Westminster Reviewer comes
to, as follows:


"We value the constitution of our world because we live by it, and because
we cannot conceive ourselves as living otherwise. Our conceptions of
possibility, of law, of regularity, of logic, are all derived from the same
source; and as we are constantly compelled to work with these conceptions,
as in our increasing endeavors to better our condition and increase our
provision we are constantly compelled to guide ourselves by Nature's
regulations, we accustom ourselves to look upon these regularities and
conceptions as antecedent to all work, even to a Creator's, and to judge of
the origin of Nature as we judge of the origin of inventions and utilities
ascribable to man. This explains why the argument of design has enjoyed
such universal popularity. But that such popularity is no criterion of the
argument's worth, and that, indeed, it is no evidence of anything save of
an unhappy weakness in man's mental constitution, is abundantly proved by
the explanation itself."    Well, the constitution and condition of man being
such that he always does infer design in Nature, what stronger presumption
could there possibly be of the relevancy of the inference? We do not say of
its correctness: that is another thing, and is not the present point. At
the last, as has well been said, the whole question resolves itself into
one respecting the ultimate veracity of Nature, or of the author of Nature,
if there be any.

Passing from these attempts to undermine the foundation of the
doctrine--which we judge to be unsuccessful--we turn to the consideration
of those aimed at the superstructure. Evidences of design may be relevant,
but not cogent. They may, as Mill thought, preponderate, or the wavering
balance may incline the other way. There are two lines of argument: one
against the sufficiency, the other against the necessity, of the principle
of design. Design has been denied on the ground that it squares with only
one part of the facts, and fails to explain others; it may be superseded by
showing that all the facts are in the way of being explained without it.

The things which the principle of design does not explain are many and
serious. Some are in their nature inexplicable, at least are beyond the
power and province of science. Others are of matters which scientific
students have to consider, and upon which they may form opinions, more or
less well grounded. As to biological science--with which alone we are
concerned--it is getting to be generally thought that this principle, as
commonly understood, is weighted with much more than it can carry.

This statement will not be thought exaggerated by those most familiar with
the facts and the ideas of the age, and accustomed to look them in the
face. Design is held to, no doubt, by most, and by a sure instinct; not,
however, as always offering an explanation of the facts, but in spite of
the failure to do so. The stumbling-blocks are various, and they lie in
every path: we can allude only to one or two as specimens.

Adaptation and utility are the marks of design. What, then, are organs not
adapted to use marks of? Functionless organs of some sort are the heritage
of almost every species. We have ways of seeming to account for them--and
of late one which may really account for them--but they are unaccountable
on the principle of design. Some, shutting their eyes to the difficulty,
deny that we know them to be functionless, and prefer to believe they must
have a use because they exist, and are more or less connected with organs
which are correlated to obvious use; but only blindfolded persons care to
tread the round of so narrow a circle. Of late some such abortive organs in
flowers and fruits are found to have a use, though not the use of their
kind. But unwavering believers in design should not trust too much to
instances of this sort. There is an old adage that, if anything be kept
long enough, a use will be found for it. If the following up of this line,
when it comes in our way, should bring us round again to a teleological
principle, it will not be one which conforms to the prevalent ideas now
attacked.

It is commonly said that abortive and useless organs exist for the sake of
symmetry, or as parts of a plan. To say this, and stop there, is a fine
instance of mere seeming to say something. For, under the principle of
design, what is the sense of introducing useless parts into a useful
organism, and what shadow of explanation does "symmetry" give? To go
further and explain the cause of the symmetry and how abortive organs came
to be, is more to the purpose, but it introduces quite another principle
than that of design. The difficulty recurs in a somewhat different form
when an organ is useful and of exquisite perfection in some species, but
functionless in another. An organ, such as an eye, strikes us by its
exquisite and, as we may, perfect adaptation and utility in some animal; it
is found repeated, still useful but destitute of many of its adaptations,
in some animal of lower grade; in some one lower still it is rudimentary and
useless. It is asked, If the first was so created for its obvious and actual
use, and the second for such use as it has, what was the design of the
third? One more case, in which use after all is well subserved, we cite
from the article already much quoted from:


"It is well known that certain fishes (Pleuronecta) display the singularity
of having both eyes on the same side of their head, one eye being placed a
little higher than the other. This arrangement has its utility; for the
Pleuronecta, swimming on their side quite near the bottom of the sea, have
little occasion for their eyesight except to observe what is going on above
them. But the detail to which we would call notice is, that the original
position of the eyes is symmetrical in these fishes, and that it is only at
a certain point of their development that the anomaly is manifested, one of
the eyes passing to the other side of the head. It is almost inconceivable
that an intelligent being should have selected such an arrangement; and
that, intending the eyes to be used only on one side of the head, he should
have placed them originally on different sides."


Then the waste of being is enormous, far beyond the common apprehension.
Seeds, eggs, and other germs, are designed to be plants and animals, but
not one of a thousand or of a million achieves its destiny. Those that fall
into fitting places and in fitting numbers find beneficent provision, and,
if they were to wake to consciousness, might argue design from the
adaptation of their surroundings to their well-being. But what of the vast
majority that perish? As of the light of the sun, sent forth in all
directions, only a minute portion is intercepted by the earth or other
planets where some of it may be utilized for present or future life, so of
potential organisms, or organisms begun, no larger proportion attain the
presumed end of their creation.


"Destruction, therefore, is the rule; life is the exception. We notice
chiefly the exception--namely, the lucky prize-winner in the lottery-- and
take but little thought about the losers, who vanish from our field of
observation, and whose number it is often impossible to estimate. But, in
this question of design, the losers are important witnesses. If the maxim
'audi alteram partem' is applicable anywhere, it is applicable here. We
must hear both sides, and the testimony of the seed fallen on good ground
must be corrected by the testimony of that which falls by the wayside, or on
the rocks. When we find, as we have seen above, that the sowing is a
scattering at random, and that, for one being provided for and living, ten
thousand perish unprovided for, we must allow that the existing order would
be accounted as the worst disorder in any human sphere of action."


It is urged, moreover, that all this and much more applies equally to the
past stages of our earth and its immensely long and varied succession of
former inhabitants, different from, yet intimately connected with, the
present. It is not one specific creation that the question has to deal
with--as was thought not very many years ago--but a series of creations
through countless ages, and of which the beginning is unknown.

These references touch a few out of many points, and merely allude to some
of the difficulties which the unheeding pass by, but which, when brought
before the mind, are seen to be stupendous.

Somewhat may be justly, or at least plausibly, said in reply to all this
from the ordinary standpoint, but probably not to much effect. There were
always insuperable difficulties, which, when they seemed to be few, might
be regarded as exceptional; but, as they increase in number and variety,
they seem to fall into a system. No doubt we may still insist that, "in the
present state of our knowledge, the adaptations in Nature afford a large
balance of probability in favor of creation by intelligence," as Mill
concluded; and probability must needs be the guide of reason through these
dark places. Still, the balancing of irreconcilable facts is not a
satisfying occupation, nor a wholly hopeful one, while fresh weights are
from time to time dropping into the lighter side of the balance. Strong as
our convictions are, they may be overborne by evidence. We cannot rival the
fabled woman of Ephesus, who, beginning by carrying her calf from the day of
its birth, was still able to do so when it became an ox. The burden which
our fathers carried comfortably, with some adventitious help, has become
too heavy for our shoulders.

Seriously, there must be something wrong in the position, some baleful
error mixed with the truth, to which this contradiction of our inmost
convictions may be attributed. The error, as we suppose, lies in the
combination of the principle of design with the hypothesis of the
immutability and isolated creation of species. The latter hypothesis, in
its nature un-provable, has, on scientific grounds, become so far
improbable that few, even of the anti-Darwinian naturalists, now hold to it;
and, whatever may once have been its religious claims, it is at present a
hinderance rather than a help to any just and consistent teleology.

By the adoption of the Darwinian hypothesis, or something like it, which we
incline to favor, many of the difficulties are obviated, and others
diminished. In the comprehensive and far-reaching teleology which may take
the place of the former narrow conceptions, organs and even faculties,
useless to the individual, find their explanation and reason of being.
Either they have done service in the past, or they may do service in the
future. They may have been essentially useful in one way in a past species,
and, though now functionless, they may be turned to useful account in some
very different way hereafter. In botany several cases come to our mind
which suggest such interpretation.

Under this view, moreover, waste of life and material in organic Nature
ceases to be utterly inexplicable, because it ceases to be objectless. It
is seen to be a part of the general "economy of Nature," a phrase which has
a real meaning. One good illustration of it is furnished by the pollen of
flowers. The seeming waste of this in a pine-forest is enormous. It gives
rise to the so-called "showers of sulphur," which every one has heard of.
Myriads upon myriads of pollen-grains (each an elaborate organic structure)
are wastefully dispersed by the winds to one which reaches a female flower
and fertilizes a seed. Contrast this with one of the close-fertilized
flowers of a violet, in which there are not many times more grains of
pollen produced than there are of seeds to be fertilized; or with an
orchis-flower, in which the proportion is not widely different. These
latter are certainly the more economical; but there is reason to believe
that the former arrangement is not wasteful. The plan in the violet-flower
assures the result with the greatest possible saving of material and
action; but this result, being close-fertilization or breeding in and in,
would, without much doubt, in the course of time, defeat the very object of
having seeds at all.[XIII-3] So the same plant produces other flowers also,
provided with a large surplus of pollen, and endowed (as the others are
not) with color, fragrance, and nectar, attractive to certain insects, which
are thereby induced to convey this pollen from blossom to blossom, that it
may fulfill its office. In such blossoms, and in the great majority of
flowers, the fertilization and consequent perpetuity of which are committed
to insects, the likelihood that much pollen may be left behind or lost in
the transit is sufficient reason for the apparent superfluity. So, too, the
greater economy in orchis-flowers is accounted for by the fact that the
pollen is packed in coherent masses, all attached to a common stalk, the end
of which is expanded into a sort of button, with a glutinous adhesive face
(like a bit of sticking-plaster), and this is placed exactly where the head
of a moth or butterfly will be pressed against it when it sucks nectar from
the flower, and so the pollen will be bodily conveyed from blossom to
blossom, with small chance of waste or loss. The floral world is full of
such contrivances; and while they exist the doctrine of purpose or final
cause is not likely to die out. Now, in the contrasted case, that of
pine-trees, the vast superabundance of pollen would be sheer waste if the
intention was to fertilize the seeds of the same tree, or if there were any
provision for insect-carriage; but with wide-breeding as the end, and the
wind which "bloweth where it listeth" as the means, no one is entitled to
declare that pine-pollen is in wasteful excess. The cheapness of
wind-carriage may be set against the overproduction of pollen.

Similar considerations may apply to the mould-fungi and other very low
organisms, with spores dispersed through the air in countless myriads, but
of which only an infinitesimal portion find opportunity for development.
The myriads perish. The exceptional one, falling into a fit medium, is
imagined by the Westminster Reviewer to argue design from the beneficial
provision it finds itself enjoying, in happy ignorance of the perishing or
latent multitude. But, in view of the large and important part they play
(as the producers of all fermentation and as the omnipresent
scavenger-police of Nature), no good ground appears for arguing either
wasteful excess or absence of design from the vast disparity between their
potential and their actual numbers. The reserve and the active members of
the force should both be counted in, ready as they always and everywhere
are for service. Considering their ubiquity, persistent vitality, and
promptitude of action upon fitting occasion, the suggestion would rather be
that, while

". . . thousands at His bidding speed,
And post o'er land and ocean without rest,
They also serve [which] only stand and wait."


Finally, Darwinian teleology has the special advantage of accounting for
the imperfections and failures as well as for successes. It not only
accounts for them, but turns them to practical account. It explains the
seeming waste as being part and parcel of a great economical process.
Without the competing multitude, no struggle for life; and without this, no
natural selection and survival of the fittest, no continuous adaptation to
changing surroundings, no diversification and improvement, leading from
lower up to higher and nobler forms. So the most puzzling things of all to
the old-school teleologists are the principia of the Darwinian. In this
system the forms and species, in all their variety, are not mere ends in
themselves, but the whole a series of means and ends, in the contemplation
of which we may obtain higher and more comprehensive, and perhaps worthier,
as well as more consistent, views of design in Nature than heretofore. At
least, it would appear that in Darwinian evolution we may have a theory that
accords with if it does not explain the principal facts, and a teleology
that is free from the common objections.

But is it a teleology, or rather--to use the new-fangled term--a
dysteleology? That depends upon how it is held. Darwinian evolution
(whatever may be said of other kinds) is neither theistical nor
nontheistical. Its relations to the question of design belong to the
natural theologian, or, in the larger sense, to the philosopher. So long as
the world lasts it will probably be open to any one to hold consistently, in
the last resort, either of the two hypotheses, that of a divine mind, or
that of no divine mind. There is no way that we know of C by which the
alternative may be excluded. Viewed philosophically, the question only is,
Which is the better supported hypothesis of the two?

We have only to say that the Darwinian system, as we understand it,
coincides well with the theistic view of Nature. It not only acknowledges
purpose (in the Contemporary Reviewer's sense), but builds upon it; and if
purpose in this sense does not of itself imply design, it is certainly
compatible with it, and suggestive of it. Difficult as it may be to
conceive and impossible to demonstrate design in a whole of which the
series of parts appear to be contingent, the alternative may be yet more
difficult and less satisfactory. If all Nature is of a piece--as modern
physical philosophy insists-- then it seems clear that design must in some
way, and in some sense, pervade the system, or be wholly absent from it. Of
the alternatives, the predication of design--special, general, or
universal, as the case may be--is most natural to the mind; while the
exclusion of it throughout, because some utilities may happen, many
adaptations may be contingent results, and no organic maladaptations could
continue, runs counter to such analogies as we have to guide us, and leads
to a conclusion which few men ever rested in. It need not much trouble us
that we are incapable of drawing clear lines of demarkation between mere
utilities, contingent adaptations, and designed contrivances in Nature; for
we are in much the same condition as respects human affairs and those of
lower animals. What results are comprehended in a plan, and what are
incidental, is often more than we can readily determine in matters open to
observation. And in plans executed mediately or indirectly, and for ends
comprehensive and far-reaching, many purposed steps must appear to us
incidental or meaningless. But the higher the intelligence, the more fully
will the incidents enter into the plan, and the more universal and
interconnected may the ends be. Trite as the remark is, it would seem still
needful to insist that the failure of a finite being to compass the designs
of an infinite mind should not invalidate its conclusions respecting
proximate ends which he can understand. It is just as in physical science,
where, as our knowledge and grasp increase, and happy discoveries are made,
wider generalizations are formed, which commonly comprehend, rather than
destroy, the earlier and partial ones. So, too, the "sterility" of the old
doctrine of final causes in science, and the presumptuous uses made of
them, when it was supposed that every adapted arrangement or structure
existed for this or that direct and special end, and for no other, can
hardly be pressed to the conclusion that there are no final causes, i.e.,
ultimate reasons of things.[XIII-4] Design in Nature is distinguished from
that in human affairs--as it fittingly should be--by all comprehensiveness
and system. Its theological synonym is Providence. Its application in
particular is surrounded by similar insoluble difficulties; nevertheless,
both are bound up with theism.

Probably few at the present day will maintain that Darwinian evolution is
incompatible with the principle of design; but some insist that the theory
can dispense with, and in fact supersedes, this principle.

The Westminster Reviewer cleverly expounds how it does so. The exposition
is too long to quote, and an abstract is unnecessary, for the argument
adverse to design is, as usual, a mere summation or illustration of the
facts and assumptions of the hypothesis itself, by us freely admitted.
Simplest forms began; variations occurred among them; under the competition
consequent upon the arithmetical or geometrical progression in numbers,
only the fittest for the conditions survive and propagate, vary further, and
are similarly selected; and so on.


"Progress having once begun by the establishment of species, the laws of
atavism and variability will suffice to tell the remainder of the story.
The colonies gifted with the faculty of forming others in their likeness
will soon by their increase become sole masters of the field; but the
common enemy being thus destroyed, the struggle for life will be renewed
among the conquerors. The saying that 'a house divided against itself
cannot stand,' receives in Nature its flattest contradiction. Civil war is
here the very instrument of progress; it brings about the survival of the
fittest. Original differences in the cell-colonies, however slight, will
bring about differences of life and action; the latter, continued through
successive generations, will widen the original differences of structure;
innumerable species will thus spring up, branching forth in every direction
from the original stock; and the competition of these species among each
other for the ground they occupy, or the food they seek, will bring out and
develop the powers of the rivals. One chief cause of superiority will lie
in the division of labor instituted by each colony; or, in other words, in
the localization of the colony's functions. In the primitive associations
(as in the lowest organisms existing now), each cell performed much the
same work as its neighbor, and the functions necessary to the existence of
the whole (alimentation, digestion, respiration, etc.) were exercised by
every colonist in his own behalf. Social life, however, acting upon the
cells as it acts upon the members of a human family, soon created
differences among them--differences ever deepened by continuance, and
which, by narrowing the limits of each colonist's activity, and increasing
his dependence on the rest, rendered him fitter for his special task. Each
function was thus gradually monopolized; but it came to be the appanage of a
single group of cells, or organ; and so excellent did this arrangement
prove, so greatly were the powers of each commonwealth enhanced by the
division of its labor, that the more organs a colony possessed, the more
likely it was to succeed in its struggle for life. . . We shall go no
further, for the reader will easily fill out the remainder of the picture
for himself. Man is but an immense colony of cells, in which the division
of labor, together with the centralization of the nervous system, has
reached its highest limit. It is chiefly to this that his superiority is
due; a superiority so great, as regards certain functions of the brain,
that he may be excused for having denied his humbler relatives, and dreamed
that, standing alone in the centre of the universe, sun, moon, and stars,
were made for him."


Let us learn from the same writer how both eyes of the flounder get, quite
unintentionally, on the same side of the head. The writer makes much of this
case (see p. 306), and we are not disposed to pass it by:


"A similar application may be made to the Pleuronecta. Presumably, these
fishes had adopted their peculiar mode of swimming long before the position
of their eyes became adapted to it. A spontaneous variation occurred,
consisting in the passage of one eye to the opposite side of the head; and
this variation afforded its possessors such increased facilities of sight
that in the course of time the exception became the rule. But the
remarkable point is, that the law of heredity not only preserved the
variation itself, but the date of its occurrence; and that, although for
thousands of years the adult Pleuronecta have had both eyes on the same
side, the young still continue during their earlier development to exhibit
the contrary arrangement, just as if the variation still occurred
spontaneously."


Here a wonderful and one would say unaccountable transference takes place
in a short time. As Steenstrup showed, one eye actually passes through the
head while the young fish is growing. We ask how this comes about; and we
are told, truly enough, that it takes place in each generation because it
did so in the parents and in the whole line of ancestors. Why offspring
should be like parent is more than any one can explain; but so it is, in a
manner so nearly fixed and settled that we can count on it; yet not from
any absolute necessity that we know of, and, indeed, with sufficiently
striking difference now and then to demonstrate that it might have been
otherwise, or is so in a notable degree. This transference of one eye
through the head, from the side where it would be nearly useless to that in
which it may help the other, bears all the marks of purpose, and so carries
the implication of design. The case is adduced as part of the evidence that
Darwinian evolution supersedes design. But how? Not certainly in the way
this goes on from generation to generation; therefore, doubtless in the way
it began. So we look for the explanation of how it came about at the first
unintentionally or accidentally; how, under known or supposed conditions,
it must have happened, or at least was likely to happen. And we read, "A
spontaneous variation occurred, consisting in the passage of one eye to the
opposite side of the head." That is all; and we suppose there is nothing
more to be said. In short, this surprising thing was undesigned because it
took place, and has taken place ever since! The writer presumes, moreover
(but this is an obiter dictum), that the peculiarity originated long after
flounders had fixed the habit of swimming on one side (and in this
particular case it is rather difficult to see how the two may have gone on
pari passu), and so he cuts away all obvious occasion for the alteration
through the summation of slight variations in one direction, each bringing
some advantage.

This is a strongly-marked case; but its features, although unusually
prominent, are like those of the general run of the considerations by which
evolution is supposed to exclude design. Those of the penultimate citation
and its context are all of the same stamp. The differences which begin as
variations are said to be spontaneous--a metaphorical word of wide
meanings--are inferred to be casual (whereas we only know them to be
occult), or to be originated by surrounding agencies (which is not in a just
sense true); they are legitimately inferred to be led on by natural
selection, wholly new structures or organs appear, no one can say how,
certainly no one can show that they are necessary outcomes of what
preceded; and these two are through natural selection kept in harmony with
the surroundings, adapted to different ones, diversified, and perfected;
purposes are all along subserved through exquisite adaptations; and yet the
whole is thought to be undesigned, not because of any assigned reason why
this or that must have been thus or so, but simply because they all
occurred in Nature! The Darwinian theory implies that the birth and
development of a species are as natural as those of an individual, are
facts of the same kind in a higher order. The alleged proof of the absence
of design from it amounts to a simple reiteration of the statement, with
particulars. Now, the marks of contrivance in the structure of animals used
not to be questioned because of their coming in the way of birth and
development. It is curious that a further extension of this birth and
development should be held to disprove them. It appears to us that all this
is begging the question against design in Nature, instead of proving that
it may be dispensed with.

Two things have helped on this confusion. One is the notion of the direct
and independent creation of species, with only an ideal connection between
them, to question which was thought to question the principle of design.
The other is a wrong idea of the nature and province of natural selection.
In former papers we have over and over explained the Darwinian doctrine in
this respect. It may be briefly illustrated thus: Natural selection is not
the wind which propels the vessel, but the rudder which, by friction, now
on this side and now on that, shapes the course. The rudder acts while the
vessel is in motion, effects nothing when it is at rest. Variation answers
to the wind: "Thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell when it
cometh and whither it goeth." Its course is controlled by natural
selection, the action of which, at any given moment, is seemingly small or
insensible; but the ultimate results are great. This proceeds mainly
through outward influences. But we are more and more convinced that
variation, and therefore the ground of adaptation, is not a product of, but
a response to, the action of the environment. Variations, in other words,
the differences between individual plants and animals, however originated,
are evidently not from without but from within--not physical but
physiological.

We cannot here assign particularly the reasons for this opinion. But we
notice that the way in which varieties make their appearance strongly
suggests it. The variations of plants which spring up in a seed-bed, for
instance, seem to be in no assignable relation to the external conditions.
They arise, as we say, spontaneously, and either with decided characters
from the first, or with obvious tendencies in one or few directions. The
occult power, whatever it be, does not seem in any given case to act
vaguely, producing all sorts of variations from a common centre, to be
reduced by the struggle for life to fewness and the appearance of order;
there are, rather, orderly indications from the first. The variations of
which we speak, as originating in no obvious casual relation to the
external conditions, do not include dwarfed or starved, and gigantesque or
luxuriant forms, and those drawn up or expanded on the one hand, or
contracted and hardened on the other, by the direct difference in the supply
of food and moisture, light and heat. Here the action of the environment is
both obvious and direct. But such cases do not account for much in
evolution.

Moreover, while we see how the mere struggle and interplay among occurring
forms may improve them and lead them on, we cannot well imagine how the
adaptations which arrest our attention are thereby secured. Our difficulty,
let it be understood, is not about the natural origination of organs. To
the triumphant outcry, "How can an organ, such as an eye, be formed under
Nature?" we would respond with a parallel question, How can a complex and
elaborate organ, such as a nettle-sting, be formed under Nature? But it is
so formed. In the same species some individuals have these
exquisitely-constructed organs and some have not. And so of other glands,
the structure and adaptation of which, when looked into, appear to be as
wonderful as anything in Nature. The impossibility lies in conceiving how
the obvious purpose was effectuated under natural selection alone. This,
under our view, any amount of gradation in a series of forms goes a small
way in explaining. The transit of a young flounder's eye across the head is
a capital instance of a wonderful thing done under Nature, and done
unaccountably.

But simpler correlations are involved in similar difficulty. The
superabundance of the pollen of pine-trees above referred to, and in
oak-trees, is correlated with chance fertilization under the winds. In the
analogous instance of willows a diminished amount of pollen is correlated
with direct transportation by insects. Even in so simple a case as this it
is not easy to see how this difference in the conveyance would reduce the
quantity of pollen produced. It is, we know, in the very alphabet of
Darwinism that if a male willow-tree should produce a smaller amount of
pollen, and if this pollen communicated to the offspring of the female
flowers it fertilized a similar tendency (as it might), this male progeny
would secure whatever advantage might come from the saving of a certain
amount of work and material; but why should it begin to produce less pollen?
But this is as nothing compared with the arrangements in orchid-flowers,
where new and peculiar structures are introduced--structures which, once
originated and then set into variation, may thereupon be selected, and
thereby led on to improvement and diversification. But the origination, and
even the variation, still remains unexplained either by the action of
insects or by any of the processes which collectively are personified by
the term natural selection. We really believe that these exquisite
adaptations have come to pass in the course of Nature, and under natural
selection, but not that natural selection alone explains or in a just sense
originates them. Or rather, if this term is to stand for sufficient cause
and rational explanation, it must denote or include that inscrutable
something which produces--as well as that which results in the survival
of--"the fittest."

We have been considering this class of questions only as a naturalist might
who sought for the proper or reasonable interpretation of the problem
before him, unmingled with considerations from any other source. Weightier
arguments in the last resort, drawn from the intellectual and moral
constitution of man, lie on a higher plane, to which it was unnecessary for
our particular purpose to rise, however indispensable this be to a full
presentation of the evidence of mind in Nature. To us the evidence, judged
as impartially as we are capable of judging, appears convincing. But,
whatever view one unconvinced may take, it cannot remain doubtful what
position a theist ought to occupy. If he cannot recognize design in Nature
because of evolution, he may be ranked with those of whom it was said,
"Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe." How strange that a
convinced theist should be so prone to associate design only with miracle!

All turns, however, upon what is meant by this Nature, to which it appears
more and more probable that the being and becoming--no less than the
well-being and succession--of species and genera, as well as of
individuals, are committed. To us it means "the world of force and movement
in time and space," as Aristotle defined it--the system and totality of
things in the visible universe. What is generally called Nature Prof.
Tyndall names matter--a peculiar nomenclature, requiring new definitions (as
he avers), inviting misunderstanding, and leaving the questions we are
concerned with just where they were. For it is still to ask: whence this
rich endowment of matter? Whence comes that of which all we see and know is
the outcome? That to which potency may in the last resort be ascribed,
Prof. Tyndall, suspending further judgment, calls mystery--using the word
in one of its senses, namely, something hidden from us which we are not to
seek to know. But there are also mysteries proper to be inquired into and
to be reasoned about; and, although it may not be given unto us to know the
mystery of causation, there can hardly be a more legitimate subject of
philosophical inquiry. Most scientific men have thought themselves
intellectually authorized to have an opinion about it. "For, by the
primitive and very ancient men, it has been handed down in the form of
myths, and thus left to later generations, that the Divine it is which
holds together all Nature;" and this tradition, of which Aristotle, both
naturalist and philosopher, thus nobly speaks[XIII-5]--continued through
succeeding ages, and illuminated by the Light which has come into the
world--may still express the worthiest thoughts of the modern scientific
investigator and reasoner.



FOOTNOTES:

I-1. "On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the
Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life," by Charles Darwin,
M.A., Fellow of the Royal, Geological, Linnaean, etc., Societies, Author of
"Journal of Researches during H. M. S. Beagle's Voyage round the World."
London: John Murray. 1859. 502 pp., post 8vo.

I-2. Article in this Journal, vol. xxiv., p. 305.

I-3. "Species tot sunt, quot diversas formas ab initio produxit Infinitum
Ens; quae formae secundum generationis inditas leges, produxere plures, at
sibi semper similes."--Linn. Phil. Bot., 99, 157.

I-4. Agassiz, "Essay on Classification; Contributions to Natural History,"
p. 132, et seq.

I-5. As to this, Darwin remarks that he can only hope to see the law
hereafter proved true (p. 449); and p. 338: "Agassiz insists that ancient
animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of recent animals of the
same classes; or that the geological succession of extinct forms is in some
degree parallel to the embryological development of recent forms. I must
follow Pictet and Huxley in thinking that the truth of this doctrine is
very far from proved. Yet I fully expect to see it hereafter confirmed, at
least in regard to subordinate groups, which have branched off from each
other within comparatively recent times. For this doctrine of Agassiz
accords well with the theory of natural selection."

I-6. Op. cit., p. 131.--One or two Bridgewater Treatises, and most modern
works upon natural theology, should have rendered the evidences of thought
in inorganic Nature not "unexpected."

I-7. Volume xvii. (2), 1854, p. 13.

I-8. We suspect that this is not an ultimate fact, but a natural consequence
   of inheritance--the inheritance of disease or of tendency to disease,
   which close interbreeding perpetuates and accumulates, but wide
   breeding may neutralize or eliminate.

I-9. The rules and processes of breeders of animals, and their results, are
so familiar that they need not be particularized. Less is popularly known
about the production of vegetable races. We refer our readers back to this
Journal, vol. xxvii., pp. 440--442 (May, 1859), for an abstract of the
papers of M. Vilmorin upon this subject.

I-10. Quadrupeds of America," vol. ii., p. 239.

I-11. "Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences," vol. iv.,
p. 178.

I-12. Owen adds a third, viz., vegetative repetition; but this, in the
vegetable kingdom, is simply unity of type.

I-13. "Contributions to Natural History of America," vol. i., pp. 127--131.

I-14. Op. cit., p. 130.

II-1. To parry an adversary's thrust at a vulnerable part, or to show that
it need not be fatal, is an incomplete defense. If the discussion had gone
on, it might, perhaps, have been made to appear that the Darwinian
hypothesis, so far from involving the idea of necessity (except in the
sense that everything is of necessity), was based upon the opposite idea,
that of contingency.

III-1. Vide "Proceedings of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science," 1859, and London Athenoeum, passim. It appears to be conceded
that these "celts" or stone knives are artificial productions, and
apparently of the age of the mammoth, the fossil rhinoceros, etc.

III-2. See "Correspondence of M. Nickles," in American Journal of Science
and Arts, for March, 1860.

III-3. See Morlot, "Some General Views on Archaeology," in American Journal
of Science and Arts, for January, 186o, translated from "Bulletin de la
Societe Vaudoise," 1859.

III-4. Page 484, English edition. In the new American edition (vide
Supplement, pp. 431, 432) the principal analogies which suggest the extreme
view are referred to, and the remark is appended: "But this inference is
chiefly grounded on analogy, and it is immaterial whether or not it be
accepted. The case is different with the members of each great class, as
the Vertebrata or Articulata; for here we have in the laws of homology,
embryology, etc., some distinct evidence that all have descended from a
single primordial parent."

III-5. In Bibliotheque Universelle de Geneve, March, 1860.

III-6. This we learn from his very interesting article, "De la Question de
l'Homme Fossile," in the same (March) number of the Biblioteque
Universelle. (See, also, the same author's "Note sur la Periode
Quaternaire ou Diluvienne, consideree dans ses Rapports avec l'Epoque
Actuelle," in the number for August, 1860, of the same periodical.)

III-7. In Comptes Rendus, Academie des Sciences, February 2, 1857.

III-8. Whatever it may be, it is not "the homoeopathic form of the
transmutative hypothesis," as Darwin's is said to be (p. 252, American
reprint), so happily that the prescription is repeated in the second (p.
259) and third (p. 271) dilutions, no doubt, on Hahnemann's famous
principle, of an increase of potency at each dilution. Probably the
supposed transmutation is per saltus. "Homoeopathic doses of
transmutation," indeed! Well, if we really must swallow transmutation in
some form or other, as this reviewer intimates, we might prefer the mild
homoeopathic doses of Darwin's formula to the allopathic bolus which the
Edinburgh general practitioner appears to be compounding.

III-9. Vide North American Review, for April, 1860, p. 475, and Christian
Examiner, for May, p. 457.

III-10. Page 188, English edition.

III-11. In American Journal of Science, July, 1860, pp. 147--149.

III-12. In "Contributions to the Natural History of the United States," vol.
i., p.128, 129.

III-13. Contributions to the Natural History of the United States," vol. 1,
p. 130; and American Journal of Science, July, 1860, p. 143.

III-14. North American Review for April 1860, p. 506.

III-15. Vide motto from Butler, prefixed to the second edition of Darwin's
work.

III-16. North American Review, loc. cit., p. 504.

III-17. North American Review, loc. cit., p. 487, et passim.

III-18. In American Journal of Science, July, 1860, p. 143.

III-19. Vide article by Mr. C. Wright, in the Mathematical Monthly for May
last.

III-20. Vide Edinburgh Review for January, 1860, article on
"Acclimatization," etc.

III-21. American Journal of Science, July, 1860, p. 146.

IV-1. A name which, at the close of his article, De Candolle proposes for
the study of the succession of organized beings, to comprehend, therefore,
palaeontology and all included under what is called geographical botany and
zoology--the whole forming a science parallel to geology--the latter
devoted to the history of unorganized bodies, the former, to that of
organized beings, as respects origin, distribution, and succession. We are
not satisfied with the word, notwithstanding the precedent of palaeontology;
since ontology, the Science of being, has an established meaning as
referring to mental existence--i.e., is a synonym for a department of
metaphysics.

IV-2. Natural History Review, January, 1862

IV-3. What the Rev. Principal Tulloch remarks in respect to the philosophy
of miracles has a pertinent application here. We quote at second hand:

"The stoutest advocates of interference can mean nothing more than that the
Supreme Will has so moved the hidden springs of Nature that a new issue
arises on given circumstances. The ordinary issue is supplanted by a higher
issue. The essential facts before us are a certain set of phenomena, and a
Higher Will moving them. How moving them? is a question for human
definition; the answer to which does not and cannot affect the divine
meaning of the change. Yet when we reflect that this Higher Will is every.
where reason and wisdom, it seems a juster as well as a more comprehensive
view to regard it as operating by subordination and evolution, rather than
by interference or violation."

IV-4. Particularly citing Flourens: "La ressemblance n'est qu'une condition
secondaire; la condition essentielle est la descendance: ce n'est pas la
ressemblance, c'est la succession des individus, qui fait l'espece."

V-1. The phrase "Atlantic United States" is here used throughout in
contradistinction to Pacific United States: to the former of course belong,
botanically and geographically, the valley of the Mississippi and its
tributaries up to the eastern border of the great woodless plains, which
constitute an intermediate region.

V-2. The tabulated list referred to was printed as an appendix to the
official edition of this discourse, but is here omitted.

V-3. American Journal of Science, 1867, p. 402; "Proceedings of American
Academy," vol. viii., p. 244.

V-4. "Memoirs of American Academy," vol. vi., pp. 377--458 (1859)


V-5. Die vegetation der erde nach ihrer kilmatischen Anordnung," 1871.

V-6. Reference should also be made to the extensive researches of Newberry
upon the tertiary and cretaceous floras of the Western United States. See
especially Prof. Newberry's paper in the Boston Journal of Natural History,
vol. vii., No. 4, describing fossil plants of Vancouver's Island, etc.; his
"Notes on the Later Extinct Floras of North America," etc., in "Annals of
the Lyceum of Natural History," vol. ix., April, 1868; "Report on the
Cretaceous and Tertiary Plants collected in Raynolds and Hayden's
Yellowstone and Missouri Exploring Expedition, 1859--1860," published in
1869; and an interesting article entitled "The Ancient Lakes of Western
America, their Deposits and Drainage," published in The American
Naturalist, January, 1871.

The only document I was able to consult was Lesquereux's "Report on the
Fossil Plants," in Hayden's report of 1872.

V-7. There is, at least, one instance so opportune to the present argument
that it should not pass unnoticed, although I had overlooked the record
until now. Onoclea sensibilis is a fern peculiar to the Atlantic United
States (where it is common and wide-spread) and to Japan. Prof. Newberry
identified it several years ago in a collection, obtained by Dr. Hayden, of
miocene fossil plants of Dakota Territory, which is far beyond its present
habitat. He moreover regards it as probably identical with a fossil specimen
"described by the late Prof. E. Forbes, under the name of Filicites
Hebridicus, and obtained by the Duke of Argyll from the island of Mull."

V-8. "Darwinism in Morals," in Theological Review, April, 1871.

VI-1. "Histoire des Sciences et des Sevants depuis deux Siecles, suivie
d'autres etudes sur des sujets scientifiques, en particulier sur la
Selection dans 1'Espèce Humaine, par Alphonse De Candolle." Geneve: H.
Georg. 1873.

"Addresses of George Bentham, President, read at the anniversary meetings
of the Linnaean Society, 1862--1873."

"Notes on the Classification, History, and Geographical Distribution of
Compositae. By George Bentham." Separate issue from the Journal of the
Linnean Society. Vol. XIII. London. 1873.

"On Palaeontological Evidence of Gradual Modification of Animal Forms, read
at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, April 25, 1873. By Prof. W.H.
Flower." (Journal of the Royal Institution, pp. 11.)

"The Distribution and Migration of Birds. Memoir presented to the National
Academy of Sciences, January, 1865, abstracted in the American Journal of
Science and the Arts. 1866, etc. By Spencer F. Baird."

"The Story of the Earth and Man. By J.W. Dawson, LL.D., F.R.S., F.G.S.,
Principal and Vice-Chancellor of McGill University, Montreal. London:
Hodder & Stoughton; New York: Harper & Brothers. 1873. Pp. 403, 12mo.

VI-2. Since this article was in type, noteworthy examples of appreciative
scientific judgment of the derivative hypothesis have come to hand: 1. In
the opening address to the Geological Section of the British Association,
at its recent meeting, by its president, the veteran Phillips, perhaps the
oldest surviving geologist after Lyell; and, 2. That of Prof. Allman,
President of the Biological Section. The first touches the subject briefly,
but in the way of favorable suggestion; the second is a full and
discriminating exposition of the reasons which seem to assure at least the
provisional acceptance of the hypothesis, as a guide in all biological
studies, "a key to the order and hidden forces of the world of life."

VII-1. "The Theory of Evolution of Living Things, and the Application of the
Principles of Evolution to Religion, considered as illustrative of the
'Wisdom and Beneficence of the Almighty.' By the Rev. George Henslow, M.A.,
F.L.S., F.G.S., etc." New York: Macmillan & Co. 1873. 12mo, pp. 220.

"Systematic Theology. By Charles Hodge, D.D., Professor in the Theological
Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey. Vol. ii. (Part II, Anthropology.") New
York: Charles Scribner & Co. 1872.

"Religion and Science: A Series of Sunday Lectures on the Relation of
Natural and Revealed Religion, or the Truths Revealed in Nature and
Scripture. By Joseph Le Conte, Professor of Geology and Natural History in
the University of California." New York: D. Appleton & Co. 1874. 12mo, pp.
324.

VII-2. "But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as
this-- we can perceive that events are brought about, not by insulated
interpositions of divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by the
establishment of general laws.--Whewell's Bridgewater Treatise.

"The only distinct meaning of the world 'natural' is stated, fixed, or
settled; since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so--i.e., to effect it continually or at
stated times--as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect it for
once."--Butler's Analogy.

VIII-1. "What Is Darwinism? By Charles Hodge, Princeton, N.J." New York:

Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1874.
"The Doctrine of Evolution. By Alexander Winchell, LL.D., etc. New York:
Harper & Brothers. 1874.

"Darwinism and Design; or, Creation by Evolution. By George St. Clair."
London: Hodder & Stoughton. 1873.

"Westminster Sermons. By the Rev. Charles Kingsley, F.L.S., F.G.S., Canon
of Westminster, etc." London and New York: Macmillan & Co. 1874.

VIII-2. These two postulate-mottoes are quoted in full in a previous
article, in No. 446 of The Nation.

XI-1. "Insectivorous Plants. By Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S." With
Illustrations. London: John Murray. 1875. Pp. 462. New York: D. Appleton &
Co.

"The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants. By Charles Darwin, M.A.,
F.R.S., etc." Second Edition, revised, with Illustrations. London: John
Murray. 1875. Pp. 208. New York: D. Appleton & Co.

XI-2. The Nation, Nos. 457, 458, 1874. It was in these somewhat light and
desultory, but substantially serious, articles that some account of Mr.
Darwin's observations upon the digestive powers of Drosera and Dionaea
first appeared; in fact, their leading motive was to make sufficient
reference to his then unpublished discoveries to guard against expected or
possible claims to priority. Dr. Burdon-Sanderson's lecture, and the report
in Nature, which first made them known in England, appeared later.

A mistake on our part in the reading of a somewhat ambiguous sentence in a
letter led to the remark, at the close of the first of those articles, that
the leaf-trap of Dionaea had been paralyzed on one side in consequence of a
dexterous puncture. What was communicated really related to Drosera.

XI-3. A. Gray, in "Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences," vol. iv., p. 98; and American Journal of Science and the Arts,
March, 1859, p. 278.

XII-1. "Les Especes affines et la Theorie de l'Evolution," par Charles
Naudin, Membre de l'Institut, in Bulletin de la Societe Botanique de
France, tome xxi., pp. 240-272, 1874. See also Comptes Rendus, September 27
and October 4, 1875, reproduced in "Annales des Sciences Naturelles," 1876,
pp. 73-81.

XII-2. In noticing M. Naudin's paper in the Comptes Rendus, now reprinted in
the "Annales des Sciences Naturelles," entitled "Variation desordonnee des
Plantes Hybrides et Deductions qu'on peut en tirer," we were at a loss to
conceive why he attributed all present variation of species to atavism,
i.e., to the reappearance of ancestral characters (American Journal of
Science, February, 1876). His anterior paper was not then known to us; from
which it now appears that this view comes in as a part of the hypothesis of
extreme plasticity and variability at the first, subsiding at length into
entire fixity and persistence of character. According to which, it is
assumed that the species of our time have lost all power of original
variation, but can still reproduce some old ones--some reminiscences, as it
were, of youthful vagaries--in the way of atavism.

XIII-1. London, 1862.

XIII-2. Hume, in his "Essays," anticipated this argument. But he did not
rest on it. His matured convictions appear to be expressed in statements
such as the following, here cited at second hand from Jackson's "Philosophy
of Natural Theology," a volume to which a friend has just called our
attention:

"Though the stupidity of men," writes Hume, "barbarous and uninstructed, be
so great that they may not see a sovereign author in the more obvious works
of Nature, to which they are so much familiarized, yet it scarce seems
possible that any one of good understanding should reject that idea, when
once it is suggested to him. A purpose, an intention, a design, is evident
in everything; and when our comprehension is so far enlarged as to
contemplate the first rise of this visible system, we must adopt, with the
strongest conviction, the idea of some intelligent cause or author. The
uniform maxims, too, which prevail throughout the whole frame of the
universe, naturally, if not necessarily, lead us to conceive this
intelligence as single and undivided, where the prejudices of education
oppose not so reasonable a theory. Even the contrarieties of Nature, by
discovering themselves everywhere, become proofs of some consistent plan,
and establish one single purpose or intention, however inexplicable and
incomprehensible."---("Natural History of Religion," xv.)

"In many views of the universe, and of its parts, particularly the latter,
the beauty and fitness of final causes strike us with such irresistible
force that all objections appear (what I believe they really are) mere
cavils and sophisms."-- ("Dialogues concerning Natural Religion," Part X.)

"The order and arrangement of Nature, the curious adjustment of final
causes, the plain use and intention of every part and organ, all these
bespeak in the clearest language an intelligent cause or author."--(Ibid.,
Part IV.)



XIII-3. See Section I, Chapter 12.

XIII-4. "No single and limited good can be assigned by us as the final cause
of any contrivance in Nature. The real final cause . . . is the sum of all
the uses to which it is ever to be put. Any use to which a contrivance of
Nature is put, we may be sure, is a part of its final cause."--(G. F.
Wright, in The New-Englander, October, 1871.)

XIII-5. "No single and limited good can be assigned by us as the final cause
of any contrivance in Nature. The real final cause . . . is the sum of all
the uses to which it is ever to be put. Any use to which a contrivance of
Nature is put, we may be sure, is a part of its final cause."--(G. F.
Wright, in The New-Englander, October, 1871.)


