VII

EVOLUTION AND

THEOLOGY [VII-1]

(The Nation, January 15, 1874)



The attitude of theologians toward doctrines of evolution, from the nebular
hypothesis down to "Darwinism," is no less worthy of consideration, and
hardly less diverse, than that of naturalists. But the topic, if pursued
far, leads to questions too wide and deep for our handling here, except
incidentally, in the brief notice which it falls in our way to take of the
Rev. George Henslow's recent volume on "The Theory of Evolution of Living
Things." This treatise is on the side of evolution, "considered as
illustrative of the wisdom and beneficence of the Almighty." It was
submitted for and received one of the Actonian prizes recently awarded by
the Royal Institution of Great Britain. We gather that the staple of a part
of it is worked up anew from some earlier discourses of the author upon
"Genesis and Geology," "Science and Scripture not antagonistic," etc.

In coupling with it a chapter of the second volume of Dr. Hodge's
"Systematic Theology (Part II, Anthropology)," we call attention to a
recent essay, by an able and veteran writer, on the other side of the
question. As the two fairly enough represent the extremes of Christian
thought upon the subject, it is convenient to review them in connection.
Theologians have a short and easy, if not wholly satisfactory, way of
refuting scientific doctrines which they object to, by pitting the authority
or opinion of one savant against another. Already, amid the currents and
eddies of modern opinion, the savants may enjoy the same advantage at the
expense of the divines-- we mean, of course, on the scientific arena; for
the mutual refutation of conflicting theologians on their own ground is no
novelty. It is not by way of offset, however, that these divergent or
contradictory views are here referred to, but only as an illustration of the
fact that the divines are by no means all arrayed upon one side of the
question in hand. And indeed, in the present transition period, until some
one goes much deeper into the heart of the subject, as respects the
relations of modern science to the foundations of religious belief, than
either of these writers has done, it is as well that the weight of opinion
should be distributed, even if only according to prepossessions, rather than
that the whole stress should bear upon a single point, and that perhaps the
authority of an interpretation of Scripture. A consensus of opinion upon
Dr. Hodge's ground, for instance (although better guarded than that of Dr.
Dawson), if it were still possible, would--to say the least--probably not
at all help to reconcile science and religion. Therefore, it is not to be
regretted that the diversities of view among accredited theologians and
theological naturalists are about as wide and as equably distributed between
the extremes (and we may add that the views themselves are quite as
hypothetical) as those which prevail among the various naturalists and
natural philosophers of the day.

As a theologian, Mr. Henslow doubtless is not to be compared with the
veteran professor at Princeton. On the other hand, he has the advantage of
being a naturalist, and the son of a naturalist, as well as a clergyman:
consequently he feels the full force of an array of facts in nature, and of
the natural inferences from them, which the theological professor, from his
Biblical standpoint, and on his implicit assumption that the Old Testament
must needs teach true science, can hardly be expected to appreciate.
Accordingly, a naturalist would be apt to say of Dr. Hodge's exposition of
"theories of the universe" and kindred topics--and in no captious spirit--
that whether right or wrong on particular points, he is not often right or
wrong in the way of a man of science.

Probably from the lack of familiarity with prevalent ideas and their
history, the theologians are apt to suppose that scientific men of the
present day are taking up theories of evolution in pure wantonness or mere
superfluity of naughtiness; that it would have been quite possible, as well
as more proper, to leave all such matters alone. Quieta non movere is
doubtless a wise rule upon such subjects, so long as it is fairly
applicable. But the time for its application in respect to questions of the
origin and relations of existing species has gone by. To ignore them is to
imitate the foolish bird that seeks security by hiding its head in the
sand. Moreover, the naturalists did not force these questions upon the
world; but the world they study forced them upon the naturalists. How these
questions of derivation came naturally and inevitably to be revived, how
the cumulative probability that the existing are derived from preexisting
forms impressed itself upon the minds of many naturalists and thinkers, Mr.
Henslow has briefly explained in the introduction and illustrated in the
succeeding chapters of the first part of his book. Science, he declares,
has been compelled to take up the hypothesis of the evolution of living
things as better explaining all the phenomena. In his opinion, it has
become "infinitely more probable that all living and extinct beings have
been developed or evolved by natural laws of generation from preexisting
forms, than that they, with all their innumerable races and varieties,
should owe their existences severally to Creative fiats." This doctrine,
which even Dr. Hodge allows may possibly be held in a theistic sense, and
which, as we suppose, is so held or viewed by a great proportion of the
naturalists of our day, Mr. Henslow maintains is fully compatible with
dogmatic as well as natural theology; that it explains moral anomalies, and
accounts for the mixture of good and evil in the world, as well as for the
merely relative perfection of things; and, finally, that "the whole scheme
which God has framed for man's existence, from the first that was created
to all eternity, collapses if the great law of evolution be suppressed."
The second part of his book is occupied with a development of this line of
argument. By this doctrine of evolution he does not mean the Darwinian
hypothesis, although he accepts and includes this, looking upon natural
selection as playing an important though not an unlimited part. He would be
an evolutionist with Mivart and Owen and Argyll, even if he had not the
vera causa which Darwin contributed to help him on. And, on rising to man,
he takes ground with Wallace, saying:


"I would wish to state distinctly that I do not at present see any evidence
for believing in a gradual development of man from the lower animals by
ordinary natural laws; that is, without some special interference, or, if
it be preferred, some exceptional conditions which have thereby separated
him from all other creatures, and placed him decidedly in advance of them
all. On the other hand, it would be absurd to regard him as totally severed
from them. It is the great degree of difference I would insist upon,
bodily, mental, and spiritual, which precludes the idea of his having been
evolved by exactly the same processes, and with the same limitations, as,
for example, the horse from the palaeotherium."


In illustrating this view, he reproduces Wallace's well-known points, and
adds one or two of his own. We need not follow up his lines of argument.
The essay, indeed, adds nothing material to the discussion of evolution,
although it states one side of the case moderately well, as far as it goes.

Dr. Hodge approaches the subject from the side of systematic theology, and
considers it mainly in its bearing upon the origin and original state of
man. Under each head he first lays down "the Scriptural doctrine," and then
discusses "anti-Scriptural theories," which latter, under the first head,
are the heathen doctrine of spontaneous generation, the modern doctrine of
spontaneous generation, theories of development, specially that of Darwin,
the atheistic character of the theory, etc. Although he admits "that there
is a theistic and an atheistic form of the nebular hypothesis as to the
origin of the universe, so there may be a theistic interpretation of the
Darwinian theory," yet he contends that "the system is thoroughly
atheistic," notwithstanding that the author "expressly acknowledges the
existence of God." Curiously enough, the atheistic form of evolutionary
hypotheses, or what he takes for such, is the only one which Dr. Hodge
cares to examine. Even the "Reign of Law" theory, Owen's "purposive route of
development and chance . . . . by virtue of inherent tendencies thereto," as
well as other expositions of the general doctrine on a theistic basis, are
barely mentioned without a word of comment, except, perhaps, a general
"protest against the arraying of probabilities against the teachings of
Scripture."

Now, all former experience shows that it is neither safe nor wise to
pronounce a whole system "thoroughly atheistic" which it is conceded may be
held theistically, and which is likely to be largely held, if not to
prevail, on scientific grounds. It may be well to remember that, "of the
two great minds of the seventeenth century, Newton and Leibnitz, both
profoundly religious as well as philosophical, one produced the theory of
gravitation, the other objected to that theory that it was subversive of
natural religion; also that the nebular hypothesis--a natural consequence
of the theory of gravitation and of the subsequent progress of physical and
astronomical discovery--has been denounced as atheistical even down to our
day." It has now outlived anathema.

It is undeniable that Mr. Darwin lays himself open to this kind of attack.
The propounder of natural selection might be expected to make the most of
the principle, and to overwork the law of parsimony in its behalf. And a
system in which exquisite adaptation of means to ends, complicated
inter-dependencies, and orderly sequences, appear as results instead of
being introduced as factors, and in which special design is ignored in the
particulars, must needs be obnoxious, unless guarded as we suppose Mr.
Darwin might have guarded his. ground if he had chosen to do so. Our own
opinion, after long consideration, is, that Mr. Darwin has no atheistical
intent; and that, as respects the test question of design in Nature, his
view may be made clear to the theological mind by likening it to that of
the "believer in general but not in particular Providence." There is no
need to cull passages in support of this interpretation from his various
works while the author--the most candid of men--retains through all the
editions of the "Origin of Species" the two mottoes from Whewell and Bishop
Butler.[VII-2]

The gist of the matter lies in the answer that should be rendered to the
questions--1. Do order and useful-working collocation, pervading a system
throughout all its parts, prove design? and, 2. Is such evidence negatived
or invalidated by the probability that these particular collocations belong
to lineal series of such in time, and diversified in the course of
Nature--grown up, so to say, step by step? We do not use the terms
"adaptation, "arrangement of means to ends," and the like, because they beg
the question in stating it.

Finally, ought not theologians to consider whether they have not already,
in principle, conceded to the geologists and physicists all that they are
asked to concede to the evolutionists; whether, indeed, the main natural
theological difficulties which attend the doctrine of evolution--serious as
they may be--are not virtually contained in the admission that there is a
system of Nature with fixed laws. This, at least, we may say, that, under a
system in which so much is done "by the establishment of general laws," it
is legitimate for any one to prove, if he can, that any particular thing in
the natural world is so done; and it is the proper business of scientific
men to push their enquiries in this direction.

It is beside the point for Dr. Hodge to object that, "from the nature of
the case, what concerns the origin of things cannot be known except by a
supernatural revelation;" that "science has to do with the facts and laws
of Nature: here the question concerns the origin of such facts." For the
very object of the evolutionists, and of Mr. Darwin in particular, is to
remove these subjects from the category of origination, and to bring them
under the domain of science by treating them as questions about how things
go on, not how they began. Whether the succession of living forms on the
earth is or is not among the facts and laws of Nature, is the very matter
in controversy.

Moreover, adds Dr. Hodge, it has been conceded that in this matter "proofs,
in the proper sense of the word, are not to be had; we are beyond the
region of demonstration, and have only probabilities to consider."
Wherefore "Christians have a right to protest against the arraying of
probabilities against the clear teachings of Scripture." The word is
italicized, as if to intimate that probabilities have no claims which a
theologian is bound to respect. As to arraying them against Scripture, there
is nothing whatever in the essay referred to that justifies the statement.
Indeed, no occasion offered; for the writer was discussing evolution in its
relations to theism, not to Biblical theology, and probably would not be
disposed to intermix arguments so different in kind as those from natural
science and those from revelation. To pursue each independently, according
to its own method, and then to compare the results, is thought to be the
better mode of proceeding. The weighing of probabilities we had regarded as
a proper exercise of the mind preparatory to forming an opinion.
Probabilities, hypotheses, and even surmises, whatever they may be worth,
are just what, as it seems to us, theologians ought not to be foremost in
decrying, particularly those who deal with the reconciliation of science
with Scripture, Genesis with geology, and the like. As soon as they go
beyond the literal statements even of the English text, and enter into the
details of the subject, they find ample occasion and display a special
aptitude for producing and using them, not always with very satisfactory
results. It is not, perhaps, for us to suggest that the theological army in
the past has been too much encumbered with impedimenta for effective
aggression in the conflict against atheistic tendencies in modern science;
and that in resisting attack it has endeavored to hold too much ground, so
wasting strength in the obstinate defense of positions which have become
unimportant as well as untenable. Some of the arguments, as well as the
guns, which well served a former generation, need to be replaced by others
of longer range and greater penetration.

If the theologians are slow to discern the signs and exigencies of the
times, the religious philosophical naturalists must be looked to. Since the
above remarks were written, Prof. Le Conte's "Religion and Science," just
issued, has come to our hands. It is a series of nineteen Sunday lectures
on the relation of natural and revealed religion, prepared in the first
instance for a Bible-class of young men, his pupils in the University of
South Carolina, repeated to similar classes at the University of
California, and finally delivered to a larger and general audience. They are
printed, the preface states, from a verbatim report, with only verbal
alterations and corrections of some redundancies consequent upon
extemporaneous delivery. They are not, we find, lectures on science under a
religious aspect, but discourses upon Christian theology and its
foundations from a scientific layman's point of view, with illustrations
from his own lines of study. As the headings show, they cover, or, more
correctly speaking, range over, almost the whole field of theological
thought, beginning with the personality of Deity as revealed in Nature, the
spiritual nature and attributes of Deity, and the incarnation; discussing
by the way the general relations of theology to science, man, and his place
in Nature; and ending with a discussion of predestination and free-will, and
of prayer in relation to invariable law--all in a volume of three hundred
and twenty-four duodecimo pages! And yet the author remarks that many
important subjects have been omitted because he felt unable to present them
in a satisfactory manner from a scientific point of view. We note, indeed,
that one or two topics which would naturally come in his way--such,
especially, as the relation of evolution to the human race--are somewhat
conspicuously absent. That most of the momentous subjects which he takes up
are treated discursively, and not exhaustively, is all the better for his
readers. What they and we most want to know is, how these serious matters
are viewed by an honest, enlightened, and devout scientific man. To solve
the mysteries of the universe, as the French lady required a philosopher to
explain his new system, "dans un mot," is beyond rational expectation.

All that we have time and need to say of this little book upon great
subjects relates to its spirit and to the view it takes of evolution. Its
theology is wholly orthodox; its tone devotional, charitable, and hopeful;
its confidence in religious truth, as taught both in Nature and revelation,
complete; the illustrations often happy, but often too rhetorical; the
science, as might be expected from this author, unimpeachable as regards
matters of fact, discreet as to matters of opinion. The argument from
design in the first lecture brings up the subject of the introduction of
species. Of this, considered "as a question of history, there is no witness
on the stand except geology."


"The present condition of geological evidence is undoubtedly in favor of
some degree of suddenness--is against infinite gradations. The evidence may
be meagre . . . but whether meagre or not, it is all the evidence we have.
. . . Now, the evidence of geology to-day is, that species seem to come in
suddenly and in full perfection, remain substantially unchanged during the
term of their existence, and pass away in full perfection. Other species
take their place apparently by substitution, not by transmutation. But you
will ask me, 'Do you, then, reject the doctrine of evolution? Do you accept
the creation of species directly and without secondary agencies and
processes?' I answer, No! Science knows nothing of phenomena which do not
take place by secondary causes and processes. She does not deny such
occurrence, for true Science is not dogmatic, and she knows full well that,
tracing up the phenomena from cause to cause, we must somewhere reach the
more direct agency of a First Cause. . . . It is evident that, however
species were introduced, whether suddenly or gradually, it is the duty of
Science ever to strive to understand the means and processes by which
species originated. . . . Now, of the various conceivable secondary causes
and processes, by some of which we must believe species originated, by far
the most probable is certainly that of evolution from other species."


    (We might interpose the remark that the witness on the stand, if subjected
to cross-examination by a biologist, might be made to give a good deal of
testimony in favor of transmutation rather than substitution.) After
referring to different ideas as to the cause or mode of evolution, he
concludes that it can make no difference, so far as the argument of design
in Nature is concerned, whether there be evolution or not, or whether, in
the case of evolution, the change be paroxysmal or uniform. We may infer
even that he accepts the idea that "physical and chemical forces are
changed into vital force, and vice versa." Physicists incline more readily
to this than physiologists; and if what is called vital force be a force in
the physicists' sense, then it is almost certainly so. But the illustration
on page 275 touches this point only seemingly. It really concerns only the
storing and the using of physical force in a living organism. If, for want
of a special expression, we continue to use the term vital force to
designate that intangible something which directs and governs the
accumulation and expenditure of physical force in organisms, then there is
as yet no proof and little likelihood that this is correlate with physical
force.

"A few words upon the first chapter of Genesis and the Mosaic cosmogony,
and I am done," says Prof. Le Conte, and so are we:


"It might be expected by many that, after speaking of schemes of
reconciliation, I should give mine also. My Christian friends, these
schemes of reconciliation become daily more and more distasteful to me. I
have used them in times past; but now the deliberate construction of such
schemes seems to me almost like trifling with the words of Scripture and
the teachings of Nature. They seem to me almost irreverent, and quite
foreign to the true, humble, liberal spirit of Christianity; they are so
evidently artificial, so evidently mere ingenious human devices. It seems
to me that if we will only regard the two books in the philosophical spirit
which I have endeavored to describe, and then simply wait and possess our
souls in patience, the questions in dispute will soon adjust themselves as
other similar questions have already done."



