XII

DURATION AND

ORIGINATION OF

RACE AND SPECIES--

IMPORT OF SEXUAL REPRODUCTION


I
Do Varieties wear out, or tend to wear out?

(New York Tribune, and American Journal of Science and the Arts, February,
1875)



This question has been argued from time to time for more than half a
century, and is far from being settled yet. Indeed, it is not to be settled
either way so easily as is sometimes thought. The result of a prolonged and
rather lively discussion of the topic about forty years ago in England, in
which Lindley bore a leading part on the negative side, was, if we rightly
remember, that the nays had the best of the argument. The deniers could
fairly well explain away the facts adduced by the other side, and evade the
force of the reasons then assigned to prove that varieties were bound to die
out in the course of time. But if the case were fully re-argued now, it is
by no means certain that the nays would win it. The most they could expect
would be the Scotch verdict, "not proven." And this not because much, if
any, additional evidence of the actual wearing out of any variety has
turned up since, but because a presumption has been raised under which the
evidence would take a bias the other way. There is now in the minds of
scientific men some reason to expect that certain varieties would die out
in the long run, and this might have an important influence upon the
interpretation of the facts. Curiously enough, however, the recent
discussions to which our attention has been called seem, on both sides, to
have overlooked this.

But, first of all, the question needs to be more specifically stated. There
are varieties and varieties. They may, some of them, disappear or
deteriorate, but yet not wear out--not come to an end from any inherent
cause. One might even say, the younger they are the less the chance of
survival unless well cared for. They may be smothered out by the adverse
force of superior numbers; they are even more likely to be bred out of
existence by unprevented cross-fertilization, or to disappear from mere
change of fashion. The question, however, is not so much about reversion to
an ancestral state, or the falling off of a high-bred stock into an
inferior condition. Of such cases it is enough to say that, when a variety
or strain, of animal or vegetable, is led up to unusual fecundity or of
size or product of any organ, for our good, and not for the good of the
plant or animal itself, it can be kept so only by high feeding and
exceptional care; and that with high feeding and artificial appliances
comes vastly increased liability to disease, which may practically
annihilate the race. But then the race, like the bursted boiler, could not
be said to wear out, while if left to ordinary conditions, and allowed to
degenerate back into a more natural if less useful state, its hold on life
would evidently be increased rather than diminished.

As to natural varieties or races under normal conditions, sexually
propagated, it could readily be shown that they are neither more nor less
likely to disappear from any inherent cause than the species from which
they originated. Whether species wear out, i.e., have their rise,
culmination, and decline, from any inherent cause, is wholly a geological
and very speculative problem, upon which, indeed, only vague conjectures can
be offered. The matter actually under discussion concerns cultivated
domesticated varieties only, and, as to plants, is covered by two
questions.

First, Will races propagated by seed, being so fixed that they come true to
seed, and purely bred (not crossed with any other sort), continue so
indefinitely, or will they run out in time--not die out, perhaps, but lose
their distinguishing characters? Upon this, all we are able to say is that
we know no reason why they should wear out or deteriorate from any inherent
cause. The transient existence or the deterioration and disappearance of
many such races are sufficiently accounted for otherwise; as in the case of
extraordinarily exuberant varieties, such as mammoth fruits or roots, by
increased liability to disease, already adverted to, or by the failure of
the high feeding they demand. A common cause, in ordinary cases, is
cross-breeding, through the agency of wind or insects, which is difficult
to guard against. Or they go out of fashion and are superseded by others
thought to be better, and so the old ones disappear.

Or, finally, they may revert to an ancestral form. As offspring tend to
resemble grandparents almost as much as parents, and as a line of
close-bred ancestry is generally prepotent, so newly-originated varieties
have always a tendency to reversion. This is pretty sure to show itself in
some of the progeny of the earlier generations, and the breeder has to
guard against it by rigid selection. But the older the variety is--that is,
the longer the series of generations in which it has come true from
seed--the less the chance of reversion: for now, to be like the immediate
parents, is also to be like a long line of ancestry; and so all the
influences concerned--- that is, both parental and ancestral
heritability--act in one and the same direction. So, since the older a race
is the more reason it has to continue true, the presumption of the
unlimited permanence of old races is very strong.

Of course the race itself may give off new varieties; but that is no
interference with the vitality of the original stock. If some of the new
varieties supplant the old, that will not be because the unvaried stock is
worn out or decrepit with age, but because in wild Nature the newer forms
are better adapted to the surroundings, or, under man's care, better
adapted to his wants or fancies.

The second question, and one upon which the discussion about the wearing
out of varieties generally turns, is, Will varieties propagated from buds,
i.e., by division, grafts, bulbs, tubers, and the like, necessarily
deteriorate and die out? First, Do they die out as a matter of fact? Upon
this, the testimony has all along been conflicting. Andrew Knight was sure
that they do, and there could hardly be a more trustworthy witness.


"The fact," he says, fifty years ago, "that certain varieties of some
species of fruit which have been long cultivated cannot now be made to grow
in the same soils and under the same mode of management, which was a
century ago so perfectly successful, is placed beyond the reach of
controversy. Every experiment which seemed to afford the slightest prospect
of success was tried by myself and others to propagate the old varieties of
the apple and pear which formerly constituted the orchards of Herefordshire,
without a single healthy or efficient tree having been obtained; and I
believe all attempts to propagate these varieties have, during some years,
wholly ceased to be made."


To this it was replied, in that and the next generation, that cultivated
vines have been transmitted by perpetual division from the time of the
Romans, and that several of the sorts, still prized and prolific, are well
identified, among them the ancient Graecula, considered to be the modern
Corinth or currant grape, which has immemorially been seedless; that the
old nonpareil apple was known in the time of Queen Elizabeth; that the
white beurre pears of France have been propagated from the earliest times;
and that golden pippins, St. Michael pears, and others said to have run
out, were still to be had in good condition.

Coming down to the present year, a glance through the proceedings of
pomological societies, and the debates of farmers' clubs, brings out the
same difference of opinion. The testimony is nearly equally divided.
Perhaps the larger number speak of the deterioration and failure of
particular old sorts; but when the question turns on "wearing out," the
positive evidence of vigorous trees and sound fruits is most telling. A
little positive testimony outweighs a good deal of negative. This cannot
readily be explained away, while the failures may be, by exhaustion of
soil, incoming of disease, or alteration of climate or circumstances. On
the other hand, it may be urged that, if a variety of this sort is fated to
become decrepit and die out, it is not bound to die out all at once, and
everywhere at the same time. It would be expected first to give way
wherever it is weakest, from whatever cause. This consideration has an
important bearing upon the final question, Are old varieties of this kind
on the way to die out on account of their age or any inherent limit of
vitality?

Here, again, Mr. Knight took an extreme view. In his essay in the
"Philosophical Transactions," published in the year 1810, he propounded the
theory, not merely of a natural limit to varieties from grafts and
cuttings, but even that they would not survive the natural term of the life
of the seedling trees from which they were originally taken. Whatever may
have been his view of the natural term of the life of a tree, and of a
cutting being merely a part of the individual that produced it, there is no
doubt that he laid himself open to the effective replies which were made
from all sides at the time, and have lost none of their force since.
Weeping-willows, bread-fruits, bananas, sugar-cane, tiger-lilies, Jerusalem
artichokes, and the like, have been propagated for a long while in this
way, without evident decadence.     Moreover, the analogy upon which his
hypothesis is founded will not hold. Whether or not one adopts the present
writer's conception, that individuality is not actually reached or
maintained in the vegetable world, it is clear enough that a common plant
or tree is not an individual in the sense that a horse or man, or any one
of the higher animals, is--that it is an individual only in the sense that
a branching zoophyte or mass of coral is. Solvitur crescendo: the tree and
the branch equally demonstrate that they are not individuals, by being
divided with impunity and advantage, with no loss of life, but much
increase. It looks odd enough to see a writer like Mr. Sisley reproducing
the old hypothesis in so bare a form as this: "I am prepared to maintain
that varieties are individuals, and that as they are born they must die,
like other individuals . . . We know that oaks, Sequoias, and other trees,
live several centuries, but how many we do not exactly know. But that they
must die, no one in his senses will dispute." Now, what people in their
senses do dispute is, not that the tree will die, but that other trees,
established from its cuttings, will die with it.

But does it follow from this that non-sexually-propagated varieties are
endowed with the same power of unlimited duration that is possessed by
varieties and species propagated sexually--i.e., by seed? Those who think
so jump too soon at their conclusion. For, as to the facts, it is not
enough to point out the diseases or the trouble in the soil or the
atmosphere to which certain old fruits are succumbing, nor to prove that a
parasitic fungus (Peronospora infestans) is what is the matter with
potatoes. For how else would constitutional debility, if such there be,
more naturally manifest itself than in such increased liability or
diminished resistance to such attacks? And if you say that, anyhow, such
varieties do not die of old age--meaning that each individual attacked does
not die of old age, but of manifest disease--it may be asked in return, what
individual man ever dies of old age in any other sense than of a similar
inability to resist invasions which in earlier years would have produced no
noticeable effect? Aged people die of a slight cold or a slight accident,
but the inevitable weakness that attends old age is what makes these slight
attacks fatal.

Finally, there is a philosophical argument which tells strongly for some
limitation of the duration of non-sexually propagated forms, one that
probably Knight never thought of, but which we should not have expected
recent writers to overlook. When Mr. Darwin announced the principle that
cross-fertilization between the individuals of a species is the plan of
Nature, and is practically so universal that it fairly sustains his
inference that no hermaphrodite species continually self-fertilized would
continue to exist, he made it clear to all who apprehend and receive the
principle that a series of plants propagated by buds only must have weaker
hold of life than a series reproduced by seed. For the former is the
closest possible kind of close breeding. Upon this ground such varieties
may be expected ultimately to die out; but "the mills of the gods grind so
exceeding slow" that we cannot say that any particular grist has been
actually ground out under human observation.

If it be asked how the asserted principle is proved or made probable, we
can here merely say that the proof is wholly inferential. But the inference
is drawn from such a vast array of facts that it is wellnigh irresistible.
It is the legitimate explanation of those arrangements in Nature to secure
cross-fertilization in the species, either constantly or occasionally,
which are so general, so varied and diverse, and, we may add, so exquisite
and wonderful, that, once propounded, we see that it must be true.* What
else, indeed, is the meaning and


    * Here an article would be in place, explaining the arrangements in Nature
for cross-fertilization, or wide-breeding, in plants, through the agency,
sometimes of the winds, but more commonly of insects; the more so, since
the development of the principle, the appreciation of its importance, and
its confirmation by abundant facts, are mainly due to Mr. Darwin. But our
reviews and notices of his early work "On the Contrivances in Nature for
the Fertilization of Orchids by Means of Insects, in 1862, and his various
subsequent papers upon other parts of this subject, are either too technical
or too fragmentary or special to be here reproduced. Indeed, a popular
essay is now hardly needed, since the topic has been fully presented, of
late years, in the current popular and scientific journals, and in common
educational works and text-books, so that it is in the way of becoming a
part--and a most inviting part--of ordinary botanical instruction. use of
sexual reproduction? Not simply increase of numbers; for that is otherwise
effectually provided for by budding propagation in plants and many of the
lower animals. There are plants, indeed, of the lower sort (such as
diatoms), in which the whole multiplication takes place in this way, and
with great rapidity. These also have sexual reproduction; but in it two old
individuals are always destroyed to make a single new one! Here propagation
diminishes the number of individuals fifty per cent. Who can suppose that
such a costly process as this, and that all the exquisite arrangements for
cross-fertilization in hermaphrodite plants, do not subserve some most
important purpose? How and why the union of two organisms, or generally of
two very minute portions of them, should reenforce vitality, we do not
know, and can hardly conjecture. But this must be the meaning of sexual
reproduction.

The conclusion of the matter, from the scientific point of view, is, that
sexually-propagated varieties or races, although liable to disappear through
change, need not be expected to wear out, and there is no proof that they
do; but, that non-sexually propagated varieties, though not especially
liable to change, may theoretically be expected to wear out, but to be a
very long time about it.


II

Do Species wear out? and if not, why not?


The question we have just been considering was merely whether races are, or
may be, as enduring as species. As to the inherently unlimited existence of
species themselves, or the contrary, this, as we have said, is a geological
and very speculative problem. Not a few geologists and naturalists,
however, have concluded, or taken for granted, that species have a natural
term of existence--that they culminate, decline, and disappear through
exhaustion of specific vitality, or some equivalent internal cause. As
might be expected from the nature of the inquiry, the facts which bear upon
the question are far from decisive. If the fact that species in general
have not been interminable, but that one after another in long succession
has become extinct, would seem to warrant this conclusion, the persistence
through immense periods of no inconsiderable number of the lower forms of
vegetable and animal life, and of a few of the higher plants from the
Tertiary period to the present, tells even more directly for the limitless
existence of species. The disappearance is quite compatible with the latter
view; while the persistence of any species is hardly explicable upon any
other. So that, even under the common belief of the entire stability and
essential inflexibility of species, extinction is more likely to have been
accidental than predetermined, and the doctrine of inherent limitation is
unsupported by positive evidence.

On the other hand, it is an implication of the Darwinian doctrine that
species are essentially unlimited in existence. When they die out--as
sooner or later any species may--the verdict must be accidental death,
under stress of adverse circumstances, not exhaustion of vitality; and,
commonly, when the species seems to die out, it will rather have suffered
change. For the stock of vitality which enables it to vary and. survive in
changed forms under changed circumstances must be deemed sufficient for a
continued unchanged existence under unaltered conditions. And, indeed, the
advancement from simpler to more complex, which upon the theory must have
attended the diversification, would warrant or require the supposition of
increase instead of diminution of power from age to age.

The only case we call to mind which, under the Darwinian view, might be
interpreted as a dying out from inherent causes, is that of a species which
refuses to vary, and thus lacks the capacity of adaptation to altering
conditions. Under altering conditions, this lack would be fatal. But this
would be the fatality of some species or form in particular, not of species
or forms generally, which, for the most part, may and do vary sufficiently,
and in varying survive, seemingly none the worse, but rather the better,
for their long tenure of life.

The opposite idea, however, is maintained by M. Naudin,[XII-1] in a
detailed exposition of his own views of evolution, which differ widely from
those of Darwin in most respects, and notably in excluding that which, in
our day, gives to the subject its first claim to scientific (as
distinguished from purely speculative) attention; namely, natural
selection. Instead of the causes or operations collectively personified
under this term, and which are capable of exact or probable appreciation,
M. Naudin invokes "the two principles of rhythm and of the decrease of
forces in Nature." He is a thorough evolutionist, starting from essentially
the same point with Darwin; for he conceives of all the forms or species of
animals and plants "comme tire tout entier d'un protoplasma primordial,
uniform, instable, eminemment plastique." Also in "l'integration croissante
de la force evolutive a mesure qu'elle se partage dans les formes produites,
et la decroissance proportionelle de la plasticite de ces formes a mesure
qu'elles s'eloignent davantage de leur origine, et qu'elles sont mieux
arretees." As they get older, they gain in fixity through the operation of
the fundamental law of inheritance; but the species, like the individual,
loses plasticity and vital force. To continue in the language of the
original:


"C'est dire qu'il y a eu, pour l'ensemble du monde organique, une periode
de formation ou tout etait changeant et mobile, une phase analogue a la vie
embryonnaire et a la jeunesse de chaque etre particulier; et qu'a cet age
de mobilite et de croissance a succede une periode de stabilite, au moins
relative, une sorte d'age adulte, ou la force evolutive, ayant acheve son
oeuvre, n'est plus occupee qu'a la maintenir, sans pouvoir produire
d'organismes nouveaux. Limitee en quantite, comme toutes les forces en jeu
dans une planete ou dans un systeme sideral tout entier, cette force n'a pu
accomplir qu'un travail limite; et du meme qu'un organisme, animal ou
vegetal, ne croit pas indefiniment et qu'il s'arrete a des proportions que
rien ne peut faire depasser, de meme aussi l'organisme total de la nature
s'est arrete a un etat d'equilibre, dont la duree, selon toutes
vraisemblances, doit etre beaucoup plus longue que celle de la phase de
developpement et de croissance.


A fixed amount of "evolutive force" is given, to begin with. At first
enormous, because none has been used up in work, it is necessarily
enfeebled in the currents into which the stream divides, and the narrower
and narrower channels in which it flows with slowly-diminishing power.
Hence the limited although very unequal duration of all individuals, of all
species, and of all types of organization. A multitude of forms have
disappeared already, and the number of species, far from increasing, as some
have believed, must, on the contrary, be diminishing. Some species, no
doubt, have suffered death by violence or accident, by geological changes,
local alteration of the conditions, or the direct or indirect attacks of
other species; but these have only anticipated their fate, for M. Naudin
contends that most of the extinct species have died a natural death from
exhaustion of force, and that all the survivors are on the way to it. The
great timepiece of Nature was wound up at the beginning, and is running
down. In the earlier stages of great plasticity and exuberant power,
diversification took place freely, but only in definite lines, and species
and types multiplied. As the power of survival is inherently limited, still
more the power of change: this diminishes in time, if we rightly apprehend
the idea, partly through the waning of vital force, partly through the
fixity acquired by heredity--like producing like, the more certainly in
proportion to the length and continuity of the ancestral chain And so the
small variations of species which we behold are the feeble remnants of the
pristine plasticity and an exhausted force.[XII-2] This force of variation
or origination of forms has acted rhythmically or intermittently, because
each movement was the result of the rupture of an equilibrium, the
liberation of a force which till then was retained in a potential state by
some opposing force or obstacle, overcoming which it passes to a new
equilibrium and so on Hence alternations of dynamic activity and static
repose, of origination of species and types, alternated with periods of
stability or fixity. The timepiece does not run down regularly, but "la
force procede par saccades; et . . . par pulsations d'autant plus
energiques que la nature etait plus pres de son commencement."

Such is the hypothesis. For a theory of evolution, this is singularly
unlike Darwin's in most respects, and particularly in the kind of causes
invoked and speculations indulged in. But we are not here to comment upon
it beyond the particular point under consideration, namely, its doctrine of
the inherently limited duration of species. This comes, it will be noticed,
as a deduction from the modern physical doctrine of the equivalence of
force. The reasoning is ingenious, but, if we mistake not, fallacious.

To call that "evolutive force" which produces the change of one kind of
plant or animal into another, is simple and easy, but of little help by way
of explanation. To homologize it with physical force, as M. Naudin's
argument requires, is indeed a step, and a hardy one; but it quite
invalidates the argument. For, if the "evolutive force" is a part of the
physical force of the universe, of which, as he reminds us, the sum is
fixed and the tendency is toward a stable equilibrium in which all change is
to end, then this evolutive was derived from the physical force; and why
not still derivable from it? What is to prevent its replenishment in
vegetation, pari passu with that great operation in which physical force is
stored up in vegetable organisms, and by the expenditure or transformation
of which their work, and that of all animals, is carried on? Whatever be
the cause (if any there be) which determines the decadence and death of
species, one cannot well believe that it is a consequence of a diminution
of their proper force by plant-development and division; for instance, that
the sum of what is called vital force in a full-grown tree is not greater,
instead of less, than that in the seeding, and in the grove greater than in
the single parental tree. This power, if it be properly a force, is
doubtless as truly derived from the sunbeam as is the power which the plant
and animal expend in work. Here, then, is a source of replenishment as
lasting as the sun itself, and a ground--so far as a supply of force is
concerned--for indefinite duration. For all that any one can mean by the
indefinite existence of species is, that they may (for all that yet
appears) continue while the external conditions of their being or
well-being continue.

Perhaps, however, M. Naudin does not mean that "evolutive force," or the
force of vitality, is really homologous with common physical force, but
only something which may be likened to it. In that case the parallel has
only a metaphorical value, and the reason why variation must cease and
species die out is still to seek. In short, if that which continues the
series of individuals in propagation, whether like or unlike the parents,
be a force in the physical sense of the term, then there is abundant
provision in Nature for its indefinite replenishment. If, rather, it be a
part or phase of that something which directs and determines the
expenditure of force, then it is not subject to the laws of the latter, and
there is no ground for inferring its exhaustibility. The limited vitality
is an unproved and unprovable conjecture. The evolutive force, dying out in
the using, is either the same conjecture repeated, or a misapplied analogy.

After all--apart from speculative analogies--the only evidences we possess
which indicate a tendency in species to die out, are those to which Mr.
Darwin has called attention. These are, first, the observed deterioration
which results, at least in animals, from continued breeding in and in,
which may possibly be resolvable into cumulative heritable disease; and,
secondly, as already stated (p. 285), what may be termed the sedulous and
elaborate pains everywhere taken in Nature to prevent close
breeding--arrangements which are particularly prominent in plants, the
greater number of which bear hermaphrodite blossoms. The importance of this
may be inferred from the universality, variety, and practical perfection of
the arrangements which secure the end; and the inference may fairly be
drawn that this is the physiological import of sexes.
It follows from this that there is a tendency, seemingly inherent, in
species as in individuals, to die out; but that this tendency is
counteracted or checked by sexual wider breeding, which is, on the whole,
amply secured in Nature, and which in some way or other reenforces vitality
to such an extent as to warrant Darwin's inference that "some unknown great
good is derived from the union of individuals which have been kept distinct
for many generations." Whether this reenforcement is a complete preventive
of decrepitude in species, or only a palliative, is more than we can
determine. If the latter, then existing species and their derivatives must
perish in time, and the earth may be growing poorer in species, as M.
Naudin supposes, through mere senility. If the former, then the earth, if
not even growing richer, may be expected to hold its own, and extant species
or their derivatives should last as long as the physical world lasts and
affords favorable conditions. General analogies seem to favor the former
view. Such facts as we possess, and the Darwinian hypothesis, favor the
latter.

