CHAPTER XXVI


                                              _At Sea_, _S.S. & Mariposa_,
                                                         _Feb._ 19th, ’93.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—You will see from this heading that I am not dead yet nor
likely to be.  I was pretty considerably out of sorts, and that is indeed
one reason why Fanny, Belle, and I have started out for a month’s lark.
To be quite exact, I think it will be about five weeks before we get
home.  We shall stay between two and three in Sydney.  Already, though we
only sailed yesterday, I am feeling as fit as a fiddle.  Fanny ate a
whole fowl for breakfast, to say nothing of a tower of hot cakes.  Belle
and I floored another hen betwixt the pair of us, and I shall be no
sooner done with the present amanuensing racket than I shall put myself
outside a pint of Guinness.  If you think this looks like dying of
consumption in Apia I can only say I differ from you.  In the matter of
David, I have never yet received my proofs at all, but shall certainly
wait for your suggestions.  Certainly, Chaps. 17 to 20 are the hitch, and
I confess I hurried over them with both wings spread.  This is doubtless
what you complain of.  Indeed, I placed my single reliance on Miss Grant.
If she couldn’t ferry me over, I felt I had to stay there.

About _Island Nights’ Entertainments_ all you say is highly satisfactory.
Go in and win.

The extracts from the _Times_ I really cannot trust myself to comment
upon.  They were infernally satisfactory; so, and perhaps still more so,
was a letter I had at the same time from Lord Pembroke.  If I have time
as I go through Auckland, I am going to see Sir George Grey.

Now I really think that’s all the business.  I have been rather sick and
have had two small hemorrhages, but the second I believe to have been
accidental.  No good denying that this annoys, because it do.  However,
you must expect influenza to leave some harm, and my spirits, appetite,
peace on earth and goodwill to men are all on a rising market.  During
the last week the amanuensis was otherwise engaged, whereupon I took up,
pitched into, and about one half demolished another tale, once intended
to be called _The Pearl Fisher_, but now razeed and called _The Schooner
Farralone_.  We had a capital start, the steamer coming in at sunrise,
and just giving us time to get our letters ere she sailed again.  The
manager of the German firm (O strange, changed days!) danced attendance
upon us all morning; his boat conveyed us to and from the steamer.

                                * * * * *

                                                            _Feb._ 21_st_.

All continues well.  Amanuensis bowled over for a day, but afoot again
and jolly; Fanny enormously bettered by the voyage; I have been as jolly
as a sand-boy as usual at sea.  The Amanuensis sits opposite to me
writing to her offspring.  Fanny is on deck.  I have just supplied her
with the Canadian Pacific Agent, and so left her in good hands.  You
should hear me at table with the Ulster purser and a little punning
microscopist called Davis.  Belle does some kind of abstruse
Boswellising; after the first meal, having gauged the kind of jests that
would pay here, I observed, ‘Boswell is Barred during this cruise.’

                                * * * * *

                                                                   23_rd_.

We approach Auckland and I must close my mail.  All goes well with the
trio.  Both the ladies are hanging round a beau—the same—that I unearthed
for them: I am general provider, and especially great in the beaux
business.  I corrected some proofs for Fanny yesterday afternoon, fell
asleep over them in the saloon—and the whole ship seems to have been down
beholding me.  After I woke up, had a hot bath, a whiskey punch and a
cigarette, and went to bed, and to sleep too, at 8.30; a recrudescence of
Vailima hours.  Awoke to-day, and had to go to the saloon clock for the
hour—no sign of dawn—all heaven grey rainy fog.  Have just had breakfast,
written up one letter, register and close this.




CHAPTER XXVII


Bad pen, bad ink,
bad light, bad
blotting-paper.



                                               _S. S. Mariposa_, _at Sea_.
                                 _Apia due by daybreak to-morrow_ 9 _p.m._

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Have had an amusing but tragic holiday, from which we
return in disarray.  Fanny quite sick, but I think slowly and steadily
mending; Belle in a terrific state of dentistry troubles which now seem
calmed; and myself with a succession of gentle colds out of which I at
last succeeded in cooking up a fine pleurisy.  By stopping and stewing in
a perfectly airless state-room I seem to have got rid of the pleurisy.
Poor Fanny had very little fun of her visit, having been most of the time
on a diet of maltine and slops—and this while the rest of us were rioting
on oysters and mushrooms.  Belle’s only devil in the hedge was the
dentist.  As for me, I was entertained at the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church, likewise at a sort of artistic club; made speeches
at both, and may therefore be said to have been, like Saint Paul, all
things to all men.  I have an account of the latter racket which I meant
to have enclosed in this. . . . Had some splendid photos taken, likewise
a medallion by a French sculptor; met Graham, who returned with us as far
as Auckland.  Have seen a good deal too of Sir George Grey; what a
wonderful old historic figure to be walking on your arm and recalling
ancient events and instances!  It makes a man small, and yet the extent
to which he approved what I had done—or rather have tried to
do—encouraged me.  Sir George is an expert at least, he knows these
races: he is not a small employé with an ink-pot and a Whittaker.

Take it for all in all, it was huge fun: even Fanny had some lively sport
at the beginning; Belle and I all through.  We got Fanny a dress on the
sly, gaudy black velvet and Duchesse lace.  And alas! she was only able
to wear it once.  But we’ll hope to see more of it at Samoa; it really is
lovely.  Both dames are royally outfitted in silk stockings, etc.  We
return, as from a raid, with our spoils and our wounded.  I am now very
dandy: I announced two years ago that I should change.  Slovenly youth,
all right—not slovenly age.  So really now I am pretty spruce; always a
white shirt, white necktie, fresh shave, silk, socks, O a great sight!—No
more possible,

                                                                  R. L. S.




