CHAPTER XIX


                                                   _Sunday_, 29_th_ _May_.

HOW am I to overtake events?  On Wednesday, as soon as my mail was
finished, I had a wild whirl to look forward to.  Immediately after
dinner, Belle, Lloyd and I, set out on horseback, they to the club, I to
Haggard’s, thence to the hotel where I had supper ready for them.  All
next day we hung round Apia with our whole house-crowd in Sunday array,
hoping for the mail steamer with a menagerie on board.  No such luck; the
ship delayed; and at last, about three, I had to send them home again, a
failure of a day’s pleasuring that does not bear to be discussed.  Lloyd
was so sickened that he returned the same night to Vailima, Belle and I
held on, sat most of the evening on the hotel verandah stricken silly
with fatigue and disappointment, and genuine sorrow for our poor boys and
girls, and got to bed with rather dismal appreciations of the morrow.

These were more than justified, and yet I never had a jollier day than
Friday 27th.  By 7.30 Belle and I had breakfast; we had scarce done
before my mother was at the door on horseback, and a boy at her heels to
take her not very dashing charger home again.  By 8.10 we were all on the
landing pier, and it was 9.20 before we had got away in a boat with two
inches of green wood on the keel of her, no rudder, no mast, no sail, no
boat flag, two defective rowlocks, two wretched apologies for oars, and
two boys—one a Tongan half-caste, one a white lad, son of the Tonga
schoolmaster, and a sailor lad—to pull us.  All this was our first taste
of the tender mercies of Taylor (the sesquipidalian half-caste introduced
two letters back, I believe).  We had scarce got round Mulinuu when Salé
Taylor’s heart misgave him; he thought we had missed the tide; called a
halt, and set off ashore to find canoes.  Two were found; in one my
mother and I were embarked with the two biscuit tins (my present to the
feast), and the bag with our dry clothes, on which my mother was
perched—and her cap was on the top of it—feminine hearts please
sympathise; all under the guidance of Salé.  In the other Belle and our
guest; Tauilo, a chief-woman, the mother of my cook, were to have
followed.  And the boys were to have been left with the boat.  But Tauilo
refused.  And the four, Belle, Tauilo, Frank the sailor-boy, and Jimmie
the Tongan half-caste, set off in the boat across that rapidly shoaling
bay of the lagoon.

How long the next scene lasted, I could never tell.  Salé was always
trying to steal away with our canoe and leave the other four, probably
for six hours, in an empty, leaky boat, without so much as an orange or a
cocoanut on board, and under the direct rays of the sun.  I had at last
to stop him by taking the spare paddle off the out-rigger and sticking it
in the ground—depth, perhaps two feet—width of the bay, say three miles.
At last I bid him land me and my mother and go back for the other ladies.
‘The coast is so rugged,’ said Salé.—‘What?’ I said, ‘all these villages
and no landing place?’—‘Such is the nature of Samoans,’ said he.  Well,
I’ll find a landing-place, I thought; and presently I said, ‘Now we are
going to land there.’—‘We can but try,’ said the bland Salé, with
resignation.  Never saw a better landing-place in my life.  Here the boat
joined us.  My mother and Salé continued in the canoe alone, and Belle
and I and Tauilo set off on foot for Malie.  Tauilo was about the size of
both of us put together and a piece over; she used us like a mouse with
children.  I had started barefoot; Belle had soon to pull off her gala
shoes and stockings; the mud was as deep as to our knees, and so slippery
that (moving, as we did, in Indian file, between dense scratching tufts
of sensitive) Belle and I had to take hands to support each other, and
Tauilo was steadying Belle from the rear.  You can conceive we were got
up to kill, Belle in an embroidered white dress and white hat, I in a
suit of Bedford cords hot from the Sydney tailors; and conceive us,
below, ink-black to the knees with adhesive clay, and above, streaming
with heat.  I suppose it was better than three miles, but at last we made
the end of Malie.  I asked if we could find no water to wash our feet;
and our nursemaid guided us to a pool.  We sat down on the pool side, and
our nursemaid washed our feet and legs for us—ladies first, I suppose out
of a sudden respect to the insane European fancies: such a luxury as you
can scarce imagine.  I felt a new man after it.  But before we got to the
King’s house we were sadly muddied once more.  It was 1 P.M. when we
arrived, the canoe having beaten us by about five minutes, so we made
fair time over our bog-holes.

But the war dances were over, and we came in time to see only the tail
end (some two hours) of the food presentation.  In Mataafa’s house three
chairs were set for us covered with fine mats.  Of course, a native house
without the blinds down is like a verandah.  All the green in front was
surrounded with sheds, some of flapping canvas, some of green palm
boughs, where (in three sides of a huge oblong) the natives sat by
villages in a fine glow of many-hued array.  There were folks in tapa,
and folks in patchwork; there was every colour of the rainbow in a spot
or a cluster; there were men with their heads gilded with powdered
sandal-wood, others with heads all purple, stuck full of the petals of a
flower.  In the midst there was a growing field of outspread food,
gradually covering acres; the gifts were brought in, now by chanting
deputations, now by carriers in a file; they were brandished aloft and
declaimed over, with polite sacramental exaggerations, by the official
receiver.  He, a stalwart, well-oiled quadragenarian, shone with sweat
from his exertions, brandishing cooked pigs.  At intervals, from one of
the squatted villages, an orator would arise.  The field was almost
beyond the reach of any human speaking voice; the proceedings besides
continued in the midst; yet it was possible to catch snatches of this
elaborate and cut-and-dry oratory—it was possible for me, for instance,
to catch the description of my gift and myself as the _alii Tusitala_, _O
le alii O malo tetele_—the chief White Information, the chief of the
great Governments.  Gay designation?  In the house, in our three curule
chairs, we sat and looked on.  On our left a little group of the family.
In front of us, at our feet, an ancient Talking-man, crowned with green
leaves, his profile almost exactly Dante’s; Popo his name.  He had
worshipped idols in his youth; he had been full grown before the first
missionary came hither from Tahiti; this makes him over eighty.  Near by
him sat his son and colleague.  In the group on our left, his little
grandchild sat with her legs crossed and her hands turned, the model
already (at some three years old) of Samoan etiquette.  Still further off
to our right, Mataafa sat on the ground through all the business; and
still I saw his lips moving, and the beads of his rosary slip stealthily
through his hand.  We had kava, and the King’s drinking was hailed by the
Popos (father and son) with a singular ululation, perfectly new to my
ears; it means, to the expert, ‘Long live Tuiatua’; to the inexpert, is a
mere voice of barbarous wolves.  We had dinner, retired a bit behind the
central pillar of the house; and, when the King was done eating, the
ululation was repeated.  I had my eyes on Mataafa’s face, and I saw pride
and gratified ambition spring to life there and be instantly sucked in
again.  It was the first time, since the difference with Laupepa, that
Popo and his son had openly joined him, and given him the due cry as
Tuiatua—one of the eight royal names of the islands, as I hope you will
know before this reaches you.

Not long after we had dined, the food-bringing was over.  The gifts
(carefully noted and tallied as they came in) were now announced by a
humorous orator, who convulsed the audience, introducing singing notes,
now on the name of the article, now on the number; six thousand odd heads
of taro, three hundred and nineteen cooked pigs; and one thing that
particularly caught me (by good luck), a single turtle ‘for the King’—_le
tasi mo le tupu_.  Then came one of the strangest sights I have yet
witnessed.  The two most important persons there (bar Mataafa) were Popo
and his son.  They rose, holding their long shod rods of talking men,
passed forth from the house, broke into a strange dance, the father
capering with outstretched arms and rod, the son crouching and gambolling
beside him in a manner indescribable, and presently began to extend the
circle of this dance among the acres of cooked food.  _Whatever they
leaped over_, _whatever they called for_, _became theirs_.  To see
mediæval Dante thus demean himself struck a kind of a chill of
incongruity into our Philistine souls; but even in a great part of the
Samoan concourse, these antique and (I understand) quite local manners
awoke laughter.  One of my biscuit tins and a live calf were among the
spoils he claimed, but the large majority of the cooked food (having once
proved his dignity) he re-presented to the King.

Then came the turn of _le alii Tusitala_.  He would not dance, but he was
given—five live hens, four gourds of oil, four fine tapas, a hundred
heads of taro, two cooked pigs, a cooked shark, two or three cocoanut
branches strung with kava, and the turtle, who soon after breathed his
last, I believe, from sunstroke.  It was a royal present for ‘the chief
of the great powers.’  I should say the gifts were, on the proper signal,
dragged out of the field of food by a troop of young men, all with their
lava-lavas kilted almost into a loin-cloth.  The art is to swoop on the
food-field, pick up with unerring swiftness the right things and
quantities, swoop forth again on the open, and separate, leaving the
gifts in a new pile: so you may see a covey of birds in a corn-field.
This reminds me of a very inhumane but beautiful passage I had forgotten
in its place.  The gift-giving was still in full swing, when there came a
troop of some ninety men all in tafa lava-lavas of a purplish colour;
they paused, and of a sudden there went up from them high into the air a
flight of live chickens, which, as they came down again, were sent again
into the air, for perhaps a minute, from the midst of a singular turmoil
of flying arms and shouting voices; I assure you, it was very beautiful
to see, but how many chickens were killed?

No sooner was my food set out than I was to be going.  I had a little
serious talk with Mataafa on the floor, and we went down to the boat,
where we got our food aboard, such a cargo—like the Swiss Family
Robinson, we said.  However, a squall began, Tauilo refused to let us go,
and we came back to the house for half-an-hour or so, when my ladies
distinguished themselves by walking through a Fono (council), my mother
actually taking up a position between Mataafa and Popo!  It was about
five when we started—turtle, pigs, taro, etc., my mother, Belle, myself,
Tauilo, a portly friend of hers with the voice of an angel, and a
pronunciation so delicate and true that you could follow Samoan as she
sang, and the two tired boys Frank and Jimmie, with the two bad oars and
the two slippery rowlocks to impel the whole.  Salé Taylor took the canoe
and a strong Samoan to paddle him.  Presently after he went inshore, and
passed us a little after, with his arms folded, and _two_ strong Samoans
impelling him Apia-ward.  This was too much for Belle, who hailed,
taunted him, and made him return to the boat with one of the Samoans,
setting Jimmie instead in the canoe.  Then began our torment, Salé and
the Samoan took the oars, sat on the same thwart (where they could get no
swing on the boat had they tried), and deliberately ladled at the lagoon.
We lay enchanted.  Night fell; there was a light visible on shore; it did
not move.  The two women sang, Belle joining them in the hymns she has
learned at family worship.  Then a squall came up; we sat a while in
roaring midnight under rivers of rain, and, when it blew by, there was
the light again, immovable.  A second squall followed, one of the worst I
was ever out in; we could scarce catch our breath in the cold, dashing
deluge.  When it went, we were so cold that the water in the bottom of
the boat (which I was then baling) seemed like a warm footbath in
comparison, and Belle and I, who were still barefoot, were quite restored
by laving in it.

All this time I had kept my temper, and refrained as far as might be from
any interference, for I saw (in our friend’s mulish humour) he always
contrived to twist it to our disadvantage.  But now came the acute point.
Young Frank now took an oar.  He was a little fellow, near as frail as
myself, and very short; if he weighed nine stone, it was the outside; but
his blood was up.  He took stroke, moved the big Samoan forward to bow,
and set to work to pull him round in fine style.  Instantly a kind of
race competition—almost race hatred—sprang up.  We jeered the Samoan.
Salé declared it was the trim of the boat: ‘if this lady was aft’
(Tauilo’s portly friend) ‘he would row round Frank.’  We insisted on her
coming aft, and Frank still rowed round the Samoan.  When the Samoan
caught a crab (the thing was continual with these wretched oars and
rowlocks), we shouted and jeered; when Frank caught one, Salé and the
Samoan jeered and yelled.  But anyway the boat moved, and presently we
got up with Mulinuu, where I finally lost my temper, when I found that
Salé proposed to go ashore and make a visit—in fact, we all three did.
It is not worth while going into, but I must give you one snatch of the
subsequent conversation as we pulled round Apia bay.  ‘This Samoan,’ said
Salé, ‘received seven German bullets in the field of Fangalii.’  ‘I am
delighted to hear it,’ said Belle.  ‘His brother was killed there,’
pursued Salé; and Belle, prompt as an echo, ‘Then there are no more of
the family? how delightful!’  Salé was sufficiently surprised to change
the subject; he began to praise Frank’s rowing with insufferable
condescension: ‘But it is after all not to be wondered at,’ said he,
‘because he has been for some time a sailor.  My good man, is it three or
five years that you have been to sea?’  And Frank, in a defiant shout:
‘Two!’  Whereupon, so high did the ill-feeling run, that we three clapped
and applauded and shouted, so that the President (whose house we were
then passing) doubtless started at the sounds.  It was nine when we got
to the hotel; at first no food was to be found, but we skirmished up some
bread and cheese and beer and brandy; and (having changed our wet clothes
for the rather less wet in our bags) supped on the verandah.

_Saturday_ 28_th_.  I was wakened about 6.30, long past my usual hour, by
a benevolent passer-by.  My turtle lay on the verandah at my door, and
the man woke me to tell me it was dead, as it had been when we put it on
board the day before.  All morning I ran the gauntlet of men and women
coming up to me: ‘Mr. Stevenson, your turtle is dead.’  I gave half of it
to the hotel keeper, so that his cook should cut it up; and we got a
damaged shell, and two splendid meals, beefsteak one day and soup the
next.  The horses came for us about 9.30.  It was waterspouting; we were
drenched before we got out of the town; the road was a fine going
Highland trout stream; it thundered deep and frequent, and my mother’s
horse would not better on a walk.  At last she took pity on us, and very
nobly proposed that Belle and I should ride ahead.  We were mighty glad
to do so, for we were cold.  Presently, I said I should ride back for my
mother, but it thundered again, Belle is afraid of thunder, and I decided
to see her through the forest before I returned for my other hen—I may
say, my other wet hen.  About the middle of the wood, where it is
roughest and steepest, we met three pack-horses with barrels of
lime-juice.  I piloted Belle past these—it is not very easy in such a
road—and then passed them again myself, to pilot my mother.  This
effected, it began to thunder again, so I rode on hard after Belle.  When
I caught up with her, she was singing Samoan hymns to support her
terrors!  We were all back, changed, and at table by lunch time, 11 A.M.
Nor have any of us been the worse for it sinsyne.  That is pretty good
for a woman of my mother’s age and an invalid of my standing; above all,
as Tauilo was laid up with a bad cold, probably increased by rage.

                                * * * * *

                                                   _Friday_, 3_rd_ _June_.

On Wednesday the club could not be held, and I must ride down town and to
and fro all afternoon delivering messages, then dined and rode up by the
young moon.  I had plenty news when I got back; there is great talk in
town of my deportation: it is thought they have written home to Downing
Street requesting my removal, which leaves me not much alarmed; what I do
rather expect is that H. J. Moors and I may be haled up before the C. J.
to stand a trial for _lèse_-Majesty.  Well, we’ll try and live it
through.

The rest of my history since Monday has been unadulterated _David
Balfour_.  In season and out of season, night and day, David and his
innocent harem—let me be just, he never has more than the two—are on my
mind.  Think of David Balfour with a pair of fair ladies—very nice ones
too—hanging round him.  I really believe David is as a good character as
anybody has a right to ask for in a novel.  I have finished drafting
