CHAPTER IX


                                                             _June_, 1891.

SIR,—To you, under your portrait, which is, in expression, your true,
breathing self, and up to now saddens me; in time, and soon, I shall be
glad to have it there; it is still only a reminder of your absence.
Fanny wept when we unpacked it, and you know how little she is given to
that mood; I was scarce Roman myself, but that does not count—I lift up
my voice so readily.  These are good compliments to the artist.  I write
in the midst of a wreck of books, which have just come up, and have for
once defied my labours to get straight.  The whole floor is filled with
them, and (what’s worse) most of the shelves forbye; and where they are
to go to, and what is to become of the librarian, God knows.  It is hot
to-night, and has been airless all day, and I am out of sorts, and my
work sticks, the devil fly away with it and me.  We had an alarm of war
since last I wrote my screeds to you, and it blew over, and is to blow on
again, and the rumour goes they are to begin by killing all the whites.
I have no belief in this, and should be infinitely sorry if it came to
pass—I do not mean for _us_, that were otiose—but for the poor, deluded
schoolboys, who should hope to gain by such a step.

                                * * * * *

[_Letter resumed_.]

                                                            _June_ 20_th_.

No diary this time.  Why? you ask.  I have only sent out four Letters,
and two chapters of the _Wrecker_.  Yes, but to get these I have written
132 pp., 66,000 words in thirty days; 2200 words a day; the labours of an
elephant.  God knows what it’s like, and don’t ask me, but nobody shall
say I have spared pains.  I thought for some time it wouldn’t come at
all.  I was days and days over the first letter of the lot—days and days
writing and deleting and making no headway whatever, till I thought I
should have gone bust; but it came at last after a fashion, and the rest
went a thought more easily, though I am not so fond as to fancy any
better.

Your opinion as to the letters as a whole is so damnatory that I put them
by.  But there is a ‘hell of a want of’ money this year.  And these
Gilbert Island papers, being the most interesting in matter, and forming
a compact whole, and being well illustrated, I did think of as a possible
resource.

It would be called

  _Six Months in Melanesia_,

  _Two Island Kings_,

  —_Monarchies_,

  _Gilbert Island Kings_,

  —_Monarchies_,

and I daresay I’ll think of a better yet—and would divide thus:—

                            _Butaritati_.
        I.  A Town asleep.
       II.  The Three Brothers.
      III.  Around our House.
       IV.  A Tale of a Tapu.
        V.  The Five Day’s Festival.
       VI.  Domestic Life—(which might be omitted, but not well,
            better be recast).
                        _The King of Apemama_.
      VII.  The Royal Traders.
     VIII.  Foundation of Equator Town.
       IX.  The Palace of Mary Warren.
        X.  Equator Town and the Palace.
       XI.  King and Commons.
      XII.  The Devil Work Box.
     XIII.  The Three Corslets.
      XIV.  Tail piece; the Court upon a Journey.

I wish you to watch these closely, judging them as a whole, and treating
them as I have asked you, and favour me with your damnatory advice.  I
look up at your portrait, and it frowns upon me.  You seem to view me
with reproach.  The expression is excellent; Fanny wept when she saw it,
and you know she is not given to the melting mood.  She seems really
better; I have a touch of fever again, I fancy overwork, and to-day, when
I have overtaken my letters, I shall blow on my pipe.  Tell Mrs. S. I
have been playing _Le Chant d’Amour_ lately, and have arranged it, after
awful trouble, rather prettily for two pipes; and it brought her before
me with an effect scarce short of hallucination.  I could hear her voice
in every note; yet I had forgot the air entirely, and began to pipe it
from notes as something new, when I was brought up with a round turn by
this reminiscence.  We are now very much installed; the dining-room is
done, and looks lovely.  Soon we shall begin to photograph and send you
our circumstances.  My room is still a howling wilderness.  I sleep on a
platform in a window, and strike my mosquito bar and roll up my
bedclothes every morning, so that the bed becomes by day a divan.  A
great part of the floor is knee-deep in books, yet nearly all the shelves
are filled, alas!  It is a place to make a pig recoil, yet here are my
interminable labours begun daily by lamp-light, and sometimes not yet
done when the lamp has once more to be lighted.  The effect of pictures
in this place is surprising.  They give great pleasure.

                                * * * * *

                                                            _June_ 21_st_.

A word more.  I had my breakfast this morning at 4.30!  My new cook has
beaten me and (as Lloyd says) revenged all the cooks in the world.  I
have been hunting them to give me breakfast early since I was twenty; and
now here comes Mr. Ratke, and I have to plead for mercy.  I cannot stand
4.30; I am a mere fevered wreck; it is now half-past eight, and I can no
more, and four hours divide me from lunch, the devil take the man!
Yesterday it was about 5.30, which I can stand; day before 5, which is
bad enough; to-day, I give out.  It is like a London season, and as I do
not take a siesta once in a month, and then only five minutes, I am being
worn to the bones, and look aged and anxious.

We have Rider Haggard’s brother here as a Land Commissioner; a nice kind
of a fellow; indeed, all the three Land Commissioners are very agreeable.




