CHAPTER XLI


                                                             _July_, 1894.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I have to thank you this time for a very good letter, and
will announce for the future, though I cannot now begin to put in
practice, good intentions for our correspondence.  I will try to return
to the old system and write from time to time during the month; but truly
you did not much encourage me to continue!  However, that is all by-past.
I do not know that there is much in your letter that calls for answer.
Your questions about _St. Ives_ were practically answered in my last; so
were your wails about the edition, _Amateur Emigrant_, etc.  By the end
of the year _St. I._ will be practically finished, whatever it be worth,
and that I know not.  When shall I receive proofs of the _Magnum Opus_?
or shall I receive them at all?

The return of the Amanuensis feebly lightens my heart.  You can see the
heavy weather I was making of it with my unaided pen.  The last month has
been particularly cheery largely owing to the presence of our good
friends the _Curaçoas_.  She is really a model ship, charming officers
and charming seamen.  They gave a ball last month, which was very rackety
and joyous and naval. . . .

On the following day, about one o’clock, three horsemen might have been
observed approaching Vailima, who gradually resolved themselves into two
petty officers and a native guide.  Drawing himself up and saluting, the
spokesman (a corporal of Marines) addressed me thus.  ‘Me and my
shipmates inwites Mr. and Mrs. Stevens, Mrs. Strong, Mr. Austin, and Mr.
Balfour to a ball to be given to-night in the self-same ‘all.’  It was of
course impossible to refuse, though I contented myself with putting in a
very brief appearance.  One glance was sufficient; the ball went off like
a rocket from the start.  I had only time to watch Belle careering around
with a gallant bluejacket of exactly her own height—the standard of the
British navy—an excellent dancer and conspicuously full of small-talk—and
to hear a remark from a beach-comber, ‘It’s a nice sight this some way,
to see the officers dancing like this with the men, but I tell you, sir,
these are the men that’ll fight together!’

I tell you, Colvin, the acquaintance of the men—and boys—makes me feel
patriotic.  Eeles in particular is a man whom I respect.  I am half in a
mind to give him a letter of introduction to you when he goes home.  In
case you feel inclined to make a little of him, give him a dinner, ask
Henry James to come to meet him, etc.—you might let me know.  I don’t
know that he would show his best, but he is a remarkably fine fellow, in
every department of life.

We have other visitors in port.  A Count Festetics de Solna, an Austrian
officer, a very pleasant, simple, boyish creature, with his young wife,
daughter of an American millionaire; he is a friend of our own Captain
Wurmbrand, and it is a great pity Wurmbrand is away.

Glad you saw and liked Lysaght.  He has left in our house a most cheerful
and pleasing memory, as a good, pleasant, brisk fellow with good health
and brains, and who enjoys himself and makes other people happy.  I am
glad he gave you a good report of our surroundings and way of life; but I
knew he would, for I believe he had a glorious time—and gave one.

I am on fair terms with the two Treaty officials, though all such
intimacies are precarious; with the consuls, I need not say, my position
is deplorable.  The President (Herr Emil Schmidt) is a rather dreamy man,
whom I like.  Lloyd, Graham and I go to breakfast with him to-morrow; the
next day the whole party of us lunch on the _Curaçoa_ and go in the
evening to a _Bierabend_ at Dr. Funk’s.  We are getting up a paper-chase
for the following week with some of the young German clerks, and have in
view a sort of child’s party for grown-up persons with kissing games,
etc., here at Vailima.  Such is the gay scene in which we move.  Now I
have done something, though not as much as I wanted, to give you an idea
of how we are getting on, and I am keenly conscious that there are other
letters to do before the mail goes.—Yours ever,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.




CHAPTER XLII


                                                             _Aug._ 7_th_.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—This is to inform you, sir, that on Sunday last (and this
is Tuesday) I attained my ideal here, and we had a paper chase in Vailele
Plantation, about 15 miles, I take it, from us; and it was all that could
be wished.  It is really better fun than following the hounds, since you
have to be your own hound, and a precious bad hound I was, following
every false scent on the whole course to the bitter end; but I came in
3rd at the last on my little Jack, who stuck to it gallantly, and awoke
the praises of some discriminating persons.  (5 + 7 + 2.5 = 14.5 miles;
yes, that is the count.)  We had quite the old sensations of
exhilaration, discovery, an appeal to a savage instinct; and I felt
myself about 17 again, a pleasant experience.  However, it was on the
Sabbath Day, and I am now a pariah among the English, as if I needed any
increment of unpopularity.  I must not go again; it gives so much
unnecessary tribulation to poor people, and, sure, we don’t want to make
tribulation.  I have been forbidden to work, and have been instead doing
my two or three hours in the plantation every morning.  I only wish
somebody would pay me £10 a day for taking care of cacao, and I could
leave literature to others.  Certainly, if I have plenty of exercise, and
no work, I feel much better; but there is Biles the butcher! him we have
always with us.

I do not much like novels, I begin to think, but I am enjoying
exceedingly Orme’s _History of Hindostan_, a lovely book in its way, in
large quarto, with a quantity of maps, and written in a very lively and
solid eighteenth century way, never picturesque except by accident and
from a kind of conviction, and a fine sense of order.  No historian I
have ever read is so minute; yet he never gives you a word about the
people; his interest is entirely limited in the concatenation of events,
into which he goes with a lucid, almost superhuman, and wholly ghostly
gusto.  ‘By the ghost of a mathematician’ the book might be announced.  A
very brave, honest book.

Your letter to hand.

Fact is, I don’t like the picter.  O, it’s a good picture, but if you
_ask_ me, you know, I believe, stoutly believe, that mankind, including
you, are going mad, I am not in the midst with the other frenzy dancers,
so I don’t catch it wholly; and when you show me a thing—and ask me,
don’t you know—Well, well!  Glad to get so good an account of the
_Amateur Emigrant_.  Talking of which, I am strong for making a volume
out of selections from the South Sea letters; I read over again the King
of Apemama, and it is good in spite of your teeth, and a real curiosity,
a thing that can never be seen again, and the group is annexed and
Tembinoka dead.  I wonder, couldn’t you send out to me the _first_ five
Butaritari letters and the Low Archipelago ones (both of which I have
lost or mislaid) and I can chop out a perfectly fair volume of what I
wish to be preserved.  It can keep for the last of the series.

_Travels and Excursions_, vol. II.  Should it not include a paper on S.
F. from the _Mag. of Art_?  The A. E., the New Pacific capital, the Old
ditto.  _Silver. Squat._  This would give all my works on the States; and
though it ain’t very good, it’s not so very bad.  _Travels and
Excursions_, vol. III., to be these resuscitated letters—_Miscellanies_,
vol. II.—_comme vous voudrez_, _cher monsieur_!

                                * * * * *

                                                    _Monday_, Aug. 13_th_.

I have a sudden call to go up the coast and must hurry up with my
information.  There has suddenly come to our naval commanders the need of
action, they’re away up the coast bombarding the Atua rebels.  All
morning on Saturday the sound of the bombardment of Lotuanu’u kept us
uneasy.  To-day again the big guns have been sounding further along the
coast.

To-morrow morning early I am off up the coast myself.  Therefore you must
allow me to break off here without further ceremony.—Yours ever,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




