CHAPTER XV


                                                       _Jan._ 31_st_, ’92.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—No letter at all from you, and this scratch from me!
Here is a year that opens ill.  Lloyd is off to ‘the coast’ sick—_the
coast_ means California over most of the Pacific—I have been down all
month with influenza, and am just recovering—I am overlaid with proofs,
which I am just about half fit to attend to.  One of my horses died this
morning, and another is now dying on the front lawn—Lloyd’s horse and
Fanny’s.  Such is my quarrel with destiny.  But I am mending famously,
come and go on the balcony, have perfectly good nights, and though I
still cough, have no oppression and no hemorrhage and no fever.  So if I
can find time and courage to add no more, you will know my news is not
altogether of the worst; a year or two ago, and what a state I should
have been in now!  Your silence, I own, rather alarms me.  But I tell
myself you have just miscarried; had you been too ill to write, some one
would have written me.  Understand, I send this brief scratch not because
I am unfit to write more, but because I have 58 galleys of the _Wrecker_
and 102 of the _Beach of Falesá_ to get overhauled somehow or other in
time for the mail, and for three weeks I have not touched a pen with my
finger.

                                * * * * *

                                                             _Feb._ 1_st_.

The second horse is still alive, but I still think dying.  The first was
buried this morning.  My proofs are done; it was a rough two days of it,
but done.  _Consummatum est_; _na uma_.  I believe the _Wrecker_ ends
well; if I know what a good yarn is, the last four chapters make a good
yarn—but pretty horrible.  _The Beach of Falesá_ I still think well of,
but it seems it’s immoral and there’s a to-do, and financially it may
prove a heavy disappointment.  The plaintive request sent to me, to make
the young folks married properly before ‘that night,’ I refused; you will
see what would be left of the yarn, had I consented.  This is a poison
bad world for the romancer, this Anglo-Saxon world; I usually get out of
it by not having any women in it at all; but when I remember I had the
_Treasure of Franchard_ refused as unfit for a family magazine, I feel
despair weigh upon my wrists.

As I know you are always interested in novels, I must tell you that a new
one is now entirely planned.  It is to be called _Sophia Scarlet_, and is
in two parts.  Part I. The Vanilla Planter.  Part II. The Overseers.  No
chapters, I think; just two dense blocks of narrative, the first of which
is purely sentimental, but the second has some rows and quarrels, and
winds up with an explosion, if you please!  I am just burning to get at
Sophia, but I _must_ do this Samoan journalism—that’s a cursed duty.  The
first part of Sophia, bar the first twenty or thirty pages, writes
itself; the second is more difficult, involving a good many
characters—about ten, I think—who have to be kept all moving, and give
the effect of a society.  I have three women to handle, out and
well-away! but only Sophia is in full tone.  Sophia and two men,
Windermere, the Vanilla Planter, who dies at the end of Part I., and
Rainsforth, who only appears in the beginning of Part II.  The fact is, I
blush to own it, but Sophia is a _regular novel_; heroine and hero, and
false accusation, and love, and marriage, and all the rest of it—all
planted in a big South Sea plantation run by ex-English officers—_à la_
Stewart’s plantation in Tahiti.  There is a strong undercurrent of labour
trade, which gives it a kind of Uncle Tom flavour, _absit omen_!  The
first start is hard; it is hard to avoid a little tedium here, but I
think by beginning with the arrival of the three Miss Scarlets hot from
school and society in England, I may manage to slide in the information.
The problem is exactly a Balzac one, and I wish I had his fist—for I have
already a better method—the kinetic, whereas he continually allowed
himself to be led into the static.  But then he had the fist, and the
most I can hope is to get out of it with a modicum of grace and energy,
but for sure without the strong impression, the full, dark brush.  Three
people have had it, the real creator’s brush: Scott, see much of _The
Antiquary_ and _The Heart of Midlothian_ (especially all round the trial,
before, during, and after)—Balzac—and Thackeray in _Vanity Fair_.
Everybody else either paints _thin_, or has to stop to paint, or paints
excitedly, so that you see the author skipping before his canvas.  Here
is a long way from poor Sophia Scarlet!

                          This day is published

                             _Sophia Scarlet_

                                    By

                         ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




CHAPTER XVI


                                                              _Feb._ 1892.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—This has been a busyish month for a sick man.  First,
Faauma—the bronze candlestick, whom otherwise I called my butler—bolted
from the bed and bosom of Lafaele, the Archangel Hercules, prefect of the
cattle.  There was the deuce to pay, and Hercules was inconsolable, and
immediately started out after a new wife, and has had one up on a visit,
but says she has ‘no conversation’; and I think he will take back the
erring and possibly repentant candlestick; whom we all devoutly prefer,
as she is not only highly decorative, but good-natured, and if she does
little work makes no rows.  I tell this lightly, but it really was a
heavy business; many were accused of complicity, and Rafael was really
very sorry.  I had to hold beds of justice—literally—seated in my bed and
surrounded by lying Samoans seated on the floor; and there were many
picturesque and still inexplicable passages.  It is hard to reach the
truth in these islands.

The next incident overlapped with this.  S. and Fanny found three strange
horses in the paddock: for long now the boys have been forbidden to leave
their horses here one hour because our grass is over-grazed.  S. came up
with the news, and I saw I must now strike a blow.  ‘To the pound with
the lot,’ said I.  He proposed taking the three himself, but I thought
that too dangerous an experiment, said I should go too, and hurried into
my boots so as to show decision taken, in the necessary interviews.  They
came of course—the interviews—and I explained what I was going to do at
huge length, and stuck to my guns.  I am glad to say the natives, with
their usual (purely speculative) sense of justice highly approved the
step after reflection.  Meanwhile off went S. and I with the three
_corpora delicti_; and a good job I went!  Once, when our circus began to
kick, we thought all was up; but we got them down all sound in wind and
limb.  I judged I was much fallen off from my Elliott forefathers, who
managed this class of business with neatness and despatch.  Half-way down
it came on to rain tropic style, and I came back from my outing drenched
liked a drowned man—I was literally blinded as I came back among these
sheets of water; and the consequence was I was laid down with diarrhoea
and threatenings of Samoa colic for the inside of another week.

I have a confession to make.  When I was sick I tried to get to work to
finish that Samoa thing, wouldn’t go; and at last, in the colic time, I
slid off into _David Balfour_, some 50 pages of which are drafted, and
like me well.  Really I think it is spirited; and there’s a heroine that
(up to now) seems to have attractions: _absit omen_!  David, on the
whole, seems excellent.  Alan does not come in till the tenth chapter,
and I am only at the eighth, so I don’t know if I can find him again; but
David is on his feet, and doing well, and very much in love, and mixed up
with the Lord Advocate and the (untitled) Lord Lovat, and all manner of
great folk.  And the tale interferes with my eating and sleeping.  The
join is bad; I have not thought to strain too much for continuity; so
this part be alive, I shall be content.  But there’s no doubt David seems
to have changed his style, de’il ha’e him!  And much I care, if the tale
travel!

                                * * * * *

                                               _Friday_, _Feb._ ?? 19_th_?

Two incidents to-day which I must narrate.  After lunch, it was raining
pitilessly; we were sitting in my mother’s bedroom, and I was reading
aloud Kinglake’s Charge of the Light Brigade, and we had just been all
seized by the horses aligning with Lord George Paget, when a figure
appeared on the verandah; a little, slim, small figure of a lad, with
blond (_i.e._ limed) hair, a propitiatory smile, and a nose that alone of
all his features grew pale with anxiety.  ‘I come here stop,’ was about
the outside of his English; and I began at once to guess that he was a
runaway labourer, and that the bush-knife in his hand was stolen.  It
proved he had a mate, who had lacked his courage, and was hidden down the
road; they had both made up their minds to run away, and had ‘come here
stop.’  I could not turn out the poor rogues, one of whom showed me marks
on his back, into the drenching forest; I could not reason with them, for
they had not enough English, and not one of our boys spoke their tongue;
so I bade them feed and sleep here to-night, and to-morrow I must do what
the Lord shall bid me.

Near dinner time, I was told that a friend of Lafaele’s had found human
remains in my bush.  After dinner, a figure was seen skulking across
towards the waterfall, which produced from the verandah a shout, in my
most stentorian tones: ‘_O ai le ingoa_?’ literally ‘Who the name?’ which
serves here for ‘What’s your business?’ as well.  It proved to be
Lafaele’s friend; I bade a kitchen boy, Lauilo, go with him to see the
spot, for though it had ceased raining, the whole island ran and dripped.
Lauilo was willing enough, but the friend of the archangel demurred; he
had too much business; he had no time.  ‘All right,’ I said, ‘you too
much frightened, I go along,’ which of course produced the usual shout of
delight from all those who did not require to go.  I got into my Saranac
snow boots.  Lauilo got a cutlass; Mary Carter, our Sydney maid, joined
the party for a lark, and off we set.  I tell you our guide kept us
moving; for the dusk fell swift.  Our woods have an infamous reputation
at the best, and our errand (to say the least of it) was grisly.  At last
they found the remains; they were old, which was all I cared to be sure
of; it seemed a strangely small ‘pickle-banes’ to stand for a big,
flourishing, buck-islander, and their situation in the darkening and
dripping bush was melancholy.  All at once, I found there was a second
skull, with a bullet-hole I could have stuck my two thumbs in—say anybody
else’s one thumb.  My Samoans said it could not be, there were not enough
bones; I put the two pieces of skull together, and at last convinced
them.  Whereupon, in a flash, they found the not unromantic explanation.
This poor brave had succeeded in the height of a Samoan warriors
ambition; he had taken a head, which he was never destined to show to his
applauding camp.  Wounded himself, he had crept here into the bush to die
with his useless trophy by his side.  His date would be about fifteen
years ago, in the great battle between Laupepa and Talavou, which took
place on My Land, Sir.  To-morrow we shall bury the bones and fire a
salute in honour of unfortunate courage.

Do you think I have an empty life? or that a man jogging to his club has
so much to interest and amuse him?—touch and try him too, but that goes
along with the others: no pain, no pleasure, is the iron law.  So here I
stop again, and leave, as I left yesterday, my political business
untouched.  And lo! here comes my pupil, I believe, so I stop in time.

                                * * * * *

                                                            _March_ 2_nd_.

Since I last wrote, fifteen chapters of _David Balfour_ have been
drafted, and five _tirés au clair_.  I think it pretty good; there’s a
blooming maiden that costs anxiety—she is as virginal as billy; but David
seems there and alive, and the Lord Advocate is good, and so I think is
an episodic appearance of the Master of Lovat.  In Chapter XVII. I shall
get David abroad—Alan went already in Chapter XII.  The book should be
about the length of _Kidnapped_; this early part of it, about D.’s
evidence in the Appin case, is more of a story than anything in
_Kidnapped_, but there is no doubt there comes a break in the middle, and
the tale is practically in two divisions.  In the first James More and
the M’Gregors, and Catriona, only show; in the second, the Appin case
being disposed of, and James Stewart hung, they rule the roast and usurp
the interest—should there be any left.  Why did I take up _David
Balfour_?  I don’t know.  A sudden passion.

Monday, I went down in the rain with a colic to take the chair at a
public meeting; dined with Haggard; sailed off to my meeting, and fought
with wild beasts for three anxious hours.  All was lost that any sensible
man cared for, but the meeting did not break up—thanks a good deal to R.
L. S.—and the man who opposed my election, and with whom I was all the
time wrangling, proposed the vote of thanks to me with a certain
handsomeness; I assure you I had earned it . . .  Haggard and the great
Abdul, his high-caste Indian servant, imported by my wife, were sitting
up for me with supper, and I suppose it was twelve before I got to bed.
Tuesday raining, my mother rode down, and we went to the Consulate to
sign a Factory and Commission.  Thence, I to the lawyers, to the printing
office, and to the Mission.  It was dinner time when I returned home.

This morning, our cook-boy having suddenly left—injured feelings—the
archangel was to cook breakfast.  I found him lighting the fire before
dawn; his eyes blazed, he had no word of any language left to use, and I
saw in him (to my wonder) the strongest workings of gratified ambition.
Napoleon was no more pleased to sign his first treaty with Austria than
was Lafaele to cook that breakfast.  All morning, when I had hoped to be
at this letter, I slept like one drugged and you must take this (which is
all I can give you) for what it is worth—

                                   D.B.

  _Memoirs of his Adventures at Home and Abroad_.  _The Second Part_;
  _wherein are set forth the misfortunes in which he was involved upon
  the Appin Murder_; _his troubles with Lord Advocate Prestongrange_;
  _captivity on the Bass Rock_; _journey into France and Holland_; _and
  singular relations with James More Drummond or Macgregor_, _a son of
  the notorious Rob Roy_.

Chapters.—I. A Beggar on Horseback.  II. The Highland Writer.  III. I go
to Pilrig.  IV. Lord Advocate Prestongrange.  V. Butter and Thunder.  VI.
I make a fault in honour.  VII. The Bravo.  VIII. The Heather on Fire.
IX. I begin to be haunted with a red-headed man.  X. The Wood by
Silvermills.  XI. On the march again with Alan.  XII. Gillane Sands.
XIII. The Bass Rock.  XIV. Black Andie’s Tale of Tod Lapraik.  XV. I go
to Inveraray.



That is it, as far as drafted.  Chapters IV. V. VII. IX. and XIV. I am
specially pleased with; the last being an episodical bogie story about
the Bass Rock told there by the Keeper.




