Chapter XX. to-day, and feel it all ready to froth when the spigot is
turned.

O I forgot—and do forget.  What did I mean?  A waft of cloud has fallen
on my mind, and I will write no more.

                                * * * * *

                                   _Wednesday_, _I believe_, 8_th_ _June_.

Lots of David, and lots of David, and the devil any other news.
Yesterday we were startled by great guns firing a salute, and to-day
Whitmee (missionary) rode up to lunch, and we learned it was the
_Curaçoa_ come in, the ship (according to rumour) in which I was to be
deported.  I went down to meet my fate, and the captain is to dine with
me Saturday, so I guess I am not going this voyage.  Even with the
particularity with which I write to you, how much of my life goes
unexpressed; my troubles with a madman by the name of —, a genuine living
lunatic, I believe, and jolly dangerous; my troubles about poor —, all
these have dropped out; yet for moments they were very instant, and one
of them is always present with me.

I have finished copying Chapter XXI. of David—‘_solus cum sola_; we
travel together.’  Chapter XXII., ‘_Solus cum sola_; we keep house
together,’ is already drafted.  To the end of XXI. makes more than 150
pages of my manuscript—damn this hair—and I only designed the book to run
to about 200; but when you introduce the female sect, a book does run
away with you.  I am very curious to see what you will think of my two
girls.  My own opinion is quite clear; I am in love with both.  I foresee
a few pleasant years of spiritual flirtations.  The creator (if I may
name myself, for the sake of argument, by such a name) is essentially
unfaithful.  For the duration of the two chapters in which I dealt with
Miss Grant, I totally forgot my heroine, and even—but this is a flat
secret—tried to win away David.  I think I must try some day to marry
Miss Grant.  I’m blest if I don’t think I’ve got that hair out! which
seems triumph enough; so I conclude.

                                * * * * *

                                                                _Tuesday_.

Your infinitesimal correspondence has reached me, and I have the honour
to refer to it with scorn.  It contains only one statement of conceivable
interest, that your health is better; the rest is null, and so far as
disquisitory unsound.  I am all right, but David Balfour is ailing; this
came from my visit to the man-of-war, where I had a cup of tea, and the
most of that night walked the verandah with extraordinary convictions of
guilt and ruin, many of which (but not all) proved to have fled with the
day, taking David along with them; he R.I.P. in Chapter XXII.

On Saturday I went down to the town, and fetched up Captain Gibson to
dinner; Sunday I was all day at Samoa, and had a pile of visitors.
Yesterday got my mail, including your despicable sheet; was fooled with a
visit from the high chief Asi, went down at 4 P.M. to my Samoan lesson
from Whitmee—I think I shall learn from him, he does not fool me with
cockshot rules that are demolished next day, but professes ignorance like
a man; the truth is, the grammar has still to be expiscated—dined with
Haggard, and got home about nine.

                                * * * * *

                                                              _Wednesday_.

The excellent Clarke up here almost all day yesterday, a man I esteem and
like to the soles of his boots; I prefer him to anyone in Samoa, and to
most people in the world; a real good missionary, with the inestimable
advantage of having grown up a layman.  Pity they all can’t get that!  It
recalls my old proposal, which delighted Lady Taylor so much, that every
divinity student should be thirty years old at least before he was
admitted.  Boys switched out of college into a pulpit, what chance have
they?  That any should do well amazes me, and the most are just what was
to be expected.

                                * * * * *

                                                               _Saturday_.

I must tell you of our feast.  It was long promised to the boys, and came
off yesterday in one of their new houses.  My good Simelé arrived from
Savaii that morning asking for political advice; then we had Tauilo;
Elena’s father, a talking man of Tauilo’s family; Talolo’s cousin; and a
boy of Simelé’s family, who attended on his dignity; then Metu, the
meat-man—you have never heard of him, but he is a great person in our
household—brought a lady and a boy—and there was another infant—eight
guests in all.  And we sat down thirty strong.  You should have seen our
procession, going (about two o’clock), all in our best clothes, to the
hall of feasting!  All in our Sunday’s best.  The new house had been
hurriedly finished; the rafters decorated with flowers; the floor spread,
native style, with green leaves; we had given a big porker, twenty-five
pounds of fresh beef, a tin of biscuit, cocoanuts, etc.  Our places were
all arranged with much care; the native ladies of the house facing our
party; the sides filled up by the men; the guests, please observe: the
two chief people, male and female, were placed with our family, the rest
between S. and the native ladies.  After the feast was over, we had kava,
and the calling of the kava was a very elaborate affair, and I thought
had like to have made Simelé very angry; he is really a considerable
chief, but he and Tauilo were not called till after all our family, _and
the guests_, I suppose the principle being that he was still regarded as
one of the household.  I forgot to say that our black boy did not turn up
when the feast was ready.  Off went the two cooks, found him, decorated
him with huge red hibiscus flowers—he was in a very dirty under
shirt—brought him back between them like a reluctant maid, and, thrust
him into a place between Faauma and Elena, where he was petted and
ministered to.  When his turn came in the kava drinking—and you may be
sure, in their contemptuous, affectionate kindness for him, as for a good
dog, it came rather earlier than it ought—he was cried under a new name.
_Aleki_ is what they make of his own name Arrick; but instead of [the cup
of / ‘le ipu o] Aleki!’ it was called ‘le ipu o _Vailima_’ and it was
explained that he had ‘taken his chief-name’! a jest at which the
plantation still laughs.  Kava done, I made a little speech, Henry
translating.  If I had been well, I should have alluded to all, but I was
scarce able to sit up; so only alluded to my guest of all this month, the
Tongan, Tomas, and to Simelé, partly for the jest of making him translate
compliments to himself.  The talking man replied with many handsome
compliments to me, in the usual flood of Samoan fluent neatness; and we
left them to an afternoon of singing and dancing.  Must stop now, as my
right hand is very bad again.  I am trying to write with my left.

                                * * * * *

                                                                 _Sunday_.

About half-past eight last night, I had gone to my own room, Fanny and
Lloyd were in Fanny’s, every one else in bed, only two boys on the
premises—the two little brown boys Mitaiele (Michael), age I suppose 11
or 12, and the new steward, a Wallis islander, speaking no English and
about fifty words of Samoan, recently promoted from the bush work, and a
most good, anxious, timid lad of 15 or 16—looks like 17 or 18, of
course—they grow fast here.  In comes Mitaiele to Lloyd, and told some
rigmarole about Paatalise (the steward’s name) wanting to go and see his
family in the bush.—‘But he has no family in the bush,’ said Lloyd.
‘No,’ said Mitaiele.  They went to the boy’s bed (they sleep in the
walled-in compartment of the verandah, once my dressing-room) and called
at once for me.  He lay like one asleep, talking in drowsy tones but
without excitement, and at times ‘cheeping’ like a frightened mouse; he
was quite cool to the touch, and his pulse not fast; his breathing seemed
wholly ventral; the bust still, the belly moving strongly.  Presently he
got from his bed, and ran for the door, with his head down not three feet
from the floor and his body all on a stretch forward, like a striking
snake: I say ‘ran,’ but this strange movement was not swift.  Lloyd and I
mastered him and got him back in bed.  Soon there was another and more
desperate attempt to escape, in which Lloyd had his ring broken.  Then we
bound him to the bed humanely with sheets, ropes, boards and pillows.  He
lay there and sometimes talked, sometimes whispered, sometimes wept like
an angry child; his principal word was ‘Faamolemole’—‘Please’—and he kept
telling us at intervals that his family were calling him.  During this
interval, by the special grace of God, my boys came home; we had already
called in Arrick, the black boy; now we had that Hercules, Lafaele, and a
man Savea, who comes from Paatalise’s own island and can alone
communicate with him freely.  Lloyd went to bed, I took the first watch,
and sat in my room reading, while Lafaele and Arrick watched the madman.
Suddenly Arrick called me; I ran into the verandah; there was Paatalise
free of all his bonds and Lafaele holding him.  To tell what followed is
impossible.  We were five people at him—Lafaele and Savea, very strong
men, Lloyd, I and Arrick, and the struggle lasted until 1 A.M. before we
had him bound.  One detail for a specimen: Lloyd and I had charge of one
leg, we were both sitting on it, and lo! we were both tossed into the
air—I, I daresay, a couple of feet.  At last we had him spread-eagled to
the iron bedstead, by his wrists and ankles, with matted rope; a most
inhumane business, but what could we do? it was all we could do to manage
it even so.  The strength of the paroxysms had been steadily increasing,
and we trembled for the next.  And now I come to pure Rider Haggard.
Lafaele announced that the boy was very bad, and he would get ‘some
medicine’ which was a family secret of his own.  Some leaves were brought
mysteriously in; chewed, placed on the boy’s eyes, dropped in his ears
(see Hamlet) and stuck up his nostrils; as he did this, the weird doctor
partly smothered the patient with his hand; and by about 2 A.M. he was in
a deep sleep, and from that time he showed no symptom of dementia
whatever.  The medicine (says Lafaele) is principally used for the
wholesale slaughter of families; he himself feared last night that his
dose was fatal; only one other person, on this island, knows the secret;
and she, Lafaele darkly whispers, has abused it.  This remarkable tree we
must try to identify.

The man-of-war doctor came up to-day, gave us a strait-waistcoat, taught
us to bandage, examined the boy and saw he was apparently well—he
insisted on doing his work all morning, poor lad, and when he first came
down kissed all the family at breakfast!  The Doctor was greatly excited,
as may be supposed, about Lafaele’s medicine.

                                * * * * *

                                                                _Tuesday_.

All yesterday writing my mail by the hand of Belle, to save my wrist.
This is a great invention, to which I shall stick, if it can be managed.
We had some alarm about Paatalise, but he slept well all night for a
benediction.  This lunatic asylum exercise has no attractions for any of
us.

I don’t know if I remembered to say how much pleased I was with _Across
the Plains_ in every way, inside and out, and you and me.  The critics
seem to taste it, too, as well as could be hoped, and I believe it will
continue to bring me in a few shillings a year for a while.  But such
books pay only indirectly.

To understand the full horror of the mad scene, and how well my boys
behaved, remember that _they believed P.’s ravings_, they _knew_ that his
dead family, thirty strong, crowded the front verandah and called on him
to come to the other world.  They _knew_ that his dead brother had met
him that afternoon in the bush and struck him on both temples.  And
remember! we are fighting the dead, and they had to go out again in the
black night, which is the dead man’s empire.  Yet last evening, when I
thought P. was going to repeat the performance, I sent down for Lafaele,
who had leave of absence, and he and his wife came up about eight o’clock
with a lighted brand.  These are the things for which I have to forgive
my old cattle-man his manifold shortcomings; they are heroic—so are the
shortcomings, to be sure.

It came over me the other day suddenly that this diary of mine to you
would make good pickings after I am dead, and a man could make some kind
of a book out of it without much trouble.  So, for God’s sake, don’t lose
them, and they will prove a piece of provision for my ‘poor old family,’
as Simelé calls it.

About my coming to Europe, I get more and more doubtful, and rather
incline to Ceylon again as place of meeting.  I am so absurdly well here
in the tropics, that it seems like affectation.  Yet remember I have
never once stood Sydney.  Anyway, I shall have the money for it all
ahead, before I think of such a thing.

We had a bowl of Punch on your birthday, which my incredible mother
somehow knew and remembered.

I sometimes sit and yearn for anything in the nature of an income that
would come in—mine has all got to be gone and fished for with the
immortal mind of man.  What I want is the income that really comes in of
itself while all you have to do is just to blossom and exist and sit on
chairs.  Think how beautiful it would be not to have to mind the critics,
and not even the darkest of the crowd—Sidney Colvin.  I should probably
amuse myself with works that would make your hair curl, if you had any
left.

                                                                   R. L S.




