The Project Gutenberg eBook, Vailima Letters, by Robert Louis Stevenson,
Edited by Sidney Colvin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Vailima Letters
       being correspondence addressed by Robert Louis Stevenson
       to Sidney Colvin


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson

Editor: Sidney Colvin

Release Date: February 19, 2013  [eBook #387]
[This file was first posted on December 5, 1995]


Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VAILIMA LETTERS***


Transcribed from the 1908 Methuen edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

              [Picture: Portrait of Robert Louis Stevenson]





                             VAILIMA LETTERS


                           BEING CORRESPONDENCE

                               ADDRESSED BY

                               ROBERT LOUIS

                                STEVENSON

                                    TO

                              SIDNEY COLVIN

                       NOVEMBER 1890 — OCTOBER 1894

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON

                             METHUEN AND CO.

                             36 ESSEX STREET

                            _Seventh Edition_

                                * * * * *

_First Published_     _November_     1895
_Second Edition_      _December_     1895
_Third Edition_       _February_     1901
_Fourth Edition_      _October_      1904
_Fifth Edition_       _March_        1906
_Sixth Edition_       _October_      1907
_Seventh Edition_     _December_     1908

CONTENTS

                                                      PAGE
EDITORIAL NOTE                                          xi
LETTER
           I.  November 1890                             1
          II.  November 25—December 2, 1890             22
         III.  December 1890                            33
          IV.  January 17, 1891                         46
           V.  February 1891                            51
          VI.  March 1891                               54
         VII.  April 1891                               65
        VIII.  April 29—May 19, 1891                    70
          IX.  June 1891                                77
           X.  September 1891                           82
          XI.  September 28—October 13, 1891            94
         XII.  October 1891                            102
        XIII.  November 25—December 7, 1891            110
         XIV.  December 1891—January 3, 1892           119
          XV.  January 31—February 1892                135
         XVI.  February—March 2, 1892                  139
        XVII.  March 9—March 30, 1892                  147
       XVIII.  May 1—May 27, 1892                      158
         XIX.  May 29—June 1892                        180
          XX.  July 2—July 12, 1892                    202
         XXI.  August—September 13, 1892               205
        XXII.  September 15—October 8, 1892            221
       XXIII.  October 28—November 8, 1892             227
        XXIV.  December 1—December 5, 1892             236
         XXV.  January—January 30, 1893                239
        XXVI.  February 19—February 23, 1893           247
       XXVII.  February 1893                           250
      XXVIII.  April—April 22, 1893                    252
        XXIX.  April 25—May 23, 1893                   260
         XXX.  May 29—June 15, 1893                    270
        XXXI.  June 24—July 18, 1893                   280
       XXXII.  August 1893                             296
      XXXIII.  August 23—September 12, 1893            298
       XXXIV.  October 23—December 4, 1893             306
        XXXV.  December 1893                           313
       XXXVI.  January 29, 1894                        320
      XXXVII.  February 1894                           322
     XXXVIII.  March 1894                              324
       XXXIX.  May 18, 1894                            330
          XL.  June 18, 1894                           333
         XLI.  July 1894                               336
        XLII.  August 7—August 13, 1894                340
       XLIII.  September 1894                          343
        XLIV.  October 6, 1894                         348
Epilogue                                               355
Appendix                                               360

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Portrait of R. L. Stevenson; etched by W. Strang        _Frontispiece_
after a photograph by Falk of Sydney
Portrait of R. L. Stevenson on his Horse ‘Jack’                    119
Portrait of R. L. Stevenson with the Native Chief                  320
Tui Malealiifano




EDITORIAL NOTE.


SO much of preface seems necessary to this volume as may justify its
publication and explain its origin.  The writer was for many years my
closest friend.  It was in the summer of 1873 that a lady, whose gracious
influence has helped to shape and encourage more than one distinguished
career, first awakened my interest in him and drew us together.  He was
at that time a lad of twenty-two, with his powers not yet set nor his way
of life determined.  But to know him was to recognise at once that here
was a young genius of whom great things might be expected.  A slender,
boyish presence, with a graceful, somewhat fantastic bearing, and a
singular power and attraction in the eyes and smile, were the signs that
first impressed you; and the impression was quickly confirmed and
deepened by the charm of his talk, which was irresistibly sympathetic and
inspiring, and not less full of matter than of mirth.  I have known no
man in whom the poet’s heart and imagination were combined with such a
brilliant strain of humour and such an unsleeping alertness and
adroitness of the critical intelligence.  But it was only in conversation
that he could as yet do himself justice.  His earliest efforts in
literature were of a very uneven and tentative quality.  The reason
partly was that in mode of expression and choice of language, no less
than in the formation of opinion and the conduct of life, he was
impatient, even to excess, of the conventional, the accepted, and the
trite.  His perceptions and emotions were acute and vivid in the extreme;
his judgments, whether founded on experience, reading, discussion, or
caprice (and a surprising amount of all these things had been crowded
into his youthful existence) were not less fresh and personal; while to
his ardent fancy the world was a theatre glowing with the lights and
bustling with the incidents of romance.  To find for all he had to say
words of vital aptness and animation—to communicate as much as possible
of what he has somewhere called ‘the incommunicable thrill of things’—was
from the first his endeavour in literature, nay more, it was the main
passion of his life.  The instrument that should serve his purpose could
not be forged in haste, still less could it be adopted at second hand or
ready-made; and he has himself narrated how long and toilsome was the
apprenticeship he served.

In those days, then, of Stevenson’s youth it was my good fortune to be of
use to him, partly by helping to soften parental opposition to his inborn
vocation for letters, partly by recommending him to editors (Mr.
Hamerton, Sir George Grove, and Mr. Leslie Stephen in succession), and a
little even by such technical hints as a classical training and five
years’ seniority enabled me to give.  It belonged to the richness of his
nature to repay in all things much for little, _ἑκατομβοἶ ἐννεαβοιών_,
and from these early relations sprang both the affection, to me
inestimable, of which the following correspondence bears evidence, and
the habit, which it pleased him to maintain after he had become one of
the acknowledged masters of English letters, of confiding in and
consulting me about his work in progress.  It was my business to find
fault; to ‘damn’ what I did not like; a duty which, as will be inferred
from the following pages, I was accustomed to discharge somewhat
unsparingly.  But he was too manly a spirit to desire or to relish
flattery, and too true an artist to be content with doing less than his
best: he knew, moreover, in what rank of English writers I put him, and
for what audience, not of to-day, I would have him labour.  _Tibi
Palinure_—so, in the last weeks of his life, he proposed to inscribe to
me a set of his collected works.  Not Palinurus so much as Polonius may
perhaps—or so I sometimes suspect—have been really the character; but his
own amiable view of the matter has to be mentioned in order to account
for part of the tenor of the following correspondence.

As a letter-writer, Mr. Stevenson was punctilious in business matters
(herein putting some violence on his nature), indefatigable where there
was a service to be requited or a kindness done, and to strangers and
slight acquaintances ever courteous and attentive.  I am not sure,
indeed, but that in this capacity it was the outer rather than the inner
circle of his correspondents who, speaking generally, had the best of
him.  To his intimate friends he wrote charmingly indeed by fits, but
often, at least in early days, in a manner not a little trying and
tantalising.  With these, his correspondence was apt to be a thing wholly
of moods.  ‘Sordid facts,’ as he called them, were almost never
mentioned: date and place one could never infer except from the postmark.
He would exclaim over some predicament to the nature of which he gave no
clue whatever, or appeal for sympathy in circumstances impossible to
conjecture; or, starting in a key of vague poetry and sentiment, would
wind up (in a manner characteristic also of his talk) with a rhapsody of
hyperbolical slang.  Or he would dilate on some new phase of his many
maladies with burlesque humour—with complaint never—but what had been the
nature of the attack you were left to wonder and guess in vain.  During
the period of his Odyssey in the South Seas, from August 1888 until the
spring of 1890, the remoteness and inaccessibility of the scenes he
visited inevitably interrupted all correspondence for months together;
and when at long intervals a packet reached us, the facts and
circumstances of his wanderings were to be gathered from the admirable
letters of Mrs. Stevenson (who has this feminine accomplishment in
perfection) rather than from his own.  But when later in the
last-mentioned year, 1890, he and his family were settled on their newly
bought property on the mountain behind Apia, to which he gave the name of
Vailima (five rivers), he for the first time, to my infinite
gratification, took to writing me long and regular monthly budgets as
full and particular as heart could wish; and this practice he maintained
until within a few weeks of his death.

It is these journal-letters from Samoa, covering with a few intervals the
period from November 1890 to October 1894, that are printed by themselves
in the present volume.  They occupy a place, as has been indicated, quite
apart in his correspondence, and in any general selection from his
letters would fill a quite disproportionate space.  Begun without a
thought of publicity, and simply to maintain our intimacy undiminished,
so far as might be, by separation, they assumed in the course of two or
three years a bulk so considerable, and contained so much of the matter
of his daily life and thoughts, that it by-and-by occurred to him, as may
be read on page 200, that ‘some kind of a book’ might be extracted out of
them after his death.  It is this passage which has given me my warrant
for their publication, and at the same time has imposed on me no very
easy editorial task.  In a correspondence so unreserved, the duty of
suppression and selection must needs be delicate.  Belonging to the race
of Scott and Dumas, of the romantic narrators and creators, Stevenson
belonged no less to that of Montaigne and the literary egotists.  The
word seems out of place, since of egotism in the sense of vanity or
selfishness he was of all men the most devoid; but he was nevertheless a
watchful and ever interested observer of the motions of his own mind.  He
saw himself, as he saw everything else, (to borrow the words of Mr.
Andrew Lang) with the lucidity of genius, and loved to put himself on
terms of confidence with his readers; but of confidence kept always
within fit limits, and permitting no undue intrusion into his private
affairs and feelings.  To maintain the same limits in the editing of an
intimate correspondence after his death would have been impossible.  I
have tried to do my best under the circumstances; to suffer no feelings
to be hurt that could be spared, and only to lift the veil of family life
so far as under the conditions was unavoidable.  Neither would it have
been possible from such a correspondence to expunge the record of those
trivialities which make up the chief part of life, even in surroundings
so romantic and unusual as Stevenson in these years had chosen for
himself.  It belonged to the personal charm of the man that nothing ever
seemed commonplace or insignificant in his company; but in correspondence
this charm must needs to some extent evaporate.

Such as they remain, then, these letters will be found a varied record,
perfectly frank and familiar, of the writer’s every-day moods, thoughts,
and doings during his Samoan exile.  They tell, with the zest and often
in the language of a man who remained to the last a boy in spirit, of the
pleasures and troubles of a planter founding his home in the virgin soil
of a tropical island; the pleasures of an invalid beginning after many
years to resume habits of outdoor life and exercise; the toils and
satisfactions, failures and successes, of a creative artist whose
invention was as fertile as his standards were high and his industry
unflinching.  These divers characters have probably never been so united
in any man before.  Something also they tell of the inward movements and
affections of one of the bravest and tenderest of human hearts.  One part
of his life, it should be said, which his other letters will fully
reveal, finds little expression in these, namely the relations of cordial
and ungrudging kindness in which he stood towards the younger generation
of writers at home, including many personally unknown to him.  Neither do
ordinary impressions of travel—impressions of the beauties of the tropics
and the captivating strangeness of the island people and their ways—fill
much space in them.  These things were no longer new to the writer when
the correspondence began; they had been part of the element of his life
since the day, near two years before, when his yacht first anchored in
the Bay of Nukahiva, and his soul, to quote his own words, ‘went down
with these moorings whence no windlass may extract nor any diver fish it
up; and I, and some part of my ship’s company, were from that hour the
bondslaves of the isles of Vivien.’  In their stead we find, what to some
readers may be hardly so welcome, the observations of a close student of
native life, history, and manners, and some of the perplexities and
pre-occupations of an island politician.

The political allusions are seldom in the form of direct statement or
narrative.  To understand them, the reader must bear in mind a few main
facts, which I shall state as briefly and plainly as possible.  At the
date when Stevenson settled in Samoa, the government of the island had
lately been settled between the three powers interested, namely Germany,
England, and the United States, at the convention of Berlin.  Under this
convention, Malietoa Laupepa, who had previously been deposed and
deported by the Germans in favour of a nominee of their own, was
reinstated as king, to the exclusion of his kinsman, the powerful and
popular Mataafa, whose titles might be held equally good and whose
abilities were certainly greater, but who was specially obnoxious to the
Germans owing to his resistance to them during the troubles of the
previous years.  For a time the two kinsmen, Laupepa and Mataafa, lived
on amicable terms, but presently differences arose between them.  Mataafa
had expected to occupy a position of influence in the government: finding
himself ignored, he withdrew to a camp a few miles outside the town of
Apia, where he lived in semi-royal state as a kind of passive rebel or
rival to the recognised king.  In the meantime, in the course of the year
1891, the two white officials appointed under the Berlin Convention,
namely the Chief Justice, a Swedish gentleman named Cedarkrantz, and the
President of the Council, Baron Senfft von Pilsach, had come out to the
islands and entered on their duties.  In Stevenson’s judgment these
gentlemen proved quite unequal to their task, an opinion which before
long came to be shared and acted on by the foreign offices of the three
powers under whom they were appointed.  Stevenson was no abstracted
student or dreamer; the human interests and the human duties lying
immediately about him were ever the first in his eyes: and petty and
remote as these island concerns may appear to us, they were for him near
and urgent.  A man of his eager nature and persuasive powers must
naturally acquire influence in any community in which he may be thrown,
and among the natives in especial, by kindness, justice, and a
sympathetic understanding of their ways and character, he soon came to
enjoy a singular degree of authority.  His unauthorised intervention in
public matters may have been of a nature disconcerting to the official
mind, but his purposes were at all times those of a peacemaker.  The
steady aim of his efforts was to bring about the withdrawal of the two
discredited white officials (against whom, it will be seen, he had no
personal animus whatever) and to procure a reconciliation between Laupepa
and Mataafa, so that the latter might exercise the share in the
government due to his character, titles, and following.  The first part
of this policy commended itself after a time to the three powers and
their agents, and was carried out; the second not; and his friend Mataafa
was by-and-by attacked by the forces of Laupepa, beaten, and sent into
exile.

In reading the following pages it must be borne in mind that Mulinuu and
Malie, the places respectively of Laupepa’s and Mataafa’s residence, are
also used to signify their respective parties and followings.  The reader
will have no difficulty in identifying the various personages composing
the family group whose names occur constantly in the correspondence,
namely the writer’s mother, his wife (‘Fanny’), his stepson, Mr. Lloyd
Osbourne (‘Lloyd’), his step-daughter and amanuensis, Mrs. Strong
(‘Belle’), and her young son (‘Austin’).  Explanation of any other
matters seeming to require it is added in the footnotes.

                                                                     S. C.

_August_ 1895.




CHAPTER I


                                       _In the Mountain_, _Apia_, _Samoa_,
                                          _Monday_, _November_ 2_nd_, 1890

MY DEAR COLVIN,—This is a hard and interesting and beautiful life that we
lead now.  Our place is in a deep cleft of Vaea Mountain, some six
hundred feet above the sea, embowered in forest, which is our strangling
enemy, and which we combat with axes and dollars.  I went crazy over
outdoor work, and had at last to confine myself to the house, or
literature must have gone by the board.  _Nothing_ is so interesting as
weeding, clearing, and path-making; the oversight of labourers becomes a
disease; it is quite an effort not to drop into the farmer; and it does
make you feel so well.  To come down covered with mud and drenched with
sweat and rain after some hours in the bush, change, rub down, and take a
chair in the verandah, is to taste a quiet conscience.  And the strange
thing that I mark is this: If I go out and make sixpence, bossing my
labourers and plying the cutlass or the spade, idiot conscience applauds
me; if I sit in the house and make twenty pounds, idiot conscience wails
over my neglect and the day wasted.  For near a fortnight I did not go
beyond the verandah; then I found my rush of work run out, and went down
for the night to Apia; put in Sunday afternoon with our consul, ‘a nice
young man,’ dined with my friend H. J. Moors in the evening, went to
church—no less—at the white and half-white church—I had never been
before, and was much interested; the woman I sat next _looked_ a
full-blood native, and it was in the prettiest and readiest English that
she sang the hymns; back to Moors’, where we yarned of the islands, being
both wide wanderers, till bed-time; bed, sleep, breakfast, horse saddled;
round to the mission, to get Mr. Clarke to be my interpreter; over with
him to the King’s, whom I have not called on since my return; received by
that mild old gentleman; have some interesting talk with him about Samoan
superstitions and my land—the scene of a great battle in his (Malietoa
Laupepa’s) youth—the place which we have cleared the platform of his
fort—the gulley of the stream full of dead bodies—the fight rolled off up
Vaea mountain-side; back with Clarke to the Mission; had a bit of lunch
and consulted over a queer point of missionary policy just arisen, about
our new Town Hall and the balls there—too long to go into, but a quaint
example of the intricate questions which spring up daily in the
missionary path.

Then off up the hill; Jack very fresh, the sun (close on noon) staring
hot, the breeze very strong and pleasant; the ineffable green country all
round—gorgeous little birds (I think they are humming birds, but they say
not) skirmishing in the wayside flowers.  About a quarter way up I met a
native coming down with the trunk of a cocoa palm across his shoulder;
his brown breast glittering with sweat and oil: ‘Talofa’—‘Talofa,
alii—You see that white man?  He speak for you.’  ‘White man he gone up
here?’—‘Ioe (Yes)’—‘Tofa, alii’—‘Tofa, soifua!’  I put on Jack up the
steep path, till he is all as white as shaving stick—Brown’s euxesis,
wish I had some—past Tanugamanono, a bush village—see into the houses as
I pass—they are open sheds scattered on a green—see the brown folk
sitting there, suckling kids, sleeping on their stiff wooden pillows—then
on through the wood path—and here I find the mysterious white man (poor
devil!) with his twenty years’ certificate of good behaviour as a
book-keeper, frozen out by the strikes in the colonies, come up here on a
chance, no work to be found, big hotel bill, no ship to leave in—and come
up to beg twenty dollars because he heard I was a Scotchman, offering to
leave his portmanteau in pledge.  Settle this, and on again; and here my
house comes in view, and a war whoop fetches my wife and Henry (or
Simelé), our Samoan boy, on the front balcony; and I am home again, and
only sorry that I shall have to go down again to Apia this day week.  I
could, and would, dwell here unmoved, but there are things to be attended
to.

Never say I don’t give you details and news.  That is a picture of a
letter.

I have been hard at work since I came; three chapters of _The Wrecker_,
and since that, eight of the South Sea book, and, along and about and in
between, a hatful of verses.  Some day I’ll send the verse to you, and
you’ll say if any of it is any good.  I have got in a better vein with
the South Sea book, as I think you will see; I think these chapters will
do for the volume without much change.  Those that I did in the _Janet
Nicoll_, under the most ungodly circumstances, I fear will want a lot of
suppling and lightening, but I hope to have your remarks in a month or
two upon that point.  It seems a long while since I have heard from you.
I do hope you are well.  I am wonderful, but tired from so much work;
’tis really immense what I have done; in the South Sea book I have fifty
pages copied fair, some of which has been four times, and all twice
written, certainly fifty pages of solid scriving inside a fortnight, but
I was at it by seven a.m. till lunch, and from two till four or five
every day; between whiles, verse and blowing on the flageolet; never
outside.  If you could see this place! but I don’t want any one to see it
till my clearing is done, and my house built.  It will be a home for
angels.

So far I wrote after my bit of dinner, some cold meat and bananas, on
arrival.  Then out to see where Henry and some of the men were clearing
the garden; for it was plain there was to be no work to-day indoors, and
I must set in consequence to farmering.  I stuck a good while on the way
up, for the path there is largely my own handiwork, and there were a lot
of sprouts and saplings and stones to be removed.  Then I reached our
clearing just where the streams join in one; it had a fine autumn smell
of burning, the smoke blew in the woods, and the boys were pretty merry
and busy.  Now I had a private design:—

                              [Picture: Map]

The Vaita’e I had explored pretty far up; not yet the other stream, the
Vaituliga (g=nasal n, as ng in sing); and up that, with my wood knife, I
set off alone.  It is here quite dry; it went through endless woods;
about as broad as a Devonshire lane, here and there crossed by fallen
trees; huge trees overhead in the sun, dripping lianas and tufted with
orchids, tree ferns, ferns depending with air roots from the steep banks,
great arums—I had not skill enough to say if any of them were the edible
kind, one of our staples here!—hundreds of bananas—another staple—and
alas!  I had skill enough to know all of these for the bad kind that
bears no fruit.  My Henry moralised over this the other day; how hard it
was that the bad banana flourished wild, and the good must be weeded and
tended; and I had not the heart to tell him how fortunate they were here,
and how hungry were other lands by comparison.  The ascent of this lovely
lane of my dry stream filled me with delight.  I could not but be
reminded of old Mayne Reid, as I have been more than once since I came to
the tropics; and I thought, if Reid had been still living, I would have
written to tell him that, for, me, _it had come true_; and I thought,
forbye, that, if the great powers go on as they are going, and the Chief
Justice delays, it would come truer still; and the war-conch will sound
in the hills, and my home will be inclosed in camps, before the year is
ended.  And all at once—mark you, how Mayne Reid is on the spot—a strange
thing happened.  I saw a liana stretch across the bed of the brook about
breast-high, swung up my knife to sever it, and—behold, it was a wire!
On either hand it plunged into thick bush; to-morrow I shall see where it
goes and get a guess perhaps of what it means.  To-day I know no more
than—there it is.  A little higher the brook began to trickle, then to
fill.  At last, as I meant to do some work upon the homeward trail, it
was time to turn.  I did not return by the stream; knife in hand, as long
as my endurance lasted, I was to cut a path in the congested bush.

At first it went ill with me; I got badly stung as high as the elbows by
the stinging plant; I was nearly hung in a tough liana—a rotten trunk
giving way under my feet; it was deplorable bad business.  And an axe—if
I dared swing one—would have been more to the purpose than my cutlass.
Of a sudden things began to go strangely easier; I found stumps, bushing
out again; my body began to wonder, then my mind; I raised my eyes and
looked ahead; and, by George, I was no longer pioneering, I had struck an
old track overgrown, and was restoring an old path.  So I laboured till I
was in such a state that Carolina Wilhelmina Skeggs could scarce have
found a name for it.  Thereon desisted; returned to the stream; made my
way down that stony track to the garden, where the smoke was still
hanging and the sun was still in the high tree-tops, and so home.  Here,
fondly supposing my long day was over, I rubbed down; exquisite agony;
water spreads the poison of these weeds; I got it all over my hands, on
my chest, in my eyes, and presently, while eating an orange, _à la_
Raratonga, burned my lip and eye with orange juice.  Now, all day, our
three small pigs had been adrift, to the mortal peril of our corn,
lettuce, onions, etc., and as I stood smarting on the back verandah,
behold the three piglings issuing from the wood just opposite.  Instantly
I got together as many boys as I could—three, and got the pigs penned
against the rampart of the sty, till the others joined; whereupon we
formed a cordon, closed, captured the deserters, and dropped them,
squeaking amain, into their strengthened barracks where, please God, they
may now stay!

Perhaps you may suppose the day now over; you are not the head of a
plantation, my juvenile friend.  Politics succeeded: Henry got adrift in
his English, Bene was too cowardly to tell me what he was after: result,
I have lost seven good labourers, and had to sit down and write to you to
keep my temper.  Let me sketch my lads.—Henry—Henry has gone down to town
or I could not be writing to you—this were the hour of his English lesson
else, when he learns what he calls ‘long expessions’ or ‘your chief’s
language’ for the matter of an hour and a half—Henry is a chiefling from
Savaii; I once loathed, I now like and—pending fresh discoveries—have a
kind of respect for Henry.  He does good work for us; goes among the
labourers, bossing and watching; helps Fanny; is civil, kindly,
thoughtful; _O si sic semper_!  But will he be ‘his sometime self
throughout the year’?  Anyway, he has deserved of us, and he must
disappoint me sharply ere I give him up.—Bene—or Peni-Ben, in plain
English—is supposed to be my ganger; the Lord love him!  God made a
truckling coward, there is his full history.  He cannot tell me what he
wants; he dares not tell me what is wrong; he dares not transmit my
orders or translate my censures.  And with all this, honest, sober,
industrious, miserably smiling over the miserable issue of his own
unmanliness.—Paul—a German—cook and steward—a glutton of work—a splendid
fellow; drawbacks, three: (1) no cook; (2) an inveterate bungler; a man
with twenty thumbs, continually falling in the dishes, throwing out the
dinner, preserving the garbage; (3) a dr—, well, don’t let us say
that—but we daren’t let him go to town, and he—poor, good soul—is afraid
to be let go.—Lafaele (Raphael), a strong, dull, deprecatory man;
splendid with an axe, if watched; the better for a rowing, when he calls
me ‘Papa’ in the most wheedling tones; desperately afraid of ghosts, so
that he dare not walk alone up in the banana patch—see map.  The rest are
changing labourers; and to-night, owing to the miserable cowardice of
Peni, who did not venture to tell me what the men wanted—and which was no
more than fair—all are gone—and my weeding in the article of being
finished!  Pity the sorrows of a planter.

I am, Sir, yours, and be jowned to you, The Planter,

                                                                  R. L. S.

                                * * * * *

                                                           _Tuesday_ 3_rd_

I begin to see the whole scheme of letter-writing; you sit down every day
and pour out an equable stream of twaddle.

This morning all my fears were fled, and all the trouble had fallen to
the lot of Peni himself, who deserved it; my field was full of weeders;
and I am again able to justify the ways of God.  All morning I worked at
the South Seas, and finished the chapter I had stuck upon on Saturday.
Fanny, awfully hove-to with rheumatics and injuries received upon the
field of sport and glory, chasing pigs, was unable to go up and down
stairs, so she sat upon the back verandah, and my work was chequered by
her cries.  ‘Paul, you take a spade to do that—dig a hole first.  If you
do that, you’ll cut your foot off!  Here, you boy, what you do there?
You no get work?  You go find Simelé; he give you work.  Peni, you tell
this boy he go find Simelé; suppose Simelé no give him work, you tell him
go ’way.  I no want him here.  That boy no good.’—_Peni_ (from the
distance in reassuring tones), ‘All right, sir!’—_Fanny_ (after a long
pause), ‘Peni, you tell that boy go find Simelé!  I no want him stand
here all day.  I no pay that boy.  I see him all day.  He no do
nothing.’—Luncheon, beef, soda-scones, fried bananas, pine-apple in
claret, coffee.  Try to write a poem; no go.  Play the flageolet.  Then
sneakingly off to farmering and pioneering.  Four gangs at work on our
place; a lively scene; axes crashing and smoke blowing; all the knives
are out.  But I rob the garden party of one without a stock, and you
should see my hand—cut to ribbons.  Now I want to do my path up the
Vaituliga single-handed, and I want it to burst on the public complete.
Hence, with devilish ingenuity, I begin it at different places; so that
if you stumble on one section, you may not even then suspect the fulness
of my labours.  Accordingly, I started in a new place, below the wire,
and hoping to work up to it.  It was perhaps lucky I had so bad a
cutlass, and my smarting hand bid me stay before I had got up to the
wire, but just in season, so that I was only the better of my activity,
not dead beat as yesterday.

A strange business it was, and infinitely solitary; away above, the sun
was in the high tree-tops; the lianas noosed and sought to hang me; the
saplings struggled, and came up with that sob of death that one gets to
know so well; great, soft, sappy trees fell at a lick of the cutlass,
little tough switches laughed at and dared my best endeavour.  Soon,
toiling down in that pit of verdure, I heard blows on the far side, and
then laughter.  I confess a chill settled on my heart.

Being so dead alone, in a place where by rights none should be beyond me,
I was aware, upon interrogation, if those blows had drawn nearer, I
should (of course quite unaffectedly) have executed a strategic movement
to the rear; and only the other day I was lamenting my insensibility to
superstition!  Am I beginning to be sucked in?  Shall I become a midnight
twitterer like my neighbours?  At times I thought the blows were echoes;
at times I thought the laughter was from birds.  For our birds are
strangely human in their calls.  Vaea mountain about sundown sometimes
rings with shrill cries, like the hails of merry, scattered children.  As
a matter of fact, I believe stealthy wood-cutters from Tanugamanono were
above me in the wood and answerable for the blows; as for the laughter, a
woman and two children had come and asked Fanny’s leave to go up
shrimp-fishing in the burn; beyond doubt, it was these I heard.  Just at
the right time I returned; to wash down, change, and begin this snatch of
letter before dinner was ready, and to finish it afterwards, before Henry
has yet put in an appearance for his lesson in ‘long explessions.’

Dinner: stewed beef and potatoes, baked bananas, new loaf-bread hot from
the oven, pine-apple in claret.  These are great days; we have been low
in the past; but now are we as belly-gods, enjoying all things.

                                * * * * *

                                  _Wednesday_.  (_Hist. Vailima resumed_.)

A gorgeous evening of after-glow in the great tree-tops and behind the
mountain, and full moon over the lowlands and the sea, inaugurated a
night of horrid cold.  To you effete denizens of the so-called temperate
zone, it had seemed nothing; neither of us could sleep; we were up
seeking extra coverings, I know not at what hour—it was as bright as day.
The moon right over Vaea—near due west, the birds strangely silent, and
the wood of the house tingling with cold; I believe it must have been
60°!  Consequence; Fanny has a headache and is wretched, and I could do
no work.  (I am trying all round for a place to hold my pen; you will
hear why later on; this to explain penmanship.)  I wrote two pages, very
bad, no movement, no life or interest; then I wrote a business letter;
then took to tootling on the flageolet, till glory should call me
farmering.

I took up at the fit time Lafaele and Mauga—Mauga, accent on the first,
is a mountain, I don’t know what Maugà means—mind what I told you of the
value of g—to the garden, and set them digging, then turned my attention
to the path.  I could not go into my bush path for two reasons: 1st, sore
hands; 2nd, had on my trousers and good shoes.  Lucky it was.  Right in
the wild lime hedge which cuts athwart us just homeward of the garden, I
found a great bed of kuikui—sensitive plant—our deadliest enemy.  A fool
brought it to this island in a pot, and used to lecture and
sentimentalise over the tender thing.  The tender thing has now taken
charge of this island, and men fight it, with torn hands, for bread and
life.  A singular, insidious thing, shrinking and biting like a weasel;
clutching by its roots as a limpet clutches to a rock.  As I fought him,
I bettered some verses in my poem, the _Woodman_; the only thought I gave
to letters.  Though the kuikui was thick, there was but a small patch of
it, and when I was done I attacked the wild lime, and had a hand-to-hand
skirmish with its spines and elastic suckers.  All this time, close by,
in the cleared space of the garden, Lafaele and Maugà were digging.
Suddenly quoth Lafaele, ‘Somebody he sing out.’—‘Somebody he sing out?
All right.  I go.’  And I went and found they had been whistling and
‘singing out’ for long, but the fold of the hill and the uncleared bush
shuts in the garden so that no one heard, and I was late for dinner, and
Fanny’s headache was cross; and when the meal was over, we had to cut up
a pineapple which was going bad, to make jelly of; and the next time you
have a handful of broken blood-blisters, apply pine-apple juice, and you
will give me news of it, and I request a specimen of your hand of write
five minutes after—the historic moment when I tackled this history.  My
day so far.

Fanny was to have rested.  Blessed Paul began making a duck-house; she
let him be; the duck-house fell down, and she had to set her hand to it.
He was then to make a drinking-place for the pigs; she let him be
again—he made a stair by which the pigs will probably escape this
evening, and she was near weeping.  Impossible to blame the indefatigable
fellow; energy is too rare and goodwill too noble a thing to discourage;
but it’s trying when she wants a rest.  Then she had to cook the dinner;
then, of course—like a fool and a woman—must wait dinner for me, and make
a flurry of herself.  Her day so far.  _Cetera adhuc desunt_.

                                * * * * *

                                                         _Friday—I think_.

I have been too tired to add to this chronicle, which will at any rate
give you some guess of our employment.  All goes well; the kuikui—(think
of this mispronunciation having actually infected me to the extent of
misspelling! tuitui is the word by rights)—the tuitui is all out of the
paddock—a fenced park between the house and boundary; Peni’s men start
to-day on the road; the garden is part burned, part dug; and Henry, at
the head of a troop of underpaid assistants, is hard at work clearing.
The part clearing you will see from the map; from the house run down to
the stream side, up the stream nearly as high as the garden; then back to
the star which I have just added to the map.

My long, silent contests in the forest have had a strange effect on me.
The unconcealed vitality of these vegetables, their exuberant number and
strength, the attempts—I can use no other word—of lianas to enwrap and
capture the intruder, the awful silence, the knowledge that all my
efforts are only like the performance of an actor, the thing of a moment,
and the wood will silently and swiftly heal them up with fresh
effervescence; the cunning sense of the tuitui, suffering itself to be
touched with wind-swayed grasses and not minding—but let the grass be
moved by a man, and it shuts up; the whole silent battle, murder, and
slow death of the contending forest; weigh upon the imagination.  My poem
the _Woodman_ stands; but I have taken refuge in a new story, which just
shot through me like a bullet in one of my moments of awe, alone in that
tragic jungle:—

    _The High Woods of Ulufanua_.
     1.  A South Sea Bridal.
     2.  Under the Ban.
     3.  Savao and Faavao.
     4.  Cries in the High Wood.
     5.  Rumour full of Tongues.
     6.  The Hour of Peril.
     7.  The Day of Vengeance.

It is very strange, very extravagant, I daresay; but it’s varied, and
picturesque, and has a pretty love affair, and ends well.  Ulufanua is a
lovely Samoan word, ulu=grove; fanua=land; grove-land—‘the tops of the
high trees.’  Savao, ‘sacred to the wood,’ and Faavao, ‘wood-ways,’ are
the names of two of the characters, Ulufanua the name of the supposed
island.

I am very tired, and rest off to-day from all but letters.  Fanny is
quite done up; she could not sleep last night, something it seemed like
asthma—I trust not.  I suppose Lloyd will be about, so you can give him
the benefit of this long scrawl.  Never say that I _can’t_ write a
letter, say that I don’t.—Yours ever, my dearest fellow,

                                                                  R. L. S.

                                * * * * *

                                                        _Later on Friday_.

The guid wife had bread to bake, and she baked it in a pan, O!  But
between whiles she was down with me weeding sensitive in the paddock.
The men have but now passed over it; I was round in that very place to
see the weeding was done thoroughly, and already the reptile springs
behind our heels.  Tuitui is a truly strange beast, and gives food for
thought.  I am nearly sure—I cannot yet be quite, I mean to experiment,
when I am less on the hot chase of the beast—that, even at the instant he
shrivels up his leaves, he strikes his prickles downward so as to catch
the uprooting finger; instinctive, say the gabies; but so is man’s
impulse to strike out.  One thing that takes and holds me is to see the
strange variation in the propagation of alarm among these rooted beasts;
at times it spreads to a radius (I speak by the guess of the eye) of five
or six inches; at times only one individual plant appears frightened at a
time.  We tried how long it took one to recover; ’tis a sanguine
creature; it is all abroad again before (I guess again) two minutes.  It
is odd how difficult in this world it is to be armed.  The double armour
of this plant betrays it.  In a thick tuft, where the leaves disappear, I
thrust in my hand, and the bite of the thorns betrays the topmost stem.
In the open again, and when I hesitate if it be clover, a touch on the
leaves, and its fine sense and retractile action betrays its identity at
once.  Yet it has one gift incomparable.  Rome had virtue and knowledge;
Rome perished.  The sensitive plant has indigestible seeds—so they
say—and it will flourish for ever.  I give my advice thus to a young
plant—have a strong root, a weak stem, and an indigestible seed; so you
will outlast the eternal city, and your progeny will clothe mountains,
and the irascible planter will blaspheme in vain.  The weak point of
tuitui is that its stem is strong.

                                * * * * *

                          _Supplementary Page_.

Here beginneth the third lesson, which is not from the planter but from a
less estimable character, the writer of books.

I want you to understand about this South Sea Book.  The job is immense;
I stagger under material.  I have seen the first big _tache_.  It was
necessary to see the smaller ones; the letters were at my hand for the
purpose, but I was not going to lose this experience; and, instead of
writing mere letters, have poured out a lot of stuff for the book.  How
this works and fits, time is to show.  But I believe, in time, I shall
get the whole thing in form.  Now, up to date, that is all my design, and
I beg to warn you till we have the whole (or much) of the stuff together,
you can hardly judge—and I can hardly judge.  Such a mass of stuff is to
be handled, if possible without repetition—so much foreign matter to be
introduced—if possible with perspicuity—and, as much as can be, a spirit
of narrative to be preserved.  You will find that come stronger as I
proceed, and get the explanations worked through.  Problems of style are
(as yet) dirt under my feet; my problem is architectural, creative—to get
this stuff jointed and moving.  If I can do that, I will trouble you for
style; anybody might write it, and it would be splendid; well-engineered,
the masses right, the blooming thing travelling—twig?

This I wanted you to understand, for lots of the stuff sent home is, I
imagine, rot—and slovenly rot—and some of it pompous rot; and I want you
to understand it’s a _lay-in_.

Soon, if the tide of poeshie continues, I’ll send you a whole lot to
damn.  You never said thank-you for the handsome tribute addressed to you
from Apemama; such is the gratitude of the world to the God-sent poick.
Well, well:—‘Vex not thou the poick’s mind, With thy coriaceous
ingratitude, The P. will be to your faults more than a little blind, And
yours is a far from handsome attitude.’  Having thus dropped into poetry
in a spirit of friendship, I have the honour to subscribe myself, Sir,

                      Your obedient humble servant,

                                                               SILAS WEGG.

I suppose by this you will have seen the lad—and his feet will have been
in the Monument—and his eyes beheld the face of George.  Well!

There is much eloquence in a well!
      I am, Sir
         Yours

                            The Epigrammatist

 [Picture: Robert Louis Stevenson written three times to form a triangle]

                              FINIS—EXPLICIT




