The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs of Carwin the Biloquist (A Fragment)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs of Carwin the Biloquist (A Fragment)

Author: Charles Brockden Brown


        
Release date: March 1, 1997 [eBook #842]
                Most recently updated: July 31, 2008

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/842

Credits: Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer, and David Widger






Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





MEMOIRS OF CARWIN THE BILOQUIST

[A fragment]

By Charles Brockden Brown

[1803-1805]




Chapter I.


I was the second son of a farmer, whose place of residence was a western
district of Pennsylvania. My eldest brother seemed fitted by nature for
the employment to which he was destined. His wishes never led him astray
from the hay-stack and the furrow. His ideas never ranged beyond the
sphere of his vision, or suggested the possibility that to-morrow
could differ from to-day. He could read and write, because he had
no alternative between learning the lesson prescribed to him, and
punishment. He was diligent, as long as fear urged him forward, but his
exertions ceased with the cessation of this motive. The limits of his
acquirements consisted in signing his name, and spelling out a chapter
in the bible.

My character was the reverse of his. My thirst of knowledge was
augmented in proportion as it was supplied with gratification. The
more I heard or read, the more restless and unconquerable my curiosity
became. My senses were perpetually alive to novelty, my fancy teemed
with visions of the future, and my attention fastened upon every thing
mysterious or unknown.

My father intended that my knowledge should keep pace with that of my
brother, but conceived that all beyond the mere capacity to write and
read was useless or pernicious. He took as much pains to keep me within
these limits, as to make the acquisitions of my brother come up to them,
but his efforts were not equally successful in both cases. The most
vigilant and jealous scrutiny was exerted in vain: Reproaches and blows,
painful privations and ignominious penances had no power to slacken
my zeal and abate my perseverance. He might enjoin upon me the most
laborious tasks, set the envy of my brother to watch me during the
performance, make the most diligent search after my books, and destroy
them without mercy, when they were found; but he could not outroot my
darling propensity. I exerted all my powers to elude his watchfulness.
Censures and stripes were sufficiently unpleasing to make me strive to
avoid them. To effect this desirable end, I was incessantly employed in
the invention of stratagems and the execution of expedients.

My passion was surely not deserving of blame, and I have frequently
lamented the hardships to which it subjected me; yet, perhaps, the
claims which were made upon my ingenuity and fortitude were not without
beneficial effects upon my character.

This contention lasted from the sixth to the fourteenth year of my age.
My father's opposition to my schemes was incited by a sincere though
unenlightened desire for my happiness. That all his efforts were
secretly eluded or obstinately repelled, was a source of the
bitterest regret. He has often lamented, with tears, what he called my
incorrigible depravity, and encouraged himself to perseverance by the
notion of the ruin that would inevitably overtake me if I were allowed
to persist in my present career. Perhaps the sufferings which arose to
him from the disappointment, were equal to those which he inflicted on
me.

In my fourteenth year, events happened which ascertained my future
destiny. One evening I had been sent to bring cows from a meadow, some
miles distant from my father's mansion. My time was limited, and I was
menaced with severe chastisement if, according to my custom, I should
stay beyond the period assigned.

For some time these menaces rung in my ears, and I went on my way with
speed. I arrived at the meadow, but the cattle had broken the fence
and escaped. It was my duty to carry home the earliest tidings of this
accident, but the first suggestion was to examine the cause and manner
of this escape. The field was bounded by cedar railing. Five of these
rails were laid horizontally from post to post. The upper one had been
broken in the middle, but the rest had merely been drawn out of the
holes on one side, and rested with their ends on the ground. The means
which had been used for this end, the reason why one only was broken,
and that one the uppermost, how a pair of horns could be so managed
as to effect that which the hands of man would have found difficult,
supplied a theme of meditation.

Some accident recalled me from this reverie, and reminded me how much
time had thus been consumed. I was terrified at the consequences of my
delay, and sought with eagerness how they might be obviated. I asked
myself if there were not a way back shorter than that by which I had
come. The beaten road was rendered circuitous by a precipice that
projected into a neighbouring stream, and closed up a passage by which
the length of the way would have been diminished one half: at the foot
of the cliff the water was of considerable depth, and agitated by an
eddy. I could not estimate the danger which I should incur by plunging
into it, but I was resolved to make the attempt. I have reason to think,
that this experiment, if it had been tried, would have proved fatal, and
my father, while he lamented my untimely fate, would have been wholly
unconscious that his own unreasonable demands had occasioned it.

I turned my steps towards the spot. To reach the edge of the stream
was by no means an easy undertaking, so many abrupt points and gloomy
hollows were interposed. I had frequently skirted and penetrated this
tract, but had never been so completely entangled in the maze as now:
hence I had remained unacquainted with a narrow pass, which, at the
distance of an hundred yards from the river, would conduct me, though
not without danger and toil, to the opposite side of the ridge.

This glen was now discovered, and this discovery induced me to change my
plan. If a passage could be here effected, it would be shorter and safer
than that which led through the stream, and its practicability was to be
known only by experiment. The path was narrow, steep, and overshadowed
by rocks. The sun was nearly set, and the shadow of the cliff above,
obscured the passage almost as much as midnight would have done: I was
accustomed to despise danger when it presented itself in a sensible
form, but, by a defect common in every one's education, goblins and
spectres were to me the objects of the most violent apprehensions. These
were unavoidably connected with solitude and darkness, and were present
to my fears when I entered this gloomy recess.

These terrors are always lessened by calling the attention away to some
indifferent object. I now made use of this expedient, and began to amuse
myself by hallowing as loud as organs of unusual compass and vigour
would enable me. I uttered the words which chanced to occur to me, and
repeated in the shrill tones of a Mohock savage... "Cow! cow! come home!
home!"... These notes were of course reverberated from the rocks which
on either side towered aloft, but the echo was confused and indistinct.

I continued, for some time, thus to beguile the way, till I reached a
space more than commonly abrupt, and which required all my attention. My
rude ditty was suspended till I had surmounted this impediment. In a
few minutes I was at leisure to renew it. After finishing the strain,
I paused. In a few seconds a voice as I then imagined, uttered the
same cry from the point of a rock some hundred feet behind me; the same
words, with equal distinctness and deliberation, and in the same tone,
appeared to be spoken. I was startled by this incident, and cast a
fearful glance behind, to discover by whom it was uttered. The spot
where I stood was buried in dusk, but the eminences were still invested
with a luminous and vivid twilight. The speaker, however, was concealed
from my view.

I had scarcely begun to wonder at this occurrence, when a new occasion
for wonder, was afforded me. A few seconds, in like manner, elapsed,
when my ditty was again rehearsed, with a no less perfect imitation, in
a different quarter..... To this quarter I eagerly turned my eyes,
but no one was visible.... The station, indeed, which this new speaker
seemed to occupy, was inaccessible to man or beast.

If I were surprized at this second repetition of my words, judge how
much my surprise must have been augmented, when the same calls were a
third time repeated, and coming still in a new direction. Five times
was this ditty successively resounded, at intervals nearly equal,
always from a new quarter, and with little abatement of its original
distinctness and force.

A little reflection was sufficient to shew that this was no more than
an echo of an extraordinary kind. My terrors were quickly supplanted by
delight. The motives to dispatch were forgotten, and I amused myself for
an hour, with talking to these cliffs: I placed myself in new positions,
and exhausted my lungs and my invention in new clamours.

The pleasures of this new discovery were an ample compensation for
the ill treatment which I expected on my return. By some caprice in
my father I escaped merely with a few reproaches. I seized the first
opportunity of again visiting this recess, and repeating my amusement;
time, and incessant repetition, could scarcely lessen its charms or
exhaust the variety produced by new tones and new positions.

The hours in which I was most free from interruption and restraint were
those of moonlight. My brother and I occupied a small room above the
kitchen, disconnected, in some degree, with the rest of the house. It
was the rural custom to retire early to bed and to anticipate the rising
of the sun. When the moonlight was strong enough to permit me to read,
it was my custom to escape from bed, and hie with my book to some
neighbouring eminence, where I would remain stretched on the mossy
rock, till the sinking or beclouded moon, forbade me to continue
my employment. I was indebted for books to a friendly person in the
neighbourhood, whose compliance with my solicitations was prompted
partly by benevolence and partly by enmity to my father, whom he
could not more egregiously offend than by gratifying my perverse and
pernicious curiosity.

In leaving my chamber I was obliged to use the utmost caution to avoid
rousing my brother, whose temper disposed him to thwart me in the least
of my gratifications. My purpose was surely laudable, and yet on leaving
the house and returning to it, I was obliged to use the vigilance and
circumspection of a thief.

One night I left my bed with this view. I posted first to my vocal glen,
and thence scrambling up a neighbouring steep, which overlooked a wide
extent of this romantic country, gave myself up to contemplation, and
the perusal of Milton's Comus.

My reflections were naturally suggested by the singularity of this
echo. To hear my own voice speak at a distance would have been formerly
regarded as prodigious. To hear too, that voice, not uttered by another,
by whom it might easily be mimicked, but by myself! I cannot now
recollect the transition which led me to the notion of sounds, similar
to these, but produced by other means than reverberation. Could I not so
dispose my organs as to make my voice appear at a distance?

From speculation I proceeded to experiment. The idea of a distant voice,
like my own, was intimately present to my fancy. I exerted myself with
a most ardent desire, and with something like a persuasion that I
should succeed. I started with surprise, for it seemed as if success
had crowned my attempts. I repeated the effort, but failed. A certain
position of the organs took place on the first attempt, altogether new,
unexampled and as it were, by accident, for I could not attain it on the
second experiment.

You will not wonder that I exerted myself with indefatigable zeal to
regain what had once, though for so short a space, been in my power.
Your own ears have witnessed the success of these efforts. By perpetual
exertion I gained it a second time, and now was a diligent observer of
the circumstances attending it. Gradually I subjected these finer
and more subtle motions to the command of my will. What was at first
difficult, by exercise and habit, was rendered easy. I learned to
accommodate my voice to all the varieties of distance and direction.

It cannot be denied that this faculty is wonderful and rare, but when we
consider the possible modifications of muscular motion, how few of these
are usually exerted, how imperfectly they are subjected to the will, and
yet that the will is capable of being rendered unlimited and absolute,
will not our wonder cease?

We have seen men who could hide their tongues so perfectly that even
an Anatomist, after the most accurate inspection that a living subject
could admit, has affirmed the organ to be wanting, but this was effected
by the exertion of muscles unknown and incredible to the greater part of
mankind.

The concurrence of teeth, palate and tongue, in the formation of speech
should seem to be indispensable, and yet men have spoken distinctly
though wanting a tongue, and to whom, therefore, teeth and palate were
superfluous. The tribe of motions requisite to this end, are wholly
latent and unknown, to those who possess that organ.

I mean not to be more explicit. I have no reason to suppose a peculiar
conformation or activity in my own organs, or that the power which I
possess may not, with suitable directions and by steady efforts, be
obtained by others, but I will do nothing to facilitate the acquisition.
It is by far, too liable to perversion for a good man to desire to
possess it, or to teach it to another.

There remained but one thing to render this instrument as powerful in
my hands as it was capable of being. From my childhood, I was remarkably
skilful at imitation. There were few voices whether of men or birds or
beasts which I could not imitate with success. To add my ancient, to my
newly acquired skill, to talk from a distance, and at the same time,
in the accents of another, was the object of my endeavours, and this
object, after a certain number of trials, I finally obtained.

In my present situation every thing that denoted intellectual exertion
was a crime, and exposed me to invectives if not to stripes. This
circumstance induced me to be silent to all others, on the subject of my
discovery. But, added to this, was a confused belief, that it might
be made, in some way instrumental to my relief from the hardships and
restraints of my present condition. For some time I was not aware of the
mode in which it might be rendered subservient to this end.



