Chapter V.


Time tended, in no degree, to alleviate my dissatisfaction. It increased
till the determination became at length formed of opening my thoughts to
Ludloe. At the next breakfast interview which took place, I introduced
the subject, and expatiated without reserve, on the state of my
feelings. I concluded with entreating him to point out some path in
which my talents might be rendered useful to himself or to mankind.

After a pause of some minutes, he said, What would you do? You forget
the immaturity of your age. If you are qualified to act a part in
the theatre of life, step forth; but you are not qualified. You want
knowledge, and with this you ought previously to endow yourself.....
Means, for this end, are within your reach. Why should you waste your
time in idleness, and torment yourself with unprofitable wishes? Books
are at hand.... books from which most sciences and languages can be
learned. Read, analise, digest; collect facts, and investigate
theories: ascertain the dictates of reason, and supply yourself with
the inclination and the power to adhere to them. You will not, legally
speaking, be a man in less than three years. Let this period be devoted
to the acquisition of wisdom. Either stay here, or retire to an house I
have on the banks of Killarney, where you will find all the conveniences
of study.

I could not but reflect with wonder at this man's treatment of me.
I could plead none of the rights of relationship; yet I enjoyed the
privileges of a son. He had not imparted to me any scheme, by pursuit
of which I might finally compensate him for the expense to which my
maintenance and education would subject him. He gave me reason to hope
for the continuance of his bounty. He talked and acted as if my fortune
were totally disjoined from his; yet was I indebted to him for the
morsel which sustained my life. Now it was proposed to withdraw myself
to studious leisure, and romantic solitude. All my wants, personal and
intellectual, were to be supplied gratuitously and copiously. No
means were prescribed by which I might make compensation for all these
benefits. In conferring them he seemed to be actuated by no view to
his own ultimate advantage. He took no measures to secure my future
services.

I suffered these thoughts to escape me, on this occasion, and observed
that to make my application successful, or useful, it was necessary
to pursue some end. I must look forward to some post which I might
hereafter occupy beneficially to myself or others; and for which all the
efforts of my mind should be bent to qualify myself.

These hints gave him visible pleasure; and now, for the first time, he
deigned to advise me on this head. His scheme, however, was not suddenly
produced. The way to it was circuitous and long. It was his business to
make every new step appear to be suggested by my own reflections. His
own ideas were the seeming result of the moment, and sprung out of
the last idea that was uttered. Being hastily taken up, they were, of
course, liable to objection. These objections, sometimes occurring to
me and sometimes to him, were admitted or contested with the utmost
candour. One scheme went through numerous modifications before it was
proved to be ineligible, or before it yielded place to a better. It
was easy to perceive, that books alone were insufficient to impart
knowledge: that man must be examined with our own eyes to make us
acquainted with their nature: that ideas collected from observation and
reading, must correct and illustrate each other: that the value of all
principles, and their truth, lie in their practical effects. Hence,
gradually arose, the usefulness of travelling, of inspecting the habits
and manners of a nation, and investigating, on the spot, the causes of
their happiness and misery. Finally, it was determined that Spain was
more suitable than any other, to the views of a judicious traveller.

My language, habits, and religion were mentioned as obstacles to close
and extensive views; but these difficulties successively and slowly
vanished. Converse with books, and natives of Spain, a steadfast purpose
and unwearied diligence would efface all differences between me and a
Castilian with respect to speech. Personal habits, were changeable,
by the same means. The bars to unbounded intercourse, rising from the
religion of Spain being irreconcilably opposite to mine, cost us no
little trouble to surmount, and here the skill of Ludloe was eminently
displayed.

I had been accustomed to regard as unquestionable, the fallacy of the
Romish faith. This persuasion was habitual and the child of prejudice,
and was easily shaken by the artifices of this logician. I was first led
to bestow a kind of assent on the doctrines of the Roman church; but my
convictions were easily subdued by a new species of argumentation, and,
in a short time, I reverted to my ancient disbelief, so that, if
an exterior conformity to the rights of Spain were requisite to the
attainment of my purpose, that conformity must be dissembled.

My moral principles had hitherto been vague and unsettled. My
circumstances had led me to the frequent practice of insincerity; but my
transgressions as they were slight and transient, did not much excite
my previous reflections, or subsequent remorse. My deviations, however,
though rendered easy by habit, were by no means sanctioned by my
principles. Now an imposture, more profound and deliberate, was
projected; and I could not hope to perform well my part, unless
steadfastly and thoroughly persuaded of its rectitude.

My friend was the eulogist of sincerity. He delighted to trace its
influence on the happiness of mankind; and proved that nothing but the
universal practice of this virtue was necessary to the perfection of
human society. His doctrine was splendid and beautiful. To detect its
imperfections was no easy task; to lay the foundations of virtue
in utility, and to limit, by that scale, the operation of general
principles; to see that the value of sincerity, like that of every other
mode of action, consisted in its tendency to good, and that, therefore
the obligation to speak truth was not paramount or intrinsical: that my
duty is modelled on a knowledge and foresight of the conduct of others;
and that, since men in their actual state, are infirm and deceitful, a
just estimate of consequences may sometimes make dissimulation my duty
were truths that did not speedily occur. The discovery, when made,
appeared to be a joint work. I saw nothing in Ludlow but proofs of
candour, and a judgment incapable of bias.

The means which this man employed to fit me for his purpose, perhaps
owed their success to my youth and ignorance. I may have given you
exaggerated ideas of his dexterity and address. Of that I am unable
to judge. Certain it is, that no time or reflection has abated my
astonishment at the profoundness of his schemes, and the perseverance
with which they were pursued by him. To detail their progress would
expose me to the risk of being tedious, yet none but minute details
would sufficiently display his patience and subtlety.

It will suffice to relate, that after a sufficient period of preparation
and arrangements being made for maintaining a copious intercourse with
Ludlow, I embarked for Barcelona. A restless curiosity and vigorous
application have distinguished my character in every scene. Here was
spacious field for the exercise of all my energies. I sought out a
preceptor in my new religion. I entered into the hearts of priests and
confessors, the _hidalgo_ and the peasant, the monk and the prelate, the
austere and voluptuous devotee were scrutinized in all their forms.

Man was the chief subject of my study, and the social sphere that
in which I principally moved; but I was not inattentive to inanimate
nature, nor unmindful of the past. If the scope of virtue were to
maintain the body in health, and to furnish its highest enjoyments to
every sense, to increase the number, and accuracy, and order of our
intellectual stores, no virtue was ever more unblemished than mine. If
to act upon our conceptions of right, and to acquit ourselves of all
prejudice and selfishness in the formation of our principles, entitle us
to the testimony of a good conscience, I might justly claim it.

I shall not pretend to ascertain my rank in the moral scale. Your
notions of duty differ widely from mine. If a system of deceit, pursued
merely from the love of truth; if voluptuousness, never gratified at the
expense of health, may incur censure, I am censurable. This, indeed,
was not the limit of my deviations. Deception was often unnecessarily
practised, and my biloquial faculty did not lie unemployed. What has
happened to yourselves may enable you, in some degree, to judge of
the scenes in which my mystical exploits engaged me. In none of them,
indeed, were the effects equally disastrous, and they were, for the most
part, the result of well digested projects.

To recount these would be an endless task. They were designed as mere
specimens of power, to illustrate the influence of superstition: to give
sceptics the consolation of certainty: to annihilate the scruples of a
tender female, or facilitate my access to the bosoms of courtiers and
monks.

The first achievement of this kind took place in the convent of the
Escurial. For some time the hospitality of this brotherhood allowed me
a cell in that magnificent and gloomy fabric. I was drawn hither chiefly
by the treasures of Arabian literature, which are preserved here in the
keeping of a learned Maronite, from Lebanon. Standing one evening on the
steps of the great altar, this devout friar expatiated on the miraculous
evidences of his religion; and, in a moment of enthusiasm, appealed to
San Lorenzo, whose martyrdom was displayed before us. No sooner was the
appeal made than the saint, obsequious to the summons, whispered his
responses from the shrine, and commanded the heretic to tremble
and believe. This event was reported to the convent. With whatever
reluctance, I could not refuse my testimony to its truth, and its
influence on my faith was clearly shewn in my subsequent conduct.

A lady of rank, in Seville, who had been guilty of many unauthorized
indulgences, was, at last, awakened to remorse, by a voice from
Heaven, which she imagined had commanded her to expiate her sins by
an abstinence from all food for thirty days. Her friends found it
impossible to outroot this persuasion, or to overcome her resolution
even by force. I chanced to be one in a numerous company where she was
present. This fatal illusion was mentioned, and an opportunity afforded
to the lady of defending her scheme. At a pause in the discourse, a
voice was heard from the ceiling, which confirmed the truth of her tale;
but, at the same time revoked the command, and, in consideration of
her faith, pronounced her absolution. Satisfied with this proof, the
auditors dismissed their unbelief, and the lady consented to eat.

In the course of a copious correspondence with Ludlow, the observations
I had collected were given. A sentiment, which I can hardly describe,
induced me to be silent on all adventures connected with my bivocal
projects. On other topics, I wrote fully, and without restraint. I
painted, in vivid hues, the scenes with which I was daily conversant,
and pursued, fearlessly, every speculation on religion and government
that occurred. This spirit was encouraged by Ludloe, who failed not to
comment on my narrative, and multiply deductions from my principles.

He taught me to ascribe the evils that infest society to the errors of
opinion. The absurd and unequal distribution of power and property gave
birth to poverty and riches, and these were the sources of luxury and
crimes. These positions were readily admitted; but the remedy for these
ills, the means of rectifying these errors were not easily discovered.
We have been inclined to impute them to inherent defects in the moral
constitution of men: that oppression and tyranny grow up by a sort of
natural necessity, and that they will perish only when the human species
is extinct. Ludloe laboured to prove that this was, by no means, the
case: that man is the creature of circumstances: that he is capable
of endless improvement: that his progress has been stopped by the
artificial impediment of government: that by the removal of this, the
fondest dreams of imagination will be realized.

From detailing and accounting for the evils which exist under our
present institutions, he usually proceeded to delineate some scheme of
Utopian felicity, where the empire of reason should supplant that of
force: where justice should be universally understood and practised;
where the interest of the whole and of the individual should be seen
by all to be the same; where the public good should be the scope of all
activity; where the tasks of all should be the same, and the means of
subsistence equally distributed.

No one could contemplate his pictures without rapture. By their
comprehensiveness and amplitude they filled the imagination. I was
unwilling to believe that in no region of the world, or at no period
could these ideas be realized. It was plain that the nations of Europe
were tending to greater depravity, and would be the prey of perpetual
vicissitude. All individual attempts at their reformation would be
fruitless. He therefore who desired the diffusion of right principles,
to make a just system be adopted by a whole community, must pursue some
extraordinary method.

In this state of mind I recollected my native country, where a few
colonists from Britain had sown the germe of populous and mighty
empires. Attended, as they were, into their new abode, by all their
prejudices, yet such had been the influence of new circumstances,
of consulting for their own happiness, of adopting simple forms of
government, and excluding nobles and kings from their system, that they
enjoyed a degree of happiness far superior to their parent state.

To conquer the prejudices and change the habits of millions, are
impossible. The human mind, exposed to social influences, inflexibly
adheres to the direction that is given to it; but for the same reason
why men, who begin in error will continue, those who commence in truth,
may be expected to persist. Habit and example will operate with equal
force in both instances.

Let a few, sufficiently enlightened and disinterested, take up their
abode in some unvisited region. Let their social scheme be founded in
equity, and how small soever their original number may be, their growth
into a nation is inevitable. Among other effects of national justice,
was to be ranked the swift increase of numbers. Exempt from servile
obligations and perverse habits, endowed with property, wisdom, and
health. Hundreds will expand, with inconceivable rapidity into thousands
and thousands, into millions; and a new race, tutored in truth, may, in
a few centuries, overflow the habitable world.

Such were the visions of youth! I could not banish them from my mind. I
knew them to be crude; but believed that deliberation would bestow upon
them solidity and shape. Meanwhile I imparted them to Ludloe.



