CHAPTER VI

A FAIRY TALE AND ITS FAIRY TAILORS

As this is not a realistic novel, I do not hold myself bound, as I have
said before, to account reasonably for everything that is done--least
of all, said--within its pages. I simply say, So it happened, or So it
is, and expect the reader to take my word.  If he be uncivil enough to
doubt it, we may as well stop playing this game of fancy.  It is one of
the first conditions of enjoying a book, as it is of all successful
hypnotism, that the reader surrenders up his will to the writer, who,
of course, guarantees to return it to him at the close of the volume.
If you say that no young lady would have behaved as I have presently to
relate of Nicolete, that no parents were ever so accommodating in the
world of reality, I reply,--No doubt you are right, but none the less
what I have to tell is true and really did happen, for all that. And
not only did it happen, but to the whimsically minded, to the true
children of fancy, it will seem the most natural thing in the world.
No doubt they will wonder why I have made such a preamble about it, as
indeed, now I think of it, so do I.

Again I claim exemption in this wandering history from all such
descriptive drudgery upon second, third, and fourth dramatis
personsonae as your thorough-going novelist must undertake with a good
grace.  Like a host and hostess at a reception, the poor novelist has
to pretend to be interested in everybody,--in the dull as in the
brilliant, in the bore as in the beauty.  I'm afraid I should never do
as a novelist, for I should waste all my time with the heroine; whereas
the true novelist is expected to pay as much attention to the heroine's
parents as though he were a suitor for her hand.  Indeed, there is no
relative of hero or heroine too humble or stupid for such a novelist as
the great Balzac.  He will invite the dullest of them to stay with him
for quite prolonged visits, and without a murmur set apart a suite of
chapters for their accommodation.  I'm not sure that the humanity of
the reader in these cases is of such comprehensive sympathy as the
novelist's, and it may well be that the novelist undertakes all such
hard labour under a misapprehension of the desires of the reader, who,
as a rule, I fancy, is as anxious to join the ladies as the novelist
himself.  Indeed, I believe that there is an opportunity for a new form
of novel, in which the novelist, as well as the reader, will skip all
the dull people, and merely indicate such of them as are necessary to
the action by an outline or a symbol, compressing their familiar
psychology, and necessary plot-interferences with the main characters,
into recognised formulae.  For the benefit of readers voracious for
everything about everybody, schedule chapters might be provided by
inferior novelists, good at painting say tiresome bourgeois fathers,
gouty uncles and brothers in the army, as sometimes in great pictures
we read that the sheep in the foreground have been painted by Mr.
So-and-so, R.A.

The Major-General and his Lady were taking the waters at Wiesbaden.
That was all I knew of Nicolete's parents, and all I needed to know;
with the exception of one good action,--at her urgent entreaty they had
left Nicolete behind them, with no other safeguard than a charming
young lady companion, whose fitness for her sacred duties consisted in
a temperament hardly less romantic and whimsical than Nicolete's own.
She was too charming to deserve the name of obstacle; and as there was
no other--

But I admit that the cart has got a little in front of the horse, and I
grow suddenly alarmed lest the reader should be suspecting me of an
elopement, or some such romantic vulgarity.  If he will only put any
such thoughts from his mind, I promise to proceed with the story in a
brief and business-like manner forthwith.

We are back once more at the close of the last chapter, in Nicolete's
book-bower in the wildwood.  It is an hour or two later, and the
afternoon sun is flooding with a searching glory all the secret places
of the woodland.  Hidden nooks and corners, unused to observation,
suddenly gleam and blush in effulgent exposure,--like lovers whom the
unexpected turning on of a light has revealed kissing in the dark,--and
are as suddenly, unlike the lovers, left in their native shade again.
It was that rich afternoon sunlight that loves to flash into teacups as
though they were crocuses, that loves to run a golden finger along the
beautiful wrinkles of old faces and light up the noble hollows of
age-worn eyes; the sunlight that loves to fall with transfiguring beam
on the once dear book we never read, or, with malicious
inquisitiveness, expose to undreamed-of detection the undusted picture,
or the gold-dusted legs of remote chairs, which the poor housemaid has
forgotten.

So in Nicolete's bower it illuminated with strange radiancy the dainty
disorder of deserted lunch, made prisms out of the wine-glasses,
painted the white cloth with wedge-shaped rainbows, and flooded the
cavernous interiors of the half-eaten fowl with a pathetic yellow
torchlight.

Leaving that melancholy relic of carnivorous appetite, it turned its
bold gold gaze on Nicolete.  No need to transfigure her! But, heavens!
how grandly her young face took the great kiss of the god!  Then it
fell for a tender moment on the jaundiced page of my old Boccaccio,--a
rare edition, which I had taken from my knapsack to indulge myself with
the appreciation of a connoisseur. Next minute "the unobstructed beam"
was shining right into the knapsack itself, for all the world like one
of those little demon electric lights with which the dentist makes a
momentary treasure-cave of your distended jaws, flashing with startled
stalactite. At the same moment Nicolete's starry eyes took the same
direction; then there broke from her her lovely laughter, merry and
inextinguishable.

Once more, need I say, my petticoat had played me false--or should I
not say true? For there was its luxurious lace border, a thing for the
soft light of the boudoir, or the secret moonlight of love's permitted
eyes, alone to see, shamelessly brazening it out in this terrible
sunlight.  Obviously there was but one way out of the dilemma, to
confess my pilgrimage to Nicolete, and reveal to her all the fanciful
absurdity to which, after all, I owed the sight of her.

"So that is why you pleaded so hard for that poor trout," she said,
when I had finished.  "Well, you are a fairy prince indeed! Now, do you
know what the punishment of your nonsense is to be?"

"Is it very severe and humiliating?" I asked.

"You must judge of that.  It is--to take me with you!"

"You,--what do you mean?"

"Yes,--not for good and all, of course, but just for, say, a fortnight,
just a fortnight of rambles and adventures, and then to deliver me safe
home again where you found me--"

"But it is impossible," I almost gasped in surprise.  "Of course you
are not serious?"

"I am, really, and you will take me, won't you?" she continued
pleadingly. "You don't know how we women envy you men those wonderful
walking-tours we can only read about in Hazlitt or Stevenson. We are
not allowed to move without a nurse or a footman.  From the day we are
born to the day we die, we are never left a moment to ourselves.  But
you--you can go out into the world, the mysterious world, do as you
will, go where you will, wander here, wander there, follow any bye-way
that takes your fancy, put up at old inns, make strange acquaintances,
have all kinds of romantic experiences--  Oh, to be a man for a
fortnight, your younger brother for a fortnight!"

"It is impossible!" I repeated.

"It isn't at all," she persisted, with a fine blush.  "If you will only
be nice and kind, and help me to some Rosalind's clothes. You have only
to write to your tailors, or send home for a spare suit of
clothes,--with a little managing yours would just fit me, you're not so
much taller,--and then we could start, like two comrades, seeking
adventures.  Oh, how glorious it would be!"

It was in vain that I brought the batteries of common-sense to bear
upon her whim.  I raised every possible objection in vain.

I pointed out the practical difficulties. There were her parents.

Weren't they drinking the waters at Wiesbaden, and weren't they to go
on drinking them for another three weeks?  My fancy made a picture of
them distended with three weeks' absorption of mineral springs.  Then
there was her companion.  Nicolete was confident of her assistance.
Then I tried vilifying myself.  How could she run the risk of trusting
herself to such intimate companionship with a man whom she hadn't known
half a dozen hours?  This she laughed to scorn.  Presently I was silent
from sheer lack of further objections; and need I say that all the
while there had been a traitor impulse in my heart, a weak sweetness
urging me on to accept the pretty chance which the good genius of my
pilgrimage had so evidently put in my way,--for, after all, what harm
could it do?  With me Nicolete was, indeed, safe,--that, of course, I
knew,--and safely she should come back home again after her little
frolic.  All that was true enough.  And how charming it would be to
have such a dainty companion! then the fun, the fancy, the whim of it
all.  What was the use of setting out to seek adventures if I didn't
pursue them when found.

Well, the long and short of it was that I agreed to undertake the
adventure, provided that Nicolete could win over the lady whom at the
beginning of the chapter I declared too charming to be described as an
obstacle.

By nine o'clock the following morning the fairy tailors, as Nicolete
called them, were at work on the fairy clothes, and, at the end of
three days, there came by parcel-post a bulky unromantic-looking
brown-paper parcel, which it was my business to convey to Nicolete
under cover of the dark.



