CHAPTER XII

AT THE CAFE DE LA PAIX

As love-making in which we have no share is apt to be either
tantalising or monotonous, I propose to skip the next fortnight and
introduce myself to the reader at a moment when I am once more alone.
It is about six o'clock on a summer afternoon, I am in Paris, and
seated at one of the little marble tables of the Cafe de la Paix,
dreamily watching the glittering tide of gay folk passing by,--

  "All happy people on their way
  To make a golden end of day."


Meditatively I smoke a cigarette and sip a pale greenish liquor
smelling strongly of aniseed, which isn't half so interesting as a
commonplace whiskey and soda, but which, I am told, has the
recommendation of being ten times as wicked.  I sip it with a delicious
thrill of degeneration, as though I were Eve tasting the apple for the
first time,--for "such a power hath white simplicity."  Sin is for the
innocent,--a truth which sinners will be the first to regret.  It was
so, I said to myself, Alfred de Musset used to sit and sip his absinthe
before a fascinated world.  It is a privilege for the world to look on
greatness at any moment, even when it is drinking. So I sat, and
privileged the world.

It will readily be surmised from this exordium that--incredible as it
may seem in a man of thirty--this was my first visit to Paris.  You may
remember that I had bought Orlando's tickets, and it had occurred to
Sylvia and me to use them.  Sylvia was due in London to fulfil a
dancing engagement within a fortnight after our arrival; so after a
tender good-bye, which there was no earthly necessity to make final, I
had remained behind for the purposes of study.  Though, logically, my
pilgrimage had ended with the unexpected discovery of Sylvia Joy, yet
there were two famous feminine types of which, seeing that I was in
Paris, I thought I might as well make brief studies, before I returned
to London and finally resumed the bachelorhood from which I had
started.  These were the grisette of fiction and the American girl of
fact.  Pending these investigations, I meditated on the great city in
the midst of which I sat.

A city!  How much more it was than that! Was it not the most portentous
symbol of modern history?  Think what the word "Paris" means to the
emancipated intellect, to the political government, to the humanised
morals, of the world; not to speak of the romance of its literature,
the tradition of its manners, and the immortal fame of its women.
France is the brain of the world, as England is its heart, and Russia
its fist.  Strange is the power, strange are the freaks and revenges,
of association, particularly perhaps of literary association.  Here
pompous official representatives may demur; but who can doubt that it
is on its literature that a country must rely for its permanent
representation? The countries that are forgotten, or are of no
importance in the councils of the world, are countries without
literature.  Greece and Rome are more real in print than ever they were
in marble.  Though, as we know, prophets are not without honour save in
their own countries and among their own kindred, the time comes when
their countries and kindred are entirely without honour save by reason
of those very prophets they once despised, rejected, stoned, and
crucified. Subtract its great men from a nation, and where is its
greatness?

Similarly, everything, however trifling, that has been written about,
so long as it has been written about sufficiently well, becomes
relatively enduring and representative of the country in which it is
found.  To an American, for example, the significance of a skylark is
that Shelley sang it to skies where even it could never have mounted;
and any one who has heard the nightingale must, if he be open-minded,
confess its tremendous debt to Keats: a tenth part genuine song, the
rest moon, stars, silence, and John Keats,--such is the nightingale.
The real truth about a country will never be known till every
representative type and condition in it have found their inspired
literary mouthpiece. Meanwhile one country takes its opinion of another
from the apercus of a few brilliant but often irresponsible or
prejudiced writers,--and really it is rather in what those writers
leave out than in what they put in that one must seek the more reliable
data of national character.

A quaint example of association occurs to me from the experience of a
friend of mine, "rich enough to lend to the poor."  Having met an
American friend newly landed at Liverpool, and a hurried quarter of an
hour being all that was available for lunch, "Come let us have a
pork-pie and a bottle of Bass" he had suggested.

"Pork-pies!" said the American, with a delighted sense of discovering
the country,--"why, you read about them in Dickens!" Who shall say but
that this instinctive association was an involuntary severe, but not
inapplicable, criticism?  A nightingale suggests Keats; a pork-pie,
Dickens.

Similarly with absinthe, grisettes, the Latin Quarter, and so on.

Why, you read about them in Murger, in Musset, in Balzac, and in
Flaubert; and the fact of your having read about them is, I may add,
their chief importance.

So rambled my after-dinner reflections as I sat that evening smoking
and sipping, sipping and smoking, at the Cafe de la Paix.

Presently in my dream I became aware of English voices near me, one of
which seemed familiar, and which I couldn't help overhearing.  The
voice of the husband said,--you can never mistake the voice of the
husband,--

  'T was the voice of the husband,
  I heard him complain,--

the voice of the husband said:  "Dora, I forbid you!  I will NOT allow
my wife to be seen again in the Latin Quarter.  I permitted you to go
once, as a concession, to the Cafe d'Harcourt; but once is enough. You
will please respect my wishes!"

"But," pleaded the dear little woman, whom I had an immediate impulse,
Perseus-like, to snatch from the jaws of her monster, and turning to
the other lady of the party of four,--"but Mrs. ---- has never been,
and she cannot well go without a chaperone. Surely it cannot matter for
once.  It isn't as if I were there constantly."

"No!" said the husband, with the absurd pomposity of his tribe.

"I'm very sorry. Mrs. ---- will, of course, act as she pleases; but I
cannot allow you to do it, Dora."

At last the little wife showed some spirit.

"Don't talk to me like that, Will," she said.  "I shall go if I please.
Surely I am my own property."

"Not at all!" at once flashed out the husband, wounded in that most
vital part of him, his sense of property.  "There you mistake.  You are
my property, MY chattel; you promised obedience to me; I bought you,
and you do my bidding!"

"Great heavens!" I ejaculated, and, springing up, found myself face to
face with a well-known painter whom you would have thought the most
Bohemian fellow in London. And Bohemian he is; but Bohemians are seldom
Bohemians for any one save themselves. They are terrible sticklers for
convention and even etiquette in other people.

We recognised each other with a laugh, and presently were at it, hammer
and tongs. I may say that we were all fairly intimate friends, and thus
had the advantage of entire liberty of speech. I looked daggers at the
husband; he looked daggers at me, and occasionally looking at his wife,
gave her a glance which was like the opening of Bluebeard's closet.
You could see the poor murdered bodies dangling within the shadowy
cupboard of his eye. Of course we got no further.  Additional
opposition but further enraged him.  He recapitulated what he would no
doubt call his arguments,--they sounded more like threats,--and as he
spoke I saw dragons fighting for their dams in the primeval ooze, and
heard savage trumpetings of masculine monsters without a name.

I told him so.

"You are," I said,--"and you will forgive my directness of
expression,--you are the Primeval Male!  You are the direct descendant
of those Romans who carried off the Sabine women. Nay! you have a much
longer genealogy.  You come of those hairy anthropoid males who hunted
their mates through the tangle of primeval forests, and who finally
obtained their consent--shall we say?--by clubbing them on the head
with a stone axe.  You talk a great deal of nonsense about the New
Woman, but you, Sir, are THE OLD MALE; and," I continued, "I have only
to obtain your wife's consent to take her under my protection this
instant."

Curiously enough, "The Old Male," as he is now affectionately called,
became from this moment quite a bosom friend.  Nothing would satisfy us
but that we should all lodge at the same pension together, and there
many a day we fought our battles over again. But that poor little wife
never, to my knowledge, went to the Cafe d'Harcourt again.



