CHAPTER V

CONCERNING THE HAVEN OF YELLOWSANDS

On the morrow, at the peep of day, Rosalind was off to seek her lord.
An hour or so after I started in leisurely pursuit.

Yellowsands!  I had heard in a vague way of the place, as a whim of a
certain young nobleman who combined brains with the pursuit of
pleasure.  Like most ideas, it was simple enough when once conceived.
Any one possessing a mile or two of secluded seaboard, cut off on the
land side by precipitous approaches, and including a sheltered river
mouth ingeniously hidden by nature, in the form of a jutting wall of
rock, from the sea, might have made as good use of these natural
opportunities as the nobleman in question, had they only been as wise
and as rich.  William Blake proposed to rebuild Jerusalem in this green
and pleasant land.  My lord proposed to erect a miniature Babylon amid
similar pleasant surroundings, a little dream-city by the sea, a home
for the innocent pleasure-seeker stifled by the puritanism of the great
towns, refugium peccatorum in this island of the saints.

"Once it was the Puritan Fathers who left our coasts," he is recorded
to have said; "nowadays it is our Prodigal Sons."

No doubt it was in further elaboration of this aphorism that the little
steamboat that sailed every other day from Yellowsands to the beckoning
shores of France was called "the Mayflower."

My lord's plan had been simple.  By the aid of cunning architects he
had first blasted his harbour into shape, then built his hotels and
pleasure-palaces, and then leased them to dependants of his who knew
the right sort of people, and who knew that it was as much as their
lease was worth to find accommodation for teetotal amateur
photographers or wistful wandering Sunday-school treats.  As,
unfortunately, the Queen's highway ran down in tortuous descent to the
handful of fishermen's cottages that had clung there limpet-like for
ages, there was always a chance of such a stray visitation; but it was
remote, and the whole place, hand and heart, was in the pocket of my
lord.

So much to give the reader some idea of the secret watering-place of
Yellowsands, situated at the mouth of that romantic little torrent, the
river Sly.  Such further description as may be needed may be kept till
we come within sight of its gilded roofs and marble terraces.



CHAPTER VI

THE MOORLAND OF THE APOCALYPSE

I reckoned that it would take me two or three days, leisurely walking,
to reach Yellowsands.  Rosalind would, of course, arrive there long
before me; but that I did not regret, as I was in a mood to find
company in my own thoughts.

Her story gave me plenty to think of.  I dwelt particularly on the
careless extravagance of the happy.  Here were two people to whom life
had given casually what I was compelled to go seeking lonely and
footsore through the world, and with little hope of finding it at the
end; and yet were they so little aware of their good fortune as to risk
it over a trumpery theory, a shadow of pseudo-philosophy.  Out of the
deep dark ocean of life Love had brought them his great moon-pearl, and
they sat on the boat's edge carelessly tossing it from one to the
other, unmindful of the hungry fathoms on every side.  A sudden slip,
and they had lost it for ever, and might only watch its shimmering fall
to the bottom of the world. Theories!  Theories are for the unknown and
the unhappy.  Who will trouble to theorise about Heaven when he has
found Heaven itself?  Theories are for the poor-devil outcast,--for him
who stands outside the confectioner's shop of life without a penny in
his pocket, while the radiant purchasers pass in and out through the
doors,--for him who watches with wistful eyes this and that sugared
marvel taken out of the window by mysterious hands, to bless some happy
customer inside.  He is not fool enough even to hope for one of those
glistering masterpieces of frosted sugar and silk flowers, which rise
to pinnacles of snowy sweetness, white mountains of blessedness, rich
inside, they say, with untold treasures for the tooth that is sweet.
No! he craves nothing but a simple Bath-bun of happiness, and even that
is denied him.

Would I ever find my Bath-bun?  I disconsolately asked myself.  I had
been seeking it now for some little time, and seemed no nearer than
when I set out.  I had seen a good many Bath-buns on my pilgrimage, it
is true.  Some I have not had space to confide to the reader; but
somehow or other they had not seemed the unmistakably predestined for
which I was seeking.

And oh, how I could love a girl, if she would only give me the
chance,--that is, be the right girl!  Oh, Sylvia Joy! where art thou?
Why so long dost thou remain hidden "in shady leaves of destiny"?


    "Seest thou thy lover lowly laid,
  Hear'st thou the sighs that rend his breast?"


And then, as the novelists say, "a strange thing happened."

The road I was tramping at the moment was somewhat desolate.  It ran up
from a small market town through a dreary undulating moorland, forking
off here and there to unknown villages of which the horizon gave no
hint.  Its cheerless hillocks were all but naked of vegetation, for a
never very flourishing growth of heather had recently been burnt right
down to the unkindly-looking earth, leaving a dwarf black forest of
charred sticks very grim to the eye and heart; while the dull surface
of a small lifeless-looking lake added the final touch to the Dead-Sea
mournfulness of the prospect.

Suddenly I became aware of the fluttering of a grey dress a little
ahead of me. Unconsciously I had been overtaking a tall young woman
walking in the same direction as myself, with a fine athletic carriage
of her figure and a noble movement of her limbs.

She walked manfully, and as I neared her I could hear the sturdy ring
of her well-shod feet upon the road.  There was an air of expectancy
about her walk, as though she looked to be met presently by some one
due from the opposite direction.

It was curious that I had not noticed her before, for she must have
been in sight for some time.  No doubt my melancholy abstraction
accounted for that, and perhaps her presence there was to be explained
by a London train which I had listlessly observed come in to the town
an hour before.  This surmise was confirmed, as presently,--over the
brow of a distant undulation in the road, I descried a farmer's gig
driven by another young woman.  The gig immediately hoisted a
handkerchief; so did my pedestrian.  At this moment I was within a yard
or two of overtaking her.  And it was then the strange thing happened.

Distance had lent no enchantment which nearness did not a hundred times
repay. The immediate impression of strength and distinction which the
first glimpse of her had made upon me was more and more verified as I
drew closer to her.  The carriage of her head was no whit less noble
than the queenly carriage of her limbs, and her glorious chestnut hair,
full of warm tints of gold, was massed in a sumptuous simplicity above
a neck that would have made an average woman's fortune.  This glowing
description, however, must be lowered or heightened in tone by the
association of these characteristics with an undefinable simplicity of
mien, a certain slight rusticity of effect.  The town spoke in her
well-cut gown and a few simple adornments, but the dryad still moved
inside.

I suppose most men, even in old age, feel a certain anxiety, conscious
or not, as they overtake a woman whose back view is in the least
attractive.  I confess that I felt a more than usual, indeed a quite
irrational, perturbation of the blood, as, coming level with her, I
dared to look into her face.  As I did so she involuntarily turned to
look at me--turned to look at me, did I say?  "To look" is a feeble
verb indeed to express the unexpected shock of beauty to which I was
suddenly exposed.  I cannot describe her features, for somehow features
always mean little to me.  They were certainly beautifully moulded, and
her skin was of a lovely pale olive, but the life of her face was in
her great violet eyes and her wonderful mouth.  Thus suddenly to look
into her face was like unexpectedly to come upon moon and stars
reflected in some lonely pool.  I suppose the look lasted only a second
or two; but it left me dazzled as that king in the Eastern tale, who
seemed to have lived whole dream-lives between dipping his head into a
bowl of water and taking it out again. Similarly in that moment I
seemed to have dived into this unknown girl's eyes, to have walked
through the treasure palaces of her soul, to have stood before the
flaming gates of her heart, to have gathered silver flowers in the
fairy gardens of her dreams. I had followed her white-robed spirit
across the moonlit meadows of her fancy, and by her side had climbed
the dewy ladder of the morning star, and then suddenly I had been
whirled up again to the daylight through the magic fountains of her
eyes.

I'll tell you more about that look presently!  Meanwhile the gig
approached, and the two girls exchanged affectionate greetings.

"Tom hasn't come with you, then?" said the other girl, who was
evidently her sister, and who was considerably more rustic in style and
accent.  She said it with a curious mixture of anxiety and relief.

"No," answered the other simply, and I thought I noticed a slight
darkening of her face.  Tom was evidently her husband.  So she was
married!

"Yes!" said a fussy hypocrite of reason within me, "and what's that to
do with you?"

"Everything, you fool!" answered a robuster voice in my soul, kicking
the feeble creature clean out of my head on the instant.

For, absurd as it may sound, with that look into those Arabian Nights'
eyes, had come somewhere out of space an overwhelming intuition, nay,
an unshakable conviction, that the woman who was already being rolled
away from me down the road in that Dis's car of a farmer's gig, was now
and for ever and before all worlds the woman God had created for me,
and that, unless I could be hers and she mine, there would be no home,
no peace for either of us so long as we lived.

And yet she was being carried away further and further every moment,
while I gazed after her, aimlessly standing in the middle of the road.
Why did I not call to her, overtake her?  In a few moments she would be
lost to me for ever--

Though I was unaware of it, this hesitation was no doubt owing to a
stealthy return of reason by the back-door of my mind.  In fact, he
presently dared to raise his voice again.  "I don't deny," he ventured,
ready any moment to flee for his life, "that she is written yours in
all the stars, and particularly do I see it written on the face of the
moon; but you mustn't forget that many are thus meant for each other
who never meet, not to speak of marrying.  It is such contradictions
between the purposes and performance of the Creator that make
life--life; you'll never see her again, so make your mind easy--"

At that moment the gig was on the point of turning a corner into a dark
pine-wood; but just ere it disappeared,--was it fancy?--I seemed to
have caught the flash of a momentarily fluttering handkerchief.  "Won't
I?  you fool!" I exclaimed, savagely smiting reason on the cheek, as I
sprang up wildly to wave mine; but the road was already blank.

At this a sort of panic possessed me, and like a boy I raced down the
road after her. To lose her like this, at the very moment that she had
been revealed to me.  It was more than I could bear.

Past the dreary lake, through the little pine-wood I ran, and then I
was brought to a halt, panting, by cross-roads and a finger-post.  An
involuntary memory of Nicolete sang to me as I read the quaint names of
the villages to one of which the Vision was certainly wending. Yes!  I
was bound on one more journey to the moon, but alas! there was no
heavenly being by my side to point the way.  Oh, agony, which was the
road she had taken?

It never occurred to me till the following day that I might have been
able to track her by the wheel-marks of the gig on the dusty summer
road.  Instead I desperately resorted to the time-honoured expedient of
setting up a stick and going in the direction of its fall. Like most
ancient guide-posts, it led me quite wrong, down into a pig's-trough of
a hamlet whither I felt sure she couldn't have been bound.  Then I ran
back in a frenzy, and tried the other road,--as if it could be any use,
with at least three quarters of an hour gone since I had lost sight of
her.  Of course I had no luck; and finally, hot and worn out with
absurd excitement, I threw myself down in a meadow and called myself an
ass,--which I undoubtedly was.

For of all the fancies that had obsessed my moonstruck brain, this was
surely the maddest.  Suppose I had overtaken the girl, what could I
have said to her?  And, suppose she had listened to me, how did I know
she was the girl I imagined her to be? But this was sheer reason again,
and has no place in a fantastic romance.  So I hasten to add that the
mood was one of brief duration, and that no cold-water arguments were
able to quench the fire which those eyes had set aflame within me, no
daylight philosophy had any power to dispel the dream of a face which
was now my most precious possession, as I once more took up my stick
and listlessly pursued my way to Yellowsands.

For I had one other reason than my own infatuation, or thought I had.
Yes, brief and rapid as our glance at each other had been, I had
fancied in her eyes a momentary kindling as they met mine, a warm
summer-lightning which seemed for a second to light up for me the inner
heaven of her soul.

Of one feeling, however, I was sure,--that on my side this apocalyptic
recognition of her, as it had seemed, was no mere passionate
correspondence of sex, no mere spell of a beautiful face (for such
passion and such glamour I had made use of opportunities to study), but
was indeed the flaming up of an elemental affinity, profounder than
sex, deeper than reason, and ages older than speech.

But it was a fancy, for all that?  Yes, one of those fancies that are
fancies on earth, but facts in heaven.  Perhaps you don't believe in
them.  Well, I'm afraid that cannot be helped.



