CHAPTER VI

IN WHICH THE AUTHOR ANTICIPATES DISCONTENT ON THE PART OF HIS READER

"But come," I imagine some reader complaining, "isn't it high time for
something to happen?"  No doubt it is, but what am I to do?  I am no
less discontented.  Is it not even more to my interest than to the
reader's for something to happen?  Here have I been tramping along
since breakfast-time, and now it is late in the afternoon, but never a
feather of her dove's wings, never a flutter of her angel's robes have
I seen.  It is disheartening, for one naturally expects to find
anything we seek a few minutes after starting out to seek it, and I
confess that I expected to find my golden mistress within a very few
hours of leaving home. However, had that been the case, there would
have been no story, as the novelists say, and I trust, as he goes on,
the reader may feel with me that that would have been a pity. Besides,
with that prevision given to an author, I am strongly of opinion that
something will happen before long.  And if the worst comes to the
worst, there is always that story of my First Love wherewith to fill
the time.  Meanwhile I am approaching a decorative old Surrey town,
little more than a cluster of ripe old inns, to one of which I have
much pleasure in inviting the reader to dinner.



CHAPTER VII

PRANDIAL

Dinner!

Is there a more beautiful word in the language?

Dinner!

Let the beautiful word come as a refrain to and fro this chapter.

Dinner!

Just eating and drinking, nothing more, but so much!

Drinking, indeed, has had its laureates. Yet would I offer my mite of
prose in its honour.  And when I say "drinking," I speak not of
smuggled gin or of brandy bottles held fiercely by the neck till they
are empty.

Nay, but of that lonely glass in the social solitude of the
tavern,--alone, but not alone, for the glass is sure to bring a dream
to bear it company, and it is a poor dream that cannot raise a song.
And what greater felicity than to be alone in a tavern with your last
new song, just born and yet still a tingling part of you.

Drinking has indeed been sung, but why, I have heard it asked, have we
no "Eating Songs?"--for eating is, surely, a fine pleasure. Many
practise it already, and it is becoming more general every day.

I speak not of the finicking joy of the gourmet, but the joy of an
honest appetite in ecstasy, the elemental joy of absorbing quantities
of fresh simple food,--mere roast lamb, new potatoes, and peas of
living green.

It is, indeed, an absorbing pleasure.  It needs all our attention.  You
must eat as you kiss, so exacting are the joys of the mouth,--talking,
for example.  The quiet eye may be allowed to participate, and
sometimes the ear, where the music is played upon a violin, and that a
Stradivarius.  A well-kept lawn, with six-hundred-years-old cedars and
a twenty-feet yew hedge, will add distinction to the meal.  Nor should
one ever eat without a seventeenth-century poet in an old yellow-leaved
edition upon the table, not to be read, of course, any more than the
flowers are to be eaten, but just to make music of association very
softly to our thoughts.

Some diners have wine too upon the table, and in the pauses of thinking
what a divine mystery dinner is, they eat.

For dinner IS a mystery,--a mystery of which even the greatest chef
knows but little, as a poet knows not,

  "with all his lore,
  Wherefore he sang,
  or whence the mandate sped."


"Even our digestion is governed by angels," said Blake; and if you will
resist the trivial inclination to substitute "bad angels," is there
really any greater mystery than the process by which beef is turned
into brains, and beer into beauty?  Every beautiful woman we see has
been made out of beefsteaks.  It is a solemn thought,--and the finest
poem that was ever written came out of a grey pulpy mass such as we
make brain sauce of.

And with these grave thoughts for grace let us sit down to dinner.

Dinner!



CHAPTER VIII

STILL PRANDIAL

What wine shall we have?  I confess I am no judge of wines, except when
they are bad.  To-night I feel inclined to allow my choice to be
directed by sentiment; and as we are on so pretty a pilgrimage, would
it not be appropriate to drink Liebfraumilch?

Hock is full of fancy, and all wines are by their very nature full of
reminiscence, the golden tears and red blood of summers that are gone.

Forgive me, therefore, if I grow reminiscent. Indeed, I fear that the
hour for the story of my First Love has come.  But first, notice the
waitress.  I confess, whether beautiful or plain,--not too
plain,--women who earn their own living have a peculiar attraction for
me.

I hope the Golden Girl will not turn out to be a duchess.  As old
Campion sings,--

  "I care not for those ladies
        Who must be wooed and prayed;
  Give me kind Amaryllis,
        The wanton country-maid."


Town-maids too of the same pattern. Whether in town or country, give me
the girls that work.  The Girls That Work!  But evidently it is high
time woe began a new chapter.



