CHAPTER III

IN WHICH I SAVE A USEFUL LIFE

Though I had said good-bye to the inn, the stream and I did not part
company at the inn-door, but continued for the best part of a morning
to be fellow-travellers.  Indeed, having led me to one pleasant
adventure, its purpose, I afterwards realised, was to lead me to
another, and then to go about its own bright business.

I don't think either of us had much idea where we were or whither we
were bound.  Our guiding principle seemed to be to get as much sunshine
as possible, and to find the easiest road.  We avoided dull sandy
levels and hard rocky places, with the same instinctive dexterity.  We
gloomed together through dark dingles, and came out on sunny reaches
with the same gilded magnificence. There are days when every stream is
Pactolus and every man is Croesus, and thanks to that first and
greatest of all alchemists, the sun, the morning I write of was a
morning when to breathe was gold and to see was silver.  And to breathe
and see was all one asked.  It was the first of May, and the world
shone like a great illuminated letter with which that father of
artists, the sun, was making splendid his missal of the seasons.

The month of May was ever his tour de force.  Each year he has strained
and stimulated his art to surpass himself, seeking ever a finer and a
brighter gold, a more celestial azure.  Never had his gold been so
golden, his azure so dazzlingly clear and deep as on this particular
May morning; while his fancy simply ran riot in the marginal
decorations of woodland and spinney, quaint embroidered flowers and
copses full of exquisitely painted and wonderfully trained birds of
song.  It was indeed a day for nature to be proud of.  So seductive was
the sunshine that even the shy trout leapt at noonday, eager apparently
to change his silver for gold.


  O silver fish in the silver stream,
  O golden fish in the golden gleam,
  Tell me, tell me, tell me true,
  Shall I find my girl if I follow you?


I suppose the reader never makes nonsense rhymes from sheer gladness of
heart,--nursery doggerel to keep time with the rippling of the stream,
or the dancing of the sun, or the beating of his heart; the gibberish
of delight.  As I hummed this nonsense, a trout at least three pounds
in weight, whom you would know again anywhere, leapt a yard out of the
water, and I took it, in my absurd, sun-soaked heart, as a good omen,
as though he had said, "Follow and see."

I had no will but to follow, no desire but to see.  All the same,
though I affected to take him seriously, I had little suspicion how
much that trout was to mean to me,--yes, within the course of a very
few moments. Indeed, I had hardly strolled on for another quarter of a
mile, when I was suddenly aroused from wool-gathering by his loud cries
for help.  Looking up, I saw him flashing desperately in mid-air, a
lovely foot of writhing silver.  In another second he was swung through
the sunlight, and laid out breathing hard in a death-bed of buttercups
and daisies.

There was not a moment to be lost, if I were to repay the debt of
gratitude which in a flash I had seen that I owed him.

"Madam," I said, breathlessly springing forward, as a heavenly being
was coldly tearing the hook from the gills of the unlucky trout,
"though I am a stranger, will you do me a great favour? It is a matter
of life or death..."

She looked up at me with some surprise, but with a fine fearless
glance, and almost immediately said, "Certainly, what can I do?"

"Spare the life of that trout--"

"It is a singular request," she replied, "and one," she smiled,
"self-sacrificing indeed for an angler to grant, for he weighs at least
three pounds.  However, since he seems a friend of yours, here goes--"
And with the gladdest, most grateful sound in the world, the happy
smack of a fish back home again in the water, after an appalling three
minutes spent on land, that prophetic trout was once more an active
unit in God's populous universe.

"Now that's good of you," I said, with thankful eyes, "and shows a kind
heart."

"And kind hearts, they say, are more than coronets," she replied
merrily, indulging in that derisive quotation which seems to be the
final reward of the greatest poets.

For a moment there was a silence, during which I confess to wondering
what I should say next.  However, she supplied my place.

"But of course," she said, "you owe it to me, after this touching
display of humanitarianism, to entertain me with your reason for
interposing between me and my just trout.  Was it one of those
wonderful talking fishes out of the Arabian Nights, or are you merely
an angler yourself, and did you begrudge such a record catch to a girl?"

"I see," I replied, "that you will understand me.  That trout was, so
to speak, out of the Arabian Nights.  Only five minutes ago it was a
May-day madness of mine to think that he leaped out of the water and
gave me a highly important message.  So I begged his life from a mere
fancy.  It was just a whim, which I trust you will excuse."

"A whim!  So you are a follower of the great god Whim," she replied,
with somewhat of an eager interest in her voice.  "How nice it is to
meet a fellow-worshipper!"

"Do women ever have whims?" I respectfully asked.

"I don't know about other women," she replied.  "Indeed, I'm afraid I'm
unnatural enough to take no interest in them at all. But, as for
me,--well, what nonsense!  Tell me some more about the trout.  What was
the wonderful message he seemed to give you? Or perhaps I oughtn't to
ask?"

"I'm afraid," I said, "it would hardly translate into anything
approaching common-sense."

"Did I ask for common-sense?" she retorted.  It was true, she hadn't.
But then I couldn't, with any respect for her, tell her the trout's
message, or, with any respect for myself, recall those atrocious
doggerel lines.  In my dilemma, I caught sight of a pretty book lying
near her fishing-basket, and diverted the talk by venturing to ask its
name.

"'T is of Aucassin and Nicolete," she replied, with something in her
voice which seemed to imply that the tender old story would be familiar
to me.  My memory served me for once gallantly.

I answered by humming half to myself the lines from the prologue,--

  "Sweet the song, the story sweet,
  There is no man hearkens it,
  No man living 'neath the sun,
  So outwearied, so foredone,
  Sick and woful, worn and sad,
  But is healed, but is glad
       'T is so sweet."


"How charming of you to know it!" she laughed.  "You are the only man
in this county, or the next, or the next, who knows it, I'm sure."

"Are the women of the county more familiar with it?" I replied.

"But tell me about the trout," she once more persisted.

At the same moment, however, there came from a little distance the
musical tinkle of a bell that sounded like silver, a fairy-like and
almost startling sound.

"It is my lunch," she explained.  "I'm a worshipper of the great god
Whim too, and close by here I have a little summer-house, full of books
and fishing-lines and other childishness, where, when my whim is to be
lonely, I come and play at solitude.  If you'll be content with rustic
fare, and promise to be amusing, it would be very pleasant if you'd
join me."

O! most prophetic and agreeable trout! Was it not like the old fairy
tales, the you-help-us and we'll-help-you of Psyche and the ants?

It had been the idlest whim for me to save the life of that poor trout.
There was no real pity in it.  For two pins, I had been just as ready
to cut it open, to see if by chance it carried in its belly the golden
ring wherewith I was to wed the Golden--

However, such is the gratitude of nature to man, that this little
thoughtless act of kindness had brought me face to face with--was it
the Golden Girl?



