BOOK II



CHAPTER I

IN WHICH I DECIDE TO BE YOUNG AGAIN

Yes, I said to myself, the lad is quite right; I will follow his
advice.  I'm afraid I was in danger of developing into a sad cynic,
with a taste for the humour of this world. What should have been a
lofty high-souled pilgrimage, only less transcendental than that of the
Holy Grail itself, has so far failed, no doubt, because I have
undertaken it too much in the wanton spirit of a troubadour.

I will grow young and serious again. Yes, why not?  I will take a vow
of Youth. One's age is entirely a matter of the imagination. From this
moment I am no longer thirty.  Thirty falls from me like a hideous
dream.  My back straightens again at the thought; my silvering hair
blackens once more; my eyes, a few moments ago lacklustre and sunken,
grow bright and full again, and the whites are clear as the finest
porcelain.  Veni, veni, Mephistophile! your Faust is young
again,--young, young, and, with a boy's heart, open once more to all
the influences of the mighty world.

I bring down my stick upon the ground with a mighty ring of resolution,
and the miracle is done.  Who would take me for thirty now?  From this
moment I abjure pessimism and cynicism in all their forms, put from my
mind all considerations of the complexities of human life, unravel all
by a triumphant optimism which no statistics can abash or criticism
dishearten.  I likewise undertake to divest myself entirely of any
sense of humour that may have developed within me during the baneful
experiences of the last ten years, and, in short, will consent for the
future to be nothing that is not perfectly perfect and pure.  These, I
take it, are the fundamental conditions of being young again.

And as for the Quest, it shall forthwith be undertaken in an entirely
serious and high-minded spirit.  From this moment I am on the look-out
for a really transcendental attachment.  No "bright-eyed bar-maids,"
however "refined," need apply. Ladies who are prodigal of their white
petticoats are no longer fit company for me.  Indeed I shall no longer
look upon a petticoat, unless I am able first entirely to spiritualise
it. It must first be disinfected of every earthly thought.

Yes, I am once more a young man, sound in wind and limb, with not a
tooth or an illusion lost, my mind tabula rasa, my heart to be had for
the asking.  Oh, come, ye merry, merry maidens!  The fairy prince is on
the fairy road.

Incipit vita nuova!

So in the lovely rapture of a new-born resolution--and is there any
rapture like it?--nature has no more intoxicating illusion than that of
turning over a new leaf, or beginning a new life from to-day--I sprang
along the road with a carolling heart; quite forgetting that Apuleius
and Fielding and Boccaccio were still in my knapsack--not to speak of
the petticoat.



CHAPTER II

AT THE SIGN OF THE SINGING STREAM

Apuleius and Fielding and Boccaccio, bad companions for a petticoat,
I'm afraid, bad companions too for so young a man as I had now become.
However, as I say, I had for the time forgotten that pagan company, or,
in my puritanic zeal, I might have thrown them all to be washed clean
in the upland stream, whose pure waters one might fancy were fragrant
from their sunny day among the ferns and the heather, fragrant to the
eye, indeed, if one may so speak, with the shaken meal of the
meadowsweet. This stream had been the good angel of my thoughts all the
day, keeping them ever moving and ever fresh, cleansing and burnishing
them, quite an open-air laundry of the mind.

We were both making for the same little town, it appeared, and as the
sun was setting we reached it together.  I entered the town over the
bridge, and the stream under it, washing the walls of the high-piled,
many-gabled old inn where I proposed to pass the night.  I should hear
it still rippling on with its gentle harpsichord tinkle, as I stretched
myself down among the cool lavendered sheets, and little by little let
slip the multifarious world.

The inn windows beamed cheerily, a home of ruddy rest.  Having ordered
my dinner and found my room, I threw down my knapsack and then came out
again to smoke an ante-prandial pipe, listen to the evensong of the
stream, and think great thoughts.  The stream was still there, and
singing the same sweet old song.  You could hear it long after it was
out of sight, in the gathering darkness, like an old nurse humming
lullabies in the twilight.

The dinner was good, the wine was old, and oh! the rest was sweet!
Nothing fills one with so exquisite a weariness as a day spent in good
resolutions and great thoughts. There is something perilously sensuous
in the relaxation of one's muscles, both of mind and body, after a day
thus well spent.

Lighting up my pipe once more, and drawing to the fire, I suddenly
realised a sense of loneliness.  Of course, I was lonely for a
book,--Apuleius or Fielding or Boccaccio!

An hour ago they had seemed dangerous companions for so lofty a mood;
but now, under the gentle influences of dinner, the mood had not indeed
changed--but mellowed. So to say, we would split the difference between
the ideal and the human, and be, say, twenty-five.

It was in this genial attitude of mind that I strode up the quaint
circular staircase to fetch Fielding from my room, and, shade of Tom
Jones! what should be leaving my room, as I advanced to enter it,
but--well, it's no use, resolutions are all very well, but facts are
facts, especially when they're natural, and here was I face to face
with the most natural little natural fact, and withal the most charming
and merry-eyed, that--well, in short, as I came to enter my room I was
confronted by the roundest, ruddiest little chambermaid ever created
for the trial of mortal frailty.

And the worst of it was that her merry eye was in partnership with a
merry tongue. Indeed, for some unexplained reason, she was bubbling
over with congested laughter, the reason for which mere embarrassment
set one inquiring.  At last, between little gushes of laughter which
shook her plump shoulders in a way that aroused wistful memories of
Hebe, she archly asked me, with mock solemnity, if I should need a
lady's maid.


"Certainly," I replied with inane promptitude, for I had no notion of
her drift; but then she ran off in a scurry of laughter, and still
puzzled I turned into my room, TO FIND, neatly hung over the end of the
bed, nothing less than the dainty petticoat and silk stockings of
Sylvia Joy.

You can imagine the colour of my cheeks at the discovery.  No doubt I
was already the laughing-stock of the whole inn.  What folly!  What a
young vixen!  Oh, what's to be done?  Pay my bill and sneak off at once
to the next town; but how pass through the grinning line of boots, and
waiter, and chambermaid, and ironically respectful landlord and
landlady, in the hall...

But while I thus deliberated, something soft pressed in at the door;
and, making a sudden dart, I had the little baggage who had brought
about my dilemma a prisoner in my arms.

I stayed some days at this charming old inn, for Amaryllis--oh, yes,
you may be sure her name was Amaryllis--had not betrayed me; and indeed
she may have some share in my retrospect of the inn as one of the most
delightful which I encountered anywhere in my journeying.  Would you
like to know its name?  Well, I know it as The Singing Stream.  If you
can find it under that name, you are welcome.  And should you chance to
be put into bedroom No. 26, you can think of me, and how I used to lie
awake, listening to the stream rippling beneath the window, with its
gentle harpsichord tinkle, and little by little letting slip the
multifarious world.

And if anything about this chapter should seem to contradict the high
ideals of the chapter preceding it, I can only say that, though the
episode should not rigidly fulfil the conditions of the transcendental,
nothing could have been more characteristic of that early youth to
which I had vowed myself.  Indeed, I congratulated myself, as I looked
my last at the sign of The Singing Stream, that this had been quite in
my early manner.



