CHAPTER XI

HOW ONE PLAYS THE HERO AT THIRTY

Had we only been able to see a day into the future, we might have
spared ourselves this agonising, for all our doubts and fears were
suddenly dispersed in an entirely unexpected manner. Happily these
interior problems are not infrequently resolved by quite exterior
forces.

We were sitting the following afternoon in one of those broad bay
windows such as one finds still in some old country inns, just thinking
about starting once more on our way, when suddenly Nicolete, who had
been gazing out idly into the road, gave a little cry.  I followed her
glance.  A carriage with arms on its panels had stopped at the inn, and
as a smart footman opened the door, a fine grey-headed military-looking
man stepped out and strode hurriedly up the inn steps.

"Aucassin," gasped Nicolete, "it is my father!"

It was too true.  The old man's keen eye had caught sight of Nicolete
at the window also, and in another moment we were all three face to
face.  I must do the Major-General the justice of saying that he made
as little of a "scene" of it as possible.

"Now, my girl," he said, "I have come to put an end to this nonsense.
Have you a petticoat with you?  Well, go upstairs and get it on.  I
will wait for you here...  On you, sir, I shall waste no words.  From
what I have heard, you are as moonstruck as my daughter."

"Of course," I stammered, "I cannot expect you to understand the
situation, though I think, if you would allow me, I could in a very few
words make it somewhat clearer,--make you realise that, after all, it
has been a very innocent and childish escapade, in which there has been
no harm and a great deal of pleasure--"

But the Major-General cut me short.

"I should prefer," he said, "not to discuss the matter.  I may say that
I realise that my daughter has been safe in your hands, however
foolish,"--for this I thanked him with a bow,--"but I must add that
your eccentric acquaintance must end here--"

I said him neither yea nor nay; and while we stood in armed and
embarrassed silence, Nicolete appeared with white face at the door,
clothed in her emergency petticoat. Alas! it was for no such emergency
as this that it had been destined that merry night when she had packed
it in her knapsack. With a stern bow her father turned from me to join
her; but she suddenly slipped past him, threw her arms round me, and
kissed me one long passionate kiss.

"Aucassin, be true," she cried, "I will never forget you,--no one shall
come between us;" and then bursting into tears, she buried her face in
her hands and followed her father from the room.

In another moment she had been driven away, and I sat as one stupefied
in the inn window.  But a few short minutes ago she had been sitting
merrily prattling by my side, and now I was once more as lonely as if
we had never met.  Presently I became conscious in my reverie of a
little crumpled piece of paper on the floor.  I picked it up. It was a
little note pencilled in her bedroom at the last moment.  "Aucassin,"
it ran, just like her last passionate words, "be true. I will never
forget you.  Stay here till I write to you, and oh, write to me soon!--
Your broken-hearted Nicolete."

As I read, I saw her lovely young face, radiant with love and sorrow as
I had last seen it, and pressing the precious little letter to my lips,
I said fervently, "Yes, Nicolete, I will be true."



CHAPTER XII

IN WHICH I REVIEW MY ACTIONS AND RENEW MY RESOLUTIONS

No doubt the youthful reader will have but a poor opinion of me after
the last two chapters.  He will think that in the scene with the
Major-General I acted with lamentably little spirit, and that generally
my friend Alastor would have proved infinitely more worthy of the
situation.  It is quite true, I confess it. The whole episode was made
for Alastor.  Nicolete and he were born for each other.  Alas! it is
one of the many drawbacks of experience that it frequently prevents our
behaving with spirit.

I must be content to appeal to the wiser and therefore sadder reader,
of whom I have but a poor opinion if he too fails to understand me.
He, I think, will understand why I didn't promptly assault the
Major-General, seize Nicolete by the waist, thrust her into her
ancestral carriage, haul the coachman from his box, and, seizing the
reins, drive away in triumph before astonishment had time to change
into pursuit. Truly it had been but the work of a moment, and there was
only one consideration which prevented my following this
now-I-call-that-heroic course. It is a consideration I dare hardly
venture to write, and the confession of which will, I know, necessitate
my changing my age back again to thirty on the instant.  Oh, be
merciful, dear romantic reader!  I didn't strike the Major-General,
because, oh, because I AGREED WITH HIM!

I loved Nicolete, you must have felt that. She was sweet to me as the
bunch of white flowers that, in their frail Venetian vase, stand so
daintily on my old bureau as I write, doing their best to sweeten my
thoughts. Dear was she to me as the birds that out in the old garden
yonder sing and sing their best to lift up my leaden heart.  She was
dear as the Spring itself, she was only less dear than Autumn.

Yes, black confession! after the first passion of her loss, the
immediate ache of her young beauty had passed, and I was able to
analyse what I really felt, I not only agreed with him, I thanked God
for the Major-General!  He had saved me from playing the terrible part
of executioner. He had just come in time to behead the Lady Jane Grey
of our dreams.

I should have no qualms about tightening the rope round the neck of
some human monster, or sticking a neat dagger or bullet into a
dangerous, treacherous foe, but to kill a dream is a sickening
business.  It goes on moaning in such a heart-breaking fashion, and you
never know when it is dead.  All on a sudden some night it will come
wailing in the wind outside your window, and you must blacken your
heart and harden your face with another strangling grip of its slim
appealing throat, another blow upon its angel eyes.  Even then it will
recover, and you will go on being a murderer, making for yourself day
by day a murderer's face, without the satisfaction of having really
murdered.

But what of Nicolete? do you exclaim. Have you no thought for her,
bleeding her heart away in solitude?  Can you so soon forget those
appealing eyes?  Yes, I have thought for her.  Would God that I could
bear for her those growing pains of the heart! and I shall never forget
those farewell eyes.  But then, you see, I had firmly realised this,
that she would sooner recover from our separation than from our
marriage; that her love for me, pretty and poignant and dramatic while
it lasted, was a book-born, book-fed dream, which must die soon or
late,--the sooner the better for the peace of the dreams that in the
course of nature would soon spring up to take its place.

But while I realised all this, and, with a veritable aching of the
heart at the loss of her, felt a curious satisfaction at the turn of
events, still my own psychology became all the more a puzzle to me, and
I asked myself, with some impatience, what I would be at, and what it
was I really wanted.

Here had I but a few moments ago been holding in my hands the very
dream I had set out to find, and here was I secretly rejoicing to be
robbed of it!  If Nicolete did not fulfil the conditions of that
mystical Golden Girl, in professed search for whom I had set out that
spring morning, well, the good genius of my pilgrimage felt it time to
resign.  Better give it up at once, and go back to my books and my
bachelorhood, if I were so difficult to please.  No wonder my kind
providence felt provoked. It had provided me with the sweetest
pink-and-porcelain dream of a girl, and might reasonably have concluded
that his labours on my behalf were at an end.

But, really, there is no need to lecture me upon the charms and virtues
of Nicolete, for I loved them from the first moment of our strange
introduction, and I dream of them still.  There was indeed only one
quality of womanhood in which she was lacking, and in which, after much
serious self-examination, I discovered the reason of my instinctive
self-sacrifice of her,--SHE HAD NEVER SUFFERED.  As my heart had warned
me at the beginning, "she was hoping too much from life to spend one's
days with." She lacked the subtle half-tones of experience. She lacked
all that a pretty wrinkle or two might have given.  There was no
shadowy melancholy in her sky-clear eyes.  She was gay indeed, and had
a certain childish humour; but she had none of that humour which comes
of the resigned perception that the world is out of joint, and that you
were never born to set it right. These characteristics I had yet to
find in woman.  There was still, therefore, an object to my quest.
Indeed my experience had provided me with a formula.  I was in search
of a woman who, in addition to every other feminine charm and virtue,
was a woman who had suffered.

With this prayer I turned once more to the genius of my pilgrimage.
"Grant me," I asked, "but this--A WOMAN WHO HAS SUFFERED!" and,
apparently as a consequence, he became once more quite genial.  He
seemed to mean that a prayer so easy to grant would put any god into a
good temper; and possibly he smiled with a deeper meaning too.




