CHAPTER IV

'T IS OF NICOLETE AND HER BOWER IN THE WILDWOOD

But I have all this time left the reader without any formal descriptive
introduction to this whimsical young lady angler. Not without reason,
for, like any really charming personality, she was very difficult to
picture.  Paint a woman! as our young friend Alastor said.

Faces that fall into types you can describe, or at all events label in
such a way that the reader can identify them; but those faces that
consist mainly of spiritual effect and physical bloom, that change with
everything they look upon, the light in which ebbs and flows with every
changing tide of the soul,--these you have to love to know, and to
worship to portray.

Now the face of Nicolete, as I learnt in time to call her, was just
soul and bloom, perhaps mainly bloom.  I never noticed whether she had
any other features except her eyes.  I suppose she had a nose; a little
lace pocket-handkerchief I have by me at the moment is almost too small
to be evidence on that important point.

As I walked by her side that May morning, I was only conscious of her
voice and her exquisite girlhood; for though she talked with the APLOMB
of a woman of the world, a passionate candour and simple ardour in her
manner would have betrayed her, had her face not plainly declared her
the incarnation of twenty.  But if she were twenty years young, she was
equally twenty years OLD; and twenty years old, in some respects, is
the greatest age attained to by man or woman.  In this she rather
differed from Alastor, of whom otherwise she was the female
counterpart.  Her talk, and something rather in her voice than her
talk, soon revealed her as a curious mixture of youth and age, of
dreamer and desillusionee.

One soon realised that she was too young, was hoping too much from
life, to spend one's days with.  Yet she had just sufficiently that
touch of languor which puts one at one's ease, though indeed it was
rather the languor of waiting for what was going to happen than the
weariness of experience gone by.  She was weary, not because of the
past, but because the fairy theatre of life still kept its curtain
down, and forced her to play over and over again the impatient overture
of her dreams.

I have no doubt that it was largely nervousness that kept the
mysterious playwright so long fumbling behind the scenes, for it was
obvious that it would be no ordinary sort of play, no every-day
domestic drama, that would satisfy this young lady, to whom life had
given, by way of prologue, the inestimable blessing of wealth, and the
privilege, as a matter of course, of choosing as she would among the
grooms (that is, the bride-grooms) of the romantic British aristocracy.

She had made youth's common mistake of beginning life with books, which
can only be used without danger by those who are in a position to test
their statements.  Youth naturally believes everything that is told it,
especially in books.

Now, books are simply professional liars about life, and the books that
are best worth reading are those which lie the most beautifully. Yet,
in fairness, we must add that they are liars, not with intent to
mislead, but merely with the tenderest purpose to console.  They are
the good Samaritans that find us robbed of all our dreams by the
roadside of life, bleeding and weeping and desolate; and such is their
skill and wealth and goodness of heart, that they not only heal up our
wounds, but restore to us the lost property of our dreams, on one
condition,--that we never travel with them again in the daylight.

A library is a better world, built by the brains and hearts of poets
and dreamers, as a refuge from the real world outside; and in it alone
is to be found the land of milk and honey which it promises.

"Milk and honey" would have been an appropriate inscription for the
delicious little library which parents who, I surmised, doted on
Nicolete in vain, had allowed her to build in a wild woodland corner of
her ancestral park, half a mile away from the great house, where, for
all its corridors and galleries, she could never feel, at all events,
spiritually alone.  All that was most sugared and musical and generally
delusive in the old library of her fathers had been brought out to this
little woodland library, and to that nucleus of old leather-bound poets
and romancers, long since dead, yet as alive and singing on their
shelves as any bird on the sunny boughs outside, my young lady's
private purse had added all that was most sugared and musical and
generally delusive in the vellum bound Japanese-paper literature of our
own luxurious day.  Nor were poets and romancers from over sea--in
their seeming simple paper covers, but with, oh, such complicated and
subtle insides!--absent from the court which Nicolete held here in the
greenwood.  Never was such a nest of singing-birds. All day long, to
the ear of the spirit, there was in this little library a sound of
harping and singing and the telling of tales,--songs and tales of a
world that never was, yet shall ever be.  Here day by day Nicolete fed
her young soul on the nightingale's-tongues of literature, and put down
her book only to listen to the nightingale's-tongues outside.  Yea,
sun, moon, and stars were all in the conspiracy to lie to her of the
loveliness of the world and the good intentions of life.  And now, thus
unexpectedly, I found myself joining the nefarious conspiracy.  Ah,
well! was I not twenty myself, and full of dreams!



CHAPTER V

'T IS OF AUCASSIN AND NICOLETE

Thus it was that we lunched together amid the books and birds, in an
exquisite solitude a deux; for the ringer of the silver bell had
disappeared, having left a dainty meal in readiness--for two.

"You see you were expected," said Nicolete, with her pretty laugh.  "I
dreamed I should have a visitor to-day, and told Susan to lay the lunch
for two.  You mustn't be surprised at that," she added mischievously;
"it has often happened before. I dream that dream every other night,
and Susan lays for two every day.  She knows my whims,--knows that the
extra knife and fork are for the fairy knight that may turn up any
afternoon, as I tell her--"

"To find the sleepless princess," I added, thinking at the same time
one of those irrelevant asides that will go through the brain of
thirty, that the woman who would get her share of kisses nowadays must
neither slumber nor sleep.

A certain great poet, I think it was Byron, objected to seeing women in
the act of eating. He thought their eating should be done in private.
What a curiously perverse opinion!  For surely woman never shows to
better advantage than in the dainty exercises of a dainty repast, and
there is nothing more thrilling to man than a meal alone with a woman
he loves or is about to love.  Perhaps, deep down, the reason is that
there still vibrates in the masculine blood the thrilling surprise of
the moment when man first realised that the angel woman was built upon
the same carnivorous principles as his grosser self.

That is one of the first heart-beating surprises that come upon the boy
Columbus, as he sets out to discover the New World of woman; and indeed
his surprise has not seldom deepened into admiration, as he has found
that not only does woman eat, but frequently eats a lot.

This privilege of seeing woman eat is the earliest granted of those
delicate animal intimacies, the fuller and fuller confiding of which
plays not the least important part, and ever such a sweet one, even in
a highly transcendental affection.  It is this gradual humanising of
the divine female that brings about the spiritualising of the
unregenerate male.

In the earliest stages of love the services are small that we are
privileged to do for the loved one.  But if we are allowed to sit at
meat with her,--ever a royal condescension,--it is ours at least to
pass her the salt, to see that she is never kept waiting a moment for
the mustard or the pepper, to cut the bread for her with geometrical
precision, and to lean as near her warm shoulder as we dare to pour out
for her the sacred wine.

Yes! for sure I was twenty again, for the performance of these simple
services for Nicolete gave me a thrill of pure boyish pleasure such as
I had never expected to feel again.  And did she not make a knight of
me by gently asking if I would be so kind as to carve the chicken, and
how she laughed quite disproportionally at my school-boy story of the
man who, being asked to carve a pigeon, said he thought they had better
send for a wood-carver, as it seemed to be a wood pigeon.

And while we ate and drank and laughed and chatted, the books around us
were weaving their spells.  Even before the invention of printing books
were "love's purveyors." Was it not a book that sent Paolo and
Francesca for ever wandering on that stormy wind of passion and of
death?  And nowadays the part played by books in human drama is greater
than we perhaps realise. Apart from their serious influence as
determining destinies of the character, what endless opportunities they
afford to lovers, who perhaps are denied all other meeting-places than
may be found on the tell-tale pages of a marked volume.  The method is
so easy and so unsuspect.  You have only to put faint pencil-marks
against the tenderest passages in your favourite new poet, and lend the
volume to Her, and She has only to leave here and there the dropped
violet of a timid confirmatory initial, for you to know your fate.  And
what a touchstone books thus become!  Indeed they simplify love-making,
from every point of view.  With books so inexpensive and accessible to
all as they are to-day, no one need run any risks of marrying the wrong
woman.  He has only to put her through an unconscious examination by
getting her to read and mark a few of his favourite authors, and he is
thus in possession of the master clues of her character.  With a list
of her month's reading and a photograph, a man ought to be able to make
up his mind about any given woman, even though he has never spoken to
her.  "Name your favourite writer" should be one of the first questions
in the Engagement Catechism.

There is, indeed, no such short cut to knowledge of each other as a
talk about books.  One short afternoon is enough for any two
book-lovers, though they may have met for the first time in the
morning, to make up their minds whether or not they have been born for
each other.  If you are agreed, say, in admiring Meredith, Hardy, Omar
Khayyam, and Maeterlinck,--to take four particularly
test-authors,--there is nothing to prevent your marrying at once.
Indeed, a love for any one of these significant writers will be enough,
not to speak of an admiration for "Aucassin and Nicolete."

Now, Nicolete and I soon found that we had all these and many another
writer in common, and before our lunch was ended we were nearer to each
other than many old friends.  The heart does not more love the heart
that loves it than the brain loves the brain that comprehends it; and,
whatever else was to befall us, Nicolete and I were already in love
with each other's brains. Whether or not the malady would spread till
it reached the heart is the secret of some future chapter.



