CHAPTER XVI

CLEARS UP MY MYSTERIOUS BEHAVIOUR OF THE LAST CHAPTER

What a sane man should be doing carrying about with him a woman's
petticoat and silk stockings, may well be a puzzle to the most
intelligent reader.

Whim, sir, whim! and few human actions admit of more satisfactory
solution.  Like Shylock, I'll say "It is my humour."  But no! I'll be
more explanatory.  This madcap quest of mine, was it not understood
between us from the beginning to be a fantastic whim, a poetical
wild-goose chase, conceived entirely as an excuse for being some time
in each other's company?  To be whimsical, therefore, in pursuit of a
whim, fanciful in the chase of a fancy, is surely but to maintain the
spirit of the game.  Now, for the purpose, therefore, of a romance that
makes no pretence to reasonableness, I had very good reasons for buying
that petticoat, which (the reasons, not the petticoat) I will now lay
before you.

I have been conscious all the way along through this pilgrimage of its
inevitable vagueness of direction, of my need of something definite,
some place, some name, anything at all, however slight, which I might
associate, if only for a time, with the object of my quest, a definite
something to seek, a definite goal for my feet.

Now, when I saw that mysterious petticoat, and realised that its wearer
would probably be pretty and young and generally charming, and that
probably her name was somewhere on the waistband, the spirit of whim
rejoiced within me.  "Why not," it said, "buy the petticoat, find out
the name of its owner, and, instead of seeking a vague Golden Girl,
make up your mind doggedly to find and marry her, or, failing that,
carry the petticoat with you, as a sort of Cinderella's slipper, try it
on any girl you happen to fancy, and marry her it exactly fits?"

Now, I confess, that seemed to me quite  a pretty idea, and I hope the
reader will think so too.  If not, I'm afraid I can offer him no better
explanation; and in fact I am all impatience to open my knapsack, and
inform myself of the name of her to the discovery of whom my wanderings
are henceforth to be devoted.



CHAPTER XVII

THE NAME UPON THE PETTICOAT

So imagine me seated in a grassy corner, with my knapsack open on the
ground and my petticoat and silk stockings spread out in front of
me,--an odd picture, to be sure, for any passer by to come upon.  I
suppose I could have passed for a pedlar, but undoubtedly it would have
been very embarrassing.  However, as it happened, I remained
undisturbed, and was able to examine my purchases at leisure.  I had
never seen a petticoat so near before,--at all events I had never given
one such close attention.  What delicious dainty things they are!  How
essentially womanly--as I hope no one would call a pair of trousers
essentially manly.

How pretty it looked spread out on the grass in front of me!  How soft!
how wondrously dainty the finish of every little seam! And the lace!
It almost tempts one to change one's sex to wear such things.  There
was a time indeed, and not so long ago, when brave men wore garments no
less dainty.

Rupert's Cavaliers were every bit as particular about their lace
collars and frills as the lady whose pretty limbs once warmed this
cambric.

But where is the name?  Ah! here it is! What sweet writing! "Sylvia
Joy, No. 6."

Sylvia Joy!  What a perfectly enchanting name! and as I repeated it
enthusiastically, it seemed to have a certain familiarity for my
ear,--as though it were the name of some famous beauty or some popular
actress,--yet the exact association eluded me, and obviously it was
better it should remain a name of mystery. Sylvia Joy!  Who could have
hoped for such a pretty name! Indeed, to tell the truth, I had dreaded
to find a "Mary Jones" or an "Ann Williams"--but Sylvia Joy!  The name
was a romance in itself.  I already felt myself falling in love with
its unseen owner.  With such a petticoat and such a name, Sylvia
herself could not be otherwise than delightful too. Already, you see, I
was calling her by her Christian name!  And the more I thought of her,
the stronger grew the conviction--which has no doubt already forced
itself upon the romantic reader--that we were born for each other.

But who is Sylvia, who is she? and likewise where is Sylvia, where is
she? Obviously they were questions not to be answered off-hand.  Was
not my future--at all events my immediate future--to be spent in
answering them?

Indeed, curiously enough, my recent haste to have them answered had
suddenly died down.  A sort of matrimonial security possessed me.  I
felt as I imagine a husband may feel on a solitary holiday--if there
are husbands unnatural enough to go holidaying without their
wives--pleasantly conscious of a home tucked somewhere beneath the
distant sunset, yet in no precipitate hurry to return there before the
appointed day.

In fact, a chill tremor went through me as I realised that, to all
intent, I was at length respectably settled down, with quite a
considerable retrospect of happy married life. To come to a decision is
always to bring something to an end.  And, with something of a pang,
resolutely stifled, I realised for a moment the true blessedness of the
single state I was so soon to leave behind.  At all events, a little
golden fragment of bachelorhood remained.  There was yet a fertile
strip of time wherein to sow my last handful of the wild oats of youth.
So festina lente, my destined Sylvia, festina lente!



