CHAPTER II

GRACE O' GOD

It was a hard winter's night four years ago, lovely and merciless; and
towards midnight I walked home from a theatre to my rooms in St.
James's Street.  The Venusberg of Piccadilly looked white as a nun with
snow and moonlight, but the melancholy music of pleasure, and the sad
daughters of joy, seemed not to heed the cold.  For another hour death
and pleasure would dance there beneath the electric lights.

Through the strange women clustering at the corners I took my
way,--women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and
Hittites,--and I thought, as I looked into their poor painted
faces,--faces but half human, vampirish faces, faces already waxen with
the look of the grave,--I thought, as I often did, of the poor little
girl whom De Quincey loved, the good-hearted little 'peripatetic' as he
called her, who had succoured him during those nights, when, as a young
man, he wandered homeless about these very streets,--that good, kind
little Ann whom De Quincey had loved, then so strangely lost, and for
whose face he looked into women's faces as long as he lived.  Often
have I stood at the corner of Titchfield Street, and thought how De
Quincey had stood there night after night waiting for her to come, but
all in vain, and how from the abyss of oblivion into which some cruel
chance had swept her, not one cry from her ever reached him again.

I thought, too, as I often did, what if the face I seek should be here
among these poor outcasts,--golden face hidden behind a mask of shame,
true heart still beating true even amidst this infernal world!

Thus musing, I had walked my way out of the throng, and only a figure
here and there in the shadows of doorways waited and waited in the cold.

It was something about one of these waiting figures,--some movement,
some chance posture,--that presently surprised my attention and
awakened a sudden sense of half recognition.  She stood well in the
shadow, seeming rather to shrink from than to court attention.  As I
walked close by her and looked keenly into her face, she cast down her
eyes and half turned away.  Surely, I had seen that tall, noble figure
somewhere before, that haughty head; and then with the apparition a
thought struck me--but, no! it couldn't be she! not HERE!

"It is," said my soul, as I turned and walked past her again; "you
missed her once, are you going to miss her again?"

"It is," said my eyes, as they swept her for the third time; "but she
had glorious chestnut hair, and the hair of this woman is--gilded."

"It is she," said my heart; "thank God, it is she!"

So it was that I went up to that tall, shy figure.

"It must be very cold here," I said; "will you not join me in some
supper?"

She assented, and we sought one of the many radiating centres of
festivity in the neighbourhood.  She was very tired and cold,--so tired
she seemed hardly to have the spirit to eat, and evidently the cold had
taken tight clutch of her lungs, for she had a cough that went to my
heart to hear, and her face was ghastly pale.  When I had persuaded her
to drink a little wine, she grew more animated and spots of suspicious
colour came into her cheeks.  So far she had seemed all but oblivious
of my presence, but now she gave me a sweet smile of gratitude, one of
those irradiating transfiguring smiles that change the whole face, and
belong to few faces, the heavenly smile of a pure soul.

Yes, it was she!  The woman who sat in front of me was the woman whom I
had met so strangely that day on that solitary moorland, and whom in
prophecy still more strange my soul had declared to be, "now and for
ever and before all worlds the woman God had created for me, and that
unless I could be hers and she mine, there could be no home, no peace,
for either of us so long as we lived--" and now so strangely met again.

Yes, it was she!

For the moment my mind had room for no other thought.  I cared not to
conjecture by what devious ways God had brought her to my side.  I
cared not what mire her feet had trodden.  She had carried her face
pure as a lily through all the foul and sooty air.  There was a pure
heart in her voice.  Sin is of the soul, and this soul had not sinned!
Let him that is without sin amongst you cast the first stone.

"Why did you dye that wonderful chestnut hair?" I asked her
presently--and was sorry next minute for the pain that shot across her
face, but I just wanted to hint at what I designed not to reveal fully
till later on, and thus to hint too that it was not as one of the
number of her defilers that I had sought her.

"Why," she said, "how do you know the colour of my hair?  We have never
met before."

"Yes, we have," I said, "and that was why I spoke to you to-night.
I'll tell you where it was another time."

But after all I could not desist from telling her that night, for, as
afterwards at her lodging we sat over the fire, talking as if we had
known each other all our lives, there seemed no reason for an arbitrary
delay.

I described to her the solitary moorland road, and the grey-gowned
woman's figure in front of me, and the gig coming along to meet her,
and the salutation of the two girls, and I told her all one look of her
face had meant for me, and how I had wildly sought her in vain, and
from that day to this had held her image in my heart.

And as I told her, she sobbed with her head against my knees and her
great hair filling my lap with gold.  In broken words she drew for me
the other side of the picture of that long-past summer day.

Yes, the girl in the gig was her sister, and they were the only
daughters of a farmer who had been rich once, but had come to ruin by
drink and misfortune.  They had been brought up from girls by an old
grandmother, with whom the sister was living at the time of my seeing
them.  Yes, Tom was her husband. He was a doctor in the neighbourhood
when he married her, and a man, I surmised, of some parts and promise,
but, moving to town, he had fallen into loose ways, taken to drinking
and gambling, and had finally deserted her for another woman--at the
very moment when their first child was born.  The child died "Thank
God!" she added with sudden vehemence, and "I--well, you will wonder
how I came to this, I wonder myself--it has all happened but six months
ago, and yet I seem to have forgotten--only the broken-hearted and the
hungry would understand, if I could remember--and yet it was not life,
certainly not life I wanted--and yet I couldn't die--"

The more I came to know Elizabeth and realise the rare delicacy of her
nature, the simplicity of her mind, and the purity of her soul, the
less was I able to comprehend the psychology of that false step which
her great misery had forced her to take.  For hers was not a sensual,
pleasure-loving nature.  In fact, there was a certain curious
Puritanism about her, a Puritanism which found a startlingly
incongruous and almost laughable expression in the Scripture almanac
which hung on the wall at the end of her bed, and the Bible, and two or
three Sunday-school stories which, with a copy of "Jane Eyre," were the
only books that lay upon the circular mahogany table.

Once I ventured gently to chaff her about this religiosity of hers.

"But surely you believe in God, dear," she had answered, "you're not an
atheist!"

I think an atheist, with all her experience of human monsters, was for
her the depth of human depravity.

"No, dear," I had answered; "if you can believe in God, surely I can!"

I repeat that this gap in Elizabeth's psychology puzzled me, and it
puzzles me still, but it puzzled me only as the method of working out
some problem which after all had "come out right" might puzzle one. It
was only the process that was obscure. The result was gold, whatever
the dark process might be.  Was it simply that Elizabeth was one of
that rare few who can touch pitch and not be defiled?--or was it, I
have sometimes wondered, an unconscious and after all a sound casuistry
that had saved Elizabeth's soul, an instinctive philosophy that taught
her, so to say, to lay a Sigurd's sword between her soul and body, and
to argue that nothing can defile the body without the consent of the
soul.

In deep natures there is always what one might call a lover's leap to
be taken by those that would love them--something one cannot understand
to be taken on trust, something even that one fears to be gladly
adventured ... all this, and more, I knew that I could safely venture
for Elizabeth's sake, ere I kissed her white brow and stole away in the
early hours of that winter's morning.

As I did so I had taken one of the sumptuous strands of her hair into
my hand and kissed it too.

"Promise me to let this come back to its own beautiful colour," I had
said, as I nodded to a little phial labelled "Peroxide of Hydrogen" on
her mantelshelf.

"Would you like to?" she had said.

"Yes, do it for me."

One day some months after I cut from her dear head one long thick lock,
one half of which was gold and the other half chestnut. I take it out
and look at it as I write, and, as when I first cut it, it seems still
a symbol of Elizabeth's life, the sun and the shadow, only that the
gold was the shadow, and the chestnut was the sun.

The time came when the locks, from crown to tip, were all chestnut--but
when it came I would have given the world for them to be gold again;
for Elizabeth had said a curious thing when she had given me her
promise.

"All right, dear," she had said, "but something tells me that when they
are all brown again our happiness will be at an end."

"How long will that take?" I had said, trying to be gay, though an
involuntary shudder had gone through me, less at her words than because
of the strange conviction of her manner.

"About two years,--perhaps a little more," she said, answering me quite
seriously, as she gravely measured the shining tresses, half her body's
length, with her eye.



CHAPTER III

THE GOLDEN GIRL

One fresh and sunny morning, some months after this night, Elizabeth
and I stood before the simple altar of a little country church, for the
news had come to us that her husband was dead, and thus we were free to
belong to each other before all the world.  The exquisite stillness in
the cool old church was as the peace in our hearts, and the rippling
sound of the sunlit leaves outside seemed like the very murmur of the
stream of life down which we dreamed of gliding together from that hour.

It was one of those moments which sometimes come and go without any
apparent cause, when life suddenly takes a mystical aspect of
completeness, all its discords are harmonised by some unseen hand of
the spirit, and all its imperfections fall away. The lover of beauty
and the lover of God alike know these strange moments, but none know
them with such a mighty satisfaction as a man and a woman who love as
loved Elizabeth and I.

Love for ever completes the world, for it is no future of higher
achievement, no expectation of greater joy.  It lives for ever in a
present made perfect by itself.  Love can dream of no greater
blessedness than itself, of no heaven but its own.  God himself could
have added no touch of happiness to our happy hearts that grave and
sunny morning. You philosophers who go searching for the meaning of
life, thinkers reading so sadly, and let us hope so wrongly, the riddle
of the world--life has but one meaning, the riddle but one
answer--which is Love.  To love is to put yourself in harmony with the
spheral music of creation, to stand in the centre of the universe, and
see it good and whole as it appears in the eye of God.

Even Death himself, the great and terrible King of kings, though he may
break the heart of love with agonies and anguish and slow tortures of
separation, may break not his faith.  No one that has loved will dream
even death too terrible a price to pay for the revelation of love.  For
that revelation once made can never be recalled.  As a little sprig of
lavender will perfume a queen's wardrobe, so will a short year of love
keep sweet a long life. And love's best gifts death can never take
away.  Nay, indeed, death does not so much rob as enrich the gifts of
love.  The dead face that was fair grows fairer each spring, sweet
memories grow more sweet, what was silver is now gold, and as years go
by, the very death of love becomes its immortality.

I think I shall never hear Elizabeth's voice again, never look into her
eyes, never kiss her dear lips--but Elizabeth is still mine, and I am
hers, as in that morning when we kissed in that little chancel amid the
flickering light, and passed out into the sun and down the lanes, to
our little home among the meadow-sweet.

She is still as real to me as the stars,--and, alas, as far away!  I
think no thought that does not fly to her, I have no joys I do not
share with her, I tell her when the spring is here, and we sit beneath
the moon and listen to the nightjar together. Sometimes we are merry
together as in the old time, and our laughter makes nightfaring folk to
cross themselves; my work, my dreams, my loves, are all hers, and my
very sins are sinned for her sake.

Two years did Elizabeth and I know the love that passeth all
understanding, and day by day the chestnut upon her head was more and
the gold less, till the day came that she had prophesied, and with the
day a little child, whose hair had stolen all her mother's gold, as her
heart had drained away her mother's life.

Ah! reader, may it be long before you kneel at the bedside of her you
love best in the world, and know that of all your love is left but a
hundred heart-beats, while opposite sits Death, watch in hand, and
fingers upon her wrist.

"Husband," whispered Elizabeth, as we looked at each other for the last
time, "let her be your little golden girl..."

And then a strange sweetness stole over her face, and the dream of
Elizabeth's life was ended.

As I write I hear in the still house the running of little feet, a
fairy patter sweet and terrible to the heart.

Little feet, little feet--perhaps if I follow you I shall find again
our mother that is lost. Perhaps Elizabeth left you with me that I
should not miss the way.

Tout par soullas.










