BOOK III



CHAPTER I

IN WHICH I RETURN TO MY RIGHT AGE AND ENCOUNTER A COMMON OBJECT OF THE
COUNTRY

And so when the days of my mourning for Nicolete were ended (and in
this sentence I pass over letters to and fro,--letters wild from
Nicolete, letters wise from Aucassin, letters explanatory and
apologetic from the Obstacle--how the Major-General had suddenly come
home quite unexpectedly and compelled her to explain Nicolete's
absence, etc., etc.  Dear Obstacle! I should rather have enjoyed a
pilgrimage with her too)--I found myself one afternoon again upon the
road.  The day had been very warm and dusty, and had turned sleepy
towards tea-time.

I had now pretty clearly in my mind what I wanted.  This time it was,
all other things equal, to be "a woman who had suffered," and to this
end, I had, before starting out once more, changed my age back again at
the inn and written "Aetat. 30" after my name in the visitors' book.
As a young man I was an evident failure, and so, having made the
countersign, I was speedily transformed to my old self; and I must say
that it was a most comfortable feeling, something like getting back
again into an old coat or an old pair of shoes.  I never wanted to be
young again as long as I lived.  Youth was too much like the Sunday
clothes of one's boyhood.  Moreover, I had a secret conviction that the
woman I was now in search of would prefer one who had had some
experience at being a man, who would bring her not the green plums of
his love, but the cunningly ripened nectarines, a man to whom love was
something of an art as well as an inspiration.

It was in this frame of mind that I came upon the following scene.

The lane was a very cloistral one, with a ribbon of gravelly road,
bordered on each side with a rich margin of turf and a scramble of
blackberry bushes, green turf banks and dwarf oak-trees making a rich
and plenteous shade.  My attention was caught firstly by a bicycle
lying carelessly on the turf, and secondly and lastly by a graceful
woman's figure, recumbent and evidently sleeping against the turf bank,
well tucked in among the afternoon shadows.  My coming had not aroused
her, and so I stole nearer to her on tiptoe.

She was a pretty woman, of a striking modern type, tall,
well-proportioned, strong, I should say, with a good complexion that
had evidently been made just a little better.  But her most striking
feature was an opulent mass of dark red hair, which had fallen in some
disorder and made quite a pillow for her head. Her hat was off, lying
in its veil by her side, and a certain general abandon of her
figure,--which was clothed in a short cloth skirt, cut with that
unmistakable touch which we call style--betokened weariness that could
no longer wait for rest.

Poor child! she was tired out.  She must never be left to sleep on
there, for she seemed good to sleep till midnight.

I turned to her bicycle, and, examining it with the air of a man who
had won silver cups in his day, I speedily discovered what had been the
mischief.  The tire of the front wheel had been pierced, and a great
thorn was protruding from the place. Evidently this had been too much
for poor Rosalind, and it was not unlikely that she had cried herself
to sleep.

I bent over her to look--yes, there were traces of tears.  Poor thing!
Then I had a kindly human impulse.  I would mend the tire, having
attended ambulance classes, do it very quietly so that she wouldn't
hear, like the fairy cobblers who used to mend people's boots while
they slept, and then wait in ambush to watch the effect upon her when
she awoke.

What do you think of the idea?

But one important detail I have omitted from my description of the
sleeper.  Her left hand lay gloveless, and of the four rings on her
third finger one was a wedding-ring.

"Such red hair,--and a wedding-ring!" I exclaimed inwardly. "How this
woman must have suffered!"



CHAPTER II

IN WHICH I HEAL A BICYCLE AND COME TO THE WHEEL OF PLEASURE

Moving the bicycle a little away, so that my operations upon it might
not arouse her, I had soon made all right again, and when I laid it
once more where she had left it, she was still sleeping as sound as
ever.  She had only to sleep long enough, a sly thought suggested, to
necessitate her ending her day's journey at the same inn as myself,
some five miles on the road.  One virtue at least the reader will allow
to this history,--we are seldom far away from an inn in its pages.
When I thought of that I sat stiller than ever, hardly daring to turn
over the pages of Apuleius, which I had taken from my knapsack to
beguile the time, and, I confess, to give my eyes some other occupation
than the dangerous one of gazing upon her face, dangerous in more ways
than one, but particularly dangerous at the moment, because, as
everybody knows, a steady gaze on a sleeping face is apt to awake the
sleeper.  And she wasn't to be disturbed!

"No! she mustn't waken before seven at the latest," I said to myself,
holding my breath and starting in terror at every noise. Once a great
noisy bee was within an ace of waking her, but I caught him with
inspired dexterity, and he buzzed around her head no more.

But despite the providential loneliness of the road, there were one or
two terrors that could not be disposed of so summarily. The worst of
all was a heavy miller's cart which one could hardly crush to silence
in one's handkerchief; but it went so slowly, and both man and horses
were so sleepy, that they passed unheard and unnoticing.

A sprightly tramp promised greater difficulty, and nothing but some
ferocious pantomime and a shilling persuaded him to forego a choice
fantasia of cockney humour.

A poor tired Italian organ-grinder, tramping with an equally tired
monkey along the dusty roads, had to be bought off in a similar
manner,--though he only cost sixpence.  He gave me a Southern smile and
shrug of comprehension, as one acquainted with affairs of the
heart,--which was a relief after the cockney tramp's impudent
expression of, no doubt, a precisely similar sentiment.

And then at last, just as my watch pointed to 6.50 (how well I remember
the exact moment!)  Rosalind awoke suddenly, as women and children do,
sitting straight up on the instant, and putting up her hands to her
tousled hair, with a half-startled "Where am I?"  When her hair was
once more "respectable," she gave her skirts a shake, bent sideways to
pull up her stockings and tighten her garters, looked at her watch, and
then with an exclamation at the lateness of the hour, went over, with
an air of desperate determination, to her bicycle.

"Now for this horrid puncture!" were the first words I was to hear fall
from her lips.

She sought for the wound in the india-rubber with growing bewilderment.

"Goodness!" was her next exclamation, "why, there's nothing wrong with
it.  Can I have been dreaming?"

"I hope your dreams have been pleasanter than that," I ventured at this
moment to stammer, rising, a startling apparition, from my ambush
behind a mound of brambles; and before she had time to take in the
situation I added that I hoped she'd excuse my little pleasantry, and
told her how I had noticed her and the wounded bicycle, et cetera, et
cetera, as the reader can well imagine, without giving me the trouble
of writing it all out.

She was sweetness itself on the instant.

"Excuse you!" she said, "I should think so.  Who wouldn't? You can't
tell the load you've taken off my mind.  I'm sure I must have groaned
in my sleep--for I confess I cried myself to sleep over it."

"I thought so," I said with gravity, and eyes that didn't dare to smile
outright till they had permission, which, however, was not long
withheld them.

"How did you know?"

"Oh, intuition, of course--who wouldn't have cried themselves to sleep,
and so tired too!"

"You're a nice sympathetic man, anyhow," she laughed; "what a pity you
don't bicycle!"

"Yes," I said, "I would give a thousand pounds for a bicycle at this
moment."

"You ought to get a good one for that," she laughed,--"all bright parts
nickel, I suppose; indeed, you should get a real silver frame and gold
handle-bars for that, don't you think? Well, it would be nice all the
same to have your company a few miles, especially as it's growing
dark," she added.

"Especially as it's growing dark," I repeated.

"You won't be going much farther to-night.  Have you fixed on your
inn?" I continued innocently.  She had--but that was in a town too far
to reach to-night, after her long sleep.

"You might have wakened me," she said.

"Yes, it was stupid of me not to have thought of it," I answered,
offering no explanation of the dead bee which at the moment I espied a
little away in the grass, and saying nothing of the merry tramp and the
melancholy musician.

Then we talked inns, and thus she fell beautifully into the pit which I
had digged for her; and it was presently arranged that she should ride
on to the Wheel of Pleasure and order a dinner, which she was to do me
the honour of sharing with me.

I was to follow on foot as speedily as might be, and it was with a high
heart that I strode along the sunset lanes, hearing for some time the
chiming of her bell in front of me, till she had wheeled it quite out
of hearing, and it was lost in the distance.

I never did a better five miles in my life.



