CHAPTER XIV

END OF BOOK THREE

So ended my pilgrimage.  I had wandered far, had loved many, but I came
back to London without the Golden Girl.  I had begun my pilgrimage with
a vision, and it was with a vision that I ended it.  From all my goings
to and fro upon the earth, I had brought back only the image of a
woman's face,--the face of that strange woman of the moorland, still
haunting my dreams of the night and the day.

It was autumn in my old garden, damp and forsaken, and the
mulberry-tree was hung with little yellow shields.  My books looked
weary of awaiting me, and they and the whole lonely house begged me to
take them where sometimes they might be handled by human fingers,
mellowed by lamplight, cheered by friendly laughter.

The very chairs begged mutely to be sat upon, the chill white beds to
be slept in.  Yes, the very furniture seemed even lonelier than myself.

So I took heed of their dumb appeal.

"I know," I answered them tenderly,--"I too, with you, have looked on
better days, I too have been where bells have knoll'd to church, I too
have sat at many a good man's feast,--yes!  I miss human society, even
as you, my books, my bedsteads, and my side-boards,--so let it be.  It
is plain our little Margaret is not coming back, our little Margaret,
dear haunted rooms, will never come back; no longer shall her little
silken figure flit up and down your quiet staircases, her hands filled
with flowers, and her heart humming with little songs.  Yes, let us go,
it is very lonely; we shall die if we stay here all so lonely together;
it is time, let us go."

So thereon I wrote to a furniture-remover, and went out to walk round
the mossy old garden for the last time, and say good-bye to the great
mulberry, under whose Dodonaesque shade we had sat half frightened on
starry nights, to the apple-trees whose blossom had seemed like
fairy-land to Margaret and me, town-bred folk, to the apricots and the
peaches and the nectarines that it had seemed almost wicked to own,--as
though we had gone abroad in silk and velvet,--to the little grassy
orchard, and to the little green corner of it, where Margaret had
fallen asleep that summer afternoon, in the great wicker-chair, and I
had brought a dear friend on tiptoe to gaze on her asleep, with her
olive cheeks delicately flushed, her great eyelids closed like the
cheeks of roses, and her gold hair tumbled about her neck...

Well, well, good-bye,--tears are foolish things.  They will not bring
Margaret back. Good-bye, old garden, good-bye, I shall never see you
again,--good-bye.




BOOK IV

THE POSTSCRIPT TO A PILGRIMAGE



CHAPTER I

SIX YEARS AFTER

This book is like a woman's letter.  The most important part of it is
the postscript.

Six years lie between the end of the last chapter and the beginning of
this. Meanwhile, I had moved to sociable chambers within sound of the
city clocks, and had lived the life of a lonely man about town, sinking
more and more into the comfortable sloth of bachelorhood.  I had long
come to look back upon my pilgrimage as a sort of Indian-summer youth,
being, as the reader can reckon for himself, just on thirty-seven.  As
one will, with one's most serious experiences, hastening to laugh lest
one should weep, as the old philosopher said, I had made some fun out
of my quest, in the form of a paper for a bookish society to which I
belonged, on "Woman as a Learned Pursuit."  It is printed among the
transactions of the society, and is accessible to the curious only by
loan from the members, and I regret that I am unable to print any
extracts here.  Perhaps when I am dead the society will see the
criminal selfishness of reserving for itself what was meant for mankind.

Meanwhile, however, it is fast locked and buried deep in the archives
of the club. I have two marriages to record in the interval: one that
of a young lady whom I must still think of as 'Nicolete' to Sir
Marmaduke Pettigrew, Bart., of Dultowers Hall, and the other the
well-known marriage of Sylvia Joy...

Sylvia Joy married after all her fine protestations!  Yes! but I'm sure
you will forgive her, for she was married to a lord. When one is twenty
and romantic one would scorn a woman who would jilt us for wealth and
position; at thirty, one would scorn any woman who didn't.  Ah me! how
one changes!  No one, I can honestly say, was happier over these two
weddings than I, and I sent Sylvia her petticoat as a wedding present.


But it was to tell of other matters that I reopen this book and once
more take up my pen--matters so near to my heart that I shrink from
writing of them, and am half afraid that the attempt may prove too hard
for me after all, and my book end on a broken cry of pain.  Yet, at the
same time, I want to write of them, for they are beautiful and solemn,
and good food for the heart.

Besides, though my pilgrimage had been ended so long, they are really a
part, yea, the part for which, though I knew it not, all the rest has
been written--for they tell how I came to find by accident her whom so
long I had sought of design.

How shall I tell of Thee who, first and last of all women, gave and
awoke in me that love which is the golden key of the world, the mystic
revelation of the holy meaning of life, love that alone may pass
through the awful gates of the stars, and gaze unafraid into the blue
abysses beyond?

Ah!  Love, it seemed far away indeed from the stars, the place where we
met, and only by the light of love's eyes might we have found each
other--as only by the light of love's eyes...  But enough, my Heart,
the world waits to hear our story,--the world once so unloving to you,
the world with a heart so hard and anon so soft for love. When the
story is ended, my love, when the story is ended--



