CHAPTER VIII

THE KIND OF THING THAT HAPPENS IN THE MOON

Two friends of my youth, with whom it would be hopeless to attempt
competition, have described the star-strewn journey to the moon.  It is
not for me to essay again where the ingenious M. Jules Verne and Mr.
William Morris have preceded me. Besides, the journey is nowadays much
more usual, and therefore much less adventurous, than when those
revered writers first described it. In the middle ages a journey to the
moon with a woman you loved was a very perilous matter indeed.  Even in
the last century the roads were much beset with danger; but in our own
day, like most journeys, it is accomplished with ease and safety in a
few hours.

However, to the latter-day hero, whose appetite for dragons is not
keen, this absence of adventure is perhaps rather pleasurable than
otherwise; and I confess that I enjoyed the days I spent on foot with
Nicolete none the less because they passed in tranquil
uneventfulness,--that is, without events of the violent kind.  Of
course, all depends on what you call an event.  We were not waylaid by
robbers, we fed and slept unchallenged at inns, we escaped collision
with the police, and we encountered no bodily dangers of any kind; yet
should I not call the journey uneventful, nor indeed, I think, would
Nicolete.

To me it was one prolonged divine event, and, with such daily
intercourse with Nicolete, I never dreamed of craving for any other
excitement.  To walk from morning to evening by her side, to minister
to her moods, to provide such entertainment as I might for her brain,
and watch like a father over her physical needs; to note when she was
weary and too proud to show it, and to pretend to be done up myself; to
choose for her the easiest path, and keep my eyes open for wayside
flowers and every country surprise,--these, and a hundred other
attentions, kept my heart and mind in busy service.

To picnic by some lonely stream-side on a few sandwiches, a flask of
claret, and a pennyworth of apples; to talk about the books we loved;
to exchange our hopes and dreams,--we asked nothing better than this
simple fare.

And so a week went by.  But, though so little had seemed to happen, and
though our walking record was shamefully modest, yet, imperceptible as
the transition had been, we were, quite insensibly indeed, and
unacknowledged, in a very different relation to each other than when we
had started out from the Morning Star.  In fact, to make no more words
about it, I was head over heels in love with Nicolete, and I think,
without conceit, I may say that Nicolete was rapidly growing rather
fond of me.  Apart from anything else, we were such excellent chums. We
got along together as if indeed we had been two brothers, equable in
our tempers and one in our desires.

At last the feeling on my side became so importunate that I could no
longer keep silence.

We were seated together taking tea at a small lonely inn, whose windows
looked out over a romantic little lake, backed by Salvator Rosa
pine-woods.  The sun was beginning to grow dreamy, and the whole world
to wear a dangerously sentimental expression.

I forget exactly what it was, but something in our talk had set us
glowing, had touched tender chords of unexpected sympathy, and
involuntarily I stretched out my hand across the corner of the table
and pressed Nicolete's hand as it rested on the cloth.  She did not
withdraw it, and our eyes met with a steady gaze of love.

"Nicolete," I said presently, when I could speak, "it is time for you
to be going back home."

"Why?" she asked breathlessly.

"Because," I answered, "I must love you if you stay."

"Would you then bid me go?" she said.

"Nicolete," I said, "don't tempt me.  Be a good girl and go home."

"But supposing I don't want to go home," she said; "supposing--oh,
supposing I love you too?  Would you still bid me go?"

"Yes," I said.  "In that case it would be even more imperative."

"Aucassin!"

"It is true, it is true, dear Nicolete."

"Then, Aucassin," she replied, almost sternly, in her great girlish
love, "this is true also,--I love you.  I have never loved, shall never
love, any man but you!"

"Nicolete!"

"Aucassin!"

There were no more words spoken between us for a full hour that
afternoon.



CHAPTER IX

WRITTEN BY MOONLIGHT

I knew deep down in my heart that it couldn't last, yet how deny myself
these roses, while the opportunity of gathering them was mine!--the
more so, as I believed it would do no harm to Nicolete.  At all events,
a day or two more or less of moonshine would make no matter either way.
And so all next day we walked hand in hand through Paradise.

It has been said by them of old time, and our fathers have told us,
that the kiss of first love, the first kiss of the first woman we love,
is beyond all kisses sweet; and true it is.  But true is it also that
no less sweet is the first kiss of the last woman we love.

Putting my faith in old saws, as a young man will, I had never dreamed
to know again a bliss so divinely passionate and pure as came to me
with every glance of Nicolete's sweet eyes, with every simple pressure
of her hand; and the joy that was mine when sometimes, stopping on our
way, we would press together our lips ever so gravely and tenderly,
seems too holy even to speak of.

The holy angels could not have loved Nicolete with a purer love, a love
freer from taint of any earthly thought, than I, a man of thirty,
blase, and fed from my youth upon the honeycomb of woman.

It was curious that the first difficulty of our pilgrimage should
befall us the very next day.  Coming towards nightfall to a small inn
in a lonely unpopulated countryside, we found that the only
accommodation the inn afforded was one double-bedded room, and there
was no other inn for at least ten miles.  I think I was more troubled
than Nicolete.  When, after interviewing the landlady, I came and told
her of the dilemma, where she sat in the little parlour wearied out
with the day's walk, she blushed, it is true, but seemed little put
about.  Indeed, she laughed, and said it was rather fun, "like
something out of Sterne,"--of such comfort is a literary reference in
all seasons and circumstances,--and then she added, with a sweet look
that sent the blood rioting about my heart, "It won't matter so much,
will it, love, NOW?"

There proved nothing for it but to accept the situation, and we made
the arrangement that Nicolete was to slip off to bed first, and then
put out the light and go to sleep.  However, when I followed her,
having sat up as long as the landlady's patience would endure, I found
that, though she had blown out the candle, she had forgotten to put out
the moon, which shone as though it were St. Agnes' Eve across half the
room.

I stole in very shyly, kept my eyes sternly from Nicolete's white bed,
though, as I couldn't shut my ears, the sound of her breathing came to
me with indescribable sweetness.  After I had lain among the sheets
some five or ten minutes, I was suddenly startled by a little voice
within the room saying,--

"I'm not asleep."

"Well, you should be, naughty child. Now shut your eyes and go to
sleep,--and fair dreams and sweet repose," I replied.

"Won't you give me one little good-night kiss?"

"I gave you one downstairs."

"Is it very wicked to want another?"

There was not a foot between our two beds, so I bent over and took her
soft white shoulders in my arms and kissed her. All the heaped-up
sweetness of the whitest, freshest flowers of the spring seemed in my
embrace as I kissed her, so soft, so fragrant, so pure; and as the
moonlight was the white fire in our blood.  Softly I released her,
stroked her brown hair, and turned again to my pillow.  Presently the
little voice was in the room again,--

"Mayn't I hold your hand?  Somehow I feel lonely and frightened."

So our hands made a bridge across which our dreams might pass through
the night, and after a little while I knew that she slept.

As I lay thus holding her hand, and listening to her quiet breathing, I
realised once more what my young Alastor had meant by the purity of
high passion.  For indeed the moonlight that fell across her bosom was
not whiter than my thoughts, nor could any kiss--were it even such a
kiss as Venus promised to the betrayer of Psyche--even in its fiercest
delirium, be other than dross compared with the wild white peace of
those silent hours when we lay thus married and maiden side by side.



