CHAPTER X

IN WHICH ONCE MORE I BECOME OCCUPIED IN MY OWN AFFAIRS

During a pause in my matrimonial lecture, Orlando had written a little
farewell note to Sylvia,--a note which, of course, I didn't read, but
which it is easy to imagine "wild with all regret."  This I undertook
to have delivered to her the same night, and promised to call upon her
on the morrow, further to illuminate the situation, and to offer her
every consolation in my power.  To conclude the history of Orlando and
his Rosalind, I may say that I saw them off from Yellowsands by the
early morning coach. There was a soft brightness in their faces, as
though rain had fallen in the night; but it was the warm sweet rain of
joy that brings the flowers, and is but sister to the sun. They are, at
the time of my writing, quite old friends of mine, and both have an
excessive opinion of my wisdom and good-nature.

"That lie," Orlando once said to me long after, "was the truest thing I
ever said in my life,"--a remark which may not give the reader a very
exalted idea of his general veracity.

As the coach left long before pretty young actresses even dreamed of
getting up, I had to control my impatient desire to call on
Mademoiselle Sylvia Joy till it was fully noon.  And even then she was
not to be seen.  I tried again in the afternoon with better success.

Rain had been falling in the night with her too, I surmised, but it had
failed to dim her gay eyes, and had left her complexion unimpaired.  Of
course her little affair with Orlando had never been very serious on
her side.  She genuinely liked him.  "He was a nice kind boy," was the
height of her passionate expression, and she was, naturally, a little
disappointed at having an affectionate companion thus unexpectedly
whisked off into space.  Her only approach to anger was on the subject
of his deceiving her about his wife.  Little Sylvia Joy had no very
long string of principles; but one generous principle she did hold
by,--never, if she knew it, to rob another woman of her husband. And
that did make her cross with Orlando.  He had not played the game fair.

There is no need to follow, step by step, the progression by which
Sylvia Joy and I, though such new acquaintances, became in the course
of a day or two even more intimate than many old friends.  We took to
each other instinctively, even on our first rather difficult interview,
and very gently and imperceptibly I bid for the vacant place in her
heart.

That night we dined together.

The next day we lunched and dined together.

The next day we breakfasted, lunched, and dined together.

And on the next I determined to venture on the confession which, as you
may imagine, it had needed no little artistic control not to make on
our first meeting.

She looked particularly charming this evening, in a black silk gown,
exceedingly simple and distinguished in style, throwing up the lovely
firm whiteness of her throat and bosom, and making a fine contrast with
her lurid hair.

It was sheer delight to sit opposite her at dinner, and quietly watch
her without a word.  Shall I confess that I had an exceedingly boyish
vanity in thus being granted her friendship? It is almost too boyish to
confess at my time of life.  It was simply in the fact that she was an
actress,--a real, live, famous actress, whose photographs made shop
windows beautiful,--come right out of my boy's fairyland of the
theatre, actually to sit eating and drinking, quite in a real way, at
my side.  This, no doubt, will seem pathetically naive to most modern
young men, who in this respect begin where I leave off.  An actress!
Great heavens! an actress is the first step to a knowledge of life.
Besides, actresses off the stage are either brainless or soulful, and
the choice of evils is a delicate one.  Well, I have never set up for a
man of the world, though sometimes when I have heard the Lovelaces of
the day hinting mysteriously at their secret sins or boasting of their
florid gallantries, I have remembered the last verse of Suckling's
"Ballad of a Wedding," which, no doubt, the reader knows as well as I,
and if not, it will increase his acquaintance with our brave old poetry
to look it up.

"You are very beautiful to-night," I said, in one of the meditative
pauses between the courses.

"Thank you, kind sir," she said, making a mock courtesy; "but the
compliment is made a little anxious for me by your evident implication
that I didn't look so beautiful this morning.  You laid such a marked
emphasis on to-night."

"Nay," I returned, "'for day and night are both alike to thee.'  I
think you would even be beautiful--well, I cannot imagine any moment or
station of life you would not beautify."

"I must get you to write that down, and then I'll have it framed.  It
would cheer me of a morning when I curl my hair," laughed Sylvia.

"But you are beautiful," I continued, becoming quite impassioned.

"Yes, and as good as I'm beautiful."

And she was too, though perhaps the beauty occasionally predominated.

When the serious business of dining was dispatched, and we were
trifling with our coffee and liqueurs, my eyes, which of course had
seldom left her during the whole meal, once more enfolded her little
ivory and black silk body with an embrace as real as though they had
been straining passionate arms; and as I thus nursed her in my eyes, I
smiled involuntarily at a thought which not unnaturally occurred to me.

"What is that sly smile about?" she asked.  Now I had smiled to think
that underneath that stately silk, around that tight little waist, was
a dainty waistband bearing the legend "Sylvia Joy," No. 4, perhaps, or
5, but NOT No. 6; and a whole wonderful underworld of lace and linen
and silk stockings, the counterpart of which wonders, my clairvoyant
fancy laughed to think, were at the moment--so entirely unsuspected of
their original owner--my delicious possessions.

Everything a woman wears or touches immediately incarnates something of
herself. A handkerchief, a glove, a flower,--with a breath she endues
them with immortal souls.  How much, therefore, of herself must inhere
in a garment so confidential as a petticoat, or so close and constant a
companion as a stocking!

Now that I knew Sylvia Joy, I realised how absolutely true my instinct
had been, when on that far afternoon in that Surrey garden I had said,
"With such a petticoat and such a name, Sylvia herself cannot be
otherwise than charming."

Indeed, now I could see that the petticoat was nothing short of a
portrait of her, and that any one learned in the physiognomy of clothes
would have been able to pick Sylvia out of a thousand by that spirited,
spoilt, and petted garment.

"What is that sly smile about?" she repeated presently.

"I only chanced to think of an absurd little fairy story I read the
other day," I said, "which is quite irrelevant at the moment.  You know
the idle way things come and go through one's head."

"I don't believe you," she replied, "but tell me the story.  I love
fairy tales."

"Certainly," I said, for I wasn't likely to get a better opportunity.
"There's nothing much in it; it's merely a variation of Cinderella's
slipper.  Well, once upon a time there was an eccentric young prince
who'd had his fling in his day, but had arrived at the lonely age of
thirty without having met a woman whom he could love enough to make his
wife.  He was a rather fanciful young prince, accustomed to follow his
whims; and one day, being more than usually bored with existence, he
took it into his head to ramble incognito through his kingdom in search
of his ideal wife,--'The Golden Girl,' as he called her.  He had hardly
set out when in a country lane he came across a peasant girl hanging
out clothes to dry, and he fell to talk with her while she went on with
her charming occupation.  Presently he observed, pegged on the line,
strangely incongruous among the other homespun garments, a wonderful
petticoat, so exquisite in material and design that it aroused his
curiosity.  At the same moment he noticed a pair of stockings, round
the tops of which one of the daintiest artists in the land had wrought
an exquisite little frieze.  The prince was learned in every form of
art, and had not failed to study this among other forms of decoration.
No sooner did he see this petticoat than the whim seized him that he
would find and marry the wearer, whoever she might be--"

"Rather rash of him," interrupted Sylvia, "for it is usually old ladies
who have the prettiest petticoats.  They can best afford them--"

"He questioned the girl as to their owner," I continued, "and after
vainly pretending that they were her own, she confessed that they had
belonged to a young and beautiful lady who had once lodged there and
left them behind.  Then the prince gave her a purse of gold in exchange
for the finery, and on the waistband of the petticoat he read a
beautiful name, and he said, 'This and no other shall be my wife, this
unknown beautiful woman, and on our marriage night she shall wear this
petticoat.'  And then the prince went forth seeking--"

"There's not much point in it," interrupted Sylvia.

"No," I said, "I'm afraid I've stupidly missed the point."

"Why, what was it?"

"The name upon the petticoat!"

"Why, what name was it?" she asked, somewhat mystified.

"The inscription upon the petticoat was, to be quite accurate, 'Sylvia
Joy, No. 6.'"

"Whatever are you talking about?" she said with quite a stormy blush.
"I'm afraid you've had more than your share of the champagne."

As I finished, I slipped out of my pocket a dainty little parcel softly
folded in white tissue paper.  Very softly I placed it on the table.
It contained one of the precious stockings; and half opening it, I
revealed to Sylvia's astonished eyes the cunning little frieze of
Bacchus and Ariadne, followed by a troop of Satyrs and Bacchantes,
which the artist had designed to encircle one of the white columns of
that little marble temple which sat before me.

"You know," I said, "how in fairy tales, when the wandering hero or the
maiden in distress has a guiding dream, the dream often leaves
something behind on the pillow to assure them of its authenticity.
'When you wake up,' the dream will say, 'you will find a rose or an
oak-leaf or an eagle's feather, or whatever it may be, on your pillow.'
Well, I have brought this stocking--for which, if I might but use them,
I have at the moment a stock of the most appropriately endearing
adjectives--for the same purpose.  By this token you will know that the
fairy tale I have been telling you is true, and to-morrow, if you will,
you shall see your autograph petticoat."

"Why, wherever did you come across them?  And what a mad creature you
must be! and what an odd thing that you should really meet me, after
all!" exclaimed Sylvia, all in a breath. "Of course, I remember," she
said frankly, and with a shade of sadness passing over her face.  "I
was spending a holiday with Jack Wentworth,--why, it must be nearly two
years ago.  Poor Jack! he was killed in the Soudan," and poor Jack
could have wished no prettier resurrection than the look of tender
memory that came into her face as she spoke of him, and the soft baby
tears filled her eyes.

"I'm so sorry," I said.  "Of course I didn't know.  Let's come for a
little stroll. There seems to be a lovely moon."

"Of course you didn't," she said, patting my cheek with a kind little
hand.  "Yes, do let us go for a stroll."



