CHAPTER XI

"THE HOUR FOR WHICH THE YEARS DID SIGH"

This unexpected awakening of an old tenderness naturally prevented my
speaking any more of my mind to Sylvia that evening. No doubt the
reader may be a little astonished to hear that I had decided to offer
her marriage,--not taking my serious view of a fanciful vow.  Doubtless
Sylvia was not entirely suitable to me, and to marry her was to be
faithless to that vision of the highest, that wonderful unknown woman
of the apocalyptic moorland, whose face Sylvia had not even momentarily
banished from my dreams, and whom, with an unaccountable certitude, I
still believed to be the woman God had destined for me; but, all things
considered, Sylvia was surely as pretty an answer to prayer as a man
could reasonably hope for.  Many historic vows had met with sadly less
lucky fulfilment.

So, after dinner the following evening, I suggested that we should for
once take a little walk up along the river-side; and when we were quiet
in the moonlight, dappling the lovers' path we were treading, and
making sharp contrasts of ink and silver down in the river-bed,--I
spoke.

"Sylvia," I said, plagiarising a dream which will be found in Chapter
IV.,--"Sylvia, I have sought you through the world and found you at
last; and with your gracious permission, having found you, I mean to
stick to you."

"What do you mean, silly boy?" she said, as an irregularity in the road
threw her soft weight the more fondly upon my arm.

"I mean, dear, that I want you to be my wife."

"Your wife?  Not for worlds!--no, forgive me, I didn't mean that.
You're an awful dear boy, and I like you very much, and I think you're
rather fond of me; but--well, the truth is, I was never meant to be
married, and don't care about it--and when you think of it, why should
I?"

"You mean," I said, "that you are fortunate in living in a society
where, as in heaven, there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage,
where in fact nobody minds whether you're married or not, and where
morals are very properly regarded as a personal and private matter--"

"Yes, that's what I mean," said Sylvia; "the people I care about--dear
good people--will think no more of me for having a wedding-ring, and no
less for my being without; and why should one put a yoke round one's
neck when nobody expects it?  A wedding-ring is like a top-hat,--you
only wear it when you must--But it's very sweet of you, all the same,
and you can kiss me if you like.  Here's a nice sentimental patch of
moonlight."

I really felt very dejected at this not of course entirely unexpected
rejection,--if one might use the word for a situation on which had just
been set the seal of so unmistakable a kiss; but the vision in my heart
seemed to smile at me in high and happy triumph.  To have won Sylvia
would have been to have lost her.  My ideal had, as it were, held her
breath till Sylvia answered; now she breathed again.

"At all events, we can go on being chums, can't we?" I said.

For answer Sylvia hummed the first verse of that famous song writ by
Kit Marlowe.

"Yes!" she said presently.  "I will sing for you, dance for you,
and--perhaps--flirt with you; but marry you--no! it's best not, for
both of us."

"Well, then," I said, "dance for me!  You owe me some amends for an
aching heart." As I said this, the path suddenly broadened into a
little circular glade into which the moonlight poured in a silver
flood.  In the centre of the space was a boulder some three or four
feet high, and with a flat slab-like surface of some six feet or so.

"I declare I will," said Sylvia, giving me an impulsive kiss, and
springing on to the stone; "why, here is a ready-made stage."

"And there," I said, "are the nightingale and the nightjar for
orchestra."

"And there is the moon," said she, "for lime-light man."

"Yes," I said; "and here is a handful of glow-worms for the footlights."

Then lifting up her heavy silk skirt about her, and revealing a
paradise of chiffons, Sylvia swayed for a moment with her face full in
the moon, and then slowly glided into the movements of a mystical dance.

It was thus the fountains were dancing to the moon in Arabia; it was
thus the Nixies shook their white limbs on the haunted banks of the
Rhine; it was thus the fairy women flashed their alabaster feet on the
fairy hills of Connemara; it was thus the Houris were dancing for
Mahomet on the palace floors of Paradise.

"It was over such dancing," I said, "that John the Baptist lost his
head."

"Give me a kiss," she said, nestling exhausted in my arms.  "I always
want some one to kiss when I have danced with my soul as well as my
body."

"I think we always do," I said, "when we've done anything that seems
wonderful, that gives us the thrill of really doing--"

"And a poor excuse is better than none, isn't it, dear?" said Sylvia,
her face full in the cataract of the moonlight.

As a conclusion for this chapter I will copy out a little song which I
extemporised for Sylvia on our way home to Yellowsands--too artlessly
happy, it will be observed, to rhyme correctly:--

  Sylvia's dancing 'neath the moon,
    Like a star in water;
  Sylvia's dancing to a tune
    Fairy folk have taught her.

  Glow-worms light her little feet
    In her fairy theatre;
  Oh, but Sylvia is sweet!
    Tell me who is sweeter!



