CHAPTER VII

"COME UNTO THESE YELLOW SANDS!"

Nothing further happened to me till I reached Yellowsands, except an
exciting ride on the mail-coach, which connected it with the nearest
railway-station some twenty miles away.  For the last three or four
miles the road ran along the extreme precipitous verge of cliffs that
sloped, a giant's wall of grassy mountain, right away down to a dreamy
amethystine floor of sea, miles and miles, as it seemed, below.  To
ride on that coach, as it gallantly staggered betwixt earth and heaven,
was to know all the ecstasy of flying, with an added touch of danger,
which birds and angels, and others accustomed to fly, can never
experience.  And then at length the glorious mad descent down three
plunging cataracts of rocky road, the exciting rattling of the harness,
the grinding of the strong brakes, the driver's soothing calls to his
horses, and the long burnished horn trailing wild music behind us, like
invisible banners of aerial brass,--oh, it stirred the dullest blood
amongst us thus as it were to tear down the sky towards the white roofs
of Yellowsands, glittering here and there among the clouds of trees
which filled the little valley almost to the sea's edge, while floating
up to us came soft strains of music, silken and caressing, as though
the sea itself sang us a welcome.  Had you heard it from aboard the
Argo, you would have declared it to be the sirens singing, and it would
have been found necessary to lash you to the mast.  But there were no
masts to lash you to in Yellowsands--and of the sirens it is not yet
time to speak.

It was the golden end of afternoon as the coach stopped in front of the
main hotel, The Golden Fortune; and for the benefit of any with not too
long purses who shall hereafter light on Yellowsands, and be alarmed at
the name and the marble magnificence of that delightful hotel, I may
say that the charges there were surprisingly "reasonable," owing to one
other wise provision of the young lord and master of that happy place,
who had had the wit to realise that the nicest and brightest and
prettiest people were often the poorest.  Yellowsands, therefore, was
carried on much like a club, to which you had only to be the right sort
of person to belong.  I was relieved to find that the hotel people
evidently considered me the right sort of person, and didn't take me
for a Sunday-school treat,--for presently I found myself in a charming
little corner bedroom, whence I could survey the whole extent of the
little colony of pleasure. The Golden Fortune was curiously situated,
perched at the extreme sea-end of a little horse-shoe bay hollowed out
between two headlands, the points of which approached each other so
closely that the river Sly had but a few yards of rocky channel through
which to pour itself into the sea. The Golden Fortune, therefore,
backed by towering woodlands, looked out to sea at one side, across to
the breakwater headland on another, and on its land side commanded a
complete view of the gay little haven, with its white houses built
terrace on terrace upon its wooded slopes, connected by flights of
zigzag steps, by which the apparently inaccessible shelves and
platforms circulated their gay life down to the gay heart of the
place,--the circular boulevard, exquisitely leafy and cool, where one
found the great casino and the open-air theatre, the exquisite
orchestra, into which only the mellowest brass and the subtlest strings
were admitted, and the Cafe du Ciel, charmingly situated among the
trees, where the boulevard became a bridge, for a moment, at the mouth
of the river Sly. Here one might gaze up the green rocky defile through
which the Sly made pebbly music, and through which wound romantic walks
and natural galleries, where far inland you might wander

  "From dewy dawn to dewy night,
  And have one with you wandering,"

or where you might turn and look across the still lapping harbour, out
through the little neck of light between the headlands to the
shimmering sea beyond,--your ears filled with a melting tide of sweet
sounds, the murmur of the streams and the gentle surging of the sea,
the rippling of leaves, the soft restless whisper of women's gowns, and
the music of their vowelled voices.  It was here I found myself sitting
at sunset, alone, but so completely under the spell of the place that I
needed no companion.  The place itself was companion enough.  The
electric fairy lamps had popped alight; and as the sun sank lower,
Yellowsands seemed like a glowing crown of light floating upon the
water.

I had as yet failed to catch any sight of Rosalind; so I sat alone, and
so far as I had any thoughts or feelings, beyond a consciousness of
heavenly harmony with my surroundings, they were for that haunting
unknown face with the violet eyes and the heavy chestnut hair.

Presently, close by, the notes of a guitar came like little gold
butterflies out of the twilight, and then a woman's voice rose like a
silver bird on the air.  It was a gay wooing measure to which she sang.
I listened with ears and heart.  "All ye," it went,--

  All ye who seek for pleasure,
  Here find it without measure--
       No one to say
       A body nay,
  And naught but love and leisure.

  All ye who seek forgetting,
  Leave frowns and fears and fretting,
       Here by the sea
       Are fair and free
  To give you peace and petting.

  All ye whose hearts are breaking
  For somebody forsaking,
       We'll count you dear,
       And heal you here,
  And send you home love-making."


"Bravo!" I cried involuntarily, as the song ended amid multitudinous
applause; and I thus attracted the attention of another who sat near me
as lonely as myself, but evidently quite at home in the place.

"You haven't heard our sirens sing before?" he said, turning to me with
a pleasant smile, and thus we fell into talk of the place and its
pleasures.

"There's one feature of the place I might introduce you to if you care
for a stroll," he said presently.  "Have you heard of The Twelve
Golden-Haired Bar-maids?"  I hadn't, but the fantastic name struck my
fancy.  It was, he explained, the name given to a favourite buffet at
the Hotel Aphrodite, which was served by twelve wonderful girls, not
one under six feet in height, and all with the most glorious golden
hair.  It was a whim of the management, he said.

So, of course, we went.



