CHAPTER II.

_EMPLOYERS IN RELATION TO BOYS._


I do not think the first thing to be considered is what a boy may do for
his employers, but rather what they may do for him, and so, at last, for
themselves through him. In all ordinary circumstances they can mould him
to their will. They are the masters, he is the servant. They are strong,
he is weak. If they do not recognize their obligation to him, in the
relation to which they invite and receive him, they ought not to complain
of his failures in duty to them. As well expect a son to know and meet
his duties to his parents while they utterly fail to recognize theirs to
him.

If an employer requires a boy to do what in his home or the sanctuary he
has learned he must not do, and if he requires him to do the forbidden
thing on pain of losing his place or his pay, the requirement is not
only a grievous wrong in itself, but an outrage upon the inalienable
rights of the boy. Children are required to obey their parents only
“in the Lord.” No man is great enough to lord it over his own child’s
conscience. And this great principle holds in the relation of employers
to their servants of all ages and grades.

Boys sell their time and service to their masters. They cannot sell their
conscience, soul, and body. They must do right if they lose a thousand
places in succession and starve to death for want of work. I can think of
no persecution more cruel and infamous than that which is practised upon
boys just starting on their career for life, here and hereafter, when
they are required to practise deceit; to say things that are not true
about goods to be sold, or in any other way to debauch conscience. The
penalty of disobedience may be sending them home to widowed mothers or
orphaned sisters without recommendation to any other place of business.
This is martyrdom with a vengeance, and it is by no means uncommon. I
have in mind glaring instances that have come under my own observation.
A man now belonging to an old and wealthy business house was thrust out
of his place when a youth because he refused to sell goods damaged in a
vital though hidden part as goods in perfect order.

Another, in a position of great responsibility and usefulness for a
number of years in a heathen land, when a boy served his employer
faithfully six days in the week, and was required to sell his goods on
the Sabbath. His conscience forbade this and he was discharged, with very
serious consequences for a time.

These are specimens of classes. But it is always safe and wise for boys
firmly and respectfully to resist human authority in all such cases.

There is another great wrong to boys, to wit, leaving them at the mercy
of subordinates who hold positions grading all the way from those held
by the boys themselves, to those just below the high positions of the
employers. I have seen something of this petty tyranny; good boys harried
into desperation or pushed and badgered into immoralities and the loss of
self-respect.

Happy are the boys who go from their homes to the care of good men,
and to the companionship of co-workers who help them to success by
instruction and example.




CHAPTER III.

_BOYS IN RELATION TO EMPLOYERS._


Thus far I have written some plain things about employers in relation
to boys. With equal plainness I now write of boys in relation to their
employers.

Clearly they must always do right even if the stars fall. It is weak and
contemptible to be eye-servants, showing all diligence in the presence
of employers, but lapsing into idleness, carelessness or mischief when
they disappear. In the long run boys that always do right will do well.
The hearts of their employers can safely trust in them. If for no higher
reason than their own interests they will advance them from one position
to another of responsibility and emolument.

But other reasons will prevail. Personal attachments will be formed. Men
of business are commonly men of heart. They have sons of their own and
cannot help admiring the excellencies of other people’s sons. It is not
uncommon to hear them boast of the virtues of boys employed by them.
Some time ago I was in an office and within a few moments two gentlemen
of the firm called my attention to a lad who was moving quietly about,
absorbed in the duties of his calling. They spoke with great interest of
his fidelity and efficiency in relation to them; of his great self-denial
in order to minister to the comfort of his family; and of his brilliant
prospects.

There is a proverb as true as when written, “A wise servant shall
have rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part of
the inheritance among the brethren.” There is another which is not
infrequently verified, and suggests a very pleasant way in which boys
grown to manhood sometimes share in the “inheritance among the brethren;”
it is this: “He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child
shall have him become his son at length.”

Again, boys must give their best thought and energies in business hours
to the interests of their employers. Nor should they forget or in any
way endanger those interests out of business hours. They are in and of
the concern. They represent it. Its reputation attaches to them and
theirs to it. It may be amusing, but it is pleasant, and suggestive of a
bright future, to hear a boy just beginning his business life speaking
loftily of “our house.” He belongs to its personnel. His life mingles
with its life. It is for his interest to give much thought, at all
proper times, to the duties of his station. If, by extra labor adding to
his qualifications for business, he can become more useful than he was
expected or is required to be, he may cut off weary months and even years
that must otherwise lie between him and higher service and better pay. I
knew a boy who in this way passed over the heads of several older than
himself, and in early manhood fairly won a position which others never
reached. As a rule, I think boys may count on being promoted when they
have outgrown the places which they wish to leave. If they can sweep
stores and set things in order better than others, and run of errands
with swifter feet, and acquaint themselves with streets and places of
business quicker than others, they will not have to do these things for a
long time. Higher service awaits them, and they will find that the habits
of thoroughness and dispatch already formed are worth more and more as
they advance to higher and more responsible positions.

In all things right, boys must sink their wills in the wills of their
employers. This is not to become slaves. Children have safest and
sweetest liberty in obeying their parents; scholars their teachers;
soldiers their commanders. In the shop, the office, the store, there must
be authority on the one hand and obedience on the other. Boys should
rejoice that above them there are men who, once boys like themselves,
are now wise enough and kind enough to assign them their duties and to
guide them in the way to success, and firm enough to require obedience
to their directions. Prompt and cheerful obedience will not fail,
in ordinary circumstances, to attract the attention and secure the
approbation of employers. Wise boys will watch for opportunities to make
themselves useful, gladly doing what has not occurred to anyone else and
yet everyone will be glad to have done; and if they can do all to please
Him who seeth in secret and rewardeth openly, rather than for any lower
motive, they are to be congratulated as having made a right start not
only for this life but for that which is to come.

“It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.” A great but
very sad prophet wrote these familiar words long ago, but they have lost
none of their truth. If a thousand boys, already in business or about to
begin their business lives, were reading the words I write, I would put
all possible emphasis in what follows: do not fear any amount of work,
or any kind, lying fairly within your power. I have been an office-boy,
doing many things, besides writing, that were not easy or pleasant. I
know that many things needing to be done may be left undone without
incurring blame. But he that does them wins the approval of his own
conscience and the favor of men. If one does unpleasant things cheerfully
they lose half of their unpleasantness, and will not have to be done many
times.

It is mean to shirk, and it never pays. The ease it brings for the moment
is punished by long drudgery, and he that habitually shirks may look back
at the end of a miserable life with unavailing regrets upon the weakness
and neglect of his early years. Even a horse that will not draw his part
of a reasonable load is despised and whipped.

Blessings on the good boys that have pluck and purpose to succeed;
and may all that are otherwise become like them, as doubtless many of
them mean to do. “You will be proud of us one of these days,” was the
assurance of a bright but mischievous boy to an anxious teacher pleading
with him and his companions to mend their ways. A boy of this kind who
gave me great solicitude a few years ago, as I was his pastor and the
teacher of his Sunday-school class, came suddenly under the power of the
truth. Deeply convicted of sin, and coming to Christ on his invitation,
he was soon rejoicing in the hope of pardon and eternal life. He is
now the efficient superintendent of a Sunday-school and bears a most
important office in the church of which he is a beloved member.

“I have a noble boy,” said a deck-hand on a ferryboat as I fell into
conversation with him. Then he gave me his history. From his school days
to full manhood his career was honorable and his life in and out of his
church relations very useful. To the father he was still his “boy” and
his pride.

Boys, you are all old enough to know that somewhere you will live
forever. The characters you form here will go with you into the world and
the life to come. If they are right here, and now, they will be right
forever and grow better and better. If they are wrong here, and continue
so till God calls you away, early or late, they will be wrong always and
wax worse and worse. Boys do not all live to become old men—or even young
men. There is just one way of starting right and being in the right way
until God calls you to a better world. Listen to the sweet words that
you have often heard: “I love them that love me, and those that seek me
early shall find me.” Determine to be boy Christians. Believe that Jesus
Christ, the only Saviour, loves you. He is able and willing to save you
from the sins of your youth. If you hear and obey his loving call he will
guide and guard you safely until you are forever with him and like him.
Believe that you need him every hour and moment. Trust him to do what he
promises. Keep company with those who delight in his service. Fear God
and keep his commandments. “Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.”
Cling to your Sunday-school and church. Confess Jesus Christ before men,
and he will confess you before his Father and the angels. If irreligious
boys make fun of you, because they think you have given up all the
pleasures of boy-life, let them know that the peace which God gives you
is far better than all their forbidden pleasures, and do what you can to
win them from their evil ways to a true and blessed life.

In any case, boys, be sure that the favor of God, which is life, and his
lovingkindness, which is better than life, will fit you for the truest
and best success in business. In all your ways acknowledge him, and he
will direct your steps: God will be your patron and friend.




