letter in his hand. Suzanne instinctively turned back; her heart told
her that here perhaps was further ill news for her friend, and she felt
that her poor Margot was not in a fit state to bear any more.

The groom stood respectfully beside his mistress, then he handed her
the sealed letter.

“What is that?” asked Marguerite.

“Just come by runner, my lady.”

Marguerite took the letter mechanically, and turned it over in her
trembling fingers.

“Who sent it?” she said.

“The runner said, my lady,” replied the groom, “that his orders were to
deliver this, and that your ladyship would understand from whom it
came.”

Marguerite tore open the envelope. Already her instinct had told her
what it contained, and her eyes only glanced at it mechanically.

It was a letter written by Armand St. Just to Sir Andrew Ffoulkes—the
letter which Chauvelin’s spies had stolen at “The Fisherman’s Rest,”
and which Chauvelin had held as a rod over her to enforce her
obedience.

Now he had kept his word—he had sent her back St. Just’s compromising
letter . . . for he was on the track of the Scarlet Pimpernel.

Marguerite’s senses reeled, her very soul seemed to be leaving her
body; she tottered, and would have fallen but for Suzanne’s arm round
her waist. With superhuman effort she regained control over
herself—there was yet much to be done.

“Bring that runner here to me,” she said to the servant, with much
calm. “He has not gone?”

“No, my lady.”

The groom went, and Marguerite turned to Suzanne.

“And you, child, run within. Tell Lucile to get ready. I fear I must
send you home, child. And—stay, tell one of the maids to prepare a
travelling dress and cloak for me.”

Suzanne made no reply. She kissed Marguerite tenderly, and obeyed
without a word; the child was overawed by the terrible, nameless misery
in her friend’s face.

A minute later the groom returned, followed by the runner who had
brought the letter.

“Who gave you this packet?” asked Marguerite.

“A gentleman, my lady,” replied the man, “at ‘The Rose and Thistle’ inn
opposite Charing Cross. He said you would understand.”

“At ‘The Rose and Thistle’? What was he doing?”

“He was waiting for the coach, your ladyship, which he had ordered.”

“The coach?”

“Yes, my lady. A special coach he had ordered. I understood from his
man that he was posting straight to Dover.”

“That’s enough. You may go.” Then she turned to the groom: “My coach
and the four swiftest horses in the stables, to be ready at once.”

The groom and runner both went quickly off to obey. Marguerite remained
standing for a moment on the lawn quite alone. Her graceful figure was
as rigid as a statue, her eyes were fixed, her hands were tightly
clasped across her breast; her lips moved as they murmured with
pathetic heart-breaking persistence,—

“What’s to be done? What’s to be done? Where to find him?—Oh, God!
grant me light.”

But this was not the moment for remorse and despair. She had
done—unwittingly—an awful and terrible thing—the very worst crime, in
her eyes, that woman ever committed—she saw it in all its horror. Her
very blindness in not having guessed her husband’s secret seemed now to
her another deadly sin. She ought to have known! she ought to have
known!

How could she imagine that a man who could love with so much intensity
as Percy Blakeney had loved her from the first—how could such a man be
the brainless idiot he chose to appear? She, at least, ought to have
known that he was wearing a mask, and having found that out, she should
have torn it from his face, whenever they were alone together.

Her love for him had been paltry and weak, easily crushed by her own
pride; and she, too, had worn a mask in assuming a contempt for him,
whilst, as a matter of fact, she completely misunderstood him.

But there was no time now to go over the past. By her own blindness she
had sinned; now she must repay, not by empty remorse, but by prompt and
useful action.

Percy had started for Calais, utterly unconscious of the fact that his
most relentless enemy was on his heels. He had set sail early that
morning from London Bridge. Provided he had a favourable wind, he would
no doubt be in France within twenty-four hours; no doubt he had
reckoned on the wind and chosen this route.

Chauvelin, on the other hand, would post to Dover, charter a vessel
there, and undoubtedly reach Calais much about the same time. Once in
Calais, Percy would meet all those who were eagerly waiting for the
noble and brave Scarlet Pimpernel, who had come to rescue them from
horrible and unmerited death. With Chauvelin’s eyes now fixed upon his
every movement, Percy would thus not only be endangering his own life,
but that of Suzanne’s father, the old Comte de Tournay, and of those
other fugitives who were waiting for him and trusting in him. There was
also Armand, who had gone to meet de Tournay, secure in the knowledge
that the Scarlet Pimpernel was watching over his safety.

All these lives, and that of her husband, lay in Marguerite’s hands;
these she must save, if human pluck and ingenuity were equal to the
task.

Unfortunately, she could not do all this quite alone. Once in Calais
she would not know where to find her husband, whilst Chauvelin, in
stealing the papers at Dover, had obtained the whole itinerary. Above
everything, she wished to warn Percy.

She knew enough about him by now to understand that he would never
abandon those who trusted in him, that he would not turn back from
danger, and leave the Comte de Tournay to fall into the bloodthirsty
hands that knew of no mercy. But if he were warned, he might form new
plans, be more wary, more prudent. Unconsciously, he might fall into a
cunning trap, but—once warned—he might yet succeed.

And if he failed—if indeed Fate, and Chauvelin, with all the resources
at his command, proved too strong for the daring plotter after all—then
at least she would be there by his side, to comfort, love and cherish,
to cheat death perhaps at the last by making it seem sweet, if they
died both together, locked in each other’s arms, with the supreme
happiness of knowing that passion had responded to passion, and that
all misunderstandings were at an end.

Her whole body stiffened as with a great and firm resolution. This she
meant to do, if God gave her wits and strength. Her eyes lost their
fixed look; they glowed with inward fire at the thought of meeting him
again so soon, in the very midst of most deadly perils; they sparkled
with the joy of sharing these dangers with him—of helping him
perhaps—of being with him at the last—if she failed.

The childlike sweet face had become hard and set, the curved mouth was
closed tightly over her clenched teeth. She meant to do or die, with
him and for his sake. A frown, which spoke of an iron will and
unbending resolution, appeared between the two straight brows; already
her plans were formed. She would go and find Sir Andrew Ffoulkes first;
he was Percy’s best friend, and Marguerite remembered with a thrill,
with what blind enthusiasm the young man always spoke of his mysterious
leader.

He would help her where she needed help; her coach was ready. A change
of raiment, and a farewell to little Suzanne, and she could be on her
way.

Without haste, but without hesitation, she walked quietly into the
house.




