CHAPTER III {1}--THE RAFTS ON THE RIVER


We contrived to keep afloat all that night, and, the stream running
strong with us, to glide a long way down the river.  But, we found the
night to be a dangerous time for such navigation, on account of the
eddies and rapids, and it was therefore settled next day that in future
we would bring-to at sunset, and encamp on the shore.  As we knew of no
boats that the Pirates possessed, up at the Prison in the Woods, we
settled always to encamp on the opposite side of the stream, so as to
have the breadth of the river between our sleep and them.  Our opinion
was, that if they were acquainted with any near way by land to the mouth
of this river, they would come up it in force, and retake us or kill us,
according as they could; but that if that was not the case, and if the
river ran by none of their secret stations, we might escape.

When I say we settled this or that, I do not mean that we planned
anything with any confidence as to what might happen an hour hence.  So
much had happened in one night, and such great changes had been violently
and suddenly made in the fortunes of many among us, that we had got
better used to uncertainty, in a little while, than I dare say most
people do in the course of their lives.

The difficulties we soon got into, through the off-settings and point-
currents of the stream, made the likelihood of our being drowned,
alone,--to say nothing of our being retaken--as broad and plain as the
sun at noonday to all of us.  But, we all worked hard at managing the
rafts, under the direction of the seamen (of our own skill, I think we
never could have prevented them from oversetting), and we also worked
hard at making good the defects in their first hasty construction--which
the water soon found out.  While we humbly resigned ourselves to going
down, if it was the will of Our Father that was in Heaven, we humbly made
up our minds, that we would all do the best that was in us.

And so we held on, gliding with the stream.  It drove us to this bank,
and it drove us to that bank, and it turned us, and whirled us; but yet
it carried us on.  Sometimes much too slowly; sometimes much too fast,
but yet it carried us on.

My little deaf and dumb boy slumbered a good deal now, and that was the
case with all the children.  They caused very little trouble to any one.
They seemed, in my eyes, to get more like one another, not only in quiet
manner, but in the face, too.  The motion of the raft was usually so much
the same, the scene was usually so much the same, the sound of the soft
wash and ripple of the water was usually so much the same, that they were
made drowsy, as they might have been by the constant playing of one tune.
Even on the grown people, who worked hard and felt anxiety, the same
things produced something of the same effect.  Every day was so like the
other, that I soon lost count of the days, myself, and had to ask Miss
Maryon, for instance, whether this was the third or fourth?  Miss Maryon
had a pocket-book and pencil, and she kept the log; that is to say, she
entered up a clear little journal of the time, and of the distances our
seamen thought we had made, each night.

So, as I say, we kept afloat and glided on.  All day long, and every day,
the water, and the woods, and sky; all day long, and every day, the
constant watching of both sides of the river, and far ahead at every bold
turn and sweep it made, for any signs of Pirate-boats, or
Pirate-dwellings.  So, as I say, we kept afloat and glided on.  The days
melting themselves together to that degree, that I could hardly believe
my ears when I asked "How many now, Miss?" and she answered "Seven."

To be sure, poor Mr. Pordage had, by about now, got his Diplomatic coat
into such a state as never was seen.  What with the mud of the river,
what with the water of the river, what with the sun, and the dews, and
the tearing boughs, and the thickets, it hung about him in discoloured
shreds like a mop.  The sun had touched him a bit.  He had taken to
always polishing one particular button, which just held on to his left
wrist, and to always calling for stationery.  I suppose that man called
for pens, ink, and paper, tape, and scaling-wax, upwards of one thousand
times in four-and-twenty hours.  He had an idea that we should never get
out of that river unless we were written out of it in a formal
Memorandum; and the more we laboured at navigating the rafts, the more he
ordered us not to touch them at our peril, and the more he sat and roared
for stationery.

Mrs. Pordage, similarly, persisted in wearing her nightcap.  I doubt if
any one but ourselves who had seen the progress of that article of dress,
could by this time have told what it was meant for.  It had got so limp
and ragged that she couldn't see out of her eyes for it.  It was so
dirty, that whether it was vegetable matter out of a swamp, or weeds out
of the river, or an old porter's-knot from England, I don't think any new
spectator could have said.  Yet, this unfortunate old woman had a notion
that it was not only vastly genteel, but that it was the correct thing as
to propriety.  And she really did carry herself over the other ladies who
had no nightcaps, and who were forced to tie up their hair how they
could, in a superior manner that was perfectly amazing.

I don't know what she looked like, sitting in that blessed nightcap, on a
log of wood, outside the hut or cabin upon our raft.  She would have
rather resembled a fortune-teller in one of the picture-books that used
to be in the shop windows in my boyhood, except for her stateliness.  But,
Lord bless my heart, the dignity with which she sat and moped, with her
head in that bundle of tatters, was like nothing else in the world!  She
was not on speaking terms with more than three of the ladies.  Some of
them had, what she called, "taken precedence" of her--in getting into, or
out of, that miserable little shelter!--and others had not called to pay
their respects, or something of that kind.  So, there she sat, in her own
state and ceremony, while her husband sat on the same log of wood,
ordering us one and all to let the raft go to the bottom, and to bring
him stationery.

What with this noise on the part of Mr. Commissioner Pordage, and what
with the cries of Sergeant Drooce on the raft astern (which were
sometimes more than Tom Packer could silence), we often made our slow way
down the river, anything but quietly.  Yet, that it was of great
importance that no ears should be able to hear us from the woods on the
banks, could not be doubted.  We were looked for, to a certainty, and we
might be retaken at any moment.  It was an anxious time; it was, indeed,
indeed, an anxious time.

On the seventh night of our voyage on the rafts, we made fast, as usual,
on the opposite side of the river to that from which we had started, in
as dark a place as we could pick out.  Our little encampment was soon
made, and supper was eaten, and the children fell asleep.  The watch was
set, and everything made orderly for the night.  Such a starlight night,
with such blue in the sky, and such black in the places of heavy shade on
the banks of the great stream!

Those two ladies, Miss Maryon and Mrs. Fisher, had always kept near me
since the night of the attack.  Mr. Fisher, who was untiring in the work
of our raft, had said to me:

"My dear little childless wife has grown so attached to you, Davis, and
you are such a gentle fellow, as well as such a determined one;" our
party had adopted that last expression from the one-eyed English pirate,
and I repeat what Mr. Fisher said, only because he said it; "that it
takes a load off my mind to leave her in your charge."

I said to him: "Your lady is in far better charge than mine, Sir, having
Miss Maryon to take care of her; but, you may rely upon it, that I will
guard them both--faithful and true."

Says he: "I do rely upon it, Davis, and I heartily wish all the silver on
our old Island was yours."

That seventh starlight night, as I have said, we made our camp, and got
our supper, and set our watch, and the children fell asleep.  It was
solemn and beautiful in those wild and solitary parts, to see them, every
night before they lay down, kneeling under the bright sky, saying their
little prayers at women's laps.  At that time we men all uncovered, and
mostly kept at a distance.  When the innocent creatures rose up, we
murmured "Amen!" all together.  For, though we had not heard what they
said, we know it must be good for us.

At that time, too, as was only natural, those poor mothers in our
company, whose children had been killed, shed many tears.  I thought the
sight seemed to console them while it made them cry; but, whether I was
right or wrong in that, they wept very much.  On this seventh night, Mrs.
Fisher had cried for her lost darling until she cried herself asleep.  She
was lying on a little couch of leaves and such-like (I made the best
little couch I could for them every night), and Miss Maryon had covered
her, and sat by her, holding her hand.  The stars looked down upon them.
As for me, I guarded them.

"Davis!" says Miss Maryon.  (I am not going to say what a voice she had.
I couldn't if I tried.)

"I am here, Miss."

"The river sounds as if it were swollen to-night."

"We all think, Miss, that we are coming near the sea."

"Do you believe now, we shall escape?"

"I do now, Miss, really believe it."  I had always said I did; but, I had
in my own mind been doubtful.

"How glad you will be, my good Davis, to see England again!"

I have another confession to make that will appear singular.  When she
said these words, something rose in my throat; and the stars I looked
away at, seemed to break into sparkles that fell down my face and burnt
it.

"England is not much to me, Miss, except as a name."

"O, so true an Englishman should not say that!--Are you not well
to-night, Davis?"  Very kindly, and with a quick change.

"Quite well, Miss."

"Are you sure?  Your voice sounds altered in my hearing."

"No, Miss, I am a stronger man than ever.  But, England is nothing to
me."

Miss Maryon sat silent for so long a while, that I believed she had done
speaking to me for one time.  However, she had not; for by-and-by she
said in a distinct clear tone:

"No, good friend; you must not say that England is nothing to you.  It is
to be much to you, yet--everything to you.  You have to take back to
England the good name you have earned here, and the gratitude and
attachment and respect you have won here: and you have to make some good
English girl very happy and proud, by marrying her; and I shall one day
see her, I hope, and make her happier and prouder still, by telling her
what noble services her husband's were in South America, and what a noble
friend he was to me there."

Though she spoke these kind words in a cheering manner, she spoke them
compassionately.  I said nothing.  It will appear to be another strange
confession, that I paced to and fro, within call, all that night, a most
unhappy man, reproaching myself all the night long.  "You are as ignorant
as any man alive; you are as obscure as any man alive; you are as poor as
any man alive; you are no better than the mud under your foot."  That was
the way in which I went on against myself until the morning.

With the day, came the day's labour.  What I should have done--without
the labour, I don't know.  We were afloat again at the usual hour, and
were again making our way down the river.  It was broader, and clearer of
obstructions than it had been, and it seemed to flow faster.  This was
one of Drooce's quiet days; Mr. Pordage, besides being sulky, had almost
lost his voice; and we made good way, and with little noise.

There was always a seaman forward on the raft, keeping a bright look-out.
Suddenly, in the full heat of the day, when the children were slumbering,
and the very trees and reeds appeared to be slumbering, this man--it was
Short--holds up his hand, and cries with great caution: "Avast!  Voices
ahead!"

We held on against the stream as soon as we could bring her up, and the
other raft followed suit.  At first, Mr. Macey, Mr. Fisher, and myself,
could hear nothing; though both the seamen aboard of us agreed that they
could hear voices and oars.  After a little pause, however, we united in
thinking that we _could_ hear the sound of voices, and the dip of oars.
But, you can hear a long way in those countries, and there was a bend of
the river before us, and nothing was to be seen except such waters and
such banks as we were now in the eighth day (and might, for the matter of
our feelings, have been in the eightieth), of having seen with anxious
eyes.

It was soon decided to put a man ashore, who should creep through the
wood, see what was coming, and warn the rafts.  The rafts in the meantime
to keep the middle of the stream.  The man to be put ashore, and not to
swim ashore, as the first thing could be more quickly done than the
second.  The raft conveying him, to get back into mid-stream, and to hold
on along with the other, as well is it could, until signalled by the man.
In case of danger, the man to shift for himself until it should be safe
to take him on board again.  I volunteered to be the man.

We knew that the voices and oars must come up slowly against the stream;
and our seamen knew, by the set of the stream, under which bank they
would come.  I was put ashore accordingly.  The raft got off well, and I
broke into the wood.

Steaming hot it was, and a tearing place to get through.  So much the
better for me, since it was something to contend against and do.  I cut
off the bend of the river, at a great saving of space, came to the
water's edge again, and hid myself, and waited.  I could now hear the dip
of the oars very distinctly; the voices had ceased.

The sound came on in a regular tune, and as I lay hidden, I fancied the
tune so played to be, "Chris'en--George--King!  Chris'en--George--King!
Chris'en--George--King!" over and over again, always the same, with the
pauses always at the same places.  I had likewise time to make up my mind
that if these were the Pirates, I could and would (barring my being shot)
swim off to my raft, in spite of my wound, the moment I had given the
alarm, and hold my old post by Miss Maryon.

"Chris'en--George--King!  Chris'en--George--King!  Chris'en--George--King!"
coming up, now, very near.

I took a look at the branches about me, to see where a shower of bullets
would be most likely to do me least hurt; and I took a look back at the
track I had made in forcing my way in; and now I was wholly prepared and
fully ready for them.

"Chris'en--George--King!  Chris'en--George--King!  Chris'en--George--King!"
Here they are!

Who were they?  The barbarous Pirates, scum of all nations, headed by
such men as the hideous little Portuguese monkey, and the one-eyed
English convict with the gash across his face, that ought to have gashed
his wicked head off?  The worst men in the world picked out from the
worst, to do the cruellest and most atrocious deeds that ever stained it?
The howling, murdering, black-flag waving, mad, and drunken crowd of
devils that had overcome us by numbers and by treachery?  No.  These were
English men in English boats--good blue-jackets and red-coats--marines
that I knew myself, and sailors that knew our seamen!  At the helm of the
first boat, Captain Carton, eager and steady.  At the helm of the second
boat, Captain Maryon, brave and bold.  At the helm of the third boat, an
old seaman, with determination carved into his watchful face, like the
figure-head of a ship.  Every man doubly and trebly armed from head to
foot.  Every man lying-to at his work, with a will that had all his heart
and soul in it.  Every man looking out for any trace of friend or enemy,
and burning to be the first to do good or avenge evil.  Every man with
his face on fire when he saw me, his countryman who had been taken
prisoner, and hailed me with a cheer, as Captain Carton's boat ran in and
took me on board.

I reported, "All escaped, sir!  All well, all safe, all here!"

God bless me--and God bless them--what a cheer!  It turned me weak, as I
was passed on from hand to hand to the stern of the boat: every hand
patting me or grasping me in some way or other, in the moment of my going
by.

"Hold up, my brave fellow," says Captain Carton, clapping me on the
shoulder like a friend, and giving me a flask.  "Put your lips to that,
and they'll be red again.  Now, boys, give way!"

The banks flew by us as if the mightiest stream that ever ran was with
us; and so it was, I am sure, meaning the stream to those men's ardour
and spirit.  The banks flew by us, and we came in sight of the rafts--the
banks flew by us, and we came alongside of the rafts--the banks stopped;
and there was a tumult of laughing and crying, and kissing and shaking of
hands, and catching up of children and setting of them down again, and a
wild hurry of thankfulness and joy that melted every one and softened all
hearts.

I had taken notice, in Captain Carton's boat, that there was a curious
and quite new sort of fitting on board.  It was a kind of a little bower
made of flowers, and it was set up behind the captain, and betwixt him
and the rudder.  Not only was this arbour, so to call it, neatly made of
flowers, but it was ornamented in a singular way.  Some of the men had
taken the ribbons and buckles off their hats, and hung them among the
flowers; others had made festoons and streamers of their handkerchiefs,
and hung them there; others had intermixed such trifles as bits of glass
and shining fragments of lockets and tobacco-boxes with the flowers; so
that altogether it was a very bright and lively object in the sunshine.
But why there, or what for, I did not understand.

Now, as soon as the first bewilderment was over, Captain Carton gave the
order to land for the present.  But this boat of his, with two hands left
in her, immediately put off again when the men were out of her, and kept
off, some yards from the shore.  As she floated there, with the two hands
gently backing water to keep her from going down the stream, this pretty
little arbour attracted many eyes.  None of the boat's crew, however, had
anything to say about it, except that it was the captain's fancy.

The captain--with the women and children clustering round him, and the
men of all ranks grouped outside them, and all listening--stood telling
how the Expedition, deceived by its bad intelligence, had chased the
light Pirate boats all that fatal night, and had still followed in their
wake next day, and had never suspected until many hours too late that the
great Pirate body had drawn off in the darkness when the chase began, and
shot over to the Island.  He stood telling how the Expedition, supposing
the whole array of armed boats to be ahead of it, got tempted into
shallows and went aground; but not without having its revenge upon the
two decoy-boats, both of which it had come up with, overhand, and sent to
the bottom with all on board.  He stood telling how the Expedition,
fearing then that the case stood as it did, got afloat again, by great
exertion, after the loss of four more tides, and returned to the Island,
where they found the sloop scuttled and the treasure gone.  He stood
telling how my officer, Lieutenant Linderwood, was left upon the Island,
with as strong a force as could be got together hurriedly from the
mainland, and how the three boats we saw before us were manned and armed
and had come away, exploring the coast and inlets, in search of any
tidings of us.  He stood telling all this, with his face to the river;
and, as he stood telling it, the little arbour of flowers floated in the
sunshine before all the faces there.

Leaning on Captain Carton's shoulder, between him and Miss Maryon, was
Mrs. Fisher, her head drooping on her arm.  She asked him, without
raising it, when he had told so much, whether he had found her mother?

"Be comforted!  She lies," said the Captain gently, "under the cocoa-nut
trees on the beach."

"And my child, Captain Carton, did you find my child, too?  Does my
darling rest with my mother?"

"No.  Your pretty child sleeps," said the Captain, "under a shade of
flowers."

His voice shook; but there was something in it that struck all the
hearers.  At that moment there sprung from the arbour in his boat a
little creature, clapping her hands and stretching out her arms, and
crying, "Dear papa!  Dear mamma!  I am not killed.  I am saved.  I am
coming to kiss you.  Take me to them, take me to them, good, kind
sailors!"

Nobody who saw that scene has ever forgotten it, I am sure, or ever will
forget it.  The child had kept quite still, where her brave grandmamma
had put her (first whispering in her ear, "Whatever happens to me, do not
stir, my dear!"), and had remained quiet until the fort was deserted; she
had then crept out of the trench, and gone into her mother's house; and
there, alone on the solitary Island, in her mother's room, and asleep on
her mother's bed, the Captain had found her.  Nothing could induce her to
be parted from him after he took her up in his arms, and he had brought
her away with him, and the men had made the bower for her.  To see those
men now, was a sight.  The joy of the women was beautiful; the joy of
those women who had lost their own children, was quite sacred and divine;
but, the ecstasies of Captain Carton's boat's crew, when their pet was
restored to her parents, were wonderful for the tenderness they showed in
the midst of roughness.  As the Captain stood with the child in his arms,
and the child's own little arms now clinging round his neck, now round
her father's, now round her mother's, now round some one who pressed up
to kiss her, the boat's crew shook hands with one another, waved their
hats over their heads, laughed, sang, cried, danced--and all among
themselves, without wanting to interfere with anybody--in a manner never
to be represented.  At last, I saw the coxswain and another, two very
hard-faced men, with grizzled heads, who had been the heartiest of the
hearty all along, close with one another, get each of them the other's
head under his arm, and pommel away at it with his fist as hard as he
could, in his excess of joy.

When we had well rested and refreshed ourselves--and very glad we were to
have some of the heartening things to eat and drink that had come up in
the boats--we recommenced our voyage down the river: rafts, and boats,
and all.  I said to myself, it was a _very_ different kind of voyage now,
from what it had been; and I fell into my proper place and station among
my fellow-soldiers.

But, when we halted for the night, I found that Miss Maryon had spoken to
Captain Carton concerning me.  For, the Captain came straight up to me,
and says he, "My brave fellow, you have been Miss Maryon's body-guard all
along, and you shall remain so.  Nobody shall supersede you in the
distinction and pleasure of protecting that young lady."  I thanked his
honour in the fittest words I could find, and that night I was placed on
my old post of watching the place where she slept.  More than once in the
night, I saw Captain Carton come out into the air, and stroll about
there, to see that all was well.  I have now this other singular
confession to make, that I saw him with a heavy heart.  Yes; I saw him
with a heavy, heavy heart.

In the day-time, I had the like post in Captain Carton's boat.  I had a
special station of my own, behind Miss Maryon, and no hands but hers ever
touched my wound.  (It has been healed these many long years; but, no
other hands have ever touched it.)  Mr. Pordage was kept tolerably quiet
now, with pen and ink, and began to pick up his senses a little.  Seated
in the second boat, he made documents with Mr. Kitten, pretty well all
day; and he generally handed in a Protest about something whenever we
stopped.  The Captain, however, made so very light of these papers, that
it grew into a saying among the men, when one of them wanted a match for
his pipe, "Hand us over a Protest, Jack!"  As to Mrs. Pordage, she still
wore the nightcap, and she now had cut all the ladies on account of her
not having been formally and separately rescued by Captain Carton before
anybody else.  The end of Mr. Pordage, to bring to an end all I know
about him, was, that he got great compliments at home for his conduct on
these trying occasions, and that he died of yellow jaundice, a Governor
and a K.C.B.

Sergeant Drooce had fallen from a high fever into a low one.  Tom
Packer--the only man who could have pulled the Sergeant through it--kept
hospital aboard the old raft, and Mrs. Belltott, as brisk as ever again
(but the spirit of that little woman, when things tried it, was not equal
to appearances), was head-nurse under his directions.  Before we got down
to the Mosquito coast, the joke had been made by one of our men, that we
should see her gazetted Mrs. Tom Packer, _vice_ Belltott exchanged.

When we reached the coast, we got native boats as substitutes for the
rafts; and we rowed along under the land; and in that beautiful climate,
and upon that beautiful water, the blooming days were like enchantment.
Ah!  They were running away, faster than any sea or river, and there was
no tide to bring them back.  We were coming very near the settlement
where the people of Silver-Store were to be left, and from which we
Marines were under orders to return to Belize.

Captain Carton had, in the boat by him, a curious long-barrelled Spanish
gun, and he had said to Miss Maryon one day that it was the best of guns,
and had turned his head to me, and said:

"Gill Davis, load her fresh with a couple of slugs, against a chance of
showing how good she is."

So, I had discharged the gun over the sea, and had loaded her, according
to orders, and there it had lain at the Captain's feet, convenient to the
Captain's hand.

The last day but one of our journey was an uncommonly hot day.  We
started very early; but, there was no cool air on the sea as the day got
on, and by noon the heat was really hard to bear, considering that there
were women and children to bear it.  Now, we happened to open, just at
that time, a very pleasant little cove or bay, where there was a deep
shade from a great growth of trees.  Now, the Captain, therefore, made
the signal to the other boats to follow him in and lie by a while.

The men who were off duty went ashore, and lay down, but were ordered,
for caution's sake, not to stray, and to keep within view.  The others
rested on their oars, and dozed.  Awnings had been made of one thing and
another, in all the boats, and the passengers found it cooler to be under
them in the shade, when there was room enough, than to be in the thick
woods.  So, the passengers were all afloat, and mostly sleeping.  I kept
my post behind Miss Maryon, and she was on Captain Carton's right in the
boat, and Mrs. Fisher sat on her right again.  The Captain had Mrs.
Fisher's daughter on his knee.  He and the two ladies were talking about
the Pirates, and were talking softly; partly, because people do talk
softly under such indolent circumstances, and partly because the little
girl had gone off asleep.

I think I have before given it out for my Lady to write down, that
Captain Carton had a fine bright eye of his own.  All at once, he darted
me a side look, as much as to say, "Steady--don't take on--I see
something!"--and gave the child into her mother's arms.  That eye of his
was so easy to understand, that I obeyed it by not so much as looking
either to the right or to the left out of a corner of my own, or changing
my attitude the least trifle.  The Captain went on talking in the same
mild and easy way; but began--with his arms resting across his knees, and
his head a little hanging forward, as if the heat were rather too much
for him--began to play with the Spanish gun.

"They had laid their plans, you see," says the Captain, taking up the
Spanish gun across his knees, and looking, lazily, at the inlaying on the
stock, "with a great deal of art; and the corrupt or blundering local
authorities were so easily deceived;" he ran his left hand idly along the
barrel, but I saw, with my breath held, that he covered the action of
cocking the gun with his right--"so easily deceived, that they summoned
us out to come into the trap.  But my intention as to future operations--"
In a flash the Spanish gun was at his bright eye, and he fired.

All started up; innumerable echoes repeated the sound of the discharge; a
cloud of bright-coloured birds flew out of the woods screaming; a handful
of leaves were scattered in the place where the shot had struck; a
crackling of branches was heard; and some lithe but heavy creature sprang
into the air, and fell forward, head down, over the muddy bank.

"What is it?" cries Captain Maryon from his boat.  All silent then, but
the echoes rolling away.

"It is a Traitor and a Spy," said Captain Carton, handing me the gun to
load again.  "And I think the other name of the animal is Christian
George King!"

Shot through the heart.  Some of the people ran round to the spot, and
drew him out, with the slime and wet trickling down his face; but his
face itself would never stir any more to the end of time.

"Leave him hanging to that tree," cried Captain Carton; his boat's crew
giving way, and he leaping ashore.  "But first into this wood, every man
in his place.  And boats!  Out of gunshot!"

It was a quick change, well meant and well made, though it ended in
disappointment.  No Pirates were there; no one but the Spy was found.  It
was supposed that the Pirates, unable to retake us, and expecting a great
attack upon them to be the consequence of our escape, had made from the
ruins in the Forest, taken to their ship along with the Treasure, and
left the Spy to pick up what intelligence he could.  In the evening we
went away, and he was left hanging to the tree, all alone, with the red
sun making a kind of a dead sunset on his black face.

Next day, we gained the settlement on the Mosquito coast for which we
were bound.  Having stayed there to refresh seven days, and having been
much commended, and highly spoken of, and finely entertained, we Marines
stood under orders to march from the Town-Gate (it was neither much of a
town nor much of a gate), at five in the morning.

My officer had joined us before then.  When we turned out at the gate,
all the people were there; in the front of them all those who had been
our fellow-prisoners, and all the seamen.

"Davis," says Lieutenant Linderwood.  "Stand out, my friend!"

I stood out from the ranks, and Miss Maryon and Captain Carton came up to
me.

"Dear Davis," says Miss Maryon, while the tears fell fast down her face,
"your grateful friends, in most unwillingly taking leave of you, ask the
favour that, while you bear away with you their affectionate remembrance,
which nothing can ever impair, you will also take this purse of money--far
more valuable to you, we all know, for the deep attachment and
thankfulness with which it is offered, than for its own contents, though
we hope those may prove useful to you, too, in after life."

I got out, in answer, that I thankfully accepted the attachment and
affection, but not the money.  Captain Carton looked at me very
attentively, and stepped back, and moved away.  I made him my bow as he
stepped back, to thank him for being so delicate.

"No, miss," said I, "I think it would break my heart to accept of money.
But, if you could condescend to give to a man so ignorant and common as
myself, any little thing you have worn--such as a bit of ribbon--"

She took a ring from her finger, and put it in my hand.  And she rested
her hand in mine, while she said these words:

"The brave gentlemen of old--but not one of them was braver, or had a
nobler nature than you--took such gifts from ladies, and did all their
good actions for the givers' sakes.  If you will do yours for mine, I
shall think with pride that I continue to have some share in the life of
a gallant and generous man."

For the second time in my life she kissed my hand.  I made so bold, for
the first time, as to kiss hers; and I tied the ring at my breast, and I
fell back to my place.

Then, the horse-litter went out at the gate with Sergeant Drooce in it;
and the horse-litter went out at the gate with Mrs. Belltott in it; and
Lieutenant Linderwood gave the word of command, "Quick march!" and,
cheered and cried for, we went out of the gate too, marching along the
level plain towards the serene blue sky, as if we were marching straight
to Heaven.

When I have added here that the Pirate scheme was blown to shivers, by
the Pirate-ship which had the Treasure on board being so vigorously
attacked by one of His Majesty's cruisers, among the West India Keys, and
being so swiftly boarded and carried, that nobody suspected anything
about the scheme until three-fourths of the Pirates were killed, and the
other fourth were in irons, and the Treasure was recovered; I come to the
last singular confession I have got to make.

It is this.  I well knew what an immense and hopeless distance there was
between me and Miss Maryon; I well knew that I was no fitter company for
her than I was for the angels; I well knew, that she was as high above my
reach as the sky over my head; and yet I loved her.  What put it in my
low heart to be so daring, or whether such a thing ever happened before
or since, as that a man so uninstructed and obscure as myself got his
unhappy thoughts lifted up to such a height, while knowing very well how
presumptuous and impossible to be realised they were, I am unable to say;
still, the suffering to me was just as great as if I had been a
gentleman.  I suffered agony--agony.  I suffered hard, and I suffered
long.  I thought of her last words to me, however, and I never disgraced
them.  If it had not been for those dear words, I think I should have
lost myself in despair and recklessness.

The ring will be found lying on my heart, of course, and will be laid
with me wherever I am laid.  I am getting on in years now, though I am
able and hearty.  I was recommended for promotion, and everything was
done to reward me that could be done; but my total want of all learning
stood in my way, and I found myself so completely out of the road to it
that I could not conquer any learning, though I tried.  I was long in the
service, and I respected it, and was respected in it, and the service is
dear to me at this present hour.

At this present hour, when I give this out to my Lady to be written down,
all my old pain has softened away, and I am as happy as a man can be, at
this present fine old country-house of Admiral Sir George Carton,
Baronet.  It was my Lady Carton who herself sought me out, over a great
many miles of the wide world, and found me in Hospital wounded, and
brought me here.  It is my Lady Carton who writes down my words.  My Lady
was Miss Maryon.  And now, that I conclude what I had to tell, I see my
Lady's honoured gray hair droop over her face, as she leans a little
lower at her desk; and I fervently thank her for being so tender as I see
she is, towards the past pain and trouble of her poor, old, faithful,
humble soldier.




FOOTNOTES


{1}   Dicken's didn't write the second chapter and it is omitted in this
edition.  In it the prisoners are firstly made a ransom of for the
treasure left on the Island and then manage to escape from the Pirates.





