BOOK XV.


1.

       E'EN should the Phrygian God enrich my tongue
       With honey'd eloquence, such as erst did fall
       From Nestor's or Antenor's lips,[109]

as the all-accomplished Euripides says, my good Timocrates—

       I never should be able

to recapitulate to you the numerous things which were said in those
most admirable banquets, on account of the varied nature of the topics
introduced, and the novel mode in which they were continually treated.
For there were frequent discussions about the order in which the dishes
were served up, and about the things which are done after the chief
part of the supper is over, such as I can hardly recollect; and some
one of the guests quoted the following iambics from The Lacedæmonians
of Plato—

[Sidenote: THE COTTABUS.]

       Now nearly all the men have done their supper;
       'Tis well.—Why don't you run and clear the tables?
       But I will go and straight some water get
       For the guests' hands; and have the floor well swept;
       And then, when I have offer'd due libations,
       I'll introduce the cottabus. This girl
       Ought now to have her flutes all well prepared,
       Ready to play them. Quick now, slave, and bring
       Egyptian ointment, extract of lilies too,
       And sprinkle it around; and I myself
       Will bring a garland to each guest, and give it;
       Let some one mix the wine.—Lo! now it's mix'd
       Put in the frankincense, and say aloud,
       "Now the libation is perform'd."[110] The guests
       Have deeply drunk already; and the scolium
       Is sung; the cottabus, that merry sport,
       Is taken out of doors: a female slave
       Plays on the flute a cheerful strain, well pleasing
       To the delighted guests; another strikes
       The clear triangle, and, with well-tuned voice,
       Accompanies it with an Ionian song.

2. And after this quotation there arose, I think, a discussion about
the cottabus and cottabus-players. Now by the term ἀποκοτταβίζοντες,
one of the physicians who were present thought those people were
meant, who, after the bath, for the sake of purging their stomach,
drink a full draught of wine and then throw it up again; and he said
that this was not an ancient custom, and that he was not aware of
any ancient author who had alluded to this mode of purging. On which
account Erasistratus of Julia, in his treatise on Universal Medicine,
reproves those who act in this way, pointing out that it is a practice
very injurious to the eyes, and having a very astringent effect on the
stomach. And Ulpian addressed him thus—

       Arise, Machaon, great Charoneus calls.[111]

For it was wittily said by one of our companions, that if there were no
physicians there would be nothing more stupid than grammarians. For who
is there of us who does not know that this kind of ἀποκοτταβισμὸς was
not that of the ancients? unless you think that the cottabus-players
of Ameipsias vomited. Since, then, you are ignorant of what this is
which is the subject of our present discussion, learn from me, in the
first place, that the cottabus is a sport of Sicilian invention, the
Sicilians having been the original contrivers of it, as Critias the son
of Callæschrus tells us in his Elegies, where he says—

       The cottabus comes from Sicilian lands,
         And a glorious invention I think it,
       Where we put up a target to shoot at with drops
         From our wine-cup whenever we drink it.

And Dicæarchus the Messenian, the pupil of Aristotle, in his treatise
on Alcæus, says that the word λατάγη is also a Sicilian noun. But
λατάγη means the drops which are left in the bottom after the cup is
drained, and which the players used to throw with inverted hand into
the κοτταβεῖον. But Clitarchus, in his treatise on Words, says that the
Thessalians and Rhodians both call the κότταβος itself, or splash made
by the cups, λατάγη.

3. The prize also which was proposed for those who gained the victory
in drinking was called κότταβος, as Euripides shows us in his
Œneus, where he says—

       And then with many a dart of Bacchus' juice,
       They struck the old man's head. And I was set
       To crown the victor with deserved reward,
       And give the cottabus to such.

The vessel, too, into which they threw the drops was also called
κότταβος, as Cratinus shows in his Nemesis. But Plato the
comic poet, in his Jupiter Ill-treated, makes out that the cottabus was
a sort of drunken game, in which those who were defeated yielded up
their tools[112] to the victor. And these are his words—

  _A._ I wish you all to play at cottabus
       While I am here preparing you your supper.

       *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

       Bring, too, some balls to play with, quick,—some balls,
       And draw some water, and bring round some cups.
  _B._ Now let us play for kisses.[113]
                                _A._ No; such games
       I never suffer . . . .
       I challenge you all to play the cottabus,
       And for the prizes, here are these new slippers
       Which she doth wear, and this your cotylus.
  _B._ A mighty game! This is a greater contest
       Than e'en the Isthmian festival can furnish.

4. There was a kind of cottabus also which they used to call κάτακτος,
that is, when lamps are lifted up and then let down again. Eubulus, in
his Bellerophon, says—

       Who now will take hold of my leg below?
       For I am lifted up like a κοτταβεῖον.

[Sidenote: THE COTTABUS.]

And Antiphanes, in his Birthday of Venus, says—

  _A._ This now is what I mean; don't you perceive
       This lamp's the cottabus: attend awhile;
       The eggs, and sweetmeats, and confectionery
       Are the prize of victory.
                              _B._ Sure you will play
       For a most laughable prize. How shall you do?
  _A._ I then will show you how: whoever throws
       The cottabus direct against the scale (πλάστιγξ),
       So as to make it fall——
                              _B._ What scale? Do you
       Mean this small dish which here is placed above?
  _A._ That is the scale—he is the conqueror.
  _B._ How shall a man know this?
                               _A._ Why, if he throw
       So as to reach it barely, it will fall
       Upon the manes,[114] and there'll be great noise.
  _B._ Does manes, then, watch o'er the cottabus,
       As if he were a slave?

And in a subsequent passage he says—

  _B._ Just take the cup and show me how 'tis done.
  _A._ Now bend your fingers like a flute-player,
       Pour in a little wine, and not too much,
       Then throw it.
                   _B._ How?
                          _A._ Look here; throw it like this.
  _B._ O mighty Neptune, what a height he throws it!
  _A._ Now do the same.
                     _B._ Not even with a sling
       Could I throw such a distance.
                                   _A._ Well, but learn.

5. For a man must curve his hand excessively before he can throw the
cottabus elegantly, as Dicæarchus says; and Plato intimates as much in
his Jupiter Ill-treated, where some one calls out to Hercules not to
hold his hand too stiff, when he is going to play the cottabus. They
also called the very act of throwing the cottabus ἀπ' ἀγκύλης,
because they curved (ἀπαγκυλόω) the right hand in throwing it.
Though some say that ἀγκύλη, in this phrase, means a kind of
cup. And Bacchylides, in his Love Poems, says—

       And when she throws ἀπ' ἀγκύλης,
       Displaying to the youths her snow-white arm.

And Æschylus, in his Bone Gatherers, speaks of ἀγκυλητοὶ κότταβοι,
saying—

       Eurymachus, and no one else, did heap
       No slighter insults, undeserved, upon me:
       For my head always was his mark at which
       To throw his cottabus....[115]

Now, that he who succeeded in throwing the cottabus properly received
a prize, Antiphanes has shown us in a passage already quoted. And
the prize consisted of eggs, sweetmeats, and confectionery. And
Cephisodorus, in his Trophonius, and Callias or Diocles, in the
Cyclopes, (whichever of the two is the author,) and Eupolis, and
Hermippus, in his Iambics, prove the same thing.

Now what is called the κατακτὸς cottabus was something of this
kind. There is a high lamp, having on it what is called the Manes, on
which the dish, when thrown down, ought to fall; and from thence it
falls into the platter which lies below, and which is struck by the
cottabus. And there was room for very great dexterity in throwing the
cottabus. And Nicochares speaks of the Manes in his Lacedæmonians.

6. There is also another way of playing this game with a platter. This
platter is filled with water, and in it there are floating some empty
saucers, at which the players throw their drops out of their cups,
and endeavour to sink them. And he who has succeeded in sinking the
greatest number gains the victory. Ameipsias, in his play entitled The
Men playing at the Cottabus or Mania, says—

       Bring here the cruets and the cups at once,
       The foot-pan, too, but first pour in some water.

And Cratinus, in his Nemesis, says—

       Now in the cottabus I challenge you,
       (As is my country's mode,) to aim your blows
       At the empty cruets; and he who sinks the most
       Shall, in my judgment, bear the palm of victory.

And Aristophanes, in his Feasters, says—

       I mean to erect a brazen figure,
       That is, a cottabeum, and myrtle-berries.

And Hermippus, in his Fates, says—

       Now soft cloaks are thrown away,
       Every one clasps on his breastplate,
       And binds his greaves around his legs,
       No one for snow-white slippers cares;
       Now you may see the cottabus staff
       Thrown carelessly among the chaff;
       The manes hears no falling drops;
       And you the πλάστιγξ sad may see
       Thrown on the dunghill at the garden door.

And Achæus, in his Linus, speaking of the Satyrs, says—

       Throwing, and dropping, breaking, too, and naming (λέγοντες),
       O Hercules, the well-thrown drop of wine!

And the poet uses λέγοντες here, because they used to utter
the names of their sweethearts as they threw the cottabi on the
saucers. On which account Sophocles, in his Inachus, called the drops
which were thrown, sacred to Venus—

[Sidenote: THE COTTABUS.]

       The golden-colour'd drop of Venus
       Descends on all the houses.

And Euripides, in his Pleisthenes, says—

       And the loud noise o' the frequent cottabus
       Awakens melodies akin to Venus
       In every house.

And Callimachus says—

       Many hard drinkers, lovers of Acontius,
       Throw on the ground the wine-drops (λατάγας) from their cups.

7. There was also another kind of way of playing at the cottabus, in
the feasts which lasted all night, which is mentioned by Callippus in
his Festival lasting all Night, where he says—

       And he who keeps awake all night shall have
       A cheesecake for his prize of victory,
       And kiss whoe'er he pleases of the girls
       Who are at hand.

There were also sweetmeats at these nocturnal festivals, in which
the men continued awake an extraordinary time dancing. And these
sweetmeats used to be called at that time χαρίσιοι, from the
joy (χαρὰ) of those who received them. And Eubulus, in his
Ancylion, mentions them, speaking as follows—

       For he has long been cooking prizes for
       The victors in the cottabus.

And presently afterwards he says—

       I then sprang out to cook the χαρίσιος.

But that kisses were also given as the prize Eubulus tells us in a
subsequent passage—

       Come now, ye women, come and dance all night,
       This is the tenth day since my son was born;
       And I will give three fillets for the prize,
       And five fine apples, and nine kisses too.

But that the cottabus was a sport to which the Sicilians were greatly
addicted, is plain from the fact that they had rooms built adapted
to the game; which Dicæarchus, in his treatise on Alcæus, states to
have been the case. So that it was not without reason that Callimachus
affixed the epithet of Sicilian to λάταξ. And Dionysius, who
was surnamed the Brazen, mentions both the λάταγες and the
κότταβοι in his Elegies, where he says—

       Here we, unhappy in our loves, establish
       This third addition to the games of Bacchus,
       That the glad cottabus shall now be play'd
       In honour of you, a most noble quintain—
       All you who here are present twine your hands,
       Holding the ball-shaped portion of your cups,
       And, ere you let it go, let your eyes scan
       The heaven that bends above you; watching well
       How great a space your λάταγες may cover.

8. After this, Ulpian demanded a larger goblet to drink out of, quoting
these lines out of the same collection of Elegies—

       Pouring forth hymns to you and me propitious,
       Let us now send your ancient friend from far,
       With the swift rowing of our tongues and praises,
       To lofty glory while this banquet lasts;
       And the quick genius of Phæacian eloquence
       Commands the Muses' crew to man the benches.

For let us be guided by the younger Cratinus, who says in his Omphale—

       It suits a happy man to stay at home
       And drink, let others wars and labours love.

In answer to whom Cynulcus, who was always ready for a tilt at the
Syrian, and who never let the quarrel drop which he had against him,
now that there was a sort of tumult in the party, said—What is this
chorus of Syrbenians?[116] And I myself also recollect some lines of
this poetry, which I will quote, that Ulpian may not give himself
airs as being the only one who was able to extract anything about the
cottabus out of those old stores of the Homeridæ—

       Come now and hear this my auspicious message,
       And end the quarrels which your cups engender;
       Turn your attention to these words of mine,
       And learn these lessons....

which have a clear reference to the present discussion. For I see the
servants now bringing us garlands and perfumes. Why now are those who
are crowned said to be in love when their crowns are broken? For when
I was a boy, and when I used to read the Epigrams of Callimachus, in
which this is one of the topics dilated on, I was anxious to understand
this point. For the poet of Cyrene says—

       And all the roses, when the leaves fell off
       From the man's garlands, on the ground were thrown.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

So now it is your business, you most accomplished man, to explain this
difficulty which has occupied me these thousand years, O Democritus,
and to tell me why lovers crown the doors of their mistresses.

9. And Democritus replied—But that I may quote some of the verses
of this Brazen poet and orator Dionysius, (and he was called
Brazen because he advised the Athenians to adopt a brazen coinage;
and Callimachus mentions the oration in his list of Oratorical
Performances,) I myself will cite some lines out of his Elegies. And do
you, O Theodorus, for this is your proper name—

       Receive these first-fruits of my poetry,
       Given you as a pledge; and as an omen
       Of happy fortune I send first to you
       This offering of the Graces, deeply studied,—
       Take it, requiting me with tuneful verse,
       Fit ornament of feasts, and emblem of your happiness.

You ask, then, why, if the garlands of men who have been crowned are
pulled to pieces, they are said to be in love. "Is it, since love takes
away the strict regularity of manners in the case of lovers, that on
this account they think the loss of a conspicuous ornament, a sort
of beacon (as Clearchus says, in the first book of his Art of Love)
and signal, that they to whom this has happened have lost the strict
decorum of their manners? Or do men interpret this circumstance also by
divination, as they do many other things? For the ornament of a crown,
as there is nothing lasting in it, is a sort of emblem of a passion
which does not endure, but assumes a specious appearance for a while:
and such a passion is love. For no people are more careful to study
appearance than those who are in love. Unless, perhaps, nature, as a
sort of god, administering everything with justice and equity, thinks
that lovers ought not to be crowned till they have subdued their love;
that is to say, till, having prevailed upon the object of their love,
they are released from their desire. And accordingly, the loss of their
crown we make the token of their being still occupied in the fields of
love. Or perhaps Love himself, not permitting any one to be crowned in
opposition to, or to be proclaimed as victor over himself, takes their
crowns from these men, and gives the perception of this to others,
indicating that these men are subdued by him: on which account all
the rest say that these men are in love. Or is it because that cannot
be loosed which has never been bound, but love is the chain of some
who wear crowns, (for no one else who is bound is more anxious about
being crowned than a lover,) that men consider that the loosing of the
garland is a sign of love, and therefore say that these men are in
love? Or is it because very often lovers, when they have been crowned,
often out of agitation as it should seem, allow their crowns to fall to
pieces, and so we argue backwards, and attribute this passion to all
whom we see in this predicament; thinking that their crown never would
have come to pieces, if they had not been in love? Or is it because
these loosings happen only in the case of men bound or men in love; and
so, men thinking that the loosing of the garland is the loosing also
of those who are bound, consider that such men are in love? For those
in love are bound, unless you would rather say that, because those who
are in love are crowned with love, therefore their crown is not of a
lasting kind; for it is difficult to put a small and ordinary kind of
crown on a large and divine one. Men also crown the doors of the houses
of the objects of their love, either with a view to do them honour, as
they adorn with crowns the vestibule of some god to do him honour: or
perhaps the offering of the crowns is made, not to the beloved objects,
but to the god Love. For thinking the beloved object the statue, as
it were, of Love, and his house the temple of Love, they, under this
idea, adorn with crowns the vestibules of those whom they love. And for
the same reason some people even sacrifice at the doors of those whom
they love. Or shall we rather say that people who fancy that they are
deprived, or who really have been deprived of the ornament of their
soul, consecrate to those who have deprived them of it, the ornament
also of their body, being bewildered by their passion, and despoiling
themselves in order to do so? And every one who is in love does this
when the object of his love is present, but when he is not present,
then he makes this offering in the public roads. On which account
Lycophronides has represented that goatherd in love, as saying—

       I consecrate this rose to you,
         A beautiful idea;
       This cap, and eke these sandals too,
         And this good hunting-spear:
       For now my mind is gone astray,
       Wandering another way,
       Towards that girl of lovely face,
       Favourite of ev'ry Grace."

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

10. Moreover, that most divine writer Plato, in the seventh book of his
Laws, proposes a problem having reference to crowns, which it is worth
while to solve; and these are the words of the philosopher:—"Let there
be distributions of apples and crowns to a greater and a lesser number
of people, in such a way that the numbers shall always be equal." These
are the words of Plato. But what he means is something of this sort. He
wishes to find one number of such a nature that, if divided among all
who come in to the very last, it shall give an equal number of apples
or crowns to every one. I say, then, that the number sixty will fulfil
these conditions of equality in the case of six fellow-feasters; for I
am aware that at the beginning we said that a supper party ought not
to consist of more than five. But we are as numerous as the sand of
the sea. Accordingly the number sixty, when the party is completed to
the number of six guests, will begin to be divided in this manner. The
first man came into the banqueting-room, and received sixty garlands.
He gives to the second who comes in half of them; and then each of
them have thirty. Then when a third comes in they divide the whole
sixty, so that each of them may have twenty. Again, they divide them
again in like manner at the entrance of a fourth guest, so that each
has fifteen; and when a fifth comes in they all have twelve a-piece.
And when the sixth guest arrives, they divide them again, and each
individual has ten. And in this way the equal division of the garlands
is accomplished.

11. When Democritus had said this, Ulpian, looking towards Cynulcus,
said—

       To what a great philosopher has Fate
       Now join'd me here!

As Theognetus the comic poet says, in his Apparition,—

       You wretched man, you've learnt left-handed letters,
       Your reading has perverted your whole life;
       Philosophising thus with earth and heaven,
       Though neither care a bit for all your speeches.

For where was it that you got that idea of the Chorus of the
Syrbenians? What author worth speaking of mentions that musical chorus?
And he replied:—My good friend, I will not teach you, unless I first
receive adequate pay from you; for I do not read to pick out all the
thorns out of my books as you do, but I select only what is most useful
and best worth hearing. And at this Ulpian got indignant, and roared
out these lines out of the Suspicion of Alexis—

       These things are shameful, e'en to the Triballi;
       Where they do say a man who sacrifices,
       Displays the feast to the invited guests,
       And then next day, when they are hungry all,
       Sells them what he'd invited them to see.

And the same iambics occur in the Sleep of Antiphanes. And Cynulcus
said:—Since there have already been discussions about garlands, tell
us, my good Ulpian, what is the meaning of the expression, "The garland
of Naucratis," in the beautiful poet Anacreon. For that sweet minstrel
says—

       And each man three garlands had:
       Two of roses fairly twined,
       And the third a Naucratite.

And why also does the same poet represent some people as crowned with
osiers? for in the second book of his Odes, he says—

       But now full twice five months are gone
       Since kind Megisthes wore a crown
       Of pliant osier, drinking wine
       Whose colour did like rubies shine.

For to suppose that these crowns were really made of osiers is absurd,
for the osier is fit only for plaiting and binding. So now tell us
about these things, my friend, for they are worth understanding
correctly, and do not keep us quibbling about words.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

12. But as he made no reply, and pretended to be considering the
matter, Democritus said:—Aristarchus the grammarian, my friend, when
interpreting this passage, said that the ancients used to wear crowns
of willow. But Tenarus says that the willow or osier is the rustics'
crown. And other interpreters have said many irrelevant things on the
subject. But I, having met with a book of Menodotus of Samos, which
is entitled, A Record of the things worth noting at Samos, found
there what I was looking for; for he says that "Admete, the wife of
Eurystheus, after she had fled from Argos, came to Samos, and there,
when a vision of Juno had appeared to her, she wishing to give the
goddess a reward because she had arrived in Samos from her own home
in safety, undertook the care of the temple, which exists even to
this day, and which had been originally built by the Leleges and the
Nymphs. But the Argives hearing of this, and being indignant at it,
persuaded the Tyrrhenians by a promise of money, to employ piratical
force and to carry off the statue,—the Argives believing that if this
were done Admete would be treated with every possible severity by the
inhabitants of Samos. Accordingly the Tyrrhenians came to the port of
Juno, and having disembarked, immediately applied themselves to the
performance of their undertaking. And as the temple was at that time
without any doors, they quickly carried off the statue, and bore it
down to the seaside, and put it on board their vessel. And when they
had loosed their cables and weighed anchor, they rowed as fast as they
could, but were unable to make any progress. And then, thinking that
this was owing to divine interposition, they took the statue out of the
ship again and put it on the shore; and having made some sacrificial
cakes, and offered them to it, they departed in great fear. But when,
the first thing in the morning, Admete gave notice that the statue had
disappeared, and a search was made for it, those who were seeking it
found it on the shore. And they, like Carian barbarians, as they were,
thinking that the statue had run away of its own accord, bound it to a
fence made of osiers, and took all the longest branches on each side
and twined them round the body of the statue, so as to envelop it all
round. But Admete released the statue from these bonds, and purified
it, and placed it again on its pedestal, as it had stood before. And on
this account once every year, since that time, the statue is carried
down to the shore and hidden, and cakes are offered to it: and the
festival is called Τονεὺς, because it happened that the statue was
bound tightly (συντόνως) by those who made the first search for it.

13. "But they relate that about that time the Carians, being
overwhelmed with superstitious fears, came to the oracle of the god
at Hybla, and consulted him with reference to these occurrences; and
that Apollo told them that they must give a voluntary satisfaction to
the god of their own accord, to escape a more serious calamity,—such
as in former times Jupiter had inflicted upon Prometheus, because of
his theft of the fire, after he had released him from a most terrible
captivity. And as he was inclined to give a satisfaction which should
not cause him severe pain, this was what the god imposed upon him.
And from this circumstance the use of this kind of crown which had
been shown to Prometheus got common among the rest of mankind who had
been benefited by him by his gift of fire: on which account the god
enjoined the Carians also to adopt a similar custom,—to use osiers
as a garland, and bind their heads with the branches with which
they themselves had bound the goddess. And he ordered them also to
abandon the use of every other kind of garland except that made of the
bay-tree: and that tree he said he gave as a gift to those alone who
are employed in the service of the goddess. And he told them that,
if they obeyed the injunctions given them by the oracle, and if in
their banquets they paid the goddess the satisfaction to which she
was entitled, they should be protected from injury: on which account
the Carians, wishing to obey the commands laid on them by the oracle,
abolished the use of those garlands which they had previously been
accustomed to wear, but permitted all those who were employed in the
service of the goddess still to wear the garland of bay-tree, which
remains in use even to this day.

14. "Nicænetus also, the epic poet, appears to make some allusion to
the fashion of wearing garlands of osier in his Epigrams. And this
poet was a native of Samos, and a man who in numberless passages shows
his fondness for mentioning points connected with the history of his
country. And these are his words:—

       I am not oft, O Philotherus, fond
       Of feasting in the city, but prefer
       The country, where the open breeze of zephyr
       Freshens my heart; a simple bed
       Beneath my body is enough for me,
       Made of the branches of the native willow (πρόμαλος),
       And osier (λύγος), ancient garland of the Carians,—
       But let good wine be brought, and the sweet lyre,
       Chief ornament of the Pierian sisters,
       That we may drink our fill, and sing the praise
       Of the all-glorious bride of mighty Jove,
       The great protecting queen of this our isle.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

But in the selines Nicænetus speaks ambiguously, for it is not quite
plain whether he means that the osier is to make his bed or his
garland; though afterwards, when he calls it the ancient garland of the
Carians, he alludes clearly enough to what we are now discussing. And
this use of osiers to make into garlands, lasted in that island down to
the time of Polycrates, as we may conjecture. At all events Anacreon
says—

       But now full twice five months are gone
       Since kind Megisthes wore a crown
       Of pliant osier, drinking wine
       Whose colour did like rubies shine."

15. And the Gods know that I first found all this out in the beautiful
city of Alexandria, having got possession of the treatise of Menodotus,
in which I showed to many people the passage in Anacreon which is the
subject of discussion. But Hephæstion, who is always charging every one
else with thefts, took this solution of mine, and claimed it as his
own, and published an essay, to which he gave this title, "Concerning
the Osier Garland mentioned by Anacreon." And a copy of this essay we
lately found at Rome in the possession of the antiquary Demetrius.
And this compiler Hephæstion behaved in the same way to our excellent
friend Adrantus. For after he had published a treatise in five books,
Concerning those Matters in Theophrastus in his books on Manners,
which are open to any Dispute, either as to their Facts, or the Style
in which they are mentioned; and had added a sixth book Concerning
the Disputable Points in the Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle; and in
these books had entered into a long dissertation on the mention of
Plexippus by Antipho the tragic poet, and had also said a good deal
about Antipho himself; Hephæstion, I say, appropriated all these books
to himself, and wrote another book, Concerning the Mention of Antipho
in the Memorabilia of Xenophon, not having added a single discovery or
original observation of his own, any more than he had in the discussion
on the Osier Garland. For the only thing he said that was new, was that
Phylarchus, in the seventh book of his Histories, mentioned this story
about the osier, and knew nothing of the passage of Nicænetus, nor of
that of Anacreon; and he showed that he differed in some respects from
the account that had been given by Menodotus.

But one may explain this fact of the osier garlands more simply, by
saying that Megisthes wore a garland of osier because there was a
great quantity of those trees in the place where he was feasting; and
therefore he used it to bind his temples. For the Lacedæmonians at the
festival of the Promachia, wear garlands of reeds, as Sosibius tells
us in his treatise on the Sacrificial Festivals at Lacedæmon, where
he writes thus: "On this festival the natives of the country all wear
garlands of reeds, or tiaras, but the boys who have been brought up in
the public school follow without any garland at all."

16. But Aristotle, in the second book of his treatise on Love Affairs,
and Ariston the Peripatetic, who was a native of Ceos, in the second
book of his Amatory Resemblances, say that "The ancients, on account of
the headaches which were produced by their wine-drinking, adopted the
practice of wearing garlands made of anything which came to hand, as
the binding the head tight appeared to be of service to them. But men
in later times added also some ornaments to their temples, which had a
kind of reference to their employment of drinking, and so they invented
garlands in the present fashion. But it is more reasonable to suppose
that it was because the head is the seat of all sensation that men
wore crowns upon it, than that they did so because it was desirable to
have their temples shaded and bound as a remedy against the headaches
produced by wine."

They also wore garlands over their foreheads, as the sweet Anacreon
says—

       And placing on our brows fresh parsley crowns,
       Let's honour Bacchus with a jovial feast.

They also wore garlands on their breasts, and anointed them with
perfume, because that is the seat of the heart. And they call the
garlands which they put round their necks ὑποθυμιάδες, as
Alcæus does in these lines—

       Let every one twine round his neck
       Wreathed ὑποθυμιάδες of anise.

And Sappho says—

       And wreathed ὑποθυμιάδες
       In numbers round their tender throats.

And Anacreon says—

       They placed upon their bosoms lotus flowers
       Entwined in fragrant ὑποθυμιάδες.

Æschylus also, in his Prometheus Unbound, says distinctly—

       And therefore we, in honour of Prometheus,
       Place garlands on our heads, a poor atonement
       For the sad chains with which his limbs were bound.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

And again, in the play entitled the Sphinx, he says—

       Give the stranger a στέφανος (garland), the ancient στέφος,—
       This is the best of chains, as we may judge
       From great Prometheus.

But Sappho gives a more simple reason for our wearing garlands,
speaking as follows—

       But place those garlands on thy lovely hair,
       Twining the tender sprouts of anise green
       With skilful hand; for offerings of flowers
       Are pleasing to the gods, who hate all those
       Who come before them with uncrownèd heads.

In which lines she enjoins all who offer sacrifice to wear garlands on
their heads, as they are beautiful things, and acceptable to the Gods.
Aristotle also, in his Banquet, says, "We never offer any mutilated
gift to the Gods, but only such as are perfect and entire; and what
is full is entire, and crowning anything indicates filling it in some
sort. So Homer says—

       The slaves the goblets crown'd with rosy wine;[117]

And in another place he says—

       But God plain forms with eloquence does crown.[118]

That is to say, eloquence in speaking makes up in the case of some men
for their personal ugliness. Now this is what the στέφανος
seems intended to do, on which account, in times of mourning, we do
exactly the contrary. For wishing to testify our sympathy for the dead,
we mutilate ourselves by cutting our hair, and by putting aside our
garlands."

17. Now Philonides the physician, in his treatise on Ointments and
Garlands, says, "After the vine was introduced into Greece from the Red
Sea, and when most people had become addicted to intemperate enjoyment,
and had learnt to drink unmixed wine, some of them became quite frantic
and out of their minds, while others got so stupified as to resemble
the dead. And once, when some men were drinking on the sea-shore, a
violent shower came on, and broke up the party, and filled the goblet,
which had a little wine left in it, with water. But when it became fine
again, the men returned to the same spot, and tasting the new mixture,
found that their enjoyment was now not only exquisite, but free from
any subsequent pain. And on this account, the Greeks invoke the good
Deity at the cup of unmixed wine, which is served round to them at
dinner, paying honour to the Deity who invented wine; and that was
Bacchus. But when the first cup of mixed wine is handed round after
dinner, they then invoke Jupiter the Saviour, thinking him the cause
of this mixture of wine which is so unattended with pain, as being the
author of rain. Now, those who suffered in their heads after drinking,
certainly stood in need of some remedy; and so the binding their heads
was what most readily occurred to them, as Nature herself led them to
this remedy. For a certain man having a headache, as Andreas says,
pressed his head, and found relief, and so invented a ligature as a
remedy for headache.

Accordingly, men using these ligatures as assistants in drinking, used
to bind their heads with whatever came in their way. And first of all,
they took garlands of ivy, which offered itself, as it were, of its own
accord, and was very plentiful, and grew everywhere, and was pleasant
to look upon, shading the forehead with its green leaves and bunches of
berries, and bearing a good deal of tension, so as to admit of being
bound tight across the brow, and imparting also a certain degree of
coolness without any stupifying smell accompanying it. And it seems to
me that this is the reason why men have agreed to consider the garland
of ivy sacred to Bacchus, implying by this that the inventor of wine
is also the defender of men from all the inconveniences which arise
from the use of it. And from thence, regarding chiefly pleasure, and
considering utility and the comfort of the relief from the effects
of drunkenness of less importance, they were influenced chiefly by
what was agreeable to the sight or to the smell. And therefore they
adopted crowns of myrtle, which has exciting properties, and which also
represses any rising of the fumes of wine; and garlands of roses, which
to a certain extent relieve headache, and also impart some degree of
coolness; and garlands also of bay leaves, which they think are not
wholly unconnected with drinking parties. But garlands of white lilies,
which have an effect on the head, and wreaths of amaracus, or of any
other flower or herb which has any tendency to produce heaviness or
torpid feelings in the head, must be avoided."

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

And Apollodorus, in his treatise on Perfumes and Garlands, has said the
same thing in the very same words. And this, my friends, is enough to
say on this subject.

18. But concerning the Naucratite Crown, and what kind of flowers
that is made of, I made many investigations, and inquired a great
deal without learning anything, till at last I fell in with a book
of Polycharmus of Naucratis, entitled On Venus, in which I found the
following passage:—"But in the twenty-third Olympiad Herostratus, a
fellow-countryman of mine, who was a merchant, and as such had sailed
to a great many different countries, coming by chance to Paphos,
in Cyprus, bought an image of Venus, a span high, of very ancient
workmanship, and came away meaning to bring it to Naucratis. And as
he was sailing near the Egyptian coast, a violent storm suddenly
overtook him, and the sailors could not tell where they were, and so
they all had recourse to this image of Venus, entreating her to save
them. And the goddess, for she was kindly disposed towards the men of
Naucratis, on a sudden filled all the space near her with branches
of green myrtle, and diffused a most delicious odour over the whole
ship, when all the sailors had previously despaired of safety from
their violent sea-sickness. And after they had been all very sick, the
sun shone out, and they, seeing the landmarks, came in safety into
Naucratis. And Herostratus having disembarked from the ship with his
image, and carrying with him also the green branches of myrtle which
had so suddenly appeared to him, consecrated it and them in the temple
of Venus. And having sacrificed to the goddess, and having consecrated
the image to Venus, and invited all his relations and most intimate
friends to a banquet in the temple, he gave every one of them a garland
of these branches of myrtle, to which garlands he then gave the name
of Naucratite." This is the account given by Polycharmus; and I myself
believe the statement, and believe that the Naucratite garland is
no other than one made of myrtle, especially as in Anacreon it is
represented as worn with one made of roses. And Philonides has said
that the garland made of myrtle acts as a check upon the fumes of wine,
and that the one made of roses, in addition to its cooking qualities,
is to a certain extent a remedy for headache. And, therefore, those men
are only to be laughed at, who say that the Naucratite garland is the
wreath made of what is called by the Egyptians biblus, quoting the
statement of Theopompus, in the third book of his History of Greece,
where he says, "That when Agesilaus the Lacedæmonian arrived in Egypt,
the Egyptians sent him many presents, and among them the papyrus,
which is used for making garlands." But I do not know what pleasure or
advantage there could be in having a crown made of biblus with roses,
unless people who are enamoured of such a wreath as this should also
take a fancy to wear crowns of garlic and roses together. But I know
that a great many people say that the garland made of the sampsychon or
amaracus is the Naucratite garland; and this plant is very plentiful in
Egypt, but the myrtle in Egypt is superior in sweetness to that which
is found in any other country, as Theophrastus relates in another place.

19. While this discussion was going on, some slaves came in bringing
garlands made of such flowers as were in bloom at the time; and
Myrtilus said;—Tell me, my good friend Ulpian, the different names of
garlands. For these servants, as is said in the Centaur of Chærephon—

       Make ready garlands which they give the gods,
       Praying they may be heralds of good omen.

And the same poet says, in his play entitled Bacchus—

       Cutting sweet garlands, messengers of good omen.

Do not, however, quote to me passages out of the Crowns of Ælius
Asclepiades, as if I were unacquainted with that work; but say
something now besides what you find there. For you cannot show me that
any one has ever spoken separately of a garland of roses, and a garland
of violets. For as for the expression in Cratinus—

       ναρκισσίνους ὀλίσβους,

that is said in a joke.

And he, laughing, replied,—The word στέφανος was first used among the
Greeks, as Semos the Delian tells us in the fourth book of his Delias,
in the same sense as the word στέφος is used by us, which, however, by
some people is called στέμμα. On which account, being first crowned
with this στέφανος, afterwards we put on a garland of bay leaves; and
the word στέφανος itself is derived from the verb στέφω, to crown. But
do you, you loquacious Thessalian, think, says he, that I am going
to repeat any of those old and hacknied stories? But because of your
tongue (γλῶσσα), I will mention the ὑπογλωττὶς, which Plato speaks of
in his Jupiter Ill-treated—

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

       But you wear leather tongues within your shoes,
       And crown yourselves with ίπογλωττίδες,
       Whenever you're engaged in drinking parties.
       And when you sacrifice you speak only words
       Of happy omen.

And Theodorus, in his Attic Words, as Pamphilus says in his treatise
on Names, says, that the ὑπογλωττὶς is a species of plaited
crown. Take this then from me; for, as Euripides says,

       'Tis no hard work to argue on either side,
       If a man's only an adept at speaking.

20. There is the Isthmiacum also, and there was a kind of crown bearing
this name, which Aristophanes has thought worthy of mention in his
Fryers, where he speaks thus—

       What then are we to do? We should have taken
       A white cloak each of us; and then entwining
       Isthmiaca on our brows, like choruses,
       Come let us sing the eulogy of our master.

But Silenus, in his Dialects, says, "The Isthmian garland." And
Philetas says, "Στέφανος. There is an ambiguity here as to
whether it refers to the head or to the main world.[119] We also use the
word ἴσθμιον, as applied to a well, or to a dagger." But
Timachidas and Simmias, who are both Rhodians, explain one word by the
other. They say, ἴσθμιον, στέφανον: and this word is also
mentioned by Callixenus, who is himself also a Rhodian, in his History
of Alexandria, where he writes as follows—

       *       *       *       *       *      *

21. But since I have mentioned Alexandria, I know that in that
beautiful city there is a garland called the garland of Antinous,
which is made of the lotus, which grows in those parts. And this lotus
grows in the marshes in the summer season; and it bears flowers of
two colours; one like that of the rose, and it is the garlands woven
of the flowers of this colour which are properly called the garlands
of Antinous; but the other kind is called the lotus garland, being
of a dark colour. And a man of the name of Pancrates, a native poet,
with whom we ourselves were acquainted, made a great parade of showing
a rose-coloured lotus to Adrian the emperor, when he was staying at
Alexandria, saying, that he ought to give this flower the name of the
Flower of Antinous, as having sprung from the ground where it drank in
the blood of the Mauritanian lion, which Hadrian killed when he was
out hunting in that part of Africa, near Alexandria; a monstrous beast
which had ravaged all Libya for a long time, so as to make a very great
part of the district desolate. Accordingly, Hadrian being delighted
with the utility of the invention, and also with its novelty, granted
to the poet that he should be maintained for the future in the Museum
at the public expense; and Cratinus the comic poet, in his Ulysseses,
has called the lotus στεφάνωμα, because all plants which are
full of leaf, are called στεφανώματα by the Athenians. But
Pancrates said, with a good deal of neatness, in his poem—

       The crisp ground thyme, the snow-white lily too,
       The purple hyacinth, and the modest leaves
       Of the white celandine, and the fragrant rose,
       Whose petals open to the vernal zephyrs;
       For that fair flower which bears Antinous' name
       The earth had not yet borne.

22. There is the word πυλέων. And this is the name given to the garland
which the Lacedæmonians place on the head of Juno, as Pamphilus relates.

I am aware, also, that there is a kind of garland, which is called
Ἰάκχας by the Sicyonians, as Timachidas mentions in his treatise on
Dialects. And Philetas writes as follows:—"Ἰάκχα—this is a name given
to a fragrant garland in the district of Sicyon—

       She stood by her sire, and in her fragrant hair
       She wore the beautiful Iacchian garland."

Seleucus also, in his treatise on Dialects, says, that there is a kind
of garland made of myrtle, which is called Ἐλλωτὶς, being twenty cubits
in circumference, and that it is carried in procession on the festival
of the Ellotia. And he says, that in this garland the bones of Europa,
whom they call Ellotis, are carried. And this festival of the Ellotia
is celebrated in Corinth.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

There is also the Θυρεατικός. This also is a name given to a species
of garland by the Lacedæmonians, as Sosibius tells us in his treatise
on Sacrifices, where he says, that now it is called ψίλινος, being
made of branches of the palm-tree. And he says that they are worn, as
a memorial of the victory which they gained, in Thyrea,[120] by the
leaders of the choruses, which are employed in that festival when they
celebrate the Gymnopædiæ.[121] And there are choruses, some of handsome
boys, and others of full-grown men of distinguished bravery, who all
dance naked, and who sing the songs of Thaletas and Alcman, and the
pæans of Dionysodotus the Lacedæmonian.

There are also garlands called μελιλώτινοι, which are mentioned by
Alexis in his Crateva, or the Apothecary, in the following line—

       And many μελιλώτινοι garlands hanging.

There is the word too, ἐπιθυμίδες, which Seleucus explains by
"every sort of garland." But Timachidas says, "Garlands of every kind
which are worn by women are called ἐπιθυμίδες."

There are also the words ὑποθυμὶς and ὑποθυμιὰς, which are names
given to garlands by the Æolians and Ionians, and they wear such around
their necks, as one may clearly collect from the poetry of Alcæus and
Anacreon. But Philetas, in his Miscellanies, says, that the Lesbians
call a branch of myrtle ὑποθυμὶς, around which they twine violets and
other flowers.

The ὑπογλωττὶς also is a species of garland. But Theodorus, in his
Attic Words, says, that it is a particular kind of garland, and is used
in that sense by Plato the comic poet, in his Jupiter Ill-treated.

23. I find also, in the comic poets, mention made of a kind of garland
called κυλιστὸς, and I find that Archippus mentions it in his Rhinon,
in these lines—

       He went away unhurt to his own house,
       Having laid aside his cloak, but having on
       His ἐκκύλιστος garland.

And Alexis, in his Agonis, or The Colt, says—

       This third man has a κυλιστὸς garland
       Of fig-leaves; but while living he delighted
       In similar ornaments:

and in his Sciron he says—

       Like a κυλιστὸς garland in suspense.

Antiphanes also mentions it in his Man in Love with Himself. And
Eubulus, in his Œnomaus, or Pelops, saying—

                    Brought into circular shape,
       Like a κυλιστὸς garland.

What, then, is this κυλιστός? For I am aware that Nicander of Thyatira,
in his Attic Nouns, speaks as follows,—"Ἐκκυλίσιοι στέφανοι, and
especially those made of roses." And now I ask what species of garland
this was, O Cynulcus; and do not tell me that I am to understand the
word as meaning merely large. For you are a man who are fond of not
only picking things little known out of books, but of even digging out
such matters; like the philosophers in the Joint Deceiver of Baton the
comic poet; men whom Sophocles also mentions in his Fellow Feasters,
and who resemble you,—

       You should not wear a beard thus well perfumed,
       And 'tis a shame for you, of such high birth,
       To be reproachèd as the son of your belly,
       When you might rather be call'd your father's son.

Since, then, you are sated not only with the heads of glaucus, but
also with that evergreen herb, which that Anthedonian Deity[122] ate,
and became immortal, give us an answer now about the subject of
discussion, that we may not think that when you are dead, you will be
metamorphosed, as the divine Plato has described in his treatise on
the Soul. For he says that those who are addicted to gluttony, and
insolence, and drunkenness, and who are restrained by no modesty,
may naturally become transformed into the race of asses, and similar
animals.

24. And as he still appeared to be in doubt;—Let us now, said Ulpian,
go on to another kind of garland, which is called the στρούθιος; which
Asclepiades mentions when he quotes the following passage, out of the
Female Garland-Sellers of Eubulus—

       O happy woman, in your little house
       To have a στρούθιος....[123]

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

And this garland is made of the flower called στρούθιον (soap-wort),
which is mentioned by Theophrastus, in the sixth book of his Natural
History, in these words—"The iris also blooms in the summer, and so
does the flower called στρούθιον, which is a very pretty flower to the
eye, but destitute of scent." Galene of Smyrna also speaks of the same
flower, under the name of στρύθιον.

There is also the πόθος. There is a certain kind of garland
with this name, as Nicander the Colophonian tells us in his treatise on
Words. And this, too, perhaps is so named as being made of the flower
called πόθος, which the same Theophrastus mentions in the
sixth book of his Natural History, where he writes thus—"There are
other flowers which bloom chiefly in the summer,—the lychnis, the
flower of Jove, the lily, the iphyum, the Phrygian amaracus, and also
the plant called pothus, of which there are two kinds, one bearing a
flower like the hyacinth, but the other produces a colourless blossom
nearly white, which men use to strew on tombs.

Eubulus also gives a list of other names of garlands—

       Ægidion, carry now this garland for me,
       Ingeniously wrought of divers flowers,
       Most tempting, and most beautiful, by Jove!
       For who'd not wish to kiss the maid who bears it?

And then in the subsequent lines he says—

  _A._ Perhaps you want some garlands. Will you have them
       Of ground thyme, or of myrtle, or of flowers
       Such as I show you here in bloom.
                                      _B._ I'll have
       These myrtle ones. You may sell all the others,
       But always keep the myrtle wreaths for me.

25. There is the philyrinus also. Xenarchus, in his Soldier, says—

       For the boy wore a garland on his brow
       Of delicate leafy linden (φιλύρα).

Some garlands also are called ἑλικτοὶ, as they are even to
this day among the Alexandrians. And Chæremon the tragic poet mentions
them in his Bacchus, saying—

       The triple folds of the ἑλικτοὶ garlands,
       Made up of ivy and narcissus.

But concerning the evergreen garlands in Egypt, Hellanicus, in his
History of Egypt, writes as follows—"There is a city on the banks
of the river, named Tindium. This is a place where many gods are
assembled, and in the middle of the city there is a sacred temple of
great size made of marble, and the doors are marble. And within the
temple there are white and black thorns, on which garlands were placed
made of the flower of the acanthus, and also of the blossoms of the
pomegranate, and of vine-leaves. And these keep green for ever. These
garlands were placed by the gods themselves in Egypt when they heard
that Babys was king, (and he is the same who is also called Typhon.)"
But Demetrius, in his History of the Things to be seen in Egypt,
says that these thorns grow about the city of Abydos, and he writes
thus—"But the lower district has a tree called the thorn, which bears
a round fruit on some round-shaped branches. And this tree blooms at
a certain season; and the flower is very beautiful and brilliant in
colour. And there is a story told by the Egyptians, that the Æthiopians
who had been sent as allies to Troy by Tithonus, when they heard that
Memnon was slain, threw down on the spot all their garlands on the
thorns. And the branches themselves on which the flower grows resemble
garlands." And the before-mentioned Hellanicus mentions also that
Amasis, who was king of Egypt, was originally a private individual of
the class of the common people; and that it was owing to the present
of a garland, which he made of the most beautiful flowers that were in
season, and sent to Patarmis, who was king of Egypt, at the time when
he was celebrating the festival of his birthday, that he afterwards
became king himself. For Patarmis, being delighted at the beauty of the
garland, invited Amasis to supper, and after this treated him as one
of his friends; and on one occasion sent him out as his general, when
the Egyptians were making war upon him. And he was made king by these
Egyptians out of their hatred to Patarmis.

26. There are also garlands called συνθηματιαῖοι,
which people make and furnish by contract. Aristophanes, in his
Thesmophoriazusæ, says—

       To make up twenty συνθηματιαῖοι garlands.[124]

We find also the word χορωνόν. Apion, in his treatise on the Roman
Dialect, says that formerly a garland was called χορωνόν, from the fact
of the members of the chorus in the theatres using it; and that they
wore garlands and contended for garlands. And one may see this name
given to garlands in the Epigrams of Simonides—

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

       Phœbus doth teach that song to the Tyndaridæ,
       Which tuneless grasshoppers have crown'd with a χορωνός.

There are ἀκίνιοι too. There are some garlands made of the
basil thyme (ἄκινος) which are called by this name, as we are
told by Andron the physician, whose words are quoted by Parthenius the
pupil of Dionysius, in the first book of his treatise on the Words
which occur in the Historians.

27. Now Theophrastus gives the following list of flowers as suitable to
be made into garlands—"The violet, the flower of Jupiter, the iphyum,
the wallflower, the hemerocalles, or yellow lily. But he says the
earliest blooming flower is the white violet; and about the same time
that which is called the wild wallflower appears, and after them the
narcissus and the lily; and of mountain flowers, that kind of anemone
which is called the mountain anemone, and the head of the bulb-plant.
For some people twine these flowers into garlands. And next to these
there comes the œnanthe and the purple violet. And of wild flowers,
there are the helichryse, and that species of anemone called the
meadow anemone, and the gladiolus, and the hyacinth. But the rose is
the latest blooming flower of all; and it is the latest to appear and
the first to go off. But the chief summer flowers are the lychnis, and
the flower of Jupiter, and the lily, and the iphyum, and the Phrygian
amaracus, and also the flower called the pothus." And in his ninth
book the same Theophrastus says, if any one wears a garland made of
the flower of the helichryse, he is praised if he sprinkle it with
ointment. And Alcman mentions it in these lines—

       And I pray to you, and bring
       This chaplet of the helichryse,
       And of the holy cypirus.

And Ibycus says—

       Myrtle-berries with violets mix'd,
       And helichryse, and apple blossoms,
       And roses, and the tender daphne.

And Cratinus, in his Effeminate People, says—

       With ground thyme and with crocuses,
       And hyacinths, and helichryse.

But the helichryse is a flower like the lotus. And Themistagoras the
Ephesian, in his book entitled The Golden Book, says that the flower
derives its name from the nymph who first picked it, who was called
Helichrysa. There are also, says Theophrastus, such flowers as purple
lilies. But Philinus says that the lily, which he calls κρίνον, is by
some people called λείριον, and by others ἴον. The Corinthians also
call this flower ambrosia, as Nicander says in his Dictionary. And
Diocles, in his treatise on Deadly Poisons, says—"The amaracus, which
some people call the sampsychus."

28. Cratinus also speaks of the hyacinth by the name of κοσμοσάνδαλον
in his Effeminate People, where he says—

       I crown my head with flowers, λείρια,
       Roses, and κρίνα, and κοσμοσάνδαλα.

And Clearchus, in the second book of his Lives, says—"You may remark
the Lacedæmonians who, having invented garlands of cosmosandalum,
trampled under foot the most ancient system of polity in the world, and
utterly ruined themselves; on which account Antiphanes the comic poet
very cleverly says of them, in his Harp-player—

       Did not the Lacedæmonians boast of old
       As though they were invincible? but now
       They wear effeminate purple head-dresses.

And Hicesius, in the second book of his treatise on Matter, says—"The
white violet is of moderately astringent properties, and has a most
delicious fragrance, and is very delightful, but only for a short time;
and the purple violet is of the same appearance, but it is far more
fragrant." And Apollodorus, in his treatise on Beasts, says—"There
is the chamæpitys, or ground pine, which some call olocyrum, but the
Athenians call it Ionia, and the Eubœans sideritis." And Nicander, in
the second book of his Georgics, (the words themselves I will quote
hereafter, when I thoroughly discuss all the flowers fit for making
into garlands,) says—"The violet (ἴον) was originally given
by some Ionian nymphs to Ion."

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

And in the sixth book of his History of Plants, Theophrastus says that
the narcissus is also called λείριον; but in a subsequent passage
he speaks of the narcissus and λείριον as different plants. And
Eumachus the Corcyrean, in his treatise on Cutting Roots, says that
the narcissus is also called acacallis, and likewise crotalum. But the
flower called hemerocalles, or day-beauty, which fades at night but
blooms at sunrise, is mentioned by Cratinus in his Effeminate People,
where he says—

       And the dear hemerocalles.

Concerning the ground thyme, Theophrastus says—"The people gather the
wild ground thyme on the mountains and plant it around Sicyon, and the
Athenians gather it on Hymettus; and other nations too have mountains
full of this flower, as the Thracians for instance." But Philinus
says that it is called zygis. And Amerias the Macedonian, speaking of
the lychnis in his treatise on Cutting up Roots, says that "it sprang
from the baths of Venus, when Venus bathed after having been sleeping
with Vulcan. And it is found in the greatest perfection in Cyprus and
Lemnos, and also in Stromboli and near mount Eryx, and at Cythera."

"But the iris," says Theophrastus, "blooms in the summer, and is the
only one of all the European flowers which has a sweet scent. And it
is in the highest beauty in those parts of Illyricum which are at a
distance from the sea." But Philinus says that the flowers of the
iris are called λύκοι, because they resemble the lips of the wolf
(λύκος). And Nicolaus of Damascus, in the hundred and eighth book of
his History, says that there is a lake near the Alps, many stadia in
circumference, round which there grow every year the most fragrant and
beautiful flowers, like those which are called calchæ. Alcman also
mentions the calchæ in these lines:—

       Having a golden-colour'd necklace on
       Of the bright calchæ, with their tender petals.

And Epicharmus, too, speaks of them in his Rustic.

29. Of roses, says Theophrastus in his sixth book, there are many
varieties. For most of them consist only of five leaves, but some
have twelve leaves; and some, near Philippi, have even as many as a
hundred leaves. For men take up the plants from Mount Pangæum, (and
they are very numerous there,) and plant them near the city. And the
inner petals are very small; for the fashion in which the flowers put
out their petals is, that some form the outer rows and some the inner
ones: but they have not much smell, nor are they of any great size.
And those with only five leaves are the most fragrant, and their lower
parts are very thorny. But the most fragrant roses are in Cyrene: on
which account the perfumes made there are the sweetest. And in this
country, too, the perfume of the violets, and of all other flowers,
is most pure and heavenly; and above all, the fragrance of the crocus
is most delicious in those parts." And Timachidas, in his Banquets,
says that the Arcadians call the rose εὐόμφαλον, meaning εὔοσμον,
or fragrant. And Apollodorus, in the fourth book of his History of
Parthia, speaks of a flower called philadelphum, as growing in the
country of the Parthians, and describes it thus:—"And there are many
kinds of myrtle,—the milax, and that which is called the philadelphum,
which has received a name corresponding to its natural character;
for when branches, which are at a distance from one another, meet
together of their own accord, they cohere with a vigorous embrace, and
become united as if they came from one root, and then growing on, they
produce fresh shoots: on which account they often make hedges of them
in well-cultivated farms; for they take the thinnest of the shoots,
and plait them in a net-like manner, and plant them all round their
gardens, and then these plants, when plaited together all round, make a
fence which it is difficult to pass through."

30. The author, too, of the Cyprian Poems gives lists of the flowers
which are suitable to be made into garlands, whether he was Hegesias,
or Stasinus, or any one else; for Demodamas, who was either a
Halicarnassian or Milesian, in his History of Halicarnassus, says that
the Cyprian Poems were the work of a citizen of Halicarnassus: however,
the author, whoever he was, in his eleventh book, speaks thus:—

       Then did the Graces, and the smiling Hours,
       Make themselves garments rich with various hues,
       And dyed them in the varied flowers that Spring
       And the sweet Seasons in their bosom bear.
       In crocus, hyacinth, and blooming violet,
       And the sweet petals of the peerless rose,
       So fragrant, so divine; nor did they scorn
       The dewy cups of the ambrosial flower
       That boasts Narcissus' name. Such robes, perfumed
       With the rich treasures of revolving seasons,
       The golden Venus wears.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

And this poet appears also to have been acquainted with the use of
garlands, when he says—

       And when the smiling Venus with her train
       Had woven fragrant garlands of the treasures
       The flowery earth puts forth, the goddesses
       All crown'd their heads with their queen's precious work,—
       The Nymphs and Graces, and the golden Venus,—
       And raised a tuneful song round Ida's springs.

31. Nicander also, in the second book of his Georgics, gives a regular
list of the flowers suitable to be made into garlands, and speaks as
follows concerning the Ionian nymphs and concerning roses:—

       And many other flowers you may plant,
       Fragrant and beauteous, of Ionian growth;
       Two sorts of violets are there,—pallid one,
       And like the colour of the virgin gold,
       Such as th' Ionian nymphs to Ion gave,
       When in the meadows of the holy Pisa
       They met and loved and crown'd the modest youth.
       For he had cheer'd his hounds and slain the boar,
       And in the clear Alpheus bathed his limbs,
       Before he visited those friendly nymphs.
       Cut then the shoots from off the thorny rose,
       And plant them in the trenches, leaving space
       Between, two spans in width. The poets tell
       That Midas first, when Asia's realms he left,
       Brought roses from th' Odonian hills of Thrace,
       And cultivated them in th' Emathian lands,
       Blooming and fragrant with their sixty petals.
       Next to th' Emathian roses those are praised
       Which the Megarian Nisæa displays:
       Nor is Phaselis, nor the land which worships
       The chaste Diana,[125] to be lightly praised,
       Made verdant by the sweet Lethæan stream.
       In other trenches place the ivy cuttings,
       And often e'en a branch with berries loaded
       May be entrusted to the grateful ground;

       *    *     *     *     *[126]

       Or with well-sharpen'd knife cut off the shoots,
       And plait them into baskets,

              *       *       *       *       *

       High on the top the calyx full of seed
       Grows with white leaves, tinged in the heart with gold,
       Which some call crina, others liria,
       Others ambrosia, but those who love
       The fittest name, do call them Venus' joy;
       For in their colour they do vie with Venus,
       Though far inferior to her decent form.
         The iris in its roots is like th' agallis,
       Or hyacinth fresh sprung from Ajax' blood;
       It rises high with swallow-shaped flowers,
       Blooming when summer brings the swallows back.
       Thick are the leaves they from their bosom pour,
       And the fresh flowers constantly succeeding,
       Shine in their stooping mouths.

              *        *       *       *       *

       Nor is the lychnis, nor the lofty rush,
       Nor the fair anthemis in light esteem,
       Nor the boanthemum with towering stem,
       Nor phlox whose brilliancy scarce seems to yield
       To the bright splendour of the midday sun.
         Plant the ground thyme where the more fertile ground
       Is moisten'd by fresh-welling springs beneath,
       That with long creeping branches it may spread,
       Or droop in quest of some transparent spring,
       The wood-nymphs' chosen draught. Throw far away
       The poppy's leaves, and keep the head entire,
       A sure protection from the teasing gnats;
       For every kind of insect makes its seat
       Upon the opening leaves; and on the head,
       Like freshening dews, they feed, and much rejoice
       In the rich latent honey that it bears;
       But when the leaves (θρῖα) are off, the mighty flame
       Soon scatters them....

(but by the word θρῖα he does not here mean the leaves of
fig-trees, but of the poppy).

                           Nor can they place their feet
       With steady hold, nor juicy food extract;
       And oft they slip, and fall upon their heads.
         Swift is the growth, and early the perfection
       Of the sampsychum, and of rosemary,
       And of the others which the gardens
       Supply to diligent men for well-earn'd garlands.
       Such are the feathery fern, the boy's-love sweet,
       (Like the tall poplar); such the golden crocus,
       Fair flower of early spring; the gopher white,
       And fragrant thyme, and all the unsown beauty
       Which in moist grounds the verdant meadows bear;
       The ox-eye, the sweet-smelling flower of Jove,
       The chalca, and the much sung hyacinth,
       And the low-growing violet, to which
       Dark Proserpine a darker hue has given;
       The tall panosmium, and the varied colours
       Which the gladiolus puts forth in vain
       To decorate the early tombs of maidens.
       Then too the ever-flourishing anemones,
       Tempting afar with their most vivid dyes.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

(But for ἐφελκόμεναι χροιῇσιν some copies have ἐφελκόμεναι φιλοχροιαῖς).

       And above all remember to select
       The elecampane and the aster bright,
       And place them in the temples of the gods,
       By roadside built, or hang them on their statues,
       Which first do catch the eye of the visitor.
       These are propitious gifts, whether you pluck
       The many-hued chrysanthemum, or lilies
       Which wither sadly o'er the much-wept tomb,
       Or gay old-man, or long-stalk'd cyclamen,
       Or rank nasturtium, whose scarlet flowers
       Grim Pluto chooses for his royal garland.

32. From these lines it is plain that the chelidonium is a different
flower from the anemone (for some people have called them the same).
But Theophrastus says that there are some plants, the flowers of which
constantly follow the stars, such as the one called the heliotrope, and
the chelidonium; and this last plant is named so from its coming into
bloom at the same time as the swallows arrive. There is also a flower
spoken of under the name of ambrosia by Carystius, in his Historical
Commentaries, where he says—"Nicander says that the plant named
ambrosia grows at Cos, on the head of the statue of Alexander." But I
have already spoken of it, and mentioned that some people give this
name to the lily. And Timachidas, in the fourth book of his Banquet,
speaks also of a flower called theseum,—

       The soft theseum, like the apple blossom,
       The sacred blossom of Leucerea,[127]
       Which the fair goddess loves above all others.

And he says that the garland of Ariadne was made of this flower.

Pherecrates also, or whoever the poet was who wrote the play of the
Persians, mentions some flowers as fit for garlands, and says—

       O you who sigh like mallows soft,
           Whose breath like hyacinths smells,
       Who like the melilotus speak,
           And smile as doth the rose,
       Whose kisses are as marjoram sweet,
           Whose action crisp as parsley,

         *       *       *       *       *

         Whose gait like cosmosandalum.
       Pour rosy wine, and with loud voice
         Raise the glad pæan's song,
       As laws of God and man enjoin
         On holy festival.

And the author of the Miners, whoever he was, (and that poem is
attributed to the same Pherecrates,) says—

         Treading on soft aspalathi
       Beneath the shady trees,
         In lotus-bearing meadows green,
       And on the dewy cypirus;
         And on the fresh anthryscum, and
       The modest tender violet,
         And green trefoil....

But here I want to know what this trefoil is; for there is a poem
attributed to Demarete, which is called The Trefoil. And also, in the
poem which is entitled The Good Men, Pherecrates or Strattis, whichever
is the author, says—

       And having bathed before the heat of day,
       Some crown their head and some anoint their bodies.

And he speaks of thyme, and of cosmosandalum. And Cratinus, in his
Effeminate Persons, says—

       Joyful now I crown my head
         With every kind of flower;
       Λείρια, roses, κρίνα too,
         And cosmosandala,
       And violets, and fragrant thyme,
         And spring anemones,
       Ground thyme, crocus, hyacinths,
         And buds of helichryse,
       Shoots of the vine, anthryscum too,
         And lovely hemerocalles.

              *       *       *       *       *

       My head is likewise shaded
         With evergreen melilotus;
       And of its own accord there comes
         The flowery cytisus.

33. Formerly the entrance of garlands and perfumes into the banqueting
rooms, used to herald the approach of the second course, as we may
learn from Nicostratus in his Pseudostigmatias, where, in the following
lines, he says—

                             And you too,
       Be sure and have the second course quite neat;
       Adorn it with all kinds of rich confections,
       Perfumes, and garlands, aye, and frankincense,
       And girls to play the flute.

[Sidenote: GARLANDS.]

But Philoxenus the Dithyrambic poet, in his poem entitled The Banquet,
represents the garland as entering into the commencement of the
banquet, using the following language:

       Then water was brought in to wash the hands,
       Which a delicate youth bore in a silver ewer,
       Ministering to the guests; and after that
       He brought us garlands of the tender myrtle,
       Close woven with young richly-colour'd shoots.

And Eubulus, in his Nurses, says—

       For when the old men came into the house,
       At once they sate them down. Immediately
       Garlands were handed round; a well-fill'd board
       Was placed before them, and (how good for th' eyes!)
       A closely-kneaded loaf of barley bread.

And this was the fashion also among the Egyptians, as Nicostratus says
in his Usurer; for, representing the usurer as an Egyptian, he says—

  _A._ We caught the pimp and two of his companions,
       When they had just had water for their hands,
       And garlands.
                  _B._ Sure the time, O Chærophon,
       Was most propitious.

But you may go on gorging yourself, O Cynulcus; and when you have
done, tell us why Cratinus has called the melilotus "the ever-watching
melilotus." However, as I see you are already a little tipsy (ἔξοινον)—
for that is the word Alexis has used for a man thoroughly drunk
(μεθύσην), in his Settler—I won't go on teasing you; but I will bid the
slaves, as Sophocles says in his Fellow Feasters,

       Come, quick! let some one make the barley-cakes,
       And fill the goblets deep; for this man now,
       Just like a farmer's ox, can't work a bit
       Till he has fill'd his belly with good food.

And there is a man of the same kind mentioned by Aristias of Phlius;
for he, too, in his play entitled The Fates, says—

      The guest is either a boatman or a parasite,
       A hanger-on of hell, with hungry belly,
       Which nought can satisfy.

However, as he gives no answer whatever to all these things which have
been said, I order him (as it is said in the Twins of Alexis) to be
carried out of the party, crowned with χύδαιοι garlands. But the comic
poet, alluding to χύδαιοι garlands, says—

       These garlands all promiscuously (χύδην) woven.

But, after this, I will not carry on this conversation any further
to-day; but will leave the discussion about perfumes to those who
choose to continue it: and only desire the boy, on account of this
lecture of mine about garlands, as Antiphanes....

       To bring now hither two good garlands,
       And a good lamp, with good fire brightly burning;

for then I shall wind up my speech like the conclusion of a play.

And not many days after this, as if he had been prophesying a silence
for himself [which should be eternal], he died, happily, without
suffering under any long illness, to the great affliction of us his
companions.

[Sidenote: DYES.]

34. And while the slaves were bringing round perfumes in alabaster
boxes, and in other vessels made of gold, some one, seeing Cynulcus,
anointed his face with a great deal of ointment. But he, being awakened
by it, when he recollected himself, said;—What is this? O Hercules,
will not some one come with a sponge and wipe my face, which is
thus polluted with a lot of dirt? And do not you all know that that
exquisite writer Xenophon, in his Banquet, represents Socrates as
speaking thus:—"'By Jupiter! O Callias, you entertain us superbly;
for you have not only given us a most faultless feast, but you have
furnished us also with delicious food for our eyes and ears.'—'Well,
then,' said he, 'suppose any one were to bring us perfumes, in order
that we might also banquet on sweet smells?'—'By no means,' said
Socrates; 'for as there is one sort of dress fit for women and another
for men, so there is one kind of smell fit for women and another for
men. And no man is ever anointed with perfume for the sake of men; and
as to women, especially when they are brides,—as, for instance, the
bride of this Niceratus here, and the bride of Critobulus,—how can they
want perfumes in their husbands, when they themselves are redolent of
it? But the smell of the oil in the gymnasia, when it is present, is
sweeter than perfume to women; and when it is absent, they long more
for it. For if a slave and a freeman be anointed with perfume, they
both smell alike in a moment; but those smells which are derived from
free labours, require both virtuous habits and a good deal of time if
they are to be agreeable and in character with a freeman.'" And
that admirable writer Chrysippus says that perfumes (μύρα) derive their
name from being prepared with great toil (μόρος) and useless labour.
The Lacedæmonians even expel from Sparta those who make perfumes, as
being wasters of oil; and those who dye wool, as being destroyers of
the whiteness of the wool. And Solon the philosopher, in his laws,
forbade men to be sellers of perfumes.

35. "But now, not only scents," as Clearchus says in the third book of
his Lives, "but also dyes, being full of luxury, tend to make those
men effeminate who have anything to do with them. And do you think
that effeminacy without virtue has anything desirable in it? But even
Sappho, a thorough woman, and a poetess into the bargain, was ashamed
to separate honour from elegance; and speaks thus—

       But elegance I truly love;
       And this my love of life has brilliancy,
       And honour, too, attached to it:

making it evident to everybody that the desire of life that she
confessed had respectability and honour in it; and these things
especially belong to virtue. But Parrhasius the painter, although he
was a man beyond all measure arrogant about his art, and though he got
the credit of a liberal profession by some mere pencils and pallets,
still in words set up a claim to virtue, and put this inscription on
all his works that are at Lindus:—

       This is Parrhasius' the painter's work,
       A most luxurious (ἁβροδίαιτος) and virtuous man.

And a wit being indignant at this, because, I suppose, he seemed to be
a disgrace to the delicacy and beauty of virtue, having perverted the
gifts which fortune had bestowed upon him to luxury, proposed to change
the inscription into ῥαβδοδίαιτος ἀνήρ: Still, said he, the
man must be endured, since he says that he honours virtue." These are
the words of Clearchus. But Sophocles the poet, in his play called The
Judgment, represents Venus, being a sort of Goddess of Pleasure, as
anointed with perfumes, and looking in a glass; but Minerva, as being a
sort of Goddess of Intellect and Mind, and also of Virtue, as using oil
and gymnastic exercises.

36. In reply to this, Masurius said;—But, my most excellent friend,
are you not aware that it is in our brain that our senses are soothed,
and indeed reinvigorated, by sweet smells? as Alexis says in his
Wicked Woman, where he speaks thus—

                   The best recipe for health
       Is to apply sweet scents unto the brain.

And that most valiant, and indeed warlike poet, Alcæus, says—

       He shed a sweet perfume all o'er my breast.

And the wise Anacreon says somewhere—

       Why fly away, now that you've well anointed
       Your breast, more hollow than a flute, with unguents?

for he recommends anointing the breast with unguent, as being the seat
of the heart, and considering it an admitted point that that is soothed
with fragrant smells. And the ancients used to act thus, not only
because scents do of their own nature ascend upwards from the breast
to the seat of smelling, but also because they thought that the soul
had its abode in the heart; as Praxagoras, and Philotimus the physician
taught; and Homer, too, says—

       He struck his breast, and thus reproved his heart.[128]

And again he says—

       His heart within his breast did rage.[129]

And in the Iliad he says—

       But Hector's heart within his bosom shook.[130]

And this they consider a proof that the most important portion of the
soul is situated in the heart; for it is as evident as possible that
the heart quivers when under the agitation of fear. And Agamemnon, in
Homer, says—

       Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,
       And scarce my heart support its load of pain;
       With fears distracted, with no fix'd design,
       And all my people's miseries are mine.[131]

And Sophocles has represented women released from fear as saying—

       Now Fear's dark daughter does no more exult
       Within my heart.[132]

But Anaxandrides makes a man who is struggling with fear say—

                 O my wretched heart!
       How you alone of all my limbs or senses
       Rejoice in evil; for you leap and dance
       The moment that you see your lord alarm'd.

[Sidenote: PERFUMES.]

And Plato says, "that the great Architect of the universe has placed
the lungs close to the heart, by nature soft and destitute of blood,
and having cavities penetrable like sponge, that so the heart, when
it quivers, from fear of adversity or disaster, may vibrate against
a soft and yielding substance." But the garlands with which men bind
their bosoms are called ὑποθυμιάδες by the poets, from the
exhalations (ἀναθυμίασις) of the flowers, and not because the
soul (ψυχὴ) is called θυμὸς, as some people think.

37. Archilochus is the earliest author who uses the word μύρον
(perfume), where he says—

       She being old would spare her perfumes (μύρα).

And in another place he says—

       Displaying hair and breast perfumed (ἐσμυρισμένον);
       So that a man, though old, might fall in love with her.

And the word μύρον is derived from μύῤῥα, which is
the Æolic form of σμύρνα (myrrh); for the greater portion
of unguents are made up with myrrh, and that which is called στακτὴ
is wholly composed of it. Not but what Homer was acquainted
with the fashion of using unguents and perfumes, but he calls them
ἔλαια, with the addition of some distinctive epithet, as—

       Himself anointing them with dewy oil (δροσόεντι ἐλαίῳ).[133]

And in another place he speaks of an oil as perfumed[134] (τεθυωμένον).
And in his poems also, Venus anoints the dead body of Hector with
ambrosial rosy oil; and this is made of flowers. But with respect to
that which is made of spices, which they called θυώματα, he says,
speaking of Juno,—

       Here first she bathes, and round her body pours
       Soft oils of fragrance and ambrosial showers:
       The winds perfumed, the balmy gale convey
       Through heaven, through earth, and all the aërial way.
       Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets
       The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.[135]

38. But the choicest unguents are made in particular places, as
Apollonius of Herophila says in his treatise on Perfumes, where he
writes—"The iris is best in Elis, and at Cyzicus; the perfume made
from roses is most excellent at Phaselis, and that made at Naples and
Capua is also very fine. That made from crocuses is in the highest
perfection at Soli in Cilicia, and at Rhodes. The essence of spikenard
is best at Tarsus; and the extract of vine-leaves is made best in
Cyprus and at Adramyttium. The best perfume from marjoram and from
apples comes from Cos. Egypt bears the palm for its essence of cypirus;
and the next best is the Cyprian, and Phœnician, and after them comes
the Sidonian. The perfume called Panathenaicum is made at Athens; and
those called Metopian and Mendesian are prepared with the greatest
skill in Egypt. But the Metopian is made of oil which is extracted from
bitter almonds. Still, the superior excellence of each perfume is owing
to the purveyors and the materials and the artists, and not to the
place itself; for Ephesus formerly, as men say, had a high reputation
for the excellence of its perfumes, and especially of its megallium,
but now it has none. At one time, too, the unguents made in Alexandria
were brought to high perfection, on account of the wealth of the city,
and the attention that Arsinoe and Berenice paid to such matters; and
the finest extract of roses in the world was made at Cyrene while
the great Berenice was alive. Again, in ancient times, the extract
of vine-leaves made at Adramyttium was but poor; but afterwards it
became first-rate, owing to Stratonice, the wife of Eumenes. Formerly,
too, Syria used to make every sort of unguent admirably, especially
that extracted from fenugreek; but the case is quite altered now. And
long ago there used to be a most delicious unguent extracted from
frankincense at Pergamus, owing to the invention of a certain perfumer
of that city, for no one else had ever made it before him; but now none
is made there.

"Now, when a valuable unguent is poured on the top of one that is
inferior, it remains on the surface; but when good honey is poured on
the top of that which is inferior, it works its way to the bottom, for
it compels that which is worse to rise above it."

39. Achæus mentions Egyptian perfumes in his Prizes; and says—

       They'll give you Cyprian stones, and ointments choice
       From dainty Egypt, worth their weight in silver.

"And perhaps," says Didymus, "he means in this passage that which is
called στακτὴ, on account of the myrrh which is brought to
Egypt, and from thence imported into Greece."

[Sidenote: PERFUMES.]

And Hicesius says, in the second book of his treatise on Matter,—"Of
perfumes, some are rubbed on, and some are poured on. Now, the perfume
made from roses is suitable for drinking parties, and so is that made
from myrtles and from apples; and this last is good for the stomach,
and useful for lethargic people. That made from vine-leaves is good
for the stomach, and has also the effect of keeping the mind clear.
Those extracted from sampsychum and ground thyme are also well suited
to drinking parties; and so is that extract of crocus which is not
mixed with any great quantity of myrrh. The στακτὴ, also, is
well suited for drinking parties; and so is the spikenard: that made
from fenugreek is sweet and tender; while that which comes from white
violets is fragrant, and very good for the digestion."

Theophrastus, also, in his treatise on Scents, says, "that some
perfumes are made of flowers; as, for instance, from roses, and white
violets, and lilies, which last is called σούσινον. There are also
those which are extracted from mint and ground thyme, and gopper, and
the crocus; of which the best is procured in Ægina and Cilicia. Some,
again, are made of leaves, as those made from myrrh and the œnanthe;
and the wild vine grows in Cyprus, on the mountains, and is very
plentiful; but no perfume is made of that which is found in Greece,
because that has no scent. Some perfumes, again, are extracted from
roots; as is that made from the iris, and from spikenard, and from
marjoram, and from zedoary."

40. Now, that the ancients were very much addicted to the use of
perfumes, is plain from their knowing to which of our limbs each
unguent was most suitable. Accordingly, Antiphanes, in his Thoricians,
or The Digger, says—

  _A._ He really bathes—
                       _B._ What then?
  _A._ In a large gilded tub, and steeps his feet
       And legs in rich Egyptian unguents;
       His jaws and breasts he rubs with thick palm-oil,
       And both his arms with extract sweet of mint;
       His eyebrows and his hair with marjoram,
       His knees and neck with essence of ground thyme.

And Cephisodorus, in his Trophonius, says—

  _A._ And now that I may well anoint my body,
       Buy me some unguents, I beseech you, Xanthias,
       Of roses made and irises. Buy, too,
       Some oil of baccaris for my legs and feet.
  _B._ You stupid wretch! Shall I buy baccaris,
       And waste it on your worthless feet?

Anaxandrides, too, in his Protesilaus, says—

       Unguents from Peron, which but yesterday
       He sold to Melanopus,—very costly,
       Fresh come from Egypt; which he uses now
       To anoint the feet of vile Callistratus.

And Theopompus also mentions this perfumer, Peron, in his Admetus, and
in the Hedychares. Antiphanes, too, says in his Antea—

       I left the man in Peron's shop, just now,
       Dealing for ointments; when he has agreed,
       He'll bring you cinnamon and spikenard essence.

41. Now, there is a sort of ointment called βάκκαρις by many
of the comic poets; and Hipponax uses this name in the following line:—

       I then my nose with baccaris anointed,
       Redolent of crocus.

And Achæus, in his Æthon, a satyric drama, says—

       Anointed o'er with baccaris, and dressing
       All his front hair with cooling fans of feathers.

But Ion, in his Omphale, says—

       'Tis better far to know the use of μύρα,
       And βάκκαρις, and Sardian ornaments,
       Than all the fashions in the Peloponnesus.

And when he speaks of Sardian ornaments, he means to include perfumes;
since the Lydians were very notorious for their luxury. And so Anacreon
uses the word Λυδοπαθὴς (Lydian-like) as equivalent to ἡδυπαθὴς
(luxurious). Sophocles also uses the word βάκκαρις; and Magnes, in his
Lydians, says—

       A man should bathe, and then with baccaris
       Anoint himself.

Perhaps, however, μύρον and βάκκαρις were not exactly the same thing;
for Æschylus, in his Amymone, makes a distinction between them, and
says—

       Your βακκάρεις and your μύρα.

And Simonides says—

       And then with μύρον, and rich spices too,
       And βάκκαρις, did I anoint myself.

And Aristophanes, in his Thesmophoriazusæ, says—

[Sidenote: PERFUMES.]

       O venerable Jove! with what a scent
       Did that vile bag, the moment it was open'd,
       O'erwhelm me, full of βάκκαρις and μύρον![136]

42. Pherecrates mentions an unguent, which he calls βρένθιον,
in his Trifles, saying—

       I stood, and order'd him to pour upon us
       Some brenthian unguent, that he also might
       Pour it on those departing.

And Crates mentions what he calls royal unguent, in his Neighbours;
speaking as follows:—

       He smelt deliciously of royal unguent.

But Sappho mentions the royal and the brenthian unguent together, as if
they were one and the same thing; saying—

       βρενθεΐῳ βασιληΐῳ,

Aristophanes speaks of an unguent which he calls ψάγδης, in
his Daitaleis; saying—

       Come, let me see what unguent I can give you:
       Do you like ψάγδης?

And Eupolis, in his Marica, says—

       All his breath smells of ψάγδης.

Eubulus, in his Female Garland-seller's, says—

       She thrice anointed with Egyptian psagdas (ψάγδανι).

Polemo, in his writings addressed to Adæus, says that there is an
unguent in use among the Eleans called plangonium, from having been
invented by a man named Plangon. And Sosibius says the same in his
Similitudes; adding, that the unguent called megallium is so named
for a similar reason: for that that was invented by a Sicilian whose
name was Megallus. But some say that Megallus was an Athenian: and
Aristophanes mentions him in his Telmissians, and so does Pherecrates
in his Petale; and Strattis, in his Medea, speaks thus:—

       And say that you are bringing her such unguents,
       As old Megallus never did compound,
       Nor Dinias, that great Egyptian, see,
       Much less possess.

Amphis also, in his Ulysses, mentions the Megallian unguent in the
following passage—

  _A._ Adorn the walls all round with hangings rich,
       Milesian work; and then anoint them o'er
       With sweet megallium, and also burn
       The royal mindax.
                      _B._ Where did you, O master,
  E'er hear the name of such a spice as that?

Anaxandrides, too, in his Tereus, says—

       And like the illustrious bride, great Basilis,
       She rubs her body with megallian unguent.

Menander speaks of an unguent made of spikenard, in his Cecryphalus,
and says—

  _A._ This unguent, boy, is really excellent.
  _B._ Of course it is, 'tis spikenard.

43. And anointing oneself with an unguent of this description, Alcæus
calls μυρίσασθαι, in his Palæstræ, speaking thus—

       Having anointed her (μυρίσασα), she shut her up
       In her own stead most secretly.

But Aristophanes uses not μυρίσματα, but μυρώματα, in
his Ecclesiazusæ, saying—

       I who 'm anointed (μεμύρισμαι) o'er my head with unguents
       (μυρώμασι).[137]

There was also an unguent called sagda, which is mentioned by Eupolis
in his Coraliscus, where he writes—

       And baccaris, and sagda too.

And it is spoken of likewise by Aristophanes, in his Daitaleis; and
Eupolis in his Marica says—

       And all his breath is redolent of sagda:

which expression Nicander of Thyatira understands to be meant as an
attack upon a man who is too much devoted to luxury. But Theodoras
says, that sagda is a species of spice used in fumigation.

44. Now a cotyla of unguent used to be sold for a high price at Athens,
even, as Hipparchus says in his Nocturnal Festival, for as much as
five minæ; but as Menander, in his Misogynist, states, for ten. And
Antiphanes, in his Phrearrus, where he is speaking of the unguent
called stacte, says—

       The stacte at two minæ's not worth having.

Now the citizens of Sardis were not the only people addicted to the use
of unguents, as Alexis says in his Maker of Goblets—

       The whole Sardian people is of unguents fond;

[Sidenote: PERFUMES.]

but the Athenians also, who have always been the leaders of every
refinement and luxury in human life, used them very much; so that among
them, as has been already mentioned, they used to fetch an enormous
price; but, nevertheless, they did not abstain from the use of them on
that account; just as we now do not deny ourselves scents which are so
expensive and exquisite that those things are mere trifles which are
spoken of in the Settler of Alexis—

       For he did use no alabaster box
       From which t'anoint himself; for this is but
       An ordinary, and quite old-fashion'd thing.
       But he let loose four doves all dipp'd in unguents,
       Not of one kind, but each in a different sort;
       And then they flew around, and hovering o'er us,
       Besprinkled all our clothes and tablecloths.
       Envy me not, ye noble chiefs of Greece;
       For thus, while sacrificing, I myself
       Was sprinkled o'er with unguent of the iris.

45. Just think, in God's name, my friends, what luxury, or I should
rather say, what profuse waste it was to have one's garments sprinkled
in this manner, when a man might have taken up a little unguent in
his hands, as we do now, and in that manner have anointed his whole
body, and especially his head. For Myronides says, in his treatise
on Unguents and Garlands, that "the fashion of anointing the head at
banquets arose from this:—that those men whose heads are naturally
dry, find the humours which are engendered by what they eat, rise up
into their heads; and on this account, as their bodies are inflamed
by fevers, they bedew their heads with lotions, so as to prevent
the neighbouring humours from rising into a part which is dry, and
which also has a considerable vacuum in it. And so at their banquets,
having consideration for this fact, and being afraid of the strength
of the wine rising into their heads, men have introduced the fashion
of anointing their heads, and by these means the wine, they think,
will have less effect upon them, if they make their head thoroughly
wet first. And as men are never content with what is merely useful,
but are always desirous to add to that whatever tends to pleasure and
enjoyment; in that way they have been led to adopt the use of unguents."

We ought, therefore, my good cynic Theodorus, to use at banquets
those unguents which have the least tendency to produce heaviness,
and to employ those which have astringent or cooling properties very
sparingly. But Aristotle, that man of most varied learning, raises the
question, "Why men who use unguents are more grey than others? Is it
because unguents have drying properties by reason of the spices used
in their composition, so that they who use them become dry, and the
dryness produces greyness? For whether greyness arises from a drying
of the hair, or from a want of natural heat, at all events dryness has
a withering effect. And it is on this account too that the use of hats
makes men grey more quickly; for by them the moisture which ought to
nourish the hair is taken away."

46. But when I was reading the twenty-eighth book of the History of
Posidonius, I observed, my friends, a very pleasant thing which was
said about unguents, and which is not at all foreign to our present
discussion. For the philosopher says—"In Syria, at the royal banquets,
when the garlands are given to the guests, some slaves come in, having
little bladders full of Babylonian perfumes, and going round the room
at a little distance from the guests, they bedew their garlands with
the perfumes, sprinkling nothing else." And since the discussion has
brought us to this point, I will add

       A verse to Love,

as the bard of Cythera says, telling you that Janus, who is worshipped
as a great god by us, and whom we call Janus Pater, was the original
inventor of garlands. And Dracon of Corcyra tells us this in his
treatise on Precious Stones, where his words are—"But it is said that
Janus had two faces, the one looking forwards and the other backwards;
and that it is from him that the mountain Janus and the river Janus are
both named, because he used to live on the mountain. And they say that
he was the first inventor of garlands, and boats, and ships; and was
also the first person who coined brazen money. And on this account many
cities in Greece, and many in Italy and Sicily, place on their coins
a head with two faces, and on the obverse a boat, or a garland, or a
ship. And they say that he married his sister Camise, and had a son
named Æthax, and a daughter Olistene. And he, aiming at a more extended
power and renown, sailed over to Italy, and settled on a mountain near
Rome, which was called Janiculum from his name."

[Sidenote: LIBATIONS.]

47. This, now, is what was said about perfumes and some unguents.
And after this most of them asked for wine, some demanding the Cup of
the Good Deity, others that of Health, and different people invoking
different deities; and so they all fell to quoting the words of those
poets who had mentioned libations to these different deities; and I
will now recapitulate what they said, for they quoted Antiphanes, who,
in his Clowns, says—

       Harmodius was invoked, the pæan sung,
       Each drank a mighty cup to Jove the Saviour.

And Alexis, in his Usurer, or The Liar, says—

  _A._ Fill now the cup with the libation due
       To Jove the Saviour; for he surely is
       Of all the gods most useful to mankind.
  _B._ Your Jove the Saviour, if I were to burst,
       Would nothing do for me.
  _A._                        Just drink, and trust him.

And Nicostratus, in his Pandrosos, says—

                     And so I will, my dear;
       But fill him now a parting cup to Health;
       Here, pour a due libation out to Health.
       Another to Good Fortune. Fortune manages
       All the affairs of men; but as for Prudence,—
       That is a blind irregular deity.

And in the same play he mentions mixing a cup in honour of the Good
Deity, as do nearly all the poets of the old comedy; but Nicostratus
speaks thus—

       Fill a cup quickly now to the Good Deity,
       And take away this table from before me;
       For I have eaten quite enough;—I pledge
       This cup to the Good Deity;—here, quick, I say,
       And take away this table from before me.

Xenarchus, too, in his Twins, says—

       And now when I begin to nod my head,
       The cup to the Good Deity     *     *
       *           *           *           *
       That cup, when I had drain'd it, near upset me;
       And then the next libation duly quaff'd
       To Jove the Saviour, wholly wreck'd my boat,
       And overwhelm'd me as you see.

And Eriphus, in his Melibœa, says—

       Before he'd drunk a cup to the Good Deity,
       Or to great Jove the Saviour.

48. And Theophrastus, in his essay on Drunkenness, says—"The unmixed
wine which is given at a banquet, which they call the pledge-cup
in honour of the Good Deity, they offer in small quantities, as if
reminding the guests of its strength, and of the liberality of the
god, by the mere taste. And they hand it round when men are already
full, in order that there may be as little as possible drunk out of
it. And having paid adoration three times, they take it from the
table, as if they were entreating of the gods that nothing may be done
unbecomingly, and that they may not indulge in immoderate desires for
this kind of drink, and that they may derive only what is honourable
and useful from it." And Philochorus, in the second book of his Atthis,
says—"And a law was made at that time, that after the solid food is
removed, a taste of the unmixed wine should be served round as a sort
of sample of the power of the Good Deity, but that all the rest of the
wine should be previously mixed; on which account the Nymphs had the
name given them of Nurses of Bacchus." And that when the pledge-cup to
the Good Deity was handed round, it was customary to remove the tables,
is made plain by the wicked action of Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily.
For there was a table of gold placed before the statue of Æsculapius
at Syracuse; and so Dionysius, standing before it, and chinking a
pledge-cup to the Good Deity, ordered the table to be removed.

But among the Greeks, those who sacrifice to the Sun, as Phylarchus
tells us in the twelfth book of his History, make their libations of
honey, as they never bring wine to the altars of the gods; saying that
it is proper that the god who keeps the whole universe in order, and
regulates everything, and is always going round and superintending the
whole, should in no respect be connected with drunkenness.

49. Most writers have mentioned the Attic Scolia; and they are worthy
also of being mentioned by me to you, on account of the antiquity and
simple style of composition of the authors, and of those especially who
gained a high reputation for that description of poetry, Alcæus and
Anacreon; as Aristophanes says in his Daitaleis, where we find this
line—

       Come, then, a scolium sing to me,
       Of old Alcæus or Anacreon.

[Sidenote: SCOLIA.]

Praxilla, the Sicyonian poetess, was also celebrated for the
composition of scolia. Now they are called scolia, not because of
the character of the verse in which they are written, as if it were
σκολιὸς (crooked); for men call also those poems written in a laxer
kind of metre σκολιά. But, "as there are three kinds of songs" (as
Artemo of Cassandra says in the second book of his treatise on the
Use of Books), "one or other of which comprehends everything which
is sung at banquets; the first kind is that which it was usual for
the whole party to sing; the second is that which the whole party
indeed sang, not, however, together, but going round according to some
kind of succession; the third is that which is ranked lowest of all,
which was not sung by all the guests, but only by those who seemed
to understand what was to be done, wherever they might happen to be
sitting; on which account, as having some irregularity in it beyond
what the other kinds had, in not being sung by all the guests, either
together or in any definite kind of succession, but just as it might
happen, it was called σκολιόν. And songs of this kind were sung when
the ordinary songs, and those in which every one was bound to join,
had come to an end. For then they invited all the more intelligent of
the guests to sing some song worth listening to. And what they thought
worth listening to were such songs as contained some exhortations and
sentiments which seemed useful for the purposes of life."

50. And of these Deipnosophists, one quoted one scolium, and one
another. And these were those which were recited—


