I.

       Orpheus,—Œagrus' son,—thou know'st full well,—
         The Thracian harper,—how with magic skill,
       Inspired by love, he struck the chorded shell,
         And made the shades obedient to his will,

       As from the nether gloom to light he led
         His love Agriope. He to Pluto's land,
       Baleful and cheerless, region of the dead,
         Sail'd far away,—and sought th' infernal strand,

       Where Charon, gaunt and grim, his hollow bark
         (Fraught with departed souls, an airy crowd)
       Steers o'er the Stygian billow dun and dark,
         And with a voice of thunder bellows loud

       O'er the slow pool, that scarcely creeps along
         Through sedge, and weedy ooze: but nathless he,
       On the lone margent, pour'd his love-sick song,
         And charm'd Hell's monsters with his minstrelsy.

       Cocytus scowl'd,—but grinn'd a ghastly smile,
         Albeit unused to the relenting mood:
       Cerb'rus, three-mouth'd, stopp'd short,—and paused the while,
         Low-crouching, list'ning, (for the sounds were good)

       Silent his throat of flame, his eyes of fire
         Quench'd in ecstatic slumber, as he lay.
       Thus Hell's stern rulers hearken'd to his lyre,
         And gave the fair one back to upper day.

II.

       Nor did Musæus, Luna's heav'nly child,
         And high-priest of the Graces, leave unsung
       The fair Antiope, in accents wild,
         As fell th' impassion'd language from his tongue:

       Who woo'd of many suitors, at the shrine
         Of mystic Ceres, by Eleusis' brow,
       Chanted the high response in strains divine,—
         And oped the secret springs,—and taught to know

       The heav'n-drawn truths, in holy rapture lost.
         But nought avail'd her zeal;—in evil hour,
       Theme of the lyre below, her hopes were cross'd:
         Death cropp'd the stalk, that bore so fair a flow'r.

III.

       I tell thee too, that the Bœotian bard,
         Sage Hesiod, quitted the Cumæan shore,
       A wand'rer not unwilling,—afterward
         In Heliconian Ascra seen to soar,

       Deathless upon the mighty wings of fame.
         'Twas there he woo'd Eœa, peerless maid,—
       And strove to achieve her love,—and with her name
         Prefaced his verse, with hallow'd lore inlaid.

IV.

       Enravish'd Homer, ward of Fate from Jove,
         Prince of melodious numbers, toil'd his way
       To barren Ithaca,—and tuned, for love
         Of chaste Penelope, the am'rous lay;

       Forgot his native land, and bade adieu
         To wide Ionia, for the island drear,
       And wail'd Icarius' house, and Sparta too,
         And dropp'd himself the sympathetic tear.

V.

       Mimnermus, school'd in hardship, who first taught
         To breathe soft airs of elegiac song,
       Fair Nanno ask'd, and had; and often sought,
         As by her side he blithely trudged along,
       The merry wake,—a ready piper arm'd
         With mouth-piece aptly fitted: and with worse
       Than deadly hate and indignation warm'd,
         Hermobius and Pherecles lash'd in verse.

VI.

       Antimachus, for beauteous Lyda's love,
         Hied him to rich Pactolus' golden tide:
       But, well-a-day! his bliss stern Fate unwove;
         Short was her doom,—in Pergamus she died,—

       And in her grave was laid in prime of age.
         He, full of lamentation, journey'd on
       To Colophon,—and on the sacred page
         Enter'd his tale, and ceased, his mission done.

VII.

       And well thou know'st, how famed Alcæus smote
         Of his high harp the love-enliven'd strings,
       And raised to Sappho's praise th' enamour'd note,
         Midst noise of mirth and jocund revellings:

       Ay, he did love that nightingale of song
         With all a lover's fervour,—and, as he
       Deftly attuned the lyre, to madness stung
         The Teian bard with envious jealousy.

       For her Anacreon, charming lyrist, woo'd,
         And fain would win, with sweet mellifluous chime,
       Encircled by her Lesbian sisterhood;—
         Would often Samos leave, and many a time,

       From vanquish'd Teos' viny orchards, hie
         To viny Lesbos' isle,—and from the shore,
       O'er the blue wave, on Lectum cast his eye,
         And think on by-gone days, and times no more.

