CHAPTER II

THE DEIFICATION OF WOMAN

(THE FIRST FORM OF METAPHYSICAL EROTICISM)

_(a) The Love of the Troubadours_


In the long chapter on the Birth of Europe, I have attempted to bring
corroborative evidence from all sides in support of my contention that
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries witnessed the birth and gradual
development of a new value of the highest importance: the value of
individuality, impersonated by the citizen of Europe. We are now
prepared to realise the psychological importance and the importance for
progress of one of the greatest results of this new development--the
spiritual love of man for woman. From this subject, the specific subject
of my book, I shall not again digress.

We are aware that the man of antiquity (and also the Eastern nations of
to-day) recognised between man and woman only the sexual bond,
uninfluenced by personal and psychological motives, and leading in
Greece to the institution of monogamy on purely economical and political
grounds. In addition to this bond there existed a very distinct
spiritual love, evolved by Plato and his circle and projected by one man
on another member of his own sex. In the true Hellenic spirit this love
aspired to guide the individual to the ideal of perfection, the beauty
and wisdom of the friend serving as stepping-stones in the upward climb.
In Christianity the spiritual love of the divine became the greatest
value and the pivot on which the emotions turned. The primitive
Christian scorned the body, his own as well as that of his fellow; he
despised beauty of form, and regarded only the divine as worthy of love.
Woman was disparaged and suspected; all thinkers, down to Thomas and
Anselm, looking upon her merely as a snare and a pitfall. The period
discussed in detail in the foregoing chapter ushered in a new and, until
then, unknown feeling. In crude and conscious contrast to sexuality,
deprecated alike by classical Greece and primitive Christianity,
spiritual love of man for woman came into existence. It was composed of
three clearly distinguishable elements: the Platonic thought,
maintaining that the greatest virtue lies in the striving for absolute
perfection; the entirely spiritual love of the divine, sufficient in
itself, and representing the final purpose of life, as developed by
Christianity; and the dawning knowledge of the value of personality.
From these three elements: the noblest inheritance of antiquity, the
central creation of Christianity, and the pivot of the new-born European
spirit, sprang the new value which is the subject of the second stage of
eroticism. The position of woman had changed; she was no longer the
medium for the satisfaction of the male impulse, or the rearing of
children, as in antiquity; no longer the silent drudge or devout sister
of the first Christian millenary; no longer the she-devil of monkish
conception; transcending humanity, she had been exalted to the heavens
and had become a goddess. She was loved and adored with a devotion not
of this earth, a devotion which was the sole source of all things lofty
and good; she had become the saviour of humanity and queen of the
universe.

The rejection of sensuality is an inherent part of the Christian
religion; only he who had overcome his sinful desires was a hero.
Spiritual love was as yet unknown, only the sexual impulse was realised,
and that was looked upon as a sin; there was but one way of escape:
renunciation. This view is very clearly expressed in the legends of
Alexius, and in Barlaam and Josaphat (which although of Indian origin,
had found a German interpreter and were known all over Europe). The
latter legend tells how Prince Josaphat, a devout Christian, married a
beautiful princess. On his wedding night he had a vision of the
celestial paradise, the dominion of chastity, and the earthly pool of
sin. Recognising in his bride a devil who had come to tempt him, he left
her and fled into the desert. Many legends illustrate the incapacity of
the first millenary to realise the relationship between the sexes in any
other sense. Woman was evil; the struggle against her a laudable effort.

Very probably the stigmatising of all eroticism during that long spell
of a thousand years was necessary. Only the unnatural condemnation of
love in its widest sense, a hatred of sex and woman such as was felt by
Tertullian and Origen, could result in the reverse of sexuality--purely
spiritual love with its logical climax, the deification and worship of
woman. There can be no doubt that the Christian ideal of chastity was
largely responsible for the evolution of the ideal of spiritual love.
The identity of love and chastity was propounded--in sharp contrast to
sexuality and--more particularly amongst the later troubadours, such as
Montanhagol, Sordello, and the poets of the "sweet new style" in
Italy--with a distinct leaning towards religious ecstasy.

Infinite tenderness pervaded the nascent cult of woman. It seemed as if
man were eager to compensate her for the indignity which he had heaped
upon her for a thousand years. His instinctive need to worship had found
an incomparable being on earth before whom he prostrated himself. She
was the climax of earthly perfection; no word, no metaphor was
sufficiently ecstatic to express the full fervour of his adoration; a
new religion was created, and she was the presiding divinity. "What were
the world if beauteous woman were not?" sang Johannes Hadlaub, a German
poet.

Once more I must revert to personality, the fundamental value of the
European. In antiquity, even in Greece and Rome, personality in its
higher sense did not exist. The hero was the epitome of all the energies
of the nation, a term for the striving of the community; the statesman
was the incarnate political will of the people; even the poet's ideal
was the representation of the Hellenic type in all its aspects.
Agamemnon was no more than the intelligent ruler, Achilles the
headstrong hero, Odysseus the cunning adventurer. The individual was a
member and servant of the tribe, the town, the state; each man knew that
his fellow did not essentially differ from him; and even at the period
when Hellas was at its meridian the individuals were, compared to modern
men, but slightly differentiated. But the Greek differed from the
Oriental, the barbarian, inasmuch as he felt himself no longer a
component part of nature, but realised his distinct individuality.

We find the first germs of the new creative principle of personality in
the Platonic figure of Socrates who, first of all, conceived the idea of
a higher spiritual love, blended it with the love of ideas and separated
it sharply from base desire. Though his conception was not yet personal
love in the true sense, it was nevertheless a spiritual divine love. The
Greek State could not tolerate him, and sentenced him to death. But this
same Socrates also said (in "Crito") that man was indebted to the State
for his existence. "Did not thy father, in obedience to the law, take
thy mother to wife and beget thee?" This sentiment was as antique as it
could well be, and the death of Socrates--as related by Plato--was the
most magnificent confirmation of the Greek idea that the individual,
even the wisest, was entirely subordinate to the community.

The civilisations of China and Japan are impersonal even to a greater
extent than the civilisation of ancient Greece. Percival Lowell
maintains that the diverse manifestations of the spirit of those
countries can only be understood if regarded from the standpoint of
absolute impersonality. He sees in a "pronounced impersonality the most
striking characteristic of the Far East", "the foundation on which the
Oriental character is built up." It is very instructive to observe how
it determines the individual's conception of birth and marriage,
thoughts and acts, life and death. It is carried to so great an extreme
that special terms for "I," "you," "he," do not even exist in the
Japanese language, and have to be replaced by objective circumlocutions.
Not content with the fact of having been born impersonal, it is the
ambition of the inhabitant of the Far East to become more and more so as
his life unfolds itself. Witness the heroic exploits of Japanese
soldiers during the last war: individual soldiers frequently went to
their death for the sake of a small advantage to their group. We
Europeans regard this in the light of heroism--and it would be heroism
in the case of a European. But with the sacrifice of his individual life
in the interest of the community, the Japanese instinctively yields the
smaller value. In the same way Greeks and Romans did not attach very
much importance to life; suicide was very common, and frequently
committed without any special motive. As true love is based on
personality, it is impossible for the modern East-Asiatic to know love
in our sense. Lowell agrees with this: "Love, as we understand it, is an
unknown feeling in the East." He reports that Japanese women will appear
before strangers entirely nude, without the least trace of
embarrassment--as would Greek women!--because they are innocent of that
other aspect of personality--the feeling of shame. To be ashamed implies
the desire of concealing something individual and intimate; where this
is not the case, there can be no feeling of shame. Finally, I should
like to point out that the perversity and sexual refinement peculiar to
China and Japan are attributable simply to the fact that the limits of
sexuality cannot be overstepped, and that sexuality is therefore
dependent on vice and perversity to satisfy its craving for variety.

The first manifestation of overwhelming personality appears in Jesus,
and he created the religion of love. In him personality and love were
convertible forces, one might even say they were identical. He, first of
all, revealed their mysterious intimate connection, and clearly showed
that love can only be experienced by a distinct personality, because it
is an emanation of the soul and not a natural instinct.

It was, again, personality which, in the twelfth century, produced a new
force: spiritual love projected not only on God and nature, but also on
woman. Now only had personality acquired its true significance; it no
longer meant--as it did in the mature Greek world--the individual
separated from his environment, the individual with a conscious
beginning and a conscious end, but the principle of the synthesis, a
higher entity above the mere individual, the source of all values and
virtue.

Personality is the self-conscious, individual soul, producing out of its
own wealth the universal ideal values, and re-absorbing and assimilating
these ideal values in their higher form. It admits of the fusion of the
subjective with the universal and eternal, with the religious and
artistic, the moral and scientific values of civilisation. "Personality
is the blending of the universal and the individual," said Kierkegaard,
expressing, if not exactly my meaning, something very near it.

I shall endeavour to depict the spiritual love of man for woman--the
position cannot be reversed--from its inception to its climax. I shall
submit abundant evidence to make the great unbroken stream of emotion
clearly apparent, and indicate all its tributaries. I do not pretend
that I have exhausted the subject--that would be impossible. The works
from which I have drawn may be safely regarded as the direct outpouring
of emotion; those purely lyric poets were entirely subjective and ever
intent upon their own feelings; there hardly exists one Provencal,
old-Italian, or mediaeval love-song without the "I."

Spiritual love first appeared as a naive sentiment--unconscious of its
own peculiar characteristics--in the poems of the earlier troubadours of
Provence. There is a poem in which the Provencals claim the fathership
of the cult of woman; their opponents do not deny it, but add that it
was an invention which "could fill no man's stomach." These words
express the great and insurmountable barrier between pure spiritual love
and pleasure. The Christian dualism: soul-body, spirit-matter, had
invaded the domain of love.

Spontaneous, genuine love, untainted by speculations and metaphysics, is
found in the songs of the earlier troubadours. The greatest among all of
them, Bernart of Ventadour, was the first to praise chaste love. If any
champion of civilisation deserves a monument, it is this poet.

     Dead is the man who knows not love,
     A sweet tremor in the heart.

     Love's rapture fills my heart
     With laughter and sighs.
     Grief slays me a hundred times,
     Joy bids me rise.

     Sweet is love's happiness,
     Sweeter love's pain.
     Joy brings back grief to me,
     Grief, joy again.

Guillem Augier Novella expressed the feeling of being "elated with
exaltation and grieved to death" as follows:

     Lady, often flow my tears,
     Glad songs in my mem'ry ring,
     For the love that makes my blood
     Dance and sing.
     I am yours with heart and soul,
     If it please you, lady, slay me....

Aimeril de Peguilhan is of opinion that the pain of love is no less
sweet than the joy of love:

     For he who loves with all his heart would fain
     Be sick with love, such rapture is his pain.

And Bernart again:

     God keep my lady fair from grief and woe,
     I'm close to her, however far I go;
     If God will be her shelter and her shield,
     Then all my heart's desire is fulfilled.

And:

     My mind was erring in a maze,
     That hour I was no longer I,
     When in your eyes I met my gaze
     As in a mirror strange and shy.
     Oh, mirror sweet, reflecting me,
     Sighing I fell beneath your spell;
     I perished in you utterly
     As did Narcissus in the well.

In the same poem he goes on to say that he will ask for no reward, but
finally concludes:

     My fervent kisses her sweet lips should cover,
     For weeks they'd show the traces of her lover.

The German minnesinger, Heinrich of Morungen, called woman "a mirror of
all the delights of the world," and sang:

     Blessed be the tender hour,
     Blest the time, the precious day,
     When my brimming heart welled over,
     When my secret open lay.
     I was startled with great gladness,
     And bewildered so with love,
     I can hardly sing thereof.

The sensuous element still dominated Bernart and his contemporaries to
some extent. In their poems, all of which are genuine and sincere, the
longing for kisses, sometimes for more, is frankly expressed, but the
tendency towards the not sensuous and super-sensuous is already
apparent. The lover loves one woman only, and would rather love in vain,
patiently enduring every pang she causes him, than receive favours from
another woman, were she beautiful as Venus her self.

Bernart says:

     My sorrow is a sweet distress
     To which no alien bliss compares,
     And if my pain such sweetness bears,
     How sweet would be my happiness!

Elias of Barjols:

     Full of joy I am and sorrow
     When I stand before her face.

Bonifacio Calvo:

     There is no treasure-trove on earth
     Which I would barter for my pain;
     I love my grief, but spite and wrath
     Run riot in my heart; my brain
     Is reeling--and I laugh and cry.
     Jubilant and desperate,
     Exultant, I bewail my fate.
     Quarter! Lady, ere I die.

The earlier troubadours were still ignorant of the later dogma which
made chaste love the sole fountain of virtue and the road to
perfection--the beloved woman can make of her admirer what she wills--a
saint or a sinner.

Thus Guillem of Poitiers says:

     Love heals the sick
     And a grave does it delve
     For the strong; mars the beauty of beauty itself,
     Makes a fool of the sage with its magic,
     A clown of the courteous knight,
     And a king of the lowliest wight.

The equally early Cercamon:

     False can I be or true for her,
     Sincere or full of lies,
     A perfect knight or worthless cur,
     Serene or grave, stupid or wise.

Raimon of Toulouse:

     In the kingdom of love
     Folly rules and not sense.

It was typical of this enthusiastic love that the social rank of the
beloved, the mistress, was invariably above the rank of the lover. The
latter was fond of calling himself her vassal and serf, proclaiming that
she had invested him with all his goods; even kings and German emperors
composed love-songs, although in all probability they would have
achieved their purpose far more quickly by other means; but in all cases
we find the characteristic attitude of the humble lover, looking up to
his mistress. The underlying thought is obvious: Love, the loftiest
value in all the world, is the great leveller of all social differences,
a force before which wealth is as dust. "I would rather win a kind
glance from my lady's eyes than the royal crown of France," was a
favourite profession of the poets. Montanhagol, for instance, in a
rhymed meditation, stated that a lady was wise in choosing a lover of a
lower social rank, because not only could she always count on his
gratitude and devotion, but she would also have more influence over him,
a fact which in the case of a social equal or superior was, to say the
least, a little doubtful. This supreme reverence for love soon became an
accepted doctrine. We constantly meet the thought that chaste love alone
can make a man noble, good and wise. I will select a few illustrations
from a wealth of instances:

Miraval:

     Noble is every deed whose root is love.

Peire Rogier:

     Full well I know that right and good
     Is all I do for love of her.

Guirot Riquier:

     The man who loves not is not noble-minded,
     For love is fruit and blossom of the highest.

And:

     Thus love transfigures ev'ry deed we do,
     And love gives everything a deeper sense.
     Love is the teaching of all genuine worth.
     So base is no man's heart on this wide earth,
     Love could not guide it to great excellence.

Giraut of Calenso said of the City of Love that no base or ignorant man
could enter it, and the Italian Lapo Gianni sang:

     The youthful maiden who appeared to me
     So filled my soul with pure and lofty thoughts,
     That henceforth all ignoble things I scorn.

Dante in the _Vita Nuova_ calls Beatrice "the destroyer of all evil and
the queen of all virtues."

The very thought of the beloved makes a good man of the lover:

     "I cannot sin when I am in her thoughts."

asserts the sincere Guirot Riquier, and he prays Christ to teach him the
true love of woman.

While it was a generally accepted theory that love was the source of
man's perfection, I know of only one passage (by Raimon of Miraval)
contending that woman, also, was perfected by love; everywhere else we
meet the universal and silently accepted opinion that the essence of
womanhood is something unearthly, unfathomable and divine. Perhaps the
most classical formulation of the new doctrine, to wit, that spiritual
love is the begetter of all virtue and the mother of chastity, outside
which there is nothing divine, is to be found in the poems of the
somewhat pedantic Montanhagol:

     The lover who loves not the highest love,
     Is like a fool polluting precious wine.
     Let loftiest love alone within thee move,
     And purity and virtue will be thine.

Guirot Riquier expressed a similar sentiment:

     For chaste and pure my love has always been,
     From my "sweet bliss" I've never asked a boon;
     If I may humbly serve her night and noon,
     My life be her inalienable lien.

Walter von der Vogelweide says: "Love is a treasure heaped up of all
virtues."

As time went on the barrier erected between true spiritual love and
insidious sensuality became more and more clearly defined; the former
pervaded the erotic emotion of the whole period. Parallel with chaste
love, sensuality continued to exist as something contemptible, unworthy
of a noble mind; and it must be admitted that according to the
contemporary "Fabliaux," later German comedies and Italian and French
novels, the sexual manifestations of the period, were of incredible
coarseness. As against these, spiritual love was not merely an artistic
and theoretic concept, but the profound emotion of the cultured minds,
and remained a powerful and creative force even in later centuries.
Spiritual love and sexuality were irreconcilable contradistinctions; the
man who thought otherwise was looked upon as a libertine. The following
passages from the poems of the troubadours and their heirs, the Italian
poets of the _dolce stil nuovo_, will prove the historical reality of
this relationship, the ideal of the declining Middle Ages. We need take
no account of the German minnesingers, for although they shared the same
ideal, they did not influence principle in the same way as the neo-Latin
poets.

Bernart of Ventadour:

       Lady, I ask no other meed
     Than that you suffer me to serve;
     My faith and love shall never swerve,
       I'm yours whatever you decreed.

Peire Rogier:

     Mine is her smile and mine her jest,
     And foolish were I more to ask
     And not to think me wholly blest.
     'Tis no deceit,
     To gaze at her is all I need,
     The sight of her is my reward.

Gaucelm Faidit:

     Of all the ways of love I chose the best,
     I love you, love, with ardour infinite,
     Yours is my life, do as you will with it.
     Nor kiss I ask, nor sweet embraces, lest
     I were blaspheming....

The most enthusiastic champions of pure love were Montanhagol, Sordello
and Guirot Riqiuer. The former maintained that a lover who asked for
favours incompatible with his lady's honour, neither loved her nor
deserved to be loved.--"Love begets purity, and he who knows the meaning
of love can never forsake virtue."

There is a controversy between Peire Guillem of Toulouse and Sordello,
which contains the following passages:

     Of all mankind I never saw
     A man like you, Sordell', I wis,
     For he who woman does adore
     Will never flout her love and kiss.
     And what to others is a prize
     You surely don't mean to despise?

     Honour and joy I crave from her,
     And if a little rose she bind
     Into the wreath, Sir Guillem Peire,
     From mercy, not from duty, mind,
     That would be happiness indeed,
     Oh! that such bliss should be my meed!

     A humble lover such as you,
     Sordell', in faith, I never knew.

     Sir Peire, methinks what you express
     Is lacking much in seemliness.

In another poem the talented Sordello says:

     My love for her is so profound
     I'd serve her, spurn and scorn despite
     Ere with another I'd be found--
     Yet I'd not serve without requite,

and in another, after stating that he loves his lady so much that he
would thank her even if she killed him, he continues:

     Thus, lady, I commend to thee
     My fate and life, thy faithful squire
     I'd rather die in misery
     Than have thee stoop to my desire.

     The knight who truly loves his dame
     Not only loves her comely face,
     Dearer to him is her fair fame
     Undimmed, unsullied by disgrace.

     How grievously I should offend
     Thy virtue, if I spoke of passion;
     But if I did--which God forfend!
     Sweet lady, stoop not to compassion.

Although Sordello appeared so extremely modest, yet he was grieved to
death because his lady did not return his love. There is a poem in which
he compares himself to a drowning man whom the beloved alone could save.

This spiritual love (then as now) puzzled the commonplace, and was
misunderstood and regarded with scepticism. Bertran d'Alaman taunted
Sordello with his "hypocritical happiness" and "the whole deception of
his love," and Granet, in a satirical poem, cast doubt upon his
sincerity.

It is very significant to find that Sordello, that typical champion of
chaste love, kept up a number of questionable liaisons with all sorts of
women. Bertran reproached him with having changed his lady at least a
hundred times, and he himself shamelessly confesses:

     The jealousies of husbands ne'er amaze me,
     For in the art of love I do excel,
     And there's no wife, however chaste she may be
     Who can resist me if I woo her well.
       And if her husband hate me I'll not grumble,
     Because his wife receives me in the night,
     If mine her kiss, if mine sweet love's delight,
       His pain and wrath my spirit shall not humble.
     No husband e'er shall rob me of my pleasure,
     None can resist me, what I wish I gain,
     All do I love and never will refrain
     Spite husbands' wrath to rob them of their treasure.

It may seem strange at first sight that this enthusiastic exponent of
pure love should have led such a double life. But Sordello's conduct is
not in the least paradoxical; in accordance with the tendency of the
period, he carefully distinguished in his own heart between sexuality
and love; before the one he lay prostrate, unable to find words enough
in self-depreciation, so that he might the more exalt his mistress; but
with respect to all other women he was a mere sensualist. We read that
although he was "an expert in the treatment of women" in her presence
his voice forsook him and he lost all self-control. Petrarch, who--while
living with a very earthly woman--extolled all his life long a lofty
being whom he called Laura, was akin to Sordello, although he was a far
less brutal character. The latter approached the type of the seeker of
love, the Don Juan.

In a tenzone between Peirol and the Dauphin of Auvergne, the former
maintains that love must die at the moment of its consummation. "I
cannot believe," he says, "that a true lover can continue to love after
he has received the last favour." (Otto Weininger agrees with this.) But
Peirol winds up with the subtle suggestion that though love be dead, a
man should always continue to behave as if he were still in love.

The troubadours never weary of drawing a line between _drudaria_ and
_luxuria_, pure love and base desire. _Mezura_, seemliness, is
contrasted with _dezmezura_, licentiousness. Pure love is regarded as
the creator of all high values, luxuriousness as their destroyer. In the
same way the German minnesingers distinguished between "low" love and
"high" love.

As both cultured minds and the upper classes, contemning sexuality,
acknowledged spiritual love only, it follows as a matter of course that
the avowal of such sentiments became good form; the motif that the
honour of the beloved must be carefully shielded, and that no desire
must dim her purity, occurs again and again. But it should not be
forgotten that a poet may love a sentiment for its own sake, without
being in the least influenced by it. Many a troubadour drew inspiration
from an emotion which all praised as the supreme value; even if he had
no earthly mistress, he adored the sublime sentiment. Not infrequently
it happened that a troubadour who had been loud in praise of high love
and denunciation of base desire--a trick of his trade--suddenly came to
himself and changed his mind. Folquet of Marseilles, for instance, after
more than ten years of vain sighing, came to the conclusion that he had
been a fool.

     Deceitful love beguiles the simple fool
     And binds with magic thongs the hapless wight;
     That like a moth lured by the candle-light,
     He hovers, helpless, round the heartless ghoul.

     I cast thee out and follow other stars
     Full evil was my meed and recompense--
     New courage steels my fainting heart, and hence
     I kneel at shrines which passion never mars.

In an interesting poem Garin the Red implores _Mezura_ to teach him the
way to love purely and nobly; but he is anything but pleased with his
instructress, and comes to the conclusion that her whole wisdom is "just
good form" and nothing else.

     But by my merry mood impelled
     I kiss and dally night and morn
     And do the things I feel compelled
     To do--or else, with tonsure shorn,
     I'd seek a cloister....

Elias of Barjols, finding that his love will never be returned, and
having no mind to sigh all his life in vain, renounces love altogether.
"I should be a fool if I served love any longer!"

"All you lovers are fools!" exclaimed another. "Do you think you can
change the nature of women?" This is one of the very rare criticisms of
woman; as a rule we hear only of her angelic perfection, wisdom, beauty
and aloofness.

The distinguished poet Marcabru was a woman-hater, and enemy of love
from the very beginning. He said of himself that he had never loved a
woman and that no woman had ever loved him.

     The love which is always a lie
     And deceiver of men, I decry
     And denounce; I had more than enough.
     Can you count all the evil it wrought?
     When I think of it I am distraught.
     What a madman I was to believe,
     To sigh, to rejoice and to grieve;
     But no longer I'll squander my days,
     We have come to the parting of the ways. Etc.

He was indefatigable in abusing the tender passion, and had a great deal
to say about the immorality of women. But it is characteristic of the
strong public opinion of the time that even this misogynist (who,
perhaps, after all was only a disappointed man) praised "high love."

The subject also found its theorists, prominent among whom was the
court-chaplain Andreas, who wrote a very learned book on love in Latin.
He expressed in propositions and conclusions what the contemporary poets
expressed in verse, proving thereby that spiritual love was not merely a
poetic fiction but the profoundest belief of the period, supported by
the full complement of its philosophical weapons. "In the whole world
there is no good and no courtliness outside the fountain of love.
Therefore love is the beginning and foundation of all good." He also
proved that a noble-minded man must be a lover, for if he were not, he
could not have attained virtue. "Love disregards all barriers, and makes
the man of low origin the equal and superior of the nobleman."

This conception of spiritual nobility, which was later on perfected in
the theory of the _cor gentil_, only existed in Provence and in Italy;
it remained unknown in France and Germany.

Andreas drew a distinction between base love, the _amor mixtus sive
communis_, and pure love, the _amor purus_. "Love," he maintained, fully
agreeing with the poets, "gives to a man the strength of chastity, for
he whose heart is brimming over with the love of a woman, cannot think
of dallying with another, however beautiful she may be." He proved from
substance and form that a man cannot love two women. In the _Leys
d'Amors_, a voluminous fourteenth-century Provencal treatise, largely a
text-book of grammar and prosody, we read: "And now lovers must be
taught how to love; passionate lovers must be restrained, so that they
may come to realise their evil and dishonourable desires. No good
troubadour, who is at the same time an honest lover, has ever abandoned
himself to base sensuality and ignoble desires." The same author opined
that a troubadour who asked his lady for a kiss, was committing an act
of indecency. On the other hand, Andreas was very broad-minded in
drawing the line between both kinds of love, allowing kisses, and even
more, in the case of true love. (The best troubadours disagree with him
in this respect.)

A scholasticism of love, modelled on ecclesiastical scholasticism and
substituting the beloved woman for the Deity, was gradually evolved.
Love, veneration, humility, hope, etc., were the sacrifices offered at
her shrine. She was full of grace and compassion, and was believed in as
fervently as was God. Some of the poets were animated by a curious
ambition "to prove" their feelings with scholastic erudition, and more
especially by the later, Italian, school, _amore_, _cor gentil_,
_valore_, were conceived as substances, attributes, inherent qualities,
etc. The allegories of _amore_ played a prominent part, and spoiled many
a masterpiece. The German poets steered clear of these absurdities,
which even Dante did not escape.

At the famous courts of love, presided over by princesses, the most
extraordinary questions relating to love were discussed and decided with
a ceremonial closely following the ceremonial of the petty courts of
law. Andreas preserved for us a number of these judgments, some of which
prove the really quite obvious fact that love and marriage are two very
different things, for if spiritual love be considered the supreme value,
matrimony can only be regarded as an inferior condition. And it was a
fact that in the higher ranks of society,--the only ones with which we
are concerned,--a marriage was nothing but a contract made for political
and economical reasons. The baron desired to enlarge his estate, obtain
a dowry, or marry into an influential family; no one dreamed of
consulting the future bride, whom marriage alone could bring into
contact with people outside her own family. To her marriage meant the
permission to shine and be adored by a man who was not her husband. "It
is an undeniable fact," propounded Andreas as _regula amoris_, "that
there is no room for love between husband and wife," and Fauriel
translated a passage as follows: "A husband who proposed to behave to
his wife as a knight would to his lady, would propose to do something
contrary to the canons of honour; such a proceeding could neither
increase his virtue nor the virtue of his lady, and nothing could come
of it but what already properly exists."--Another judgment maintained
"that a lady lost her admirer as soon as the latter became her husband;
and that she was therefore entitled to take a new lover." At the court
of love of the Viscountess Ermengarde, of Narbonne, the problem whether
the love between husband and wife or the love between lovers were the
greater, was decided as follows: "The affection between a married couple
and the tender love which unites two lovers are emotions which differ
fundamentally and according to custom. It would be folly to attempt a
comparison between two subjects which neither resemble each other, nor
have any connection." A husband declared: "It is true, I have a
beautiful wife, and I love her with conjugal love. But because true love
is impossible between husband and wife, and because everything good
which happens in this world has its origin in love, I am of opinion that
I should seek an alliance of love outside my married life." All this was
not frivolity, but the only logical conclusion of dualistic eroticism,
incapable of blending sensuality and love. It was equally logical that
love between divorced persons was not only regarded as not immoral, but
as perfectly right and justifiable; it was even decided that "a new
marriage could never become a drawback to old love." In the old novel,
_Gerard of Roussillon_, the princess, beloved by Gerard, is married to
the emperor Charles Martel, and compelled to part from her knight. At
their last meeting, before a number of witnesses, she called on the name
of Christ and said: "Know ye all that I give my love to Sir Gerard with
this ring and this flower from my chaplet. I love him more than father
and husband, and now I must weep tears of bitter sorrow." After this
they parted, but their love continued undiminished though there was
nothing between them but tender wishes and secret thoughts.

Matrimony had no advantage over the love-alliance, not even the
sanction of the Church. A love-alliance was frequently accompanied by a
ceremony in which a priest officiated. Fauriel describes--without
mentioning his source--such a ceremony as follows: "Kneeling before his
lady, with his folded hands between hers, he dedicated himself to her
service, vowing to be faithful to her until death, and to shield her
from all harm and insults as far as lay within his power. The lady, on
her side, declared her willingness to accept his service, promised to
devote her loftiest feelings to him, and as a rule gave him a ring as a
symbol of their union. Then she raised and kissed him, always for the
first, usually for the last time." The parting of the lovers, too, was a
solemn act, resembling in many ways the dissolution of a marriage.

       So that our solemn plighted troth
     When love is dead, we shall not break,
     We'll to the priest ourselves betake.
     You set me free, as I do you,
     A perfect right then shall we both
     Enjoy to choose a love anew,

wrote Peire of Barjac.

It was far more easy to dissolve a marriage than a true love-alliance;
the husband had only to state that his wife was a distant relation of
his, and the Church was ready to annul the contract. But the
love-alliance--so Sordello maintained, in a long poem--should be more
binding than any marriage.

     Only one love a woman can
     Prefer. So let her choose her man
     With care. To him she must be true,
     For choosing once she ne'er may rue.
     More binding than the wedding-tie
     Is love; for a diversity
     Of causes wedlock may divide,
     By death alone be love untied.

The idea that marriage and love cannot be combined is therefore only the
logical conclusion of the fundamental feeling that love and desire
cannot together be projected on one woman.

If matrimonial love had not been questioned, the choice would have lain
between two alternatives: the canonisation of matrimony--an expedient
chosen by the Church--or a fusion of love and sexuality in our modern
sense. The first was a stage which humanity had left behind, for the
ideal of absolutely perfect and pure love had already been evolved, and
the world was not ripe for the second. The tendency of the rarest minds
was in the direction of a further idealisation of love, of freeing it
from all earthly shackles and bringing it nearer and nearer to heaven.
One of the early troubadours, Jaufre Rudel, Prince of Blaya, gave a
practical illustration to this feeling by falling in love with a lady
whom he had never seen. The story of his love was famous for centuries.
He loved a Countess of Tripoli, a Christian princess, and his whole soul
was filled with his imaginary picture of her. The _Provencal Biography_
relates that "he worshipped her for all the good the pilgrims had
narrated of her." In order to see her, he took the cross and journeyed
across the sea; he fell ill on the ship and was carried ashore in a
dying condition. The countess, on hearing of his great love, hastened to
the inn where he lay. As she entered his room, Jaufre regained
consciousness; he knew her at once and died happily in her arms. She was
so touched by his love that she henceforth renounced the world.--This
story is no fairy tale; it is well attested and universally accounted
genuine to-day. Jaufre's love, expressed in touching poems, was no
_amour de tete_, as it is sometimes called, but a genuine _amour de
coeur_, a purely spiritual love which asked nothing of the beloved
woman but permission to love her. There are other instances, and even in
later times it is not an infrequent occurrence in the case of
imaginative people (I need only mention Buerger and Klopstock).

We men of the present age look upon this eccentric woman-worship with
uncomprehending eyes. Perhaps we shall feel a little less bewildered
when we meet it, stripped of courtly theories and mediaeval fashions, in
some of the great men who are closely connected with our own period; in
Michelangelo, in Goethe, and in Beethoven.

The Church, dualistic and ascetic from its inception, waged war against
sensuality as the evil of evils. "As fire and water will not mix," wrote
St. Bernard, "so spiritual and carnal delights cannot be experienced
together." The toleration of matrimony was never more than a compromise;
we require no proof that as far as the Church was concerned, chastity
was the only real value. Even Luther took up that position, and to this
day Christianity and sexuality remain unreconciled. But both the
Catholic and the Protestant professions of faith regarded matrimony as
the lesser evil, a concession made to the enemy, in order to render
existence possible. It is very interesting to observe the position taken
up by the Church in connection with the new woman-worship which,
although it sprang from the most genuine Christian dualism, had for its
object not God, but mortal woman. The logical attitude of the Church
would have been one of welcome, for the chaste worship of woman which
regarded matrimony as an inferior state, was her natural ally. Two
clerics, the court-chaplain Andreas, and the prolific rhymester Matfre
Ermengau, actually elaborated the theory of spiritual love contrary to
the spirit of the Church, but both men hastened to utter a timely
recantation and recommendation of orthodoxy as the only means of
salvation. After establishing all the desirable details of love
according to substance and accidents, Andreas deduced that every love
not dedicated to God was bound to offend Him, and advanced eighteen
points against the love of woman, starting with the well-known argument
that woman was naturally of a base disposition, covetous, envious,
greedy, fickle, garrulous, stubborn, proud, vain, sensual, deceitful,
etc. "He who serves love, cannot serve God," he declared, "and God will
punish every man who, apart from matrimony, serves Venus. What good
could come from acting against the will of God?" Here we are face to
face with a grotesque position: the official Church favouring sexuality,
that is matrimony, as against the newer and higher standard of ascetic,
spiritual love. This attitude was quite logical, if not in the spirit of
religion and in contradiction to the principle of asceticism, yet in the
spirit of orthodoxy; for "whatever was not for her, was against her."
The brave, Janus-headed abbe was spokesman for the whole clergy, which
branded love not projected on God as _fornicatio_. In his recantation
Andreas upheld the previously-despised matrimonial state at the expense
of love; "love," he maintained, "destroys matrimony." Matfre did exactly
the same thing; after recapitulating in his _Breviari d'Amor_ all the
splendid achievements rooted in the cult of woman, he suddenly veered
round (at the 27,445th verse):

     And Satan blows on their desire,
     In monstrous flames leaps up the fire,
     And maddened by the raging fiend,
     From love of God and honour weaned,
     They turn from their Creator's shrine
     And call their mistresses divine.
     With soul and body, mind and sense,
     They worship woman's excellence.
     Abandoned in her beauty revel,
     And unawares adore the devil.

Three hundred years later the fanatical Savanorola stormed: "You clothe
and adorn the Mother of God as you clothe and adorn your courtesans, and
you give her the features of your mistresses!" which, as we shall
presently see, was literally true.

The clergy resisted all counsels of the _cortezia_ and _cavalaria_ with
the sure instinct desiring the continuance of existing conditions
rather than the victory of the higher conception. Some writers aver that
it was partly due to this fact that later on the cult of woman developed
into the cult of Mary. Again we are confronted by a process which in the
course of time has been repeated more than once: the spiritual-mystical
principle of Christianity entered upon a new stage, and took possession
of a new and important domain; but the Church, rigid and unyielding,
preferred clinging to a past lower stage rather than tolerating any
change. Had she been absolutely consistent, her greatest poet would be
on the index to-day, for, following his own intuition and ignoring her
rigid dogma, he introduced his beloved Beatrice into the Catholic
heaven.

The new spiritual love was not without its caricatures. Famous in
Provence for many strange exploits, committed in order to please his
lady, was the talented Peire Vidal. On one occasion he caused himself to
be sewn into a wolfskin and ran about the fields; but he was set upon by
dogs and so badly mangled that he nearly succumbed to his wounds. He was
an insufferable braggart, but never had any success in love. The prince
of caricatures, however, was the German knight and minnesinger, Ulrich
of Lichtenstein. He is responsible for a novel in prose, entitled _The
Service of Woman_, which is faintly reminiscent of Goethe's _Werther_.
As a page he commenced his glorious career by drinking the water in
which his lady had washed her hands; later on he caused his upper lip to
be amputated because it displeased his mistress, for "whatever she
dislikes in me, I, too, hate." On another occasion he cut off one of his
fingers and used it, set in gold, as a clasp for a volume of his poems
which he sent to her. One of his most famous exploits was a journey
through nearly the whole of Austria, disguised as Venus, jousting,
dressed in women's clothes, with every knight he met. But in spite of
his eccentricities, the tendency of his mind was not at all
metaphysical; he craved very obvious favours, but as a rule contented
himself with a kind, or even an unkind word. Incidentally, we learn that
he was married; but he devoted his whole life to "deeds of heroism" in
honour of his lady. Not the great book of Cervantes, as is commonly
believed, held up mediaeval court life to ridicule and destroyed it as
an ideal, but the life and exploits of this knight and minnesinger. The
same spirit animated Guilhem of Balaun. At the command of his lady he
had a finger-nail extracted and sent to her, after which he was
re-admitted to her favour.

Spiritual love was discovered by the Provencals, but the greater and
profounder Italian poets developed it and brought it to perfection. What
had been a naive sentiment with the troubadours, became in Dante's
circle a system of the universe and a religion. The Italian poet,
Sordello, who wrote in Provencal, may be regarded as the connecting
link, and the forerunner of the great Italians. He died in the year of
grace 1270, and Dante, who was almost a contemporary, immortalised his
name in the _Divine Comedy_. The doctrine on which the _dolce stil
nuovo_ was based pointed to the love of a noble heart as the source of
all perfection in heaven and earth. Purely spiritual woman-worship was
regarded as an absolute virtue. The words of the last of the Provencal
troubadours, Guirot Riquier, "Love is the doctrine of all sublime
things"--was developed into a philosophy. I will quote a few
characteristic verses, omitting Dante for the present. One of the finest
lyric poems of all tongues and ages, written by Guido Guinicelli, begins
as follows:

     Within the gentle heart love shelters him,
     As birds within the green shades of the grove;
     Before the gentle heart in nature's scheme
     Love was not, or the gentle heart ere love.

                         (_Transl. by_ D.G. ROSSETTI.)

Cino da Pistoia says in epigrammatic brevity:

     You want to know the inmost core of love?
     'Tis art and guerdon of a noble heart.

A wonderful canzone by Guinicelli contains the following verses:

     A song she seems among the rest and these
     Have all their beauties in her splendour drowned.
     In her is ev'ry grace,--
     Simplicity of wisdom, noble speech,
     Accomplished loveliness;
     All earthly beauty is her diadem.
     This truth my song must teach--
     My lady is of ladies chosen gem.

                         (_Transl. by_ D.G. ROSSETTI.)

And Cavalcanti sings:

     What's she whose coming rivets all men's eyes,
     Who makes the air so tremble with delight,
     And thrills so every heart that no man might
     Find tongue for words but vents his soul in sighs?

                   (_Transl. by_ SIR THEODORE MARTIN.)

The sentiment which pervades these verses has lifted us into the higher
sphere which will henceforth be our main theme. The beloved was more and
more extolled; in her presence the lover became more and more convinced
of his insignificance; she was worshipped, deified. The overwhelming
emotion, the longing for metaphysical values which dominated the whole
epoch, had reached its highest characteristic, had reached perfection.
It proved the eternal quality of human emotion: the impossibility of
finding satisfaction, the striving towards the infinite; it soared above
its apparent object and sought its consummation in metaphysic. The love
of woman and the mystical love of God were blended in a profounder
devotion; love had become the sole giver of the eternal value and
consolation, yearned for by mortal man. Christianity had taught man to
look up; now his upward gaze lost its rigidity and beheld living
beauty--metaphysical eroticism had been evolved--the canonisation and
deification of woman. The ideal of the troubadours to love the adored
mistress chastely and devoutly from a distance in the hope of receiving
a word of greeting, no longer satisfied the lover; she must become a
divine being, must be enthroned above human joy and sorrow, queen of the
world. Traditional religion was transformed so that a place might be
found in it for a woman.

The reason for the recognition of spiritual love from the moment of its
inception as something supernatural and divine, is obvious. The heart of
man was filled with an emotion hitherto unknown, an emotion which
pointed direct to heaven. The soul, the core of profound Christian
consciousness, had received a new, glad content, rousing a feeling of
such intensity that it could only be compared to the religious ecstasy
of the mystic; man divined that it was the mother of new and great
things--was it not fitting to regard it as divine and proclaim it the
supreme value? The troubadours had known it. Bernart of Ventadour had
sung:

     I stand in my lady's sight
     In deep devotion;
     Approach her with folded hands
     In sweet emotion;
     Dumbly adoring her,
     Humbly imploring her.

Peire Raimon of Toulouse:

     I would approach thee on my knees,
     Lowly and meek,
     I would fare far o'er lands and seas
     Thy ruth to seek.

     And come to thee--a slave to his lord--
     I'd pay thee homage with eyes that mourn,
     Until thy mercy I'd implored,
     Heedless of laughter, heedless of scorn.

Raimon of Miraval had said, "I am no lover, I am a worshipper," and
Cavalcanti:

     My lady's virtue has my blindness riven,
     A secret sighing thrills my humbled heart:
     When favoured with a sight of her thou art,
     Thy soul will spread its wings and soar to heaven.

Peire Vidal:

     God called the women close to Him,
     Because he saw all good in them.

And:

     The God of righteousness endowed
     So well thy body and thy mind
     That His own radiancy grew blind.
     And many a soul that has not bowed
     To Him for years in sin enmeshed,
     Is by thy grace and charm refreshed.

The beauty of the adored was divine. Bernart of Ventadour wrote:

     Her glorious beauty sheds a brilliant ray
     On darkest night and dims the brightest day.

Guilhem of Cabestaing:

     God has created her without a blemish
     Of His own beauty.

Gaucelm Faidit:

     The beauty which is God Himself
     He poured into a single being.

And Montanhagol, anticipating Dante:

     Wherefore I tell you, and my words are true,
     From heaven came her beauty, rare and tender,
     Her loveliness was wrought in Paradise,
     Men's dazzled eyes can scarce support her splendour.

Folquet of Romans:

     When I behold her beauty rare,
     I'm so confused and startled by her worth,
     I ween I am no longer on this earth.

A canzone which has been attributed to Cavalcanti, Cino da Pistoia and
Dante, reads as follows:

     My lady comes and ev'ry lip is silent;
     So perfect is her beauty's high estate
     That mortal spirit swoons and falls prostrate
     Before her glory. And she is so noble:
     If I uplift to her my inward eye,
     My soul is startled as if death were nigh.

Cavalcanti says:

     Round you are flowers, is the tender green,
     The sun is not as bright as your dear face,
     All nature in her glorious summer-sheen
     Has not so fair and beautiful a place,
     It pales beside you. Earth has never seen
     A thing so full of loveliness and grace.

The perfection which the mere presence of the beloved was supposed to
bestow on the lover, is here conceived more broadly and freely; not only
the lover, but all men are touched and transfigured by her appearance.
The sentiment of the lover aspired to become objective truth. This was
an important stage on the road from the spiritual to the deifying love,
which I have called metaphysical eroticism. Another rung of the ladder
of evolution had been climbed--the mistress had become queen of the
world and goddess, a being enthroned by the side of God. I will again
quote Guinicelli:

     Ever as she walks she has a sober grace,
     Making bold men abashed and good men glad,
     If she delight thee not, thy heart must err,
     No man dare look on her, his thoughts being base;
     Nay, let me say even more than I have said,
     No man could think base thoughts who looked on her.

                                      (D.G. ROSSETTI.)

The same poet in his canzone, _Al Cor Gentil_ says:

     "She shines on us as God shines on His angels."

When madonna dies the angels receive her, rejoicing that she has joined
them. The Provencal, Pons of Capduelh, anticipated Dante:

     And now we know that the celestial choir
     Sings songs of jubilee at her release
     From this dull earth; I heard and am at rest;
     Who praise His hosts, praise the Eternal Sire.
     I know she is in Heaven with the blest,
     'Midst flow'rs whose glory time can never dim
     Singing God's praise, and blest by seraphim.
     Nought but the truth from my glad lips shall fall,
     In Heaven she is, enthroned above all.

Folquet of Romans wrote a letter to his beloved, in which he said
amongst other things:

        Kneeling in church before God's face,
        --A sinner to beseech His grace,--
        And for my sins to make amends,--
        'Twas you to whom I raised my hands;
        Your loveliness alone was there,
        My soul knew only of one pray'r.
        I fancied "Our Father" framed
        My trembling lips, when they exclaimed
        Exultant at His sacred shrine:
        Oh! Lady! All my soul is thine!

     Lady, you have bewitched me with your beauty,
     That God I have forgotten and myself.

Cino da Pistoia wrote the following commendatory prayer:

     Into thy hands, sweet lady of my soul,
     The spirit that is dying I commend;
     And which departs so sorrowful that Love
     Views it with pity, while dismissing it.

     By you to His dominion it was bound,
     So firmly, that it since hath had no power
     To call on Him but thus: Oh, mighty Lord,
     Whate'er thou wilt of me, Thy will is mine.

                              (_Transl. by_ C. LYELL.)

Lancelot, one of the great mediaeval lovers, possessed a lock of
Guinevere's hair, which he prized above all the relics of the saints.
When he parted from his mistress (whom he had loved not only
spiritually) he fell on his knees before the door of her chamber and
prayed as if "he were kneeling before the altar."

Spiritual love was obviously acquiring a religious tinge. The mistress
took the place of God; her grace was the source of all joy and
consolation; she led the souls of the dying to eternal life. God had
yielded His position to her, she had stepped to His side, nay, above
Him. With the curse of the Church still clinging to her, she had been
remoulded by man's emotion into a perfect, a celestial being. The God of
Christianity was in danger--would the new religion of cultured minds,
the religion of woman (unwilling to tolerate any other God beside her)
replace the religion of the masses? Was a reformation imminent? Would
the traditional religion be transformed into metaphysical eroticism,
dethroning God, enthroning a goddess? It is impossible to say in what
direction the spiritual history of Europe would have developed if Dante
had been merely a metaphysical lover, and not also an orthodox
theologian; if instead of penetrating to the vision of the divine
secret, he had fainted before the face of Beatrice....

The religion of woman and the dominant religion came to terms. This
compromise was possible because the Christian pantheon included a female
deity who, although she had not hitherto played a prominent part, held
an exceptional position: this was Mary, the Mother of the Redeemer. From
A.D. 400 to A.D. 1200, her rank had been on a level with the rank of the
antique goddesses; now the new emotion enveloped and revivified her. The
rigid, soulless image with the golden circle round the head slowly
melted into sweet womanhood. In Italy this sentiment inspired wonderful
paintings of the Madonna, and was responsible for the development of
portraiture in general. The hold of the overwhelming tradition was
broken. Rejecting the universal conviction that the historical Mary had
resembled the Mary of Byzantine art, the artist, under the dominion of
his woman-worship--which surpassed and re-valued all things--drew his
inspiration from the fulness of life. I do not agree with Thode that we
are indebted to the legend of St. Francis for the modern soulful and
highly individualised art. Its source must have been the strongest
feeling of the most cultured minds, and that was undoubtedly spiritual
love. The Jesuit Beissel wrote with deep regret: "Every master almost
formed his own conception of Mary, but in such a way that the hieratic
severity of earlier times disappeared but slowly." And he continued: "It
is true, the artists' models were the noble ladies of their period; not
only on account of their kindly smiling faces, but also on account of
the charming coquetry with which their hands drew their cloaks across
the bosom." And the art-historian, Male, says: "It is a remarkable fact
that in the thirteenth century the legend, or the story, of the Virgin
Mary was depicted on the doors of all our (_i.e._, French) cathedrals."

The difference between the Catholic and the Protestant world-principles
is strongly marked in this connection. Catholicism with its striving for
absolute uniformity, acknowledging no individual differences, but eager
to shape all life and all doctrines in harmony with one definite ideal,
very consistently pronounced one single, historical woman to be divine,
and made her the object of universal worship. This dogma had to be
rigid, immutable, and almost meaningless. Again, the historic and pagan
principle of Catholicism was maintained; a unique event in the history
of the world was immortalised and systematised and all new religious
conceptions were excluded. Catholicism invariably places all really
important events in the past, even in a quite definite period of the
past, a period unassailable by historical criticism. But with the
commencement of individual intellectual life the uniform, ecclesiastical
image of the Madonna gradually gained life and individuality. Just as
according to Protestant teaching every soul must establish its
individual relationship with God (which is subject to change because
individuality is not excluded as it is in Catholicism), so the
imaginative emotionalist created his own Queen of Heaven. Frequently he
was still under the impression--this was especially the case with
monks--that he was worshipping the ecclesiastical deity, when he had
long been praying to a metaphysical conception of his own. The great
Italian art since the fourteenth century, as well as the Neo-Latin and
German cults of the Virgin Mary were, though apparently still orthodox,
in their innermost essence the outcome of a personal desire for love,
and had therefore abandoned the teaching of the Church and become
Protestant. The fact that the so-called Protestant Church looked askance
at Mary, and that the rather coarse-minded Luther said, in his
annoyance: "Popery has made a goddess of Mary, and is therefore guilty
of idolatry," does not contradict my statement. The true Queen of Heaven
was a conception of the artist and lover, incomprehensible to those who
were only thinkers and moralists.

Through the legitimation of a divine woman open enmity between the
religion of woman and the religion of the Church was avoided. A woman
had stepped between God and humanity as mediator, intercessor and
redeemer. Every metaphysically-loving soul could conceive her as it
pleased, could love her and pray to her without being a heretic and
worshipper of the devil. Matfre had complained that men

     Abandoned in her beauty revel
     And unawares adore the devil.--

but now a means had been found to adore the beloved, and yet remain
faithful to God. Once in a way it was remembered that the adored,
strictly speaking, was the Mother of God--if for no other reason, for
fear of the Inquisition which the Dominicans had founded and placed
under the special patronage of Mary--her bodyguard as it were, defending
her from the onslaught of minds all too worldly. Very rarely the adored
earthly woman was identified with the official Queen of Heaven--(this
may have been done occasionally by monks); sometimes as in the case of
Michelangelo and Guinicelli, the beloved was the sole goddess; other
poets, among whom we may include Dante and Goethe, conceived her as
enthroned by the side of Mary.

At this point I must interrupt my argument, and briefly sketch the
position occupied by Mary in the western world from the dawn of
Christianity.


_(b) The Queen of Heaven._

During the first two hundred years Mary did not occupy a prominent place
in the Christian communities; even in the fourth century she was still
regarded as a human woman and denied divinity by St. Chrysostom, who
reproached her with vainglory. But in proportion as Christ transcended
humanity, and was more dogmatically and formally interpreted by the
Church--more especially the Greek Church--the desire for a mediator
between the wrathful Deity and sinful humanity grew more pronounced, a
mediator who, although a human being, could be endowed after the manner
of the ancient demi-gods with super-human virtues. The Mother of the
Saviour gradually assumed this position. She had been an earthly woman,
born of earthly parents, and would be able to understand human needs and
wishes, and she had become the Mother of God. Would not her intercession
have weight with the Son of God? Simultaneously with the growing
recognition of asceticism, the doctrine of the immaculate conception
gained ground; in the course of time this moment was more and more
emphasised, and virginity was set up as an ideal.

St. Athanasius (fourth century) had written: "What God did to Mary is
the glory of all virgins; for they are attached as virginal saplings to
her who is the root." At the close of the fourth century a long and
bitter controversy arose over the question as to whether Mary had
remained a virgin after the birth of Jesus. St. Ambrose, St. Jerome and
St. Augustine were in favour of this new doctrine. St. Ambrose, the
founder of Western music, was the first to praise her perfection in the
Latin tongue, and St. Augustine in his treatise _De Natura et Gratia_,
maintained that she was the only human being born without original sin.
This was the first important step towards the stripping of the Saviour's
mother of her humanity, and establishing her as a divine being. St.
Irenaeus contrasted Eve, the bringer of sin, with Mary, the second Eve,
the bringer of salvation, and St. Ambrose said: "From Eve we inherited
damnation through the fruit of the tree; but Mary has brought us
salvation through the gift of the tree, for Christ too, hung on the tree
like a fruit."

Hitherto Mary had not been worshipped; all prayers had been addressed to
God and to Christ. The idea of approaching her in prayer appeared for
the first time in a pamphlet entitled "On the Death of Mary," written
about the end of the fourth century, and Gregory of Nazianz pictured
Mary in Heaven, caring for the welfare of humanity. The fourth and fifth
centuries produced the first hymns to the Virgin, written in Syriac; but
orthodox bishops objected to her deification; St. Epiphanus (end of
fourth century) said: "Let us honour Mary by all means, but let us
worship only the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost."

This was the position of the evangelical and historical Mary before the
famous and decisive Council of Ephesus.

There is a very important fact which must not be overlooked. All the
nations dwelling on the shores of the Mediterranean, Semites, and
Egyptians, as well as Greeks and Romans, had been accustomed to the
worship of female deities. In the minds of the ancient peoples, woman,
the symbol of sex, had always been endowed with qualities of magic and
mystery. There was something supernatural in her power of bringing forth
a living specimen of the race, and in all cults the maternal woman
occupied a very important position. Had Christianity suddenly destroyed
this ancient and natural need? We know that the Church had assimilated a
great number of antique superstitions; nor were the female deities
sacrificed. The great Asiatic Mothers had not been forgotten; the very
ancient Babylonian Istar (Astarte), Rhea Kybele of Asia Minor, and above
all the Egyptian Isis, still lived in the heart of man,--subconsciously,
probably--as lofty, sacred memories, but nevertheless influencing his
life. The Egyptian Isis with Horus in her lap is the direct model of the
Madonna with the Child. She represented earth, bringing forth fruit
without fertilisation. "This religious custom (the worship of Isis),"
says Flinders Petrie, "exerted a powerful influence on nascent
Christianity. It is not too much to say that without the Egyptians we
should have had no Madonna in our creed. The cult of Isis was widely
spread at the time of the first emperors, when it was fashionable all
over the Roman Empire; when later on it merged into that other great
religious movement, and fashion and conviction could be combined, its
triumph was assured."

Advancing Christianity had depopulated the national pantheon. There must
have been a great sense of loss, especially among the lower classes, and
it does not require much psychological insight to realise that it was
the lack of female deities which more especially roused a feeling of
anxiety and distress. The masses were yearning for a goddess, and it was
at Ephesus, the classical seat of the hundred-breasted Diana, that the
stolen divinity was restored to them. The theologians were divided into
three camps. While some of them regarded Mary merely as "the mother of
man" others acknowledged her as the "Mother of God," and Nestorius
suggested as a compromise the title "Mother of Christ." At the synod of
Alexandria, in the year of grace 430, and at the council of Ephesus in
431, Nestorius was found guilty of blasphemy and deprived of his
bishopric. Henceforth Mary was [Greek: Theotochos], the "Mother of God,"
and her worship was sanctioned by the Church. "Through Thee the Holy
Trinity has been glorified," exclaimed Cyril joyfully, "through Thee the
Cross of the Saviour has been raised! Through Thee the angels triumphed,
the devils were driven back; the tempter was beaten and human nature
uplifted to Heaven; through Thee all intelligent creatures who were
committing idolatry, have learned the truth!" Loud rejoicing filled the
streets of Ephesus. When the judgment passed on Nestorius was announced,
the people exclaimed: "The enemy of the Holy Virgin has been overcome;
glory be to the great, the divine Mother of God!" The highest authority
in the land had re-established the public worship of the great goddess,
who had for many years been worshipped in secrecy. The ancient paganism
had triumphed over the spiritual intuition of the loftier minds.
According to ancient custom sacrifices were offered at Mary's shrine;
the second epoch of her history had begun.

In the East the worship of female divinities was older and more
spontaneous than in the Western world, and thus the cult of Mary existed
in the Orient long before it penetrated to Italy and thence into the
newly Christianised countries. The Virgin, who for the first few hundred
years had held a clearly defined position in evangelical history, had
become an independent object of worship. Festivals were held in her
honour; churches were dedicated to her; the will of the people triumphed
in the litany; art took possession of the grateful subject. The
tendency to make Mary the equal of Christ grew steadily. Metaphors
originally intended for Christ alone were used indifferently for either.
We constantly find her addressed as the "archetype, the light of the
world, the vine, the mediator, the source of eternal life, etc." Finally
she ceased being regarded as a passive participator in the work of
salvation, as the Mother of the Saviour, and was accredited with
independent saving power. John of Damascus (eighth century) first called
Mary [Greek: soteira tou chosmou], and soon after she was styled
"Saviour of the World" in the Occident also. With this the cult of Mary
had reached its third stage, the stage which interests us; she had
become the object of metaphysical love. But before dealing with this
third stage, we must glance, in passing, at the ancient Teutonic tribes.
They, too, worshipped goddesses and sacred women; virginity, a virtue
not appreciated by the Orientals, here stood in high repute. According
to Tacitus and others, the Teutons looked upon the Virgin as a
mysterious being, approaching divinity more closely than all others.
Thus there was here, perhaps, more than on the shores of the
Mediterranean, a favourable soil for the cult of Mary. The
characteristics of Holda and Freya, as well as their perfect beauty,
were transferred to Mary, and Mary's name was substituted for the names
of the old auxiliary goddesses. In the oldest German evangelical poems
Mary does not yet rank as a divinity, she is merely extolled as the most
perfect of all earth-born women. In the "Heliand" (about A.D. 830) she
is called "the most beautiful of all women, the loveliest of all
maidens"; and the monk Otfried, of Weissenburg (860), calls her, "Of all
women to God the most pleasing, the white jewel, the radiant maid."

Mary had now taken her place by the side of God, and was commonly
addressed as divine. Anselm of Canterbury explains: "God is the Father
of all created things, Mary the Mother of all things recreated.... God
begat the creator of the world, Mary gave birth to its Saviour." Peter
of Blois declared that the Virgin was the only mediatress between Christ
and humanity. "We were sinners and afraid of the wrath of the Father,
for He is terrible; but we have the Virgin, in whom there is nothing
terrible, for in her is the fulness of mercy and purity." The twelfth
century produced the _Ave Maria_, the angelic salutation, the principal
prayer to Mary, which was introduced into all churches. The Italian
Franciscan monk, Bonaventura, and Peter Damiani, were above all others
instrumental in spreading the worship of the Virgin, and Damiani said of
her: "To Thee has been given all power in heaven and on earth." The
fresco of the Camposanto at Pisa, ascribed to Orcagna, shows the
transfigured Virgin sitting by the side of Christ, not below Him. The
numerous legends in which Mary, often regardless of justice and
propriety, delivers her faithful worshippers from all manner of dangers,
were written during the same period. One of the most famous of these is
the legend of Theophilus, the forerunner of Faust. In a German version
(by Brun of Schoenebeck) dating from the thirteenth century, Theophilus
abjures God and all things divine, with the sole exception of Mary,
wherefore she saves him from eternal damnation. This poem therefore
shows us Mary as absolutely opposed to God.

We have now arrived at the third stage of the cult of Mary; the new,
spiritual love, translated into metaphysics, was projected on her; she
was approached by her worshippers with the ardent love which hitherto
had been the prerogative of earthly women. The two currents, the one
arising in ecclesiastical tradition, and the other in the soul of the
metaphysical lover, had met; the genuine spiritual cult of Mary was the
creation of the great metaphysical lovers, who existed not only in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, but are met not infrequently later
on; man's irresistible need to raise woman above him and worship her,
created the true Madonna, for whose sake romantic souls of all times
have "returned home" into the fold of the Church, the true Madonna who
at heart is alien to the principles of the Church, but is re-born daily
in the soul of the metaphysical lover. The hierarchy knew how to take
advantage of and control this adoring love; the metaphysical lover
raised his mistress above humanity and prayed before her shrine;
religion said: "The celestial woman whom you may lovingly adore is here,
with me. All you have to do is to call her by the name I have given her,
and the kingdom of Heaven will be yours."

But on the other hand Mary represents to-day, and doubtless will do for
a long time to come, a dogmatically acknowledged deity, recognised by
the spirit of Protestantism as a remnant of Paganism, and duly detested;
the masses in Italy and Spain pray to-day to her image, as in bygone
days the masses prayed to the images in Greek and Roman temples. This
goddess is unchanging, and from the point of view of the psychologist
uninteresting.

It is not difficult to understand why the two conceptions of Mary (more
especially in the souls of the monks) were so often inextricably
intermingled; circumstances frequently demanded a complete fusion. As
late as in the nineteenth century, a romantic poet, Zacharias Werner,
said:

     Oh, sov'reign lady, mistress of my fortune,
     And thou, the Queen and ruler of the heavens,
     (I cannot keep you sundered and apart.)

I shall endeavour to keep them sundered and apart as far as possible,
for I am only concerned with man's metaphysical emotion of love and its
creation, womanhood deified, and not with Catholic dogmas. With this
object in view, I will return to the poets previously quoted, and
continue the unfolding of the process of deification. As a rule the
metaphysical lovers were content with immortalising their feelings in,
very often, excellent verses, raising the beloved mistress above the
earth and worshipping her as the culmination of beauty and perfection.
The quite unusual craving to give her a place in the eternal structure
of the cosmos animated only one poet, Dante, who, combining the Catholic
striving for unity with spontaneous, magnificent woman-worship, created
a masterpiece which is unique in literature.

Typical among the later Provencals was Guirot Riquier. Several of his
poems which have been preserved to us make it impossible to say whether
they are addressed to an earthly woman or to the Queen of Heaven; these
poems mark, in a sense, a period of transition. They are exceedingly
vague, and it is not worth while to translate them; but as they are
dated it is interesting to watch the poet's love growing more and more
spiritual and religious, to see him gradually deserting his earthly love
for the Lady of Heaven. In one poem he prays to his lady "who is
worshipped by all true lovers," to teach him the right way of loving. In
the next he repents his all too earthly passion:

     I often thought I was of true love singing,
     And knew not that to love my heart was blind,
     And folly was as love itself enshrined.
     But now such love in all my soul is ringing,
     That though to love and praise her I aspire
     As is her meed--in vain is my desire.
     Henceforth her love alone shall be my guide
     And my new hope in that great love abide.

     For her great love the uttermost shall proffer
     Of honour, wealth, and earthly joy and bliss,
     With her to love, my heart will never miss
     Those who no gifts like her gifts have to offer.
     She the fulfilment is of my desire,
     Therefore I vow myself her true esquire;
     She'll love me in return--my splendid meed--
     If I but love aright in word and deed.

and one of his rather more religious songs ends as follows:

     Without true love there is on earth no peace,
     Love gives us wisdom, faith which will not swerve,
     A noble mind and willingness to serve.
     How rare a thing on earth in perfect ease!
     To Thee, oh Virgin! Mother of all love,
     I dedicate this song; if thou deniest
     Me not, thou shall be my "sweet bliss." With Christ
     I pray Thee, intercede for me above.

In this song, then, he calls Mary "his sweet bliss" (_bel deport_), a
name which he had previously given to a certain countess with whom he
had been in love. In the next poem, in which earthly love and love of
the Madonna are again brought into juxta-position, he commends himself
"to the Virgin, the sublime mother of love, on whom all my happiness
depends." One of his poems which begins in quite an earthly strain, ends
thus:

     I feel no jealousy; for he whose soul
     Is filled with yearning for his heavenly love,
     Has purest happiness; he is her serf,
     And he has all things that his heart can crave.

But long before this, in one of his very worldly poems there is a sudden
outburst, addressed to the Madonna: "He who does not serve the Mother of
God, knows not the meaning of love." Excellent proof of this intimate
connection between earthly and Madonna love is found in the poems of the
trouvere Ruteboeuf, who calls Mary his "very sweet lady."

Lanfranc Cigala wrote genuine love-songs to the Virgin. The following
are two stanzas from one of his poems:

     I worship a celestial maid,
     Serene and wondrously adorned;
     And all she does is well; arrayed
     In noble love and gentleness.
     Her smile is bliss to all who mourn,
     Her tender love is happiness,
     And for her kiss the world I scorn.
     Lady of Heaven, Thy heart incline
     To me, and untold bliss is mine.
     By day and night my only thought
     Art, Mary, Thou. I am distraught
     Say many men, for few can gauge
     The ardour which consumes my soul.
     I care not that they say bereft
     I am of sense; the world I've left,
     To worship Thee, love's spring and goal.

But other poems written by Cigala are unmistakably addressed to the
celestial Madonna; some of them seem to be written in a penitential
mood; he almost seems to repent of his former passionate adoration. The
same poet, in his love-songs, uses all the metaphors which are commonly
used for Mary (or for Christ), "root and climax, flower, fruit and seed
of all goodness."

A little older is an erotic hymn to Mary by Peire Guillem of Luserna; I
quote a few stanzas:

     Thy praise is happiness unmarred,
     For he who praises Thee, proclaims the truth,
     Thou art the flower of beauty, love and ruth,
     Full of compassion, with all grace bedight,
     From Thy white hands we gather all delight.

The love of Mary had usurped the peculiar property of the love of woman:
it had become the source of poetic and artistic inspiration.

The songs of Aimeric of Peguilhan resemble those of Cigala; the former
bewails the decline of the service of woman; he sings of the "root and
crown of all noble things," but it is not quite clear whether he is
addressing an earthly or a heavenly lady. "Suffer my love, which asks
for no reward!" The terms, "friends" and "lovers" (_amans_) of the
Virgin are with these poets convertible terms, and the Virgin is styled
"the true friend" (_i.e._, the beloved).

Guilhem of Autpol wrote a fine poem to the Queen of Heaven, beginning:

     Thou hope of all sad hearts who yearn for love,
     Thou stream of loveliness, thou well of grace,
     Thou dove of peace in fret and restlessness,
     Thou ray of light to those who, lightless, grope.
     Thou house of God, thou garden of sweet shades,
     Rest without ceasing, refuge of the sad,
     Bliss without mourning, flow'r that never fades,
     Alien to death, and shelter in the mad
     Whirlpool of life, to all who seek thy port.
     Lady of Heaven, in whom all hearts rejoice,
     Thou roseate dawn and light of Paradise!

Perdigon, among many worldly songs, wrote one to the _regina d'auteza e
de senhoria_, which might be translated thus:

     Supreme ruler of the world,
     Thy grace sustains
     And maintains
     The world.
     Thou fragrant rose, thou fruitful vine,
     Thou wert the chosen vessel of
     Mercy divine.

Unsurpassed in the fusion of his earthly and his celestial lady was
Folquet de Lunel. Some of his poems cannot be classed with any
certainty.

The first poem which obtained a prize at the Academy of Mastersingers of
Toulouse was a hymn to Mary.

This very genuine sentimentalism appears strange to us; we cannot enter
into the feelings of that period. A modern philologist, Karl Appel,
regards Jaufre Rudel's pathetic songs, addressed by him to the Countess
of Tripoli:

     Oh, love in lands so far away,
     My heart is yearning, yearning....

as songs to the Madonna; but it is a matter of indifference to the lover
whether his heart's impulse, translated into metaphysic, is projected on
an unknown Countess of Tripoli, or a still more unknown Lady of Heaven.
It is not the loved woman who is of importance--what do we know of the
ladies who inspired the exquisite mediaeval poetry? They have long been
dust, and we may be sure that their perfection was no greater than is
the perfection of their grand-daughters. But the love of the poets is
alive to-day, an eternal document of the human heart, representing one
of the great phases through which the relationship between man and woman
has passed.

The following are a few stanzas by the German minnesinger, Steinmar,
which were later on adapted to the Holy Virgin:

     In summer-time how glad am I
     When over lea or down
     A country lass mine eyes espy,
     Of maidens all the crown.

     Oh! Paradise! How glad am I
     When o'er the heavenly down
     God and God's Mother I espy,
     Of women all the crown.

The Italian poets, far more profound than the Provencals, saw a goddess
in the beloved (whom they always addressed as Madonna), and humbled
themselves before her. Social differences, which played such a prominent
part in the North, are here ignored. The impecunious poet no longer
extols the princess, the wife of his lord and master. There is no
question of such a relationship; the poet is a free citizen of the town,
subject only to the emotion of the heart, and his song carries its own
reward. It has ceased to be the married woman's privilege to be lauded
and extolled; the maiden of unaristocratic origin, who to the poets
represents more strongly the ideas of purity and perfection, has usurped
her place. We know that Lapo Gianni, Dino Frescobaldi, Guinicelli and
Dante worshipped a maiden untouched by as much as a sensuous thought,
and Frescobaldi decided the question whether it were better to love a
married woman or a maiden, in favour of the latter. The feeling of those
lovers was pure and lofty, and they had the power of giving it perfect
expression.

In a canzone, the authorship of which is ascribed to both Cavalcanti and
Cino da Pistoia, it is said of the beloved dead that God needed her
presence to perfect Heaven, and that all the saints now worship her.
She was a miracle of perfection while she was yet on earth, but now:

     Look thou into the pleasure wherein dwells
     Thy lovely lady, who is in heaven crowned,
     Who is herself thy hope in heaven, the while
     To make thy mem'ry hallowed she prevails.

     Of thee she entertains the blessed throngs,
     And says to them, while yet my body thrave
     On earth, I gat much honour which he gave,
     Commending me in his commended songs.

                         (_Transl. by_ D.G. ROSSETTI.)

At the conclusion of his finest poem, "Al Cor Gentil," Guinicelli, next
to Dante doubtless the greatest poet of the Middle Ages, says: "God will
ask me after my death: 'How could'st thou have loved aught but Me?' And
I will reply: 'She came from Thy realm and bore the semblance of an
angel. Therefore in loving her, I was not unfaithful to Thee!'" Here we
have the perfection of metaphysical eroticism: the beloved woman is God;
he who loves her, loves God in her.

Cavalcanti maintained in a poem that an image of the Madonna actually
bore the features of his lady.

     Guido, an image of my lady dwells
     At San Michele, in Orto, consecrate,
     And daily worshipped. Fair, in holy state,
     She listens to the tale each sinner tells.
     And among them who come to her, who ails
     The most, on him the most does blessing fall;
     She bids the fiend men's bodies abdicate;
     Over the curse of blindness she prevails,
     And heals sick languors in the public squares....

                         (_Transl. by_ D.G. ROSSETTI.)

And Guido Orlandi replies to him from the ecclesiastical standpoint, as
to a lost man: "Had'st thou been speaking of Mary, thou would'st have
spoken the truth. But now I must bewail thy errors."

A complete blending of sensuality and Mary-worship was achieved in an
Italian poem of the fifteenth century. The author of this poem addressed
Mary as "queen of my heart," and "blossom of loveliness," and goes on to
say: "I can tell by your gestures and your face that you respond to my
love; when you look at me, you smile, and when you sigh, your eyes are
full of tenderness.... Sometimes, in the evening, I stand below your
balcony; you hear my sighs, but you make no reply.... When I gaze at
your beauty, I burn with love, but when I think of your cruelty, I call
on death to release me." In this poem we have a caricature of
metaphysical eroticism.

In the sonnets of Petrarch, metaphysical love has become stereotyped.
Adoration has become a phrase (as Cupid has become a phrase with the
earlier poets). It is obvious that he loves Laura because the play on
the word Laura and _lauro_ (laurel) caught his fancy. I can find no
spontaneous feeling in the famous Canzoniero; all I see is erudition and
perfection of form. But among the few sincere specimens there is one
beautiful poem addressed to Mary: "_Vergine bella che di sol vestida!_"
which is not without erotic warmth. But the singer and humanist
expresses himself judiciously:

     Oh, Thou, the Queen of Heaven and our goddess
     (If it be fitting such a phrase to use).

So far we have observed the current which, emanating from the beloved
woman, lifted her into supernal regions and endowed her with
perfection--the mistress is stripped of everything earthly, the longing
which can never be stilled on earth, soars heavenward. Now we will
examine the opposite current; the current which emanates from the
Madonna of dogma, the Lady of Heaven who is the same to all men, in her
last stage, that is to say when she is finally enthroned by the side of
God. Many a monk--earthly love being denied to him--was driven to a
purely spiritual, metaphysical love by the fact of his being permitted
to love the Lady of Heaven without hesitation or remorse. She was the
fairest of women, and he was at liberty to interpret the meaning of "the
fairest" in any sense he chose.

The climax of the emotional worship of the ecclesiastical Mary was
reached by St. Bernard, the _Doctor Marianus_ mentioned on a previous
occasion. He was the author of sermons and homilies in honour of Mary,
and has been instrumental in dogmatising her worship by placing her side
by side with the Saviour. "It was more fitting that both sexes should
take part in the renewal of mankind," he says, "because both were
instrumental in bringing about the fall...." "Man who fell through
woman, can be raised only by her." "Humanity kneels at Thy feet, for the
comfort of the wretched, the release of the prisoners, the delivery of
the condemned, the salvation of the countless sons of Adam depend on a
word from Thy lips. Oh! Virgin, hasten to reply! Speak the word for
which the earth, the nethermost hell, and the heavens even, are waiting;
yea, the King and Ruler of the universe, greatly as He desires Thy
loveliness, awaits Thy consent, in which He has laid the salvation of
the world." Basing his description on the Revelation of St. John the
Divine, he draws her picture as follows: "Brilliant and white and
dazzling are the garments of the Virgin. She is so full of light and
radiance that there is not the least darkness about her, and no part of
her may be described as less brilliant, or not glowing with intense
light." And with increasingly pronounced erotic emphasis, passing from
the Church dogma of salvation to passionate fervour, he goes on to say:
"A garden of sacred delight art Thou, oh, Mary! In it we gather flowers
of manifold joys as often as we reflect on the fulness of sweetness
which through Thee was poured out on the world.... Right lovely art
Thou, oh, perfect One! A bed of heavenly spices and precious flowers of
all virtues, filling the house of the Lord with sweet perfume! Oh! Mary,
Thou violet of humility! Thou lily of chastity! Thou rose of love!" etc.

St. Bernard inaugurated that extraordinary blending of eroticism with
half-crazy, inconceivable allegories and fantasies, which lasted for
centuries. Here, again, we perceive the ideal of metaphysical eroticism,
which in the case of a loyal son of the Church could only refer to the
official Queen of Heaven, and consisted partly of the genuine emotion of
love, partly of allegorically constructed connections with the Church
dogma.

St. Bernard's emotional outbursts were comprehended and admired. His
authority was sufficient to override all scruples that might have stood
in the way of this downright description of Mary's charms. He became the
model for all her later worshippers; Suso, for instance, often quotes
him, and Brother Hans called him _the harpist and fiddler of her
praise_.

The great ecstatic poet, Jacopone da Todi, sang Mary's praise as
follows:

     Hail, purest of virgins,
     Mother and maid,
     Gentle as moonlight,
     Lady of Aid!

     I greet thee, life's fountain,
     Fruitladen vine!
     Infinite mercy
     Thou sheddest on thine!

     Hope's fairest sunshine,
     Balm's well serene!
     I claim a dance with thee,
     All the world's Queen!

     Gate of beatitude!
     --All sins forgiven,--
     Lead us to paradise,
     Sweet breeze of heaven!

     Thou pointest us upward
     Where angels adore,
     White lily of gentleness
     Thy grace I implore.

     Mirror of Cherubim!
     Seraphim laud thy grace,
     All things in heaven and earth
     Ring with thy praise!

The spiritual love of Mary especially appealed to the German temper.
Among the adoring monks Suso deserves particular mention. He laid great
stress on the difference between _high_ love and _low_ love. "Low love
begins with rapture and ends with pain, but high love begins with grief,
and is transformed into ecstasy, until finally the lovers are united in
eternity." He was keenly conscious of the older motive of the cult of
Mary, namely, the need of a gentle mediator between man and the
inaccessible Deity. "Oh, thou! God's chosen delight, thou dulcet, golden
song of the Eternal Wisdom, suffer me, a poor sinner, to tell thee a
little of my sufferings. My soul prostrates itself before thee with
timorous eyes, shamefaced. Oh! thou Mother of all mercies, I ween that
neither my soul nor the soul of any other poor sinner needs a mediator,
or permission to come to thy throne, for thou, thyself, art the
intercessor for all sinners." Compared to his forerunner, St. Bernard,
Suso exhibits a marked degree of intimacy in his relationship with Mary.
He describes heaven as a kind of flowered meadow, and Mary keeping
court, like any earthly princess. "Now go and behold the sweet Queen of
Heaven, whom you love so profoundly, leading the procession of the
celestial throng in great gladness and stateliness, inclining to her
lover with roses and lilies! Behold her wonderful beauty shedding light
and joy on the heavenly hosts! Eya! Look up to her who giveth gladness
to heart and mind; behold the Mother of Mercy resting her eyes, her
tender, pitiful eyes, on you and all sinners, powerfully protecting her
beloved child." The whole sixteenth chapter of the _Booklet of Eternal
Wisdom_ is an ardent hymn to the Madonna, almost comparable to St.
Bernard's prayer to Mary in Dante's _Divine Comedy_. It was written
about the time of Dante's death, not very long, therefore, after the
composition of the last chapters of the _Paradise_.

_The Life of Suso_ (the first German biography ever written) evidences
his adoration for the Lady of Heaven: "It was customary in his country,
Swabia, for the young men to go to their sweethearts' houses on New
Year's Eve, singing songs until they received from the maidens a chaplet
in return. This custom so pleased his young and ardent heart that he,
too, went on the eve of the New Year to his eternal love, to beg her for
a gift. Before daybreak he repaired to the statue which represented the
Virginal Mother pressing her tender child, the beautiful Eternal Wisdom,
to her bosom, and kneeling down before her, with a sweet, low singing of
his soul, he chanted a sequence to her, imploring her to let him win a
chaplet from her Child...." "He then said to the Eternal Wisdom" (and it
is uncertain whether he is addressing the mother or the child): "Thou
art my love, my glad Easter day, the summer-joy of my heart, my sweet
hour; thou art the love which my young heart alone worships, and for the
sake of which it has scorned earthly love. Give me a guerdon, then, my
heart's delight, and let me not go away from thee empty-handed."

_With a sweet, low singing of his soul_, this worshipper approached the
statue of the Queen of Heaven. This is love of woman undisguised, it
merely has a religious undertone. Other secular merry-makings were
adapted by Suso to his celestial mistress, as, for instance, the
planting of the may-tree, and he repeatedly makes use of similes and
metaphors borrowed from the chivalrous service of woman. He frequently
alludes to himself as "the servant of the Eternal Wisdom"; the meaning
of this expression is apparently intentionally obscured, but it has a
savour of the feminine. Suso pictured himself, after the manner of
lovers, with a chaplet of roses on his brow. In his _Life_ there is a
passage unsurpassed by the best of the minnesingers: "In the golden
summer-time when all the tender little flowers had opened their buds, he
gathered none until he had dedicated the first blossoms to his spiritual
love, the gentle, flower-like, rosy maiden and Mother of God; when it
seemed to him that the time had come, he culled the flowers with many
loving thoughts, carried them into his cell and wove them into a
garland; and after he had done so, he went into the choir, or into Our
Lady's Chapel, prostrated himself before his dear lady, and placed the
sweet garland on her head, hoping that she would not scorn her servant's
offering, as she was the most wondrous flower herself, and the
summer-joy of his heart."

Doubtless we here have an analogy to the religious feeling of the
mystics. The metaphysical lover is still under the impression that he is
worshipping the Mary of the Catholic Church; but as in the case of the
mystic the Christ of dogma is transformed into the divine spark in his
own soul, so the love of Mary has become undogmatic and pure
woman-worship, the ideal of the great lovers of that age.

Another prominent Madonna-worshipper was Conrad of Wuerzburg (died 1278).
He began his career as a minnesinger, but later on entered a monastery.
He was the author of a very extensive, and in part, poetical collection
of songs in praise of the Queen of Heaven. "The Golden Smithy" is an
interesting instance of the mingling of genuine metaphysical eroticism
and traditional Church doctrines. Conrad inextricably mingles all the
Biblical allegories more or less applicable to Mary, the stories of the
Gospels, the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, etc., with his own
emotions, and thus creates a world of feeling which, though in many
respects exaggerated, still represents in its quaint unity something
entirely novel and unique:

     Thy glorious form,
     Though by beauty all envested,
     Never passion has suggested
     Nor has lit unholy fire
     In man's heart, that gross desire
     From thy purity should spring.

He, too, describes the celestial Paradise as a lovely garden, in which
Mary walks as queen, and he says of her celestial maidens, (perhaps a
reminiscence of the mythological German swan-maidens):

     Thy white hand with blossoms
     Their chaplets enhances,
     Thou show'st them the dances
     Of God's Paradise.
     'Mid radiant skies
     Thou gather'st heavenly roses.

The Italian Franciscan monk Giacomo of Verona also wrote poems to the
"Queen of the Heavenly Meadows". "On the right hand of Christ sits Mary,
more lovely than the flowers in the meadows and the half-opened
rose-buds. Before her face stand the heavenly hosts singing jubilant
songs in her praise, but she adorns her knights with garlands and gives
them roses." Just as Pons of Capduelh describes the transfiguration of
his earthly mistress, Jacopone describes Mary's ascent into Heaven,
where she is received by the angels singing songs of jubilee, their
_sanctus, sanctus, sanctus_, replaced by a joyful _sancta, sancta,
sancta_--a goddess has been received in the place of God.

Gottfried of Strassburg, the author of the sensuous and passionate epic
poem "Tristan and Isolde," composed a long poem in honour of Mary
couched in the well-known terms of the loving worshipper:

     Thou vale of roses,--violet-dell,
     Thou joy that makest hearts to swell,
     Eternal well
     Of valour; Queen of Heaven!
     Thou rosy dawn, thou morning-red,
     Thou steadfast friend when hope has fled,
     The living bread,
     Oh! Lady, hast thou given.

     Thou sheen of flow'rs with love alight,
     Thou bridal crown, all maids' delight,
     Thou art bedight
     With heaven's golden splendour!

     Thou of all sweetness sweetest shine,
     Thou sweeter than the sweetest wine,
     The sweetness thine,
     Is my salvation ever.
     Thou art a potion sweet of love,
     Sweetly pervading heaven above,
     To sailors rough
     Sang syrens sweeter never.

     Thou enterest through eye and ear,
     Senses and soul pervading,
     Thou givest to the heart great cheer,
     A guerdon dear,
     A glory never fading.

The poet who wrote of Isolde's love potion here calls the Queen of
Heaven a _potion sweet of love_, a strange metaphor to use in connection
with the Mary of dogma. Another characteristic frequently alluded to is
her _sweet perfume_, an attribute which we to-day do not look upon as
exclusively celestial.

Quaintly delicate and tender are the love-songs of Brother Hans, an
otherwise unknown monk of the fourteenth century. He himself tells us
that he deserted his earthly mistress for the Queen of Heaven. Perhaps
the dualism between earthly and transcendent love has never been
expressed more clearly than by him; for in his case the worshipping love
did not gradually lead up to Mary, the essence of womanhood, but an
earthly love had to be killed so that the pure heavenly love could live.

     Mary! Gentle mistress mine!
     I humbly kneel before you;
     All my heart and soul are thine.

And:

     Oh, Mary! Secret fountain,
     Closed garden of delight,
     The Prince of Heaven mirrors
     Him in thy beauty bright.

But after describing all the joys of heaven, Brother Hans comes to the
conclusion that a man knows about as much of celestial matters as an ox
knows of discant singing.

His relationship to Mary is tender, intimate and familiar:

     Within my heart concealed
     There is a secret cell;
     At nightfall and at daybreak
     My lady there does dwell.
     The mistress of the house is she,
     I feel her love and care about.
     If she denies herself to me,
     Methinks the mistress has gone out.

In another poem he prays to Mary to allow him to tear off a small piece
of her robe, so that he may keep himself warm with it in the winter.

Like Cino da Pistoia, who commended his dying soul not to God but to his
loved one, Brother Hans commends himself to Mary:

     Thus I commend my soul into thy hands,
     When it must journey to those unknown lands,
     Where roads and paths are new and strange to it.

And:

     Oh, come to me, thou Bride of God,
     When my faint soul departs from me!

There remains one more motif to consider, a motif which in a way
completes the picture of the celestial lady: As men love and desire the
women of the earth, so God loves the Lady of Heaven. St. Bernard first
expressed this naive idea, which makes God the Father resemble a little
the ancient Jupiter. "She attracted the eyes of the heavenly hosts, even
the heart of the King went out to her." "He Himself, the supreme King
and Ruler, so much desires thy beauty, that He is awaiting thy consent,
upon which He has decided to save the world. And Him Whom thou
delightest in thy silence, thou wilt delight even more by thy speech,
for He called to thee from Heaven: 'Oh! fairest among women! Let me hear
thy voice!'" etc. Here we have St. Bernard, the rock of orthodoxy,
representing God as Mary's languishing admirer! Suso is irreproachable
in this respect, but Conrad says that the colour of Mary's face was so
bright and made it so lovely,

     That even the Eternal Sire
     Was filled with sacred fire,
     And all the heavenly princes....

Thus, at the turn of the fourteenth century the great celestial change
was complete: By the side of God, nay, even in the place of God, a woman
was enthroned. "The Virgin became the God of the Universe," says
Michelet, a thorough, though rather imaginative expert on the Middle
Ages. The people primitively worshipped idols. The clergy, headed by the
Dominican and Franciscan monks, introduced Lady Days into the calendar
and invented the rosary to facilitate the recital of the _Aves_; secular
orders of knighthood placed themselves under the Virgin's protection (La
Chevalerie de Sainte Marie), but the rarest minds, sublimating the
beloved, raised her into Heaven and worshipped her as divine. The
established religion was compelled to enter into partnership with the
great emotion of the time, metaphysical love, lest it ran the risk of
losing its sway over humanity.

And a feeling was born then which to this day constitutes one of the
striking differences between the Eastern and the Western worlds: the
respect for womanhood. It is based on the woman-worship of secular, and
the Madonna-worship of ecclesiastical circles. It is true that Jesus,
anticipating the intuition of Europe, had taught the divinity of the
human soul and recognised woman--in this respect--as on an equality with
man, but the instincts of Greece and the Eastern nations had proved to
be stronger than his teaching; for twelve hundred years woman was
despised, and more than once the question as to whether or no she had a
soul--in other words, as to whether or no she was a human being--had
come under discussion. The crude and primitively dualistic minds of the
period realised in her sex merely an embodiment of their own sensuality,
the enemy against whom they fought, and to whom they knew themselves
subject. The strongest argument in her favour which the first millenary
could adduce, was the fact that the Saviour of the world had been borne
by a woman, and that consequently her sex had a share in the work of
salvation; the idea that through the "other Eve" a part of the sin of
the first Eve was expiated. But genuine appreciation and respect were
only possible after base sensuality had been contrasted with spiritual
love, whose vehicle again was woman. Now the "eternal-feminine"--
contrasted with the "earthly-feminine"--drew the lovers upwards, and
this new emotion threw such a glamour over the whole sex, that it never
entirely died away; if to-day women are respected and their efforts at
emancipation supported, they are not indebted, as they are sometimes
told, to Christian ethics, but rather to the mundane culture which had
its origin at the courts of the Provencal lords, whose ideals ultimately
became the controlling ideals of Europe, and whose inmost essence still
influences the world.

The evolution of love had obviously arrived at a stage when respect was
considered due to women--though not perhaps to all women. I will not go
to the courts of the great for evidence, but merely relate an episode
from the life of the Dominican friar Suso: "In crossing a field, Suso
met on a narrow path a poor, respectable woman. When he was close to
her, he stepped off the dry path and stood in the mud, waiting for her
to pass. The woman, who knew him, was astonished. 'How is it, Sir,' she
said, 'that you, a venerable priest, are humbly standing aside to allow
me, a poor woman, to pass, when it were far more meet that I should
stand aside and make room for you?' 'Why, my good woman,' replied Suso,
'I like to honour all women for the sake of the gentle Mother of God in
Heaven.'"

It may seem extraordinary, but this absolutely unphilosophical, and
really paradoxical emotion, found an appreciator in the German
philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach, the enemy of Christianity. In his _Essence
of Christianity_, as well as in his treatise _On the Cult of Mary_, he
refers to it more than once. "The holy Virgin," he says, "the Mother of
God, is the only divine and positive, that is to say, the only lovable
and poetical figure of Christian mythology, and the only one worthy of
worship; for Mary is the goddess of beauty, the goddess of love, the
goddess of humanity, the goddess of nature, the goddess of freedom from
dogma." Feuerbach is right. The Lady of Heaven stands for the delivery
from dogma, because she had her origin in spontaneous emotion, clothed
with but a few rags of dogma. "The monks vowed the vow of chastity," he
continues in his great work; "they suppressed the sexual impulse, but in
exchange they had the personification of womanhood, of love, in the
Virgin in Heaven. The more their ideal, fictitious representative of her
sex became an object of spontaneous love, the more easily could they
dispense with the women of flesh and blood. The more they emphasised in
their lives the complete suppression of sexuality, the more prominent
became the part which the Virgin played in their emotions; she usurped
in many cases, the place of Christ, and even the place of God."
Feuerbach then explains the need of man to project his noblest
sentiments on Heaven, and lays much stress on the necessity of believing
in the Mother of God, because the love of a child for its mother is the
first strong feeling of man. "Where the faith in the Mother of God
declines, the faith in the Son of God, and in God the Father, declines
also."


I will now leave the region of the historical and examine the emotion
whose reality and influence I have substantiated, from a timeless
standpoint, for my principal point is the psychical, and more
particularly the metaphysical consummation of the emotion of love. The
sole object of the abundant evidence I have been compelled to adduce is
my desire to prove the existence and significance of all the emotions
which stir the soul, and in the later Middle Ages strove so powerfully
to express themselves. My thesis that sexuality and love are opposed
principles will no doubt be rejected, for, under the strong influence of
the theory of evolution, all the world is to-day agreed that love is
nothing but the refinement of the sexual impulse. I maintain that (as
far as man is concerned) they differ very essentially, and I have
attempted to prove their incommensurability by submitting historical
facts. That they may, and will, ultimately merge, is my unalterable
conviction. My assertion that something so fundamental as the personal
love of man and woman did not exist from the beginning, but came into
existence in the course of history, at a not very remote period, may
seem even more strange. My only reply is that instead of advancing
opinions I have brought forward facts and allowed them to speak for
themselves. Moreover, to my mind the realisation of the intimate
connection of love and evolving personality is a far more magnificent
proof of the soundness of the evolutionary theory than the reflection
that we have received all things ready-made from the hands of nature.
Has it not been proved to us that the religious consciousness of the
divinity of the human soul was also evolved in historical time, and has
never again disappeared?

Every strong love which finds no response is fraught with the
possibility of an infinite unfolding; it may powerfully seize the whole
soul and make life a tragedy. But this tragedy is not of the very
essence of tragedy, inasmuch as here we have merely love confronted by
an unsurmountable obstacle, meeting and overwhelming it; the discord is
not inherent. Many a lover suffering from unrequited love, is born with
the tendency to become unhappy, with a secret will to the voluptuousness
of pain and melancholy; he will enjoy his unhappiness, perhaps become
productive through it. Thus, this deliberately unhappy love may be
regarded as an analogy to genuine metaphysical eroticism. For the
worship of woman is in its essence infinite striving; its object is
always unattainable, an illusion. Every earthly love, even if it finds
no response at all, may, in principle, be gratified, and is only unhappy
if external circumstances intervene. But the love of the Madonna is in
itself fraught with the tragic impossibility of requital; its foundation
is the recognition, or divination, of the fact that mortal women are too
insignificant for a passion which yearns for infinitude. A lover filled
with the longing to glorify a woman and worship her as a divine being,
has frequently experienced a certain disappointment. The beloved may
have died young--as did Beatrice--without his ever having come into
close contact with her; instinctively his soul turns heavenward--and
imagination has ample scope to transform and transfigure the dead. Or he
may have been disappointed in his mistress; it may have been that he,
attuned to pure, spiritual love, has found her all too human. He flees
from reality into the world of dreams, and envelops her with the veil of
mysteriousness and divinity. Purely spiritual love is an intense
emotion, and as men and women of flesh and blood cannot always live at
high pressure, hours of dejection and disappointment will necessarily
have to be experienced. The soul takes refuge in an illusion which
becomes more and more an end in itself, and gradually the lover creates
an inaccessibly lofty, celestial woman. For purely spiritual love
aspires to absolute transcendency; it cannot bear contact with every-day
life. The psychologists of the present day tell us that a feeling, in
becoming spiritualised, loses strength,--history teaches us that in the
case of great souls the opposite is the rule.

These suggestions purpose to explain the inception of an ecstatic love;
but the true metaphysical erotic is born and needs no outside stimulus;
his heart yearns for the inaccessible from the very beginning. There are
certain elements of feeling which must be present in his soul
simultaneously: a religious elementary feeling tending to the
metaphysical; the need of a sacred--a divine--being, as the foundation
of all existing things; a powerful and purely spiritual craving for
love, hurt, perhaps unconsciously, in early youth, and finally an
imagination endowed with plastic force--artistic tendencies. In the case
of the mystic the soul, too, is filled with the consciousness of the
divine; he, too, has the capacity for a great love, but with him it is
not the love of woman, but of something universal, not individualised,
the world, the cosmos, God.

While the mystic attempts to embody the inconceivable Deity in his soul,
the worshipper of the Madonna, like the artist, imaginatively creates a
being which he sets up for contemplation at the greatest possible
distance. The mystic is blind, as it were; he is yearning personified,
and he would force God into his soul. The metaphysical lover needs a
plastic figure which, in the extremest case, may represent the whole
world to him, and this figure must be a woman. It is a historical
accident that this woman is frequently connected with a woman of
ecclesiastical tradition, an accident strengthened by insufficient
creative power on the part of the lover, or lack of courage and
self-confidence. He is grateful for the support given to him by
tradition. The greatest metaphysical lovers, Dante, Goethe and
Michelangelo, freely created the objects of their love; the Protestant
Goethe--whom some people even accuse of paganism--clung more closely
than either of the others to the Mary of Catholicism (in the final scene
of _Faust_). The worship of the Madonna is the love of great solitary
souls, and--as is proved by Goethe--of the great souls in the hours of
their last solitude.

While there was only unindividualised sexual instinct, the chastity of
woman was of no account; we have seen that neither the Eastern nations
nor the Greeks attached any value to it. The woman who had best
fulfilled her vocation as a mother, was the woman most highly respected.
In the East, as well as with Jews and Romans, a woman could be divorced
by her husband for sterility. The only women who were, to some extent,
appreciated for their own sakes, were the Greek hetaerae. But when
asceticism became a moral value, chastity, too, was regarded as a
virtue, and personal love between two individuals invested it with a
profound significance. Henceforth woman should no longer be regarded as
the vehicle for the gratification of male sensuality; it should be her
mission to lead the lover to spiritual perfection. The fusion of the
older ideal of womanhood, the mother (acknowledged and sanctioned by
religion in the mother of the Saviour), with the newer ideal, the
Virgin, created the ideal of the late Middle Ages: the virgin with the
Child. Here the natural vocation of woman and the fantastic mission laid
upon her by man were united in a paradoxical higher intuition, and it
is superfluous to point out that the most irreligious minds of the
Renascence, as well as those of all later eras, have to this day
worshipped this ideal, and never wearied of representing it under new
forms.

But the worship of the Virginal Mother contains another element, an
element of which man in his contact with woman is deeply conscious: the
element of mystery. To a man a young girl, untouched by the faintest
breath of sensuality, has a quality of strangeness and mysteriousness
(this is probably a result of European sentiment), and at all times the
woman who has become a mother has been regarded with a slight feeling of
superstitious awe. In the Virginal Mother these two vaguely reverential
feelings are blended; she is a strange and awe-inspiring being, and man,
divining a mystery, bows down before her.

Otto Weininger was the first to give us a psychology of the cult of the
Madonna, and he did it in a manner which proved his entire comprehension
of this peculiar sentimental disposition. He realised and pointed out
the contrast between sexuality and eroticism (his terms for sexual
impulse and love), but in accordance with his extreme mental disposition
he left these two principles in irreconcilable conflict, while I regard
their antithesis merely in the light of a transient phase which will be
followed by a reconciling synthesis. Weininger is, I believe, in
conflict with spiritual reality when (guided by ethical, not
psychological considerations) he proposes the theory that a man endows
the beloved woman with all the lofty values he desires for himself. "He
projects his ideal of an absolutely perfect being on another human
being, and this and nothing else is the meaning of his love." "To bestow
all the qualities one would like to possess, but never can quite
possess, on another individual, to make it the representative of all
values, that is to love." It is a commonplace experience that genuine
love will awaken in the soul new and transcendent emotions, compared to
which all previous experience appears petty and insignificant. The waves
of this emotion are able to carry the lover to the infinite, or at least
his emotion will help him to divine the infinite. He sees, unexpectedly,
his inmost soul revealed to him, he has exceeded the limits upon which
he has hitherto looked as a matter of course; the barrier between him
and the universe has fallen, the whole world belongs to him; the egoist
becomes less selfish, the cruel man gentle, the dullard clairvoyant;
every man feels that he has become greater and more human. This is
neither illusion nor projection, nor is it a subtle, psychical
deception--it is sober reality. Weininger's suspicion of a delusion is
nothing but the result of his ascetic solipsism, refusing to accept
another being's help in his striving for perfection, a consequence of
the one-sided, sterile cult of his individual soul, a noble but puerile
pride refusing to be indebted to the world and to his fellow-men, the
fanatical, metaphysical dualism which is so often met with in the second
stage of eroticism, and to which stage he belongs.

Weininger shrank from the idea that an individual might be made the
means to an end, instead of being an end in itself. In my opinion his
justification for the translation of this formula--framed by Kant for
pure ethics--to empirical psychology, is doubtful. To use an individual
only as a means to an end which is alien to his inmost being, is
certainly immoral. But all social life is based on a mutual relationship
of means and ends; a man is an end in himself at the same time that he
is a means to other individuals and the community. The teacher is a
means as far as his pupils are concerned; the poet is a means in respect
to all who seek in his writings information or recreation. To carry the
stigmatisation of these facts to a logical conclusion, one would have to
call it immoral to accept anything from parents or teachers; one would
have to reject every good influence--which always comes from
outside--and become completely absorbed in the cult of one's own soul.
One would even have to object to being born, and would have to create
one's self out of nothing. It has always been regarded as the splendid
privilege of great men to exert an ennobling influence on others--why,
therefore, should the influence of a beloved woman on her lover be
objectionable?

Weininger's error in the sphere of eroticism arises from the fact of his
imprisoning love in a formula which is by no means applicable to it. In
love the mutual relationship of means and ends does not exist, the lover
feels that the beloved is always an end in herself in the highest sense;
he would find it impossible inwardly to establish such a relationship
between himself and her; very frequently himself, his well-being and his
life, are of no account to him if he can serve her. Weininger's
assertion that at the consummation of love every woman is merely the
means of gratifying a man's passion, is simply not true. On the
contrary, it is a characteristic of genuine love that the physical
embrace is of no great importance, does not even rise to full
consciousness. The personality of the beloved is everything, physical
sensation nothing. Weininger identifies love with passion and his
argument is easily refutable by the experience of many. In love there is
neither means nor end; if, however, categoric formulas must be used, one
might speak of a reciprocal action. Equally erroneous is his
corresponding assertion that the artist loves a woman spiritually, that
is, in the sense of deifying her, for the purpose of drawing from her
inspiration for his work. If he loves her, then his love is the alpha
and omega of his striving, and if love inspires him to achieve a
masterpiece, the effect of love on him must be considered great and
good, because it is a creative effect.

The extreme individualistic ideal would lead to an absolutely
unproductive view of life. Asceticism stands condemned because it is
unproductive. I may regard an Indian fakir who has become so godlike
that he can sustain life on six grains of rice a day, and draw breath
once every quarter of an hour--to say nothing of speech or
cleanliness--as a very strange individual; but I see nothing positive or
important in him. The road which leads from the individual to the
universal cannot be the rejection of the world; it must be its
perfection, resulting from productivity of mind, or soul, or deed. He
who on principle refuses to be productive, condemns himself to
annihilation in the higher sense. I admit that he who works at his own
perfection does good work, too; but it is the inexplicable secret of all
truly creative labour--in the highest as well as in the lowest
sense--that it must ultimately affect the world and eternity. The
strongest emotions, the inner illumination of the mystic and the love of
the great erotic, have been conceived in the _heart of hearts_; and have
ultimately grown beyond their creator, from the individual to the
universal. The more intimate and powerful the creative impulse has been,
the more retarded and abundant may, perhaps, be the effect. But the
chain which links the great soul to humanity cannot be broken, the work
will make itself manifest--the work of deed, the work of the mind, the
work of love--I do not say to "the public," but to life, to the world.
The creative personality alone is the father of the objective values of
civilisation.

The great love which led Dante, Goethe and Wagner to the summits of
humanity is in the highest sense positive and creative. And he who
realises that love is not subject to sexual impulse, who knows it as
something purely personal, foreign and even hostile to the genus, must
admit that it is one of the very highest of values. A contrary ethic is
sterile, Indian, unproductive, not European. I am well aware that
Weininger did not explicitly draw this conclusion; but he rejects
spiritual love because it endows the lover with new capacities, the
capacities of growth and perfection, and he is therefore in the last
resort a representative of philosophic nihilism.


_(c) Dante and Goethe_

The worship of woman found its climax in Dante. Through the work of his
youth, the _Vita Nuova_ and his masterpiece, _The Divine Comedy_, we can
trace step by step the stages of the road, beginning with a glimpse of a
young girl in Florence, and ending with the incorporation of a woman
into the world-system. We are face to face with an extraordinary process
of evolution. The young girl he had seen a few times, and who died in
her youth, goes on growing and developing in his soul, until, at last,
in him the will to raise woman above time into eternity, the will to
make her a member of the divine system, reaches its full realisation.
What had been begun by the troubadours and fully comprehended by the
poets of the _sweet new style_, reached completion in Dante, and, was
henceforth an eternal value for all humanity.

We see that the later troubadours were inclined to blend the lady of
their heart with the universal Lady of Heaven; the need of deifying the
loved woman was at the root of many dubious growths, and possibly these
early poets were also to some extent influenced by their dread of the
Inquisition (which never gained much importance in Italy). The new poets
deepened this feeling, stripped it of all externalities, and appeared
before the adored simply as lovers. They did not require the dogmatic
support of the Church, their own feeling was sufficient guarantee.
Dante, moreover, was possessed by a craving for an absolutely perfect
and consistent world-system, and had, besides, the power to build it up
and people it with sublime intelligences. And in this system, the crown
and perfection of the mediaeval-Catholic conception of the universe, he
assigned to the love of his youth a high and permanent place by the side
of the deities. Dante thus raised his individual feeling to a universal
dogma, and enriched the Catholic heaven by his personal love. What for
two hundred years had been a dream and a desire, had become a matter of
faith and truth. Now, and not until now, love and religion were one; the
love of a woman had been included in the system of eternal verities, and
had become identical with the love of immortality. "Love which moves the
sun and all the stars" was acknowledged as a fundamental feeling. The
anchoring of the subjective in the eternal was achieved in this
metaphysical setting: the deification of the beloved; and no greater
gift was ever vouchsafed to man than the creation of metaphysically true
beings and values. All that had been done before had merely prepared the
ground for this great deed: the enshrinement of the beloved in the heart
of the divine secrets.

The _Vita Nuova_, which is at once a glorified historical record and the
greatest testimony of metaphysical love, emphasises from the outset the
inspiring, purifying influence emanating from the beloved; Beatrice is
"the destroyer of all evil and the queen of all virtue." "When I saw her
coming towards me and could hope for her salutation, the world held no
enemy for me, yea, I was filled with the fire of brotherly love to such
an extent, that I was ready to forgive anybody who had ever offended me.
And whoever had begged me for a gift, I should have replied: Love! and
my face would have been full of humility." Even before his love had been
translated to the world beyond, he portrayed spiritual love as hardly
any other poet before or after him. The women of Florence ask Dante:
"Why doest thou love this lady, seeing that thou canst not even bear her
presence? Tell us, for the end of such love must be incomprehensible to
men." And he replies: "Ladies, the end and aim of my love is but the
salutation of that lady; therein I find that beatitude which is the goal
of my desire. And now that it has pleased her to deny me her salutation,
my whole happiness is contained in that which can never perish." And the
women: "Tell us, then, wherein lies such happiness?" "In the words that
praise my lady" (that is to say in the emotion which is an end in itself
and in its artistic expression). The lover never exchanged a word with
her; had he done so, attempting to establish a reciprocal relationship,
Beatrice, bereft of his idealising love, would have had to descend from
her pedestal and show herself a girl like all the rest. Not until after
her deification has become an established fact, does Beatrice (in the
beginning of the _Divine Comedy_) remember her lover and come to save
him. In one of his poems Dante says that not every woman could inspire
such a love, but only a woman of peculiar nobility of character. It is
very apparent that Dante, at first, was not sure of himself, and that he
only gradually discovered the new consciousness which was stirring his
soul; with every chapter the beloved recedes to a greater distance and
becomes more sacred to him.

It is quite in keeping with all this that our knowledge of this girl of
eighteen is very vague and uncertain. Some of Dante's commentators
believe her to have been a figment of his brain, a woman who never
lived, or an allegory of wisdom, virtue, the Church, theology, etc. But
at the death of her father Beatrice again behaves like any other earthly
maiden. There is a grain of truth in every one of these theories, for
Dante was a great scholastic as well as a great poet, and in more
advanced years he felt a need somehow to connect the love of his youth
with the system of the Church; this could be done in an allegorical way
without being inwardly untruthful.

Vague forces, which the lover himself realises as mysterious, run high
in the _Vita Nuova_ and in the poems; the lover has hallucinations in
sleep and sickness. In the third canzone Dante speaks of the
impossibility of comprehending what gave him a glimpse of the nature of
his mistress. It was a foreboding of new and great things, struggling
slowly and gradually to take shape, for the creation of a world-system,
one of whose supporting pillars was personal love of an individual, was
an unprecedented achievement. "When she speaks a spirit inclines from
heaven." The angels implore God to call this "miracle" into their midst,
but God wills that they shall have patience until the "Hope of the
Blessed" appears.

     Love says of her can there be mortal thing
     At once adorned so richly and so pure?
     Then looks on her and silently affirms
     That heaven designed in her a creature new.

                              (_Transl. by_ C. LYELL.)

Again and again recurs the motif of her beauty before which the world
must fall prostrate. In a sonnet not included in the _Vita Nuova_ he
says:

     In heaven itself that lady had her birth,
     I think, and is with us for our behoof;
     Blessed are they who meet her on the earth.

                         (_Transl. by_ D.G. ROSSETTI.)

The lover has a foreboding of the fate awaiting him: "I have set my feet
into that phase of life from whence there is no return." He divines the
sorrow to which love has predestined him. But others, too, divining that
this man "expects more, perhaps, of love than others," ask him to
explain to them the essence of love, and he answers them with the famous
sonnet:

     _Amor e cor gentil sono una cosa_
     (Love and the gentle heart are but one thing.)

The death of Beatrice is accompanied by the same phenomena as was the
death of Christ: the sun lost its brilliance, stars appeared in the
sky, birds fell to the ground, dead, the earth trembled; God visibly
intervened in the course of nature.

     For from the lamp of her meek lowlihead
     Such an exceeding glory went up hence,
     That it woke wonder in the Eternal Sire,
     Until a sweet desire
     Entered Him for that lovely excellence,
     So that He bade her to Himself aspire;
     Counting this weary and most evil place
     Unworthy of a thing so full of grace.

                         (_Transl. by_ D.G. ROSSETTI.)

In the 29th chapter, which we, to-day, do not readily understand, Dante
established by a system of symbolical numbers a connection between
Beatrice and the Trinity; the deification of the beloved had been
achieved in thought and emotion, religion enriched by a new divinity.
"Love, weeping, has filled my heart with new knowledge," he says, at the
conclusion of the work of his youth. I repeat what I have already said
in another place, and supported by passages from the _Divine Comedy_: It
was never Dante's intention to write fictitious poems in our meaning of
the term, but at every hour of his life he was convinced that he was
proclaiming the pure truth; he knew himself to be the chosen vehicle for
the interpretation of the eternal system of the world.

At the conclusion of the _Vita Nuova_, Beatrice is a divine being,
devoid of all emotion--enthroned in Heaven; in the _Comedy_ she becomes
her lover's saviour and redeemer, and through him a helper of all
humanity. The love of the youth had found no response in the heart of
the Florentine maiden, but the soul of the glorified woman was inspired
by love of him. She trembles for him, and when Mary's messenger
admonishes her: "Why doest thou not help him who has loved thee so
much?" she sends Virgil to him as a guide and finally herself leads her
redeemed lover to God. Now she responds to his love; she has even wept
for him. This ultimately fulfilled, but always chastely hidden longing
for love in return, gives the woman-worship of Dante a peculiarly noble
charm. At the end of his journey through life he prays to her, who has
again disappeared from his sight, and his last confession is: "Into a
free man thou transform'st a slave."

Love's greatest miracle has been made manifest in him; it has
transfigured and purified him, and made of the slave of the world and
its desires, a personality--the fundamental motif of love.

There is a close connection between the metaphysical love of Dante and
Goethe's confession in the last scene of _Faust_, which reveals the
poet's deepest conviction, his final judgment of life. The confessions
of both poets are identical to the smallest detail. The _Divine Comedy_
represents the journey of humanity through the kingdoms of the world in
a manner unique and representative, applicable alike to all men, in the
sense of the Catholic Middle Ages. The fundamental idea of _Faust_ is
again the desire of man to find the right way through the world. Here
also the journey through life is intended to be typical; it is
undertaken five hundred years later; the scene is laid for the most part
on the surface of the earth, but the ultimate goal of the wayfarer is
Heaven. Hell, instead of being a subterraneous region, is embodied in a
presence, accompanying and tempting man; modern man has no faithful
guide; he must himself seek the way which to the man of the Middle Ages
was clearly indicated in the Bible. The love of his youth (which in the
case of Dante fills a book in itself) is merely an episode at the
beginning of the tragedy--the lover wanders through all the kingdoms of
the world, finally to return home to the beloved.

The last scene of _Faust_ is an unfolding of metaphysical love into its
inherent multiplicity; its summit is the metaphysical love of woman. All
human striving is determined and crowned by the saving grace of love.
Faust has no longer a specific name; he has dropped everything
subjective, and is briefly styled _a lover_; like Dante, he has become
representative of humanity. The hour of death revives the memory of the
love of his youth, apparently forgotten in the storm and stress of a
crowded life, yet never quite extinguished in the heart of his heart.
Margaret is present and guides him (as Beatrice guided Dante) upward, to
the _Eternal-Feminine_, that is to say, to the metaphysical consummation
of all male yearning for love. "The love from on high" saves Faust as it
has saved Dante. _The blessed boys_ (who, as well as the angels, are
present in both poems) singing:

     Whom ye adore shall ye
     See face to face.[2]

are again referring to the transcendently loving lover. Like Beatrice,
Margaret intercedes for him (intercession for her lover has always been
woman's profoundest prayer) with the Queen of Heaven:

     Incline, oh incline,
     All others excelling,
     In glory aye dwelling,
     Unto my bliss thy glance benign;
     The loved one ascending,
     His long trouble ending,
     Comes back, he is mine!

These words are more intimate and human than the words of Beatrice, but
fundamentally they mean the same thing. Dante, meeting Beatrice again,
says:

     And o'er my spirit that so long a time
     Had from her presence felt no shuddering dread,
     Albeit my eyes discovered her not, there moved
     A hidden virtue from her, at whose touch
     The power of ancient love was strong within me.[3]

But when he who has said so much beholds her face to face, he is
stricken dumb.

Beatrice receives Dante from his guide and herself unveils to him the
mysteries of life. Similarly Margaret beseeches the Virgin:

     To guide him, be it given to me
     Still dazzles him the new-born day!

and receives from on high the command which the symbolically burdened
Beatrice knows intuitively:

     Ascend, thine influence feeleth he,
     He'll follow on thine upward way.

As Beatrice approaches, the angels sing:

     Oh! Turn
     Thy saintly eyes to this thy faithful one,
     Who to behold thee many a wearisome pace
     Hath measured.

And with the fundamental feeling of Dante's _Divine Comedy_ Faust
concludes:

     The ever-womanly
     Draws us above.

The earthly love of his youth is fulfilled in the dream of metaphysical
love, in the dream of a divine woman. The genius creates, at the
conclusion of his life, the fulfilment of all longing. It may sound
paradoxical, but Faust--like Dante and Peer Gynt--unconsciously sought
Margaret in the hurly-burly of the world; not the young girl whom he had
seduced and deserted, but the _Eternal-Feminine_, the purely spiritual
love, which in his youth he divined, but destroyed, bound by the
shackles of desire. To Dante, to whom life and poem were one, as well as
to Goethe-Faust, the memory of first love remained typical of all
genuine, profound feeling; with Dante love and Beatrice are identical.
In the soul of these two men metaphysical love, the longing for the
eternal in woman, which they did not find on earth, gradually awoke to
life. Both place the glorified mistress by the side of another woman,
the Catholic Queen of Heaven. In Dante's, as well as in Goethe's
Paradise two women, a personal one and a universal one, are loved and
adored. The second woman, too, has her exclusive, ecstatic worshipper.
St. Bernard, the _Doctor Marianus_ of Dante, prostrating himself before
her, addresses to her the sublime prayer which begins:

     Oh, Virgin! Mother! Daughter of thy Son!

and in _Faust_ we meet again the _Doctor Marianus_ burning--as the
representative of the totality of her worshippers--with the "sacred joy
of love" (Dante says

     The Queen of Heaven for whom my soul
     Burns with love's rapture)

and pronouncing the most beautiful prayer to the Madonna which the world
possesses, and which is almost identical with Dante's:

     Virgin, pure from taint of earth,
     Mother, we adore thee,
     With the Godhead one by birth,
     Queen, we bow before thee!

And, prostrated before her:

     Penitents, her saviour-glance
     Gratefully beholding,
     To beatitude advance,
     Still new pow'rs unfolding!
     Thine each better thought shall be,
     To thy service given!
     Holy Virgin, gracious be,
     Mother, Queen of Heaven!

In the Divine Comedy St. Bernard prays:

     So mighty art thou, Lady, and so great,
     That he who grace desireth and comes not
     To thee for aidence, fain would have desire
     Fly without wings.

The _Chorus mysticus_ could equally well form the conclusion of the
_Comedy_. The _inadequate_ which to _fulness groweth_, is what the
Provencals already, in their time, realised as _folly_, as a paradox:
the metaphysical love of woman, for ever remaining dream and longing,
always unfulfilled, the eternal-feminine.

As the _Mater Gloriosa_ appears, Dante exclaims:

     Thenceforward what I saw
     Was not for words to speak, nor memory's self
     To stand against such outrage on her skill.

And Goethe:

     In starry wreath is seen
     Lofty and tender,
     Midmost the heavenly queen,
     Known by her splendour.

Here the "sacred fire of love," metaphysical eroticism, has reached its
absolute climax. The universe is represented by a divine woman, and man,
abandoning himself to her, worships her. Goethe's _Faust_ concludes at
this point, but Dante went further, right into the heart of the eternal
glory of the Deity, there to lose himself.

I have previously said that the last scene of _Faust_ was the final
unfolding of the manifold blossom of metaphysical eroticism, and I will
proceed to establish my point. Hitherto I have used the term
metaphysical eroticism always in its narrow sense of love of woman.
Henceforth I shall use it in its broader meaning of mystical love in
general, all love that is projected on the transcendental and the
divine. Emotion is the specific domain of humanity, its power, its
essence. And in the profoundest emotion, in love, a connection between
the temporal and the eternal may be divined. Hence the Christian mystery
of mysteries, God giving His Son to the world for love of humanity; God
unable to approach the world other than as a lover--sacrificing Himself
for the sake of love. We cannot conceive the Sublime with any other
principal function than that of love; for love is the deepest and
profoundest emotion of the human heart, and, in accordance with the
first postulate, must therefore be the soul of the universe. On this
point all mystics and all metaphysical ecstatics are agreed; "God is
love" is written in the Gospel of St. John. "Love which moves the sun
and all the stars," stands at the termination of Dante's masterpiece:
and in _Faust_ the _Pater Profundus_ confesses:

     So love, almighty, all-pervading,
     Does all things mould, does all sustain.

He is still wrestling for divine love; he still has to fight against the
temptations of doubt (of thought),

     Oh, God! My troubled thoughts composing,
     My needy heart do thou illume!

But the true enthusiastic lover of the divine, compelled to annihilate
himself so as to become absorbed in God, the lover who no longer knows
the difference between pain and delight, is represented by the _Pater
Ecstaticus_: The condition of rest is foreign to him, ceaselessly moving
up and down, he sings:

     Joy's everlasting fire,
     Love's glow of pure desire,
     Pang of the seething breast,
     Rapture a hallowed guest!
     Darts pierce me through and through,
     Lances my flesh subdue,
     Clubs me to atoms dash,
     Lightnings athwart me flash,
     That all the worthless may
     Pass like a cloud away,
     While shineth from afar,
     Love's gem, a deathless star!

These ejaculations completely exhaust the emotional life of the
self-destructive metaphysical erotic--he is conscious of nothing but his
passion of love which eclipses all else. With him the second form of
metaphysical love, the love-death, is reached. Goethe, in creating this
character, must have had in his mind the unique Jacopone da Todi. For
this rapturous love was the keynote of Jacopone's character, his whole
life was one great ecstasy:

     My heart was all to broken,
     As prostrate I was lying,
     With dear love's fiery token
     Swift from the archer flying;
     Wounded, with sweet pain soaken,
     Peace became war--and dying,
     My soul with pain was soaken,
     Distraught with throes of love.

     In transports I am dying,
     Oh! Love's astounding wonder!--
     For love, his fell spear plying,
     Has cleft my heart asunder.
     Around the blade are lying
     Sharp teeth, my life to sunder,
     In rapture I am dying,
     Distraught with throes of love.

And:

     Oh, Love! oh, Love! oh, Jesus, my desire,
     Oh, Love! I hold thee clasped in sweet embrace!
     Oh, Love! embracing thee, could I expire!
     Oh, Love! I'd die to see thee face to face.
     Oh, Love! oh, Love! I burn in rapture's fire,
     I die, enravished in the soul's embrace.

The legend has it that the heart of Jacopone broke with the intensity of
love. This would have been a love-death of cosmic grandeur.

Before Jacopone St. Bernard, in whom all the radiations of metaphysical
eroticism are traceable, was consumed by similar emotions. Some of his
Latin poems very much resemble the poems of his successor:

     Oh, most sweet Jesu, Saviour blest,
     My yearning spirit's hope and rest,
     To thee mine inmost nature cries,
     And seeks thy face with tears and sighs.

     Thou, my heart's joy where'er I rove,
     Thou art the perfecting of love;
     Thou art my boast--all praise be thine,
     Jesu, the world's salvation, mine!


     Then his embrace, his holy kiss,
     The honeycomb were naught to this!
     'Twere bliss fast bound to Christ for aye,
     But in these joys is little stay.

     This love with ceaseless ardour burns,
     How wondrous sweet no stranger learns;
     But tasted once, the enraptured wight,
     Is filled with ever new delight.

     Now I behold what most I sought;
     Fulfilled at last my longing thought;
     Lovesick, my soul to Jesus turns,
     And all my heart within me burns.

                          (_Transl. by_ T.G. CRIPPEN.)

We read in his writings: "Blessed and sacred is he to whom it has been
given to experience this in his earthly life; even if he have
experienced it only once, for the space of a fleeting minute. For to
melt away completely, as it were, as if one had ceased to exist, to be
emptied of self, dissolved in holy emotion, has not been given to mortal
life, but is the state of the blessed."

I shall have to refer to both men in a future chapter, when I shall
examine the degenerate growths of metaphysical eroticism; for the ardour
of their souls was frequently kindled by sexual imaginings; in the case
of emotional mystics it is often difficult to distinguish between
sensual conceptions and the pure love of God (a fact which does not,
however, justify the superficial opinion that all mysticism is diverted
sexuality).

It is obvious that this love of God is not the original creation of the
lover, as is the deifying love of woman, but the mystic love whose
self-evident object is God or eternity. Jacopone's (and later on
Zinzendorf's) love of Jesus, though projected on a historical
personality, was fundamentally the same thing. The love of God also--and
in this connection I might mention Jacob Boehme, Alphonso da Liguori,
Novalis--is metaphysical eroticism; but I have restricted my subject to
the metaphysical love of woman, and shall not overstep my limits. I will
merely elucidate a little more the last scene of _Faust_.

_Pater seraphicus_, a title given both to St. Francis and to
Bonaventura--requires but a few words: he, too, praises metaphysical
love, the essence of the supreme spirits.

     Thus the spirits' nature stealing
     Through the ether's depths profound;
     Love eternal, self-revealing,
     Sheds beatitude around.

But even the _more perfect angels_ cannot free themselves from the
dualism of all things human (body and soul)--an unmistakable confession
of metaphysical dualism:

     Parts them God's love alone,
       Their union ending.

The identity of the last scene of _Faust_, Goethe's masterpiece, and the
conclusion of Dante's _Divine Comedy_, is so obvious that I do not think
any one could deny it. I have pointed out the thought underlying both
works, and could easily advance further proof of their similarity, but I
will keep within the limits of the last scene which contains the
totality of metaphysico-erotic yearning, and I contend that it is very
remarkable that a lifetime after the composition of Margaret, Faust (and
with him Goethe) very old, very wise, and a little cold, having had
love-affairs with demi-goddesses, and having finally renounced the love
of woman, found his mission and his happiness in uninterrupted,
productive activity. He has discovered the final value in work. But the
long-forgotten heaven opens and the love of his youth comes to meet him.
Stripped of everything earthly, a divine being, she still loves him and
shows him the way to salvation, presented under the aspect of the
_Eternal-Feminine_--exactly as in the _Divine Comedy_. There must be a
reason for the uniformity of feeling in the case of the two greatest
subjective poets of Europe (Shakespeare was greater than either, but he
was quite impersonal), for the logical possibility that Goethe imitated
Dante, and borrowed his supreme values from him, cannot be maintained
for a moment. Their mutual characteristic is the longing for
metaphysical love. When these great lovers experienced for the first
time the sensation of love, their hearts were thrown open to the
universe, they had the first powerful experience of eternity, and they
became poets. The first love and the cosmic consciousness of genius were
simultaneously present, they were one in their inmost soul. (With the
philosopher it is a different matter, for to him the love of woman is
not fraught with the same tremendous significance.) This experience of
first love, awakening the consciousness of eternity, remained to them
for all time interwoven with religion and metaphysics--interwoven, that
is to say, with all transcendent longing. And though the aged Faust had
believed it to be buried in the dark night of forgotten things, it was
still alive in his inmost heart, and the dying man's vision of the
Divine took colour and shape from it.

The source of both great poems was the poet's will to assimilate the
world and recreate it, impregnated with his own soul; the secret motive
powers were the mystic love of eternity and the love of woman which had
outgrown this world and aspired to the next. To Goethe, thirsting to
give a concrete shape to his yearning, God and eternity were too
intangible, too remote and incomprehensible--but the woman he loved with
religio-erotic intensity was familiar to him. The Eternal-Feminine is
thus not fraught with incomprehensibility, but is rather, and this
necessarily, the final conclusion. For this conclusion is a profession
of metaphysical eroticism, that is to say, the _Eternal-Feminine_ in
contradistinction to the _Transitory-Feminine_. Both Dante, the devout
son of the Middle Ages, and Goethe, the champion of modern culture,
demand, in virtue of the inherent right of their genius, the
consummation of their mystic yearning for love in another life, and
achieve the creation of the divine woman. Precisely because Margaret was
nothing but a little provincial, Goethe could sublimate her into a new
being, for the greater the tension between reality and the vision of the
soul, the greater is the task and the more gigantic the creative power
which such a task may develop. It has been said that, in this scene,
Goethe revealed leanings towards Catholicism. I do not pretend to deny
it offhand, but I must insist on these leanings being understood in the
sense of my premises. Goethe took from tradition those elements which
were able to materialise his spiritual life and gave them a new
interpretation. We are justified in believing that he accepted nothing
but what was conformable to his nature; the Madonna represented his
profoundest feeling and, like Dante (I attribute the greatest importance
to this), he created a new deity, moulded in the shape of his first
love, and placed it by the side of the universal Queen of Heaven, the
Madonna of the Catholic Church, transformed by love.

The emotional life of both poets agrees fundamentally. They differ not
so much in feeling as in thought and in faith. Dante possessed
unshakable faith in the reality of his visions; eternal love in the
shape of Beatrice was awaiting him; his vision was pure, eternal truth.
The vision of Goethe, on the other hand, was poetic longing, tragical,
because the vision of the transcendent came to the modern poet only in
rare hours. Where Dante possessed, Goethe must seek, strive and err.

The deifying love of woman is, as we have seen, the extreme development
of the second stage, in which sexual impulse and spiritual love are
strictly separated, in which man despises and fights his natural
instinct, or abandons himself to it--which is the same in
principle--while his soul, worshipping love, soars heavenward. This
dualism of feeling corresponds to the persistent dualism of Christianity
and the whole mediaeval period. But as Goethe is frequently looked upon
as a _monist_, my proposition that he was a dualist _in eroticis_ will
possibly be rejected, in spite of the fact that his emotional life is
revealed to us with great lucidity. His first important work, his
_Werther_, which is also one of the most important monuments of
sentimental love, contains the germs of love as we understand it; the
love which is no longer content to look upon sexuality and soul as two
opposed principles, but strives to blend them in the person of the
beloved. I will revert to _Werther_ later on. This third stage, love in
the modern sense, is programmatically established (as it were) in
_Elective Affinities_, but all the rest of the very abundant evidence of
his emotional life exhibits the typically dualistic feeling. Many of his
early poems evidence sexuality pure and simple; in the _Venetian
Epigrams_ and in the _Roman Elegies_ it is even held up as a positive
value. In the third Elegy, for instance, the poet's sensuality is linked
directly to the famous lovers of antiquity, and everything which aspires
beyond it is rejected. In the same way his _West-Eastern Divan_ is
characterised by a gay sensuality with homo-sexual tendencies.

The sensual quality of Goethe's eroticism was partly spent in his
relationship with Christiane Vulpius. The following passage, which forms
an interesting counterpart to Goethe's famous correspondence with
Charlotte von Stein, is taken from a letter written to Christiane
Vulpius during his absence from home. "The beds everywhere are very
wide, and you would have no reason for complaint, as you sometimes have
at home. Oh, my sweet heart! There is no such happiness on earth as
being together."

If Christiane represented sensuality, unrelieved by any other feeling,
Frau von Stein represented the most important object of Goethe's craving
for spiritual love. These two liaisons were to some extent
contemporaneous; the _Roman Elegies_ and the famous letters to Charlotte
von Stein were written at the same period. When she reproached him with
his love-affair with Christiane, he replied with consistent dualism:
"And what sort of an affair is it? Whose interests are suffering by it?"
Frau von Stein, his senior by seven years, was thirty-four years old,
and mother of seven children when Goethe first met her. According to
Schiller she "can never have been beautiful," and in a letter to Koerner
the latter says: "They say that their relationship (Goethe's and
Charlotte von Stein's) is absolutely pure and irreproachable." It was a
great mistake ever to regard this relationship as anything but a purely
spiritual one; Goethe never felt any passion for Charlotte; he called
her "his sister," the "guide of his soul"; he told her of his little
love-affairs and was never jealous of her husband. The following are a
few typical passages culled from his letters, arranged chronologically:
"My only love whom I can love without torment!" Then, quite in the
spirit of the _dolce stil nuovo_: "Your soul, in which thousands believe
in order to win happiness," "The purest, truest and most beautiful
relationship which (with the exception of my sister) ever existed
between me and any woman." "The relationship between us is so strange
and sacred, that I strongly felt, on that occasion, that it cannot be
expressed in words, that men cannot realise it." The following passage
written by Goethe when he was thirty, might have been written by
Guinicelli or by Dante: "You appeared to me like the Madonna ascending
into heaven; in vain did the abandoned mourner stretch out his arms, in
vain did his tearful glance plead for a last return--she was absorbed in
the splendour surrounding her, longing only for the crown hovering
above her head." "I long to be purified in triple fire so as to be
worthy of you." He addresses a prayer to her and says: "On my knees I
implore you to complete your work and make a good man of me." "While
writing Tasso, I worshipped you." Charlotte knew intuitively what he
desired of her, and remained silent and passive like the Madonna. Not a
single sensual, or even passionate word, replied to all these
utterances.

In the course of time the relationship between the lovers became one of
equality; the note of adoration disappeared, and the keynote of his
letters became friendship and familiarity. "Farewell, sweet friend and
beloved, whose love alone makes me happy." In another letter he said
that all the world held no further prize for him, since he had found
everything in her. And just as spiritual love approached more and more
the mean of a familiar friendship, so was his sexuality concentrated on
a single woman, on Christiane, in this connection, too, seeking a mean.
But it is an important point that the fundamental dualistic feeling
remained unchanged. There was no woman in Goethe's life in regard to
whom he arrived at, or even aspired to, the blending of both emotions in
a higher intuition.

Even before his friendship with Frau von Stein, at the time of his
engagement to Lili Schoenemann, Goethe experienced a spiritual love for
a girl he had never seen. He calls Countess Auguste Stolberg "his
angel," "his only, only maiden," "his golden child," and says: "I have
an intuition that you will save me from great tribulation, and that no
other being on earth could do it." These letters also contain the
significant passage: "Miserable fate which has denied me a happy mean."
And touching the love of his youth, Lotte, Goethe wrote to Kestner: "I
really had no idea that all that was in her, for I always loved her far
too much to observe her."

The Princess in "Tasso" and "Iphigenia" who delivers Orestes from unrest
and insanity, are modelled on Charlotte. Tasso is unmistakably a
fantastic woman-worshipper, a fact of which Leonore is fully aware:

     Now he exalts her to the starry heavens,
     In radiant glory, and before that form
     Bows down like angels in the realms above.
     Then, stealing after her, through silent fields,
     He garlands in his wreath each beauteous flower.

     He loves not us--forgive me what I say--
     His lov'd ideal from the spheres he brings
     And does invest it with the name we bear.
     He has relinquished passion's fickle sway,
     He clings no longer with delusion sweet
     To outward form and beauty to atone
     For brief excitement by disgust and hate.[4]

And Tasso says:

                                  My very knees
     Trembled beneath me and my spirit's strength
     Was all required to hold myself erect,
     And curb the strong desire to throw myself
     Prostrate before her. Scarcely could I quell
     The giddy rapture.

The significant avowal addressed by Dante to Beatrice: "Into a free man
thou transform'st a slave," the seal of all great spiritual love, was
repeated by Goethe in his letters to Charlotte, and is again repeated in
Tasso:

     Over my spirit's depths there comes a change;
     Relieved from dark perplexity I feel,
     Free as a god, and all I owe to you.

Very interesting is also a remark which Goethe made to Eckermann: "Woman
is a silver vessel in which we men lay golden apples. I did not deduce
my idea of woman from reality, but I was born with it, or I conceived
it--God knows how." These notable words, deliberately pronounced, reveal
Goethe's feeling very clearly; he knows that there is a little
self-deception in his attitude towards woman, but he consciously and
lovingly clings to it. His pronouncements are not contradictions; it is
natural, almost essential, that in the soul of the highly-gifted and
highly-developed representative of a mature civilisation the whole
wealth of human emotions should be revivified. He possesses all
psychical qualities--at least potentially--and one element after the
other regains life and becomes productive. We shall see this with
startling clearness when we come to examine the emotional life of
Richard Wagner. The intimate connection between the individual and the
entire evolutionary process of the race will then become evident.

It is remarkable that Dante, too, wrote a poem clearly expressive of the
fact that the beloved woman does not actually possess the qualities
ascribed to her, but that she has been endowed with them by the
imagination of her lover.

I shall discuss the emotional life of only one other poet in detail, and
that one is Michelangelo. For the most part the poets whose emotions
were akin to that of Dante and Goethe were men who created their ideal
woman because reality left them unsatisfied. In passing I will mention
Beethoven, and his touching letter to his "immortal love" ("My angel, my
all, my I!"), whose name, in spite of all the strenuous attempts to
discover it, is to this day not known with any certainty; even if it
should ever be discovered, Beethoven's "immortal love" will yet remain a
figment of his brain, based on a human woman.

Together with Beethoven, we may notice the other great "old bachelor"
Grillparzer, and his eternal fiancee Kathi Froehlich, and the critical
Hebbel, who at the time of composing "Genovefa" wrote in his diary:
"All earthly love is merely the road to the heavenly love."


Before closing this chapter, I must draw attention to a strange fact in
connection with the psychology of races. All nations endowed with fair
mental gifts and a sympathetic understanding of nature, have in the
period of their youth and anthropomorphistic and animistic thought
worshipped light, and its source, the sun, as the supreme deity, the
giver of joy and abundance. All the benevolent deities of the Arians
were celestial beings, all the malevolent divinities spirits of
darkness: Olympian gods and the demons of the netherworld--Aesir and
Giants. To the naive mind of the Indo-Germanic races it appeared a
matter of course that the sun, the conqueror of night and winter, the
fertilizing, life-giving deity, should be worshipped as the active male
principle, and represented as a god, while on the other hand the moon
was usually conceived as a female deity. In primitive Christianity
Christ, as the bringer of light, was worshipped under the symbol of the
sun. Thus we naturally find in the old and new Indo-Germanic languages
the designation of the sun--or the sun-god--of the masculine gender. In
the following words our word _sun_ is easily recognisable:

     Savar and svari (the oldest Indo-Germanic tongue).
     svar and surya (Sanscrit; savitar--the sungod).
     saval (the oldest European language).
     savel (Gracco-Italian).
     sol (Latin and related languages).

In the Germanic languages and in the Prussian-Lithuanian both genders
occur. (Gothic sunnan and Old High-German sunno). _Sol_ in the Norse
Edda is a female deity, and the Anglo-Saxon _sol_ is also feminine. The
transition from the male to the female gender was achieved in the
Middle-High-German language of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and
the German language is the only one in which the word _sun_ is
feminine. As the old Teutonic deities of light were male (Baldur and
Sigurd), this change of gender must seem strange. The Germanic tribes at
all times observed natural phenomena with the greatest attention,
borrowed their ethical symbols from nature and used natural objects to
represent their highest values. The change of gender of the supreme
symbol of divinity, the sun, can only be explained by the fact that in
the period of woman-worship the highest value was no longer felt as male
but as female, that secretly a goddess had usurped the place of a god.
Very likely the minnesingers finally fixed the female gender when it had
become problematical, and worshipped the loved woman under the divine
symbol of "Lady Sun."

The great erotic, Heinrich of Morungen, says in one of his poems that
his lady is radiant "as the sun at break of day." And also:

     My lady shines into the heart
     As through the glass the sun does shine;
     Thus the beloved lady mine
     Is sweet as May, full of delight,
     Unclouded sunshine, golden light.

Mary, who had been called _Maris Stella_, the morning star, gradually
assumed the symbol of the all-conquering sun. Suso, in one of his poems,
still clinging to the older epithet, makes use of a metaphor
corresponding to the breaking of the sun through clouds. "When the
radiant morning star, Mary, broke through the suffering of thy darkened
heart, it was saluted with gladness and with these words: Greeting,
beautiful, rising morning star, from the fathomless depths of all loving
hearts!" But he also calls Mary: "Thou dazzling mirror of the Eternal
Sun!" And his Biography contains the following beautiful passage: "And
his eyes were opened and he fell on his knees, saluting the rising
morning star, the tender queen of the light of heaven; as the little
birds in the summer time salute the day, so he saluted the luminous
bringer of the eternal day, and he spoke his salutation not
mechanically, but with a sweet low singing of his soul." This is pure
and genuine nature-worship mingled with the worship of Mary.

So much for Suso. In Goethe's _Faust_, Doctor Marianus prays:

     In thy tent of azure blue,
     Queen supremely reigning,
     Let me now thy secret view,
     Vision high obtaining.

It is obvious that here the Queen of Heaven and the sun are conceived as
one. Eichendorff makes use of the metaphor:

     The sun is smiling languidly
     Like to a woman wondrous sweet.

The typically un-Teutonic modern poet, Alfred Mombert, on the other
hand, conceives the sun as a youth, and contrary to all custom, calls a
poem: _Der_ Sonnengeist (the sun-spirit).

The great Italians, also, were not unaware of this change of the sex of
the supreme value; at the conclusion of the _Paradise_ there is a
passage (in St. Bernard's prayer) which points to a connection in
Dante's mind between the sun and the Queen of Heaven:

     "The love that moves the sun in heaven!"


_(d) Michelangelo._

In Michelangelo we meet the spirit of Plato and the plastic genius of
Greece raised to a higher plane and lit by the peculiar glory of
Christianity--the conception of the soul as an absolute value.
Michelangelo was thrilled by a passionate love of beauty; beauty
absolute, eternal and immutable. He felt profoundly the need of
salvation, and he possessed an unprecedented power of spiritual vision.
In the end, added to all these things, came consuming love for a woman,
love raised to the pitch of self-destruction, an adoration which
entitles us to regard him, next to Dante, as the greatest metaphysical
lover of all times.

At the court of the Medici at Florence, Ficinio had founded a Platonic
Academy, where Plato's works and the writings of Plotinus--his greatest
pupil--were after two thousand years translated and elucidated. Many
read and a few understood, but only in Michelangelo did the spirit of
Platonic Hellenism revive and become productive; the Platonic ideal of a
purely masculine culture, aesthetically and spiritually perfect,
illumined his soul; once again the unconditional cult of beauty and the
love of the perfect male form, which speaks to us from the _Dialogues_,
quickened an imagination, and boyhood and youth were portrayed in a
manner which has never since been equalled.

Nearly all Michelangelo's youthful male figures--with the exception,
perhaps, of the gigantic David--deviate from the decidedly masculine and
approach the mean, the human in the abstract; thus they seem to us
imbued with a quality of femininity; they even exhibit decidedly female
characteristics. I have in mind first and foremost the youths depicted
on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel (the most soulful adolescent
figures in the world), but also Bacchus, St. John, Adonis and the
figures in the background of the Holy Family at Florence. Cupid and
David Apollo (in the Bargello) are almost hermaphroditic, and even the
Adam, and the unfinished Slaves in the Bobili Gardens exhibit female
characteristics. Without going further into detail I would draw
attention to the breasts and thighs, which positively raise a doubt on
the question of sex. (I am referring to the two youths above the
Erythrean Sybil.) Seen from a distance they create the impression of
female figures, while the youth above Jeremiah is a perfect Hellenic
_ephebos_. On the other hand--with the exception of two of his early
Madonnas and, perhaps, Eve--he has not given us one glorified female
figure; all his women are characterised by something careworn and
unlovely; some of his old women--most strikingly the Cumaic Sybil--are
depicted with absolutely masculine features, masculine figures and
gigantic musculature. His ideal was the Hellenic ideal, was a human form
neither man nor woman; all extremes, but also all peculiarities and
everything personal, were, if not completely suppressed, at any rate
pushed into the background. We regard this ideal, which is alien to our
inherent nature, with a feeling akin to contempt, for the modern ideal
is male and female, but it nevertheless was of great moment in the
obliteration of sex and the accentuation of the purely human. The
Platonic (and also Michelangelo's) love of young men was in its essence
pure love of humanity, love of the perfect human body and the perfect
human soul, whose greatest harmony was achieved in the adolescent.
Moreover, the superior mental endowment of the boy made an intelligent
conversation--so highly appreciated by Platonists and neo-Platonists--
possible, whereas with a girl a man could only jest.

Civilisations and individuals inclining to erotic male friendships are
endowed with great plastic talent. Artists and poets whose genius lies
in the direction of the plastic arts rather than in music, frequently
have homo-sexual leanings. A musical talent, however, is as a rule
accompanied by the love of woman. I know of no great musician, or great
lyrical poet, inclined to erotic friendships with men. The simple song
suggests the love of woman, the artificial metre, let us say the Greek
rhythm, the love of man. I am, however, merely pointing out this
connection, without drawing any conclusions.

The poems addressed by Michelangelo to Tommaso dei Cavalieri breathe a
deep longing for friendship and complete surrender, but above all things
for a return of affection; all barriers between the friends must be
thrown down, "for one soul is living in two bodies."

These poems are calm and well-balanced, and differ greatly from the rest
of his poetry.

     If each the other love, himself foregoing,
     With such delight, such savour and so well
     That both to one sole end their wills combine.

                          (_Transl. by_ J.A. SYMONDS.)

Michelangelo painted "Ganymede" for Tommaso, and even at a ripe old age
he addressed poems to Cechino Bracci, who died at the age of seventeen.

His contempt of woman, without which the spirit of classical Greece,
too, is unthinkable, formed a parallel to his male friendships.

In the prime of his life the Platonic element was superseded by the
other great element which stirred his soul so profoundly. Exceeding the
perfection of form of antique statuary, his later works throb with a
spiritual and passionate life quite peculiar to him; an inward fire
seems to consume his ardent figures. They are not creatures of this
earth, a breath of eternity has touched them; they are an embodiment of
the Platonic heritage which accounts all earthly things as symbols of
eternal beauty, fertilised and glorified by a deep mourning over human
destiny and a longing for deliverance. And when his years were already
beginning to decline, Vittoria Colonna came into his life, a semblance
and symbol of divine perfection. The love which took possession of him
transformed his whole life and lifted it into religion. In his
tempestuous soul this first love, coming so late in life, far exceeded
human limits; it became adoration and religious ecstasy. Michelangelo,
who could not tolerate in friendship any other relationship than that of
complete self-surrender and equality, threw himself into the very dust
before his love and debased himself almost to self-destruction.

His book of poems is filled with an unspeakable longing for the
perfection of earthly beauty and for eternity; and his beloved mistress
is the sole symbol of this metaphysical climax. Earthly beauty is but an
imperfect semblance of the divine beauty, the embodiment of which is his
love. We meet all the familiar motives; he is nothing before her; he is
unworthy of existence; he is like the moon receiving her light from the
sun; love has raised him from his base condition and is teaching him the
futility of all he had hitherto valued.

     Yea, well I see what folly 'twere to think
     That largess dropped from thee like dews from heaven
     Could ever be paid by work so frail as mine.

                          (_Transl. by_ J.A. SYMONDS.)

And of love he says:

     From loftiest stars shoots down a radiance all their own,
     Drawing the soul above,
     And such, we say, is love.

                               (_Transl. by_ HARFORD.)

His poems, which would proclaim him a great poet if he were not an even
greater sculptor, breathe an emotion unsurpassed in its intensity. They
reveal to us in an almost unique manner the emotional process which
culminated in the deification of the beloved. If we did not know that
Vittoria Colonna was an historical individual, not much younger than
Michelangelo himself, and (if we are to credit her portrait) a very
plain woman with a large masculine nose, we might be tempted to believe
her to be a mythical personage like Beatrice Portinari, or Margaret in
_Faust_. But the conviction that all true perfection was centred only in
her, now faced his art and threw its terrible shadow over it.

"Michelangelo conceived love in the Platonic sense," wrote his friend
and biographer, Condivi; but this is only a part of the truth. In the
heart of Michelangelo there took place the tremendous reconciliation
between the Greek cult of beauty and the religion of the beyond; he
blended the finest blossom of Hellenism with the profoundest spirit of
Christianity; he sublimated Plato and Dante into a higher intuition; the
_eroico furore_ of his contemporary, Giordano, had found an embodiment.
The two great rays which illuminated his life: the perfect earthly
beauty to which destiny had called him, and the boundless religious
longing, the last fundamental force of his soul, converged in the
glorified woman. Vittoria appeared to him as the solution of the
world-discord, a solution which he had no right to expect, a miracle.
She was the greatest experience of his great life, an experience which
almost broke him. More than once the thought of Vittoria filled him with
sudden dread. In her he had seen God and the world in one. The powerful
effect of this on so self-reliant a character, a man who had been unable
to find much sympathy with patrons and friends, to whom women had meant
nothing, may easily be imagined. All at once he had found a centre, and
more than that--a solution of all the discords of life, of the eternal
dualism of the earthly and the divine. His love was not the love of a
youth stretching out feelers to the world beyond, but the final creed of
a lonely life which had known nothing but beauty and divinity. With the
passion characteristic of him, he threw himself into this new experience
and made it his fate, flinging world and art aside. Before Vittoria he
ceased to be a sculptor and became a worshipper.

We realise the great difference between this worship and the worship of
Dante. The latter formed the consciousness of eternity, and became a
poet, early in life. He never doubted the profoundest truth, the
metaphysical importance of his love; but in the case of Michelangelo,
the love of an old man was the last event in a life consumed by
restlessness. The adoration of this mysogynist was almost an act of
despair; not a sweet delivery from doubt, but a source of fresh shocks.
It problematised his whole previous existence and nullified the work of
his life. For before this new experience--perfection, met in the
flesh--art broke down. The greatest of sculptors never made an attempt
to imprison the beauty which had appeared to his soul in marble or in
canvas, deeply convinced that such an achievement was beyond the power
of earthly endeavour.

Before Vittoria Michelangelo became deeply conscious of his inmost self;
she gave direction to his longing and was its symbol; she was the
perfection for which he had always striven--and he despaired of his art.

     Thy beauty it befell in yonder spheres:
     A symbol of salvation, bright'ning heaven
     Th' Eternal Artist sent it down to earth;
     If it diminish, years succeeding years,
     My love will lend it but a greater worth.
     Age cannot fade the beauty God has given.

And the conviction that only the idea of eternal beauty has any value,
and that all earthly things are as nothing before it, became stronger
and more tormenting. One instance from many:

     As heat from fire, from loveliness divine
     The mind that worships what recalls the sun,
     From whence she sprang, can be divided never.

                          (_Transl._ by J.A. SYMONDS.)

In the same way he realised the futility of earthly love compared to
metaphysical love:

     The one love soars, the other downward tends,
     The soul lights this while that the senses stir.

And:

     The highest beauty only I desire.

It is extraordinary, however, that even this ecstatic adorer vaguely
suspected that he himself might be the creator of the beauty which he
saw in his mistress. In a sonnet he asks Cupid whether her beauty
really exists, or whether it is a delusion of his senses, and he
receives the reply:

     The beauty thou discernest all is hers;
     But grows in radiance as it soars on high.

                                       (J.A. SYMONDS.)

It is indescribably tragic to watch Michelangelo slowly despairing of
his own genius and art, and becoming more and more dominated by the
thought of the futility of all earthly things and all earthly beauty.
The religious conception of eternity and transcendent beauty, the _forma
universale_ became his last refuge. After Vittoria's death Michelangelo
said to Condivi: "I have only one regret and that is that I never kissed
Vittoria's brow or lips when she lay dying." More and more he brooded on
sin and salvation, incarnation and crucifixion. The beloved mistress had
become the sole herald of eternal truths. Melancholy and mourning took
possession of his soul with an iron grip; he could conceive of only one
happiness, death closely following on birth. But the thought of death
again was seized and symbolised with the old artistic passion:

     And cleansed by fire, I shall live for ever.

     And as the flames are soaring to the sky,
     I, changed and purified, shall soar to heaven.

     Oh, blissful day! When in a single flash
     Time slips away into eternity--
     The sun no longer rides across the skies....

Michelangelo was conscious of his near kinship with Dante; he
illustrated a copy of the _Divine Comedy_ which, unfortunately, is lost,
and wrote a poem on Dante in which the following lines occur:

     Were I but he! Born for like lingering pains,
     Against his exile, coupled with his good,
     I'd gladly change the world's inheritage.

                          (_Transl. by_ J.A. SYMONDS.)

The paintings in the Sistine Chapel, with their materialised thoughts of
destiny, retribution and eternity, originated in a feeling akin to the
feeling underlying the _Divine Comedy_. Both here and there the creation
of celestial and infernal spirits was the outcome of the infinite
longing of the artistic imagination. Both men could spend the human and
creative passions with which their souls were thrilled only on the
supreme and universal. The eternal destiny of man, fate, sin, the
futility of all earthly things, the relationship of the world to God,
love surpassing all human limits and aspiring to the eternal--these are
the common objects over which they brooded. But while it was given to
Dante to create his picture of the world in harmony with his own soul,
and account it a true representation of the world-system; while his
world was a definite place with a beginning and an end, and his
life-work remained in harmony with his own soul, and the universe,
Michelangelo's lacerated soul could find peace only in the ultimate
truth, which filled his heart, and to which he yearned to give plastic
life, only to be unsatisfied after achieving it. George Simmel, in a
profound work, draws our attention to the infinite melancholy which
overshadows all Michelangelo's figures, because his genius aspired to
express the inexpressible. Even the supremest plastic representation of
the passion and longing for the transcendental which thrilled his soul
did not satisfy him. This tragedy is the tragedy of the metaphysical
erotic overflowing its own specific domain. Dante's faith in the
absolute value of his work and in the truth of the consummation of his
love in eternity--which was the sustaining power of his life--remained
unshaken, but Michelangelo lost his faith in his work; art and love
forsook him and withdrew into a transcendental world which he could
divine, but could not grasp. His faith was no blissful certainty; he
knew no more than the dark aspect of things; the imperfection of even
the sublimest, of his art and his love.

Shakespeare's genius could breathe life into all things human, and he
found satisfaction in doing so. Michelangelo's creative, plastic power
seemed illimitable; he possessed all the gifts an artist could possibly
have, but from year to year his conviction of the futility of all
earthly things grew to a profounder certainty. He had knocked at the
iron gate of humanity with his hammer and his chisel; they had broken
into fragments and sorrow made him dumb. There is a stage in the life of
every genius when he comes to this gate, when he has to show his
credentials and reveal the inmost kernel of his being. Dante attempted
to grasp the transcendental in one gigantic vision, Goethe timidly
shrank back from it.

In examining the prophets and youths in the Sistine Chapel, or the
chained men in the Louvre, who seem unable to bear existence, and are
therefore "slaves" of the earth; or in contemplating the half-finished
slaves in the Boboli Gardens, who seem almost to burst the stone in
their wild longing for a higher life; or in reading his last sonnets, we
can conceive a vague idea of the deep melancholy darkening the life of
this man, a gloom which was not the melancholy of the individual, but of
all humanity, unable and unwilling to deceive itself further. Can there
be a greater tragedy than the tragedy of this incomparable artist,
looking back at the work of his lifetime with despair?

     For art and wit and passion fade and vanish,
     Countless achievements, ever new and great,
     Are naught but dross within the sight of heaven.

To Vasari he sent a sonnet denouncing the artistic passion which
abandons itself completely to art:

     Now know I well that that fond phantasy
     Which made my soul the worshipper and thrall
     Of earthly art is vain.

                          (_Transl. by_ J.A. SYMONDS.)

Faith, is to him "the mercy of mercies," for he has never possessed its
deepest conviction.

But the passion which burned in him remained unquelled to the last: his
soul is torn between love and the thought of death.

     Flames of love
     And chill of death are battling in my heart.

He longed to break away from love and find peace, and he called on death
for delivery, but in vain:

     Burdened with years and full of sinfulness
     With evil customs grown inveterate,
     Both deaths I dread that both before me wait,
     Yet feed my heart on poisonous thoughts no less.

                          (_Transl. by_ J.A. SYMONDS.)

And later on he thanks love again for being his deliverer, and not
death.

Michelangelo poured all his heart into these last sonnets. We see his
solitary and heroic age overshadowed by the thought of death. His whole
soul is wrapped in gloom; art is vanity, love is sorrow, the thought of
the futility of all things frames the portrait of his love with a wreath
of black laurel. He ponders on his life, and comes to the conclusion
that

     Among the many years not one was his.

This man, the supremest creative genius the world has known, accused
himself of having wasted his life.

No song of praise ever rose to the Deity from Michelangelo's heart, as
it did at least once or twice during his lifetime from the heart of
Beethoven. He never had one hour of true inward peace. He represents the
metaphysical world-feeling which (in addition to love) is the foundation
of the deification of woman, but it has grown into immensity, and has
been lifted to a higher plane; not only love, but all life is felt as
fragmentary and pointing to a world beyond. If at an earlier stage it
was the love of woman which could not find its consummation on earth, it
is now the whole of our earthly life and all our aspirations which can
only attain to their highest meaning and to final truth in a
metaphysical existence. The tragedy of metaphysical love has deepened
into the supreme tragedy of life.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] The quotations from _Faust_ are from the translation of Anna
Swanwick.

[3] The quotations from the _Divine Comedy_ are from the translation of
Henry Francis Cary.

[4] The quotations from Tasso are from the translation of Anna Swanwick.




