CHAPTER I.

THE LONGING FOR THE SYNTHESIS.


Humanity inherited the pairing-instinct from the animal-world; but as
differentiation progressed, this instinct tended to restrict itself to a
few individuals--sometimes even to a single representative only--of the
other sex. In the beginning of the twelfth century a new and
unprecedented emotion--spiritual love of man for woman based on
personality--made its appearance, and until modern times the two
fundamental erotic principles existed side by side without inner
relationship. Sexuality with its various manifestations has existed from
the beginning; the ultimate object of sexual intercourse is pleasure;
but here and there, and parallel with sexual pleasure, there have been,
in varying degrees of intensity, instances of spiritual love. In the
second half of the eighteenth century there appeared--timidly at first,
but gradually gaining in strength and determination--a tendency to find
the sole course of every erotic emotion in the personality of the
beloved, a longing no longer to dissociate sexual impulse and spiritual
love, but to blend them in a harmonious whole. Personality should knit
body and soul together in a higher synthesis. The first signs of this
longing became apparent in the period of the French revolution; (we find
traces of it in the works of Rousseau and in Goethe's _Werther_); it was
developed by the romanticists and represents the typical form of modern
love with all its incompleteness and inexhausted possibilities. The
achievement of this eagerly desired unity, which would be synonymous
with the victory of personality over the limitations of body and soul,
is the great problem of modern time in the domain of eroticism. The
characteristic of this third stage of eroticism is the complete triumph
of love over pleasure, the neutralisation of the sexual and the
generative by the spiritual and the personal. The physical and spiritual
unity of the lovers has become so much supreme erotic reality, that the
line of demarcation between soul and senses is completely obliterated.
In extreme cases--which are not at all rare--the bodily union is not
realised as anything distinct, specifically pleasurable; it does not
occupy a prominent position in the complex of love; sensuous pleasure,
the universal inheritance from the animal world, has been vanquished by
personality, the supreme treasure of man. The characteristic of the
first stage was the unquestioned sway of one of the elements of erotic
life, sensual gratification (this stage has, of course, never ceased to
exist), as well as the aesthetic pleasure in the beauty of the human
form. The second stage gave prominence to all those spiritual qualities
which were most appreciated, virtue, purity, kindness, wisdom, etc.,
because love rouses and embraces everything in the human soul which is
perfect. In the third stage, sensuous pleasure and spiritual love no
longer exist as separate elements; the personality of the beloved in its
individuality is the only essential, regardless as to whether she be the
bringer of weal or woe, whether she be good or evil, beautiful or plain,
wise or foolish. Personality has--in principle--become the sole, supreme
source of eroticism. In this stage there is no tyranny of man over
woman--as in the sexual stage--no submission of man to woman--as in the
stage of woman-worship; it is the stage of the complete equality of the
sexes, a mutual giving and taking. If sexuality is infinite as matter,
spiritual love eternal as the metaphysical ideal, the synthesis is human
and personal.

Before the eighteenth century, this new erotic union did not exist as a
phenomenon of civilisation, but occasionally we find it anticipated or
vaguely alluded to. Some of the early German minnesingers (such as
Dietmar von Aist and Kuernberg) sometimes betray, especially when
speaking through the medium of a woman, sentiments prophetic of our
modern sentimental ballads. The following verses by Albrecht of
Johansdorf, express the reciprocity characteristic of modern love:

     When two hearts are so united
     That their love can never wane,
     Then I ween no man should blight it,
     Death alone should part the twain.

Even more modern in sentiment are the following stanzas:

     This is love's measure:
     Two hearts and one pleasure,
     Two loves one love, nor more nor less,
     And both right full of happiness.
     In woe one woe,
     And neither from the other go.

Though Walter von der Vogelweide adopted the contemporaneous conception
of love as the source of everything good and noble ("Tell me what is
Love?") he never quite accepted it:

     Love is the ecstasy of two fond hearts,
     If both share equally, then love is there.

More ancient evidence even is the definition of marriage by the
scholastic Hugo of St. Victor, who had leanings towards mysticism:
"Marriage is the friendship between man and woman," he says.

My knowledge of the subject cannot, of course, be unexceptional, but I
do not believe that personal love of the third stage, that is, the
blending of both erotic elements, was quite definitely expressed before
the second half of the eighteenth century. We may be justified in
maintaining that the tension between sexuality and spiritual love had
been slackening in the course of the centuries, that sexuality was
conceived as less diabolical, and love as less celestial than
heretofore; but the principle had remained unchanged. Only the female
portraits of Leonardo da Vinci are deserving of special mention; the
great artist was possibly the first who artistically divined, if he did
not achieve, the synthesis. The exceptional position always granted to
his women--particularly to his Mona Lisa--must doubtless be ascribed to
this premonition. We may be certain that Leonardo not only as artist,
but as lover also, was ahead of his time; but he must be regarded as an
isolated instance. The three stages apply to the eroticism of man only.
His emotion soared from brutality to divinity, and then gradually became
human; his feeling alone has a history. The force which seized, moulded
and transformed him, had no influence over woman. Compared to man, she
is to-day what she was at the beginning, pure nature. Her lover has
always been everything to her; never merely a means for the
gratification of the senses, nor, on the other hand, a higher being to
whom she looked up and whom she worshipped with a purely spiritual love;
but at all times he possessed her undivided love, unable in its naive
simplicity to differentiate between body and soul. The higher intuition,
the object of the supreme erotic yearning of man, for the possession of
which he has struggled for centuries, and even to-day does not fully
possess, has always been a matter of course to her. She whose truest
vocation is love, received from nature that which the greatest of men
have striven hard to win and only half succeeded in winning. Man's
profound dualism is alien to her; her greatness--but also her
limitation--lies in the simplicity and infallibility of her instinct,
which has had no evolution and is consequently not liable to produce
atavisms and aberrations. She is hardly conscious of the chasm between
sexual instinct and personal love. Wherever this is not so, we _may_
find intellectual greatness (as for instance in the case of the Empress
Catherine of Russia), but as a rule we find only morbidness, despondency
and callousness. To the normal woman the phenomena of dualistic
eroticism appear unintelligible, even unwholesome. The unity of love is
a matter of course to her, so that the third stage is practically male
acquiescence to female intuition.

Even in our time, when so much is said and written about modern woman
and her claims, her feeling is still perfect in itself; compared to the
discord and heterogeneity of man, she represents simplicity and harmony.
Both purely spiritual worship and undifferentiated sexual desire are
exceptions as far as she is concerned and must still be regarded as
abnormal.

This unbroken, determinative female eroticism may possibly be explained
(as Weininger explains it) by woman's sexuality, which is absolute, and
does not rise above the horizon of distinct consciousness, but
Weininger's dualism is in this direction attempting to value and
standardise something which in its essence is alien to his standard.

Psycho-physical unity, then, is the basic characteristic of female
eroticism, but the state of affairs in the case of male eroticism is a
very different one. A study of the gradual origin of the erotic elements
will facilitate a better understanding of the relevant phenomena.

In the case of woman, the primary sexual instinct pervades the whole
being; it has been refined and purified without any great fluctuations
or changes; in the case of man it has always been restricted to certain
regions of his physical and psychical life, and an entirely novel
experience was required before it could win to the final form of
personal love. This prize, in his case, is therefore enhanced by the
fact of being the outcome of a long conflict; the reward of a task still
showing the traces of the struggle and pain of centuries. The truth of
the words "Pleasure is degrading" had been established by experience.

A few historical instances, illustrating female eroticism, will uphold
my contention. In the remote days of Greek antiquity, we find an example
of undivided wifely love in Alcestis, whose devotion to her husband sent
her to voluntary death in order to lengthen his life. Wifely devotion
accomplished what parental love could not achieve. The _Alcestis_ of
Euripides represents a feeling very familiar to us. Penelope, the
faithful martyr, is a similar instance.

At the time when spiritual love, accompanied by eccentricities and Latin
treatises, gradually, and amidst heavy conflict, struggled into
existence, the soul of woman was already glowing with the emotion which
we, to-day, realise as love. I have three witnesses to prove this
statement. The _Lais_ of the French poetess Marie de France, based on
Breton and Celtic motifs, are permeated by a sweet sentimentality, very
nearly related to the sentiment of our popular ballads. They tell of
simple feelings, of love and longing and the grief of love. One of her
_lais_ treats the touching story of Lanval and Guinevere, and another an
episode of Tristan and Isolde.

     De Tristan et de la reine,
     De leur amour qui tant fut fine,
     Dont ils eurent mainte doulour
     Puis en moururent en un jour.

The naive sentiment of these poems forms a delicious contrast to the
contemporaneous mature and subtile art of Provence, and the entire
erudite armoury of love.

A great baron declared that only the man who could carry his daughter in
his arms to the summit of a certain mountain--an impossible
feat--should win her hand in marriage. No man possessed strength to
carry her farther than half way. But the knight whom she loved secretly
went out into the world, and after years of searching, discovered a
magic potion able to endow him who quaffed it with enormous strength.
Full of joy he returned home and, his beloved in his arms, began the
laborious ascent. Strong and jubilant, he laughed at the potion. But
after a while, feeling his strength ebbing away, the maiden implored
him: "Drink, I beseech thee, beloved!" "My heart is strong, to drink
were waste of time." And again she pleaded: "Drink now, beloved, thy
strength is diminishing fast." But he, eager to win her only by his own
effort, staggered on and reached the summit, only to sink to the ground
and expire. The maiden, throwing herself on his lifeless body, kissed
his eyes and lips and died with him.

We recognise in this simple tale the new form of love, mutual devotion,
and the thought of the consummation of this love, the _Love-death_,
which was not definitely realised until six hundred years later. It
originated in the Celtic soul, as the worship of woman originated in the
Romanesque (the Teutonic soul shared in the development of both). It was
a dream of the suppressed Celtic race, spending its whole soul in dreams
and producing visions of such depth and beauty that even we of to-day
cannot read them without being profoundly moved.

Next there are three love-letters written in Latin by a German woman of
the twelfth century. In very touching words she tells her lover that the
love of him can never be torn out of her heart. "I turn to you whom I
hold for ever enclosed in my inmost heart." She promises and claims
faithfulness until death: "Among thousands my heart has chosen you, you
alone can satisfy my longing, and you will never find my love wanting. I
trust myself to you, all my hope is centred in you. I could say a great
deal more," she concludes, "but there is no need of it." And then
follow the charming German stanzas:

     Thou to me and I to thee,
     Knit for all eternity.
     In my heart art thou imprisoned,
     And I threw away the key.
     Nevermore canst thou be free.

In the third letter she drops the formal Latin and addresses him in
intimate, simple German. But the man's replies are clumsy and strange,
and plainly evidence his uncertainty of himself: "You have put a human
head on a horse's neck, and the beautiful female form ends in an ugly
fish's tail." It looks as if a parting were inevitable.

But the most touching testimony from the Middle Ages is the famous love
story of Abelard and Heloise. We probably possess no older document of
the passionate devotion of a woman, differing in nothing from the
sentiment of the present age, than the letters of Heloise. Abelard
persuaded her to take the veil and repent in a convent the sin of
voluptuousness--but she knows nothing of God--her whole soul is wrapped
up in her lover: "I expect no reward from God, for what I did was not
done for love of Him.... I wanted nothing from you but yourself; I
desired only you, not that which belonged to you; I did not expect
marriage or gifts; I did not seek to gratify my desires and do my will,
but yours, and well you know that I am speaking the truth! The name of
wife may seem sacred and honourable to you, but I prefer to be called
your mistress or even your harlot. The more I degraded myself for your
sake, the more I hoped to find grace in your eyes.... I renounced all
the pleasures of the world to live only for you; I kept nothing for
myself but the desire to belong entirely to you." Abelard's replies are
pious sermons and theological treatises; he thinks of the love of the
past only as _the cursed desires of the flesh_, the snare in which the
devil had caught them, and urges Heloise to thank God that henceforth
they are safe. "My love which entangled both of us in sin," he says in
one of his letters, "deserves not the name of love, for it was naught
but carnal lust. I sought in you the gratification of my sinful
desires," etc. He blessed the savage crime committed on him because it
saved him for ever from the sin of voluptuousness. What Heloise loved
and treasured as her sweetest memory, was to him hell and devil's work.
He wrote to her almost as if in mockery: "What splendid interest does
the talent of your wisdom bear to the Lord day after day! How many
spiritual daughters you have borne to Him! What a terrible loss it would
have been if you had abandoned yourself to the lust of the flesh, had
borne, with travail, a few earthly children, while now, with joy, you
bear a great number of daughters for the kingdom of Heaven. You would
have remained a woman like all the rest, but now you are far exalted
even above men." This correspondence plainly reveals the tragedy of the
lacerated man of the Middle Ages, as compared to the never-varying
woman, emerging perfect from the hands of nature. A long and toilsome
road still stretches out before him; she had reached the goal, without a
struggle, at the outset. How strange is this cry of a mediaeval nun: "It
seems as if the world had grown old, as if all men and all living
creatures had lost their freshness, as if love had grown cold not in
many, but in all hearts."

What was really the final cause of the hostility to sensuousness
displayed by dualistic mediaeval Christianity? Was it not contained in
eroticism itself?

This hostility was based on the fact that the world knew as yet only
spiritual love and its antithesis, the sexuality which man shares with
the animals; the only salvation, not merely in the Christian sense, but
from the point of view of every lofty conception of civilisation, lay in
the victory over animalism. The contempt of and the struggle against
the lower form of eroticism animating the dualistic period was
absolutely consistent; asceticism represents the highest form of culture
attainable by that period. (The rejection of spiritual love was an
inconsistency on the part of the clergy.) The principle of personality
was the fundamental principle of Christianity; this is clearly expressed
by the fact that Christianity regarded the soul as the supreme value.
And what is the soul but the consciousness of human personality
conceived naively as substance? In the light of this higher intuition
sensuousness was bound to appear base and degrading.

It is therefore historically correct, though essentially an error, to
regard Christianity as the religion of asceticism, for the asceticism of
the Middle Ages was nothing but the immature stage of the principle of
personality. Directly spiritual love was no longer in opposition to
sexuality, directly a synthesis had been effected, Christianity should
have drawn the obvious conclusion from its fundamental principle and
acknowledged love, which united the hostile elements. Protestantism did
so, half-heartedly. Luther's vacillating attitude towards sexuality is
typical of this indecision. At heart he could not justify sexuality; he
regarded it, in the same way as did the Fathers of the Church, as an
evil with which one had to make terms. His sanction of marriage was
nothing but a crooked and ill-founded compromise; and as he remained at
the old dualistic standpoint, it could not have been otherwise. But the
moment the new sensuous-supersensuous form of love had come into
existence, it behoved Christianity, as the religion of personality, to
acknowledge it.

After this digression I return to the period of the inception of the
third stage of love. If I were writing a history of eroticism, I should
now have to describe the rococo period, a period essentially
rationalistic and devoted to pleasure, a period which believed in
nothing but the obvious and understood love only in the sense of sensual
pleasure. If sensuality had hitherto been evil--at least
theoretically--it now became obscene. Stripped of every grand and cosmic
feature, it degenerated into the principal form of amusement. The
eighteenth century, though instructive and interesting to the student of
eroticism, produced nothing new. Under the undisputed sway of France, a
period of sensuality set in, unparalleled by any other epoch in the
history of the race, except, perhaps, the early oriental epoch; even the
gynecocratic family of remote antiquity was openly revived by the ladies
of Paris. Casanova was the sexual hero of the age (as he is to some
extent the hero of our present impotent epoch). Indefatigable in the
pursuit of woman and successful until old age, he was a well-bred
sexualist without subtlety or depth. The Vicomte de Valmont, the hero of
Choderlos de Laclos' famous and realistic novel _Les Liaisons
Dangereuses_, an absolutely cold and cunning seducer, was its god. They
were seconded by the pleasure-loving Ninon de l'Enclos, who was still
desired at the age of eighty.

This ultra-refinement was followed by the loathing of civilisation and
love of nature expressed by Rousseau, Werther and Hoelderlin; closely
allied to these passions was sentimental love, the direct precursor of
our modern conception of love. Its peculiarity lay in the fact that
although spiritual in its source, it yearned for psycho-physical unity,
and was therefore always slightly discordant. Rousseau was the first
exponent of this romantic nature cult and sentimental love of woman. He
represents the sharp recoil from the frivolity of the _ancien regime_,
and the beginning of the third stage of love. His _Nouvelle Heloise_
(1759) was probably the first work in which sentimental love found
expression. In Goethe's _Werther_ (1774), which is a faithful portrayal
of the poet's personal feelings, it was represented more powerfully.
Werther's love was purely spiritual at its inception. "Lotte is sacred
to me. All desire is silent in her presence." But in the end he desires
her with unconquerable passion; a dream undeceives him about the nature
of his feelings, and as he clasps her in a passionate embrace he is
conscious of having reached the summit of his longing. This would seem
the goal of modern love, embodying all its previous stages. It is
interesting to find embodiments of the extreme poles in two incidental
characters; one has been driven mad by his adoring love for a woman and
wanders about the fields in November to gather flowers for his queen;
the other is a young peasant who kills his rival in jealous rage. But
Werther himself, steering a middle-course between these two extremes,
walks straight into modern love, which means death to him.

Both the _New Heloise_ and _Werther_ are, sentimentally, efforts to
reach the synthesis _via_ the soul. Friedrich Schlegel, in his famous
_Lucinda_ (1799), tried the opposite way. He has been savagely attacked
for it by one side and lauded to the skies by the other, and when "the
emancipation of the flesh" became the motto of the day, he was glorified
as a martyr. The philosopher and theologian Schleiermacher saw in
_Lucinda_ a delivery from the tyranny of centuries. "Love has become
whole again and of one piece," he exclaims, joyfully calling the poem "a
vision of a future world God knows how distant." "Love shall come again;
a new life shall unite and animate its broken limbs; it shall rule the
hearts and works of men in freedom and gladness, and supersede the
lifeless phantoms of fictitious virtues." Schleiermacher also voiced the
idea of the synthesis: "And why should we be arrested in this struggle
(_i.e._, between love as the flower of sensuousness and the intellectual
mystical component of love), when in all domains we are striving to
bring the ideas, born by the new development of humanity, into harmony
with the result of the work of past ages?" His _Confidential Letters on
Schlegel's Lucinda_ have made the Protestant pastor Schleiermacher the
philosopher of the third stage of eroticism, as the chaplain Andreas was
the theorist of the second. The third stage gained its first footing
amongst the German romanticists. Women were largely instrumental in
achieving its victory. I will not go into detail but will confine myself
to mentioning in passing the names of Jean Paul, Henrietta Herz,
Brentano, Sophy Mereau, Dorothy Vest, Schelling, Friedrich Gentz. W. von
Humboldt records a conversation which he had in the year of the
Revolution with Schiller. The latter unhesitatingly professed his faith
in the unity of love. "It (the blending of love and sensuality) is
always possible and always there." But Humboldt was diffident, unable
fully to grasp the new conception. "I said that it would sever the most
beautiful, most delicate relationships, that it was too heterogeneous to
admit of coherence; but my principal argument was that in the majority
of cases it was out of the question...."

There is a document from the year 1779 which contains in its entirety
the modern conception of harmonious love, together with its ecstatic
apotheosis, the love-death, a document which puts the later theorising
romanticists and _Lucinda_ completely in the shade. I am referring to
the only one of Gottfried August Buerger's letters to Molly, which has
been preserved. It contains the following passages: "I cannot describe
to you in words how ardently I embrace you in the spirit. There is in me
such a tumult of life that frequently after an outburst my spirit and
soul are left in such weariness that I seem to be on the point of death.
Every brief calm begets more violent storms. Often in the black darkness
of a stormy, rainy midnight, I long to hasten to you, throw myself into
your arms, sink with you into the infinite ocean of delight and--die. Oh
Love! oh Love! what a strange and wonderful power art thou to hold body
and soul in such unbreakable bonds!... I let my imagination roam through
the whole world, yea, through all the heavens and the Heaven of heavens,
and examine every delight and compare it to you, but by the Eternal God!
there is nothing I desire so ardently as to hold you, sweetest and
heavenliest of all women, in my arms. If I could win you by walking
round the earth, naked and barefoot, through thorns and thistles, over
rocks and snow and ice, and, on the point of death, with the last spark
of life, sink into your arms and draw new life and happiness from your
loving bosom, I should consider that I bought you for a trifle."

To adduce more historical evidence of modern love would serve no
purpose; in the next chapter I shall discuss its metaphysical
consummation, the love-death. But I will briefly point out the not quite
obvious difference between synthetic love and sexuality projected on a
specific individual. In several of the higher animals the sexual
instinct is to some extent individualised, but nevertheless it is no
more than instinct, seeking a suitable mate for its gratification. All
the well-known theories of "sexual attraction," from Schopenhauer to
Weininger, accounting love as nothing but a mutual supplementing of two
individuals for the purpose of the best possible reproduction of the
species, do not apply to love in the modern sense, but to the sexual
impulse; they completely disregard the individual, and are only aware of
the species; they apprehend individualisation as an instrument in the
service of the race. But genuine personal love is not kindled by
instinct; it is not differentiated sexual impulse; it embraces the
psycho-physical unity of the beloved without being conscious of sexual
desire. It shares with the purely spiritual love the eagerness of man to
raise and glorify the beloved woman, without ulterior motive or desire.
This distinction may be called hair-splitting, and I admit that it is
frequently impossible to make it in practice, but it is important in
principle because it goes back to origins and finds in the metaphysical
climax of the third stage, the love-death, its practical anti-generic
proof. But with all this it is of common occurrence that spiritual and
sensual love are at different times projected on one and the same woman.

Schopenhauer's instinct of philoprogenitiveness has to-day become an
article of faith with the learned and unlearned. Schopenhauer was the
first, probably, to conceive the idea that love was the consciousness of
the unconscious instincts in the service of the species, and had no
other content or purpose than the will of the species to produce the
best possible offspring. In a chapter of his principal work, entitled
_The Metaphysics of Love_, he essayed to promulgate and prove his theory
in detail. "All love, however ethereal it may pretend to be, is rooted
solely in the sexual instinct; it is nothing more nor less than
specialised, strictly speaking individualised, sexual desire."
Schopenhauer's conception of love does not rise above this specialised
impulse. He calmly ignores all phenomena such as those I have described
because they do not fit his theory. With the exception of his cheap
observation that contrasts attract each other (which is the pith of all
his "truths") he does not adduce the smallest evidence for the truth of
his myth of "the genius of the species spreading his wings over the
coming generation." However much the results of breeders may be
applicable to the human species, they have nothing to do with love, and
the believers in the theory of the instinct of philoprogenitiveness are
silent on the subject of the best and most suitable subject for the
purpose; is it the law-abiding citizen? the restless reformer? or the
artist and thinker? Strange to say, the legend of the instinct of
philoprogenitiveness, intuitively conscious of the right way, is to-day
accepted even by scientists who are in sympathy neither with
Schopenhauer's nor with any other metaphysic. It is taken for granted
that love can only serve the purpose of the species; the fact that this
theory is both metaphysically and scientifically unsound is ignored. For
even leaving the genius of the species out of the question, his
intelligent comprehension of the "composition of the next generation" is
nevertheless devoutly believed in. Even Nietzsche, that
arch-individualist, was completely under the spell of this dogma, as is
proved by many of his utterances, for instance, by the well-known
socialistic definition of marriage as "the will of twain to create that
which is higher than its creators," and also by his theory that man is
not an end in himself but a bridge to something else. Nietzsche's
pronouncement that he has not yet found the woman whom he would like to
be the mother of his children, echoes the philosophy of Schopenhauer,
the superstition of the genius of philoprogenitiveness. The intrinsic
worth of love without any ulterior motive, without a view to pleasure or
to offspring, seems to have been unknown to Nietzsche. Schopenhauer's
hero puts the purport of love not in the actual individual, but in a
conception, and annihilates the value of the individual and the unique.
Every great emotion is an end in itself, and whatever we may read into
it of "purposes" and "expediencies," is an invention, and independent of
the emotion itself. The aim of the purely spiritual love of the second
stage was not propagation, and yet it was an emotion whose loftiness
cannot easily be surpassed. With the deification of woman love reached
far beyond the beloved into infinitude, and the phenomenon of the
love-death renders all the supposed generic purpose of love impossible.
But even if we ignored love altogether and admitted the existence of the
sexual instinct only, its mysterious endeavour in the interest of the
species would still remain pure imagination, and a conception far
inferior to that of the winged god of love. The instinct does not
possess a trace of "discretion," takes no interest in the weal and woe
of humanity, but is utterly selfish, seeking its own gratification and
nothing else.

The theory which fits so well into Schopenhauer's metaphysics has,
without it, neither sense nor support. There is no instinct of
philoprogenitiveness, but rather a pairing-instinct, and in addition to
this a conscious desire for offspring. The difference between these two
instincts is great, for as a rule, the pairing-instinct is not
accompanied by a wish for children (that it should be so unconsciously
is a theory not worth considering seriously), and the longing for
children very frequently exists without any sexual desire; to
manufacture an instinct out of those two inherently dissimilar impulses
is fantastic metaphysics and not spiritual reality. The history of
antiquity furnishes ample proof of my contention, for in the days of the
remote past the sexual impulse had its special domain, as well as the
wish for progeny, which was often regarded in the light of a duty.

The legend of the instinct of philoprogenitiveness which is to-day so
universally believed, is undoubtedly the result of the general feeling
that sexual intercourse as such is base and degrading. But because of
the more or less clear consciousness that sexual intercourse is really
what is most desired in love, and because of the lack of courage openly
to admit it, attempts are made to justify it from a social standpoint.

The task of establishing the equilibrium between love and sensuousness
has not yet been accomplished. What is so often realised as _the sexual
trouble_ has its origin in the fact that the higher stage has not yet
been finally reached. There is an infinite number of unions, all of
which have a flaw. Witness modern literature with its indefatigable
treatment of eroticism. If a complete unity is ever to be established,
then doubtless it will be the privilege of the Germanic race to achieve
it, for the Neo-Latin nations mean by love either the individualised
instinct, or the rare, purely spiritual love. But it is not likely that
the third stage will become a universal condition; in all probability it
will, for a long time to come, be limited to special individuals, and
even then only to specific phases of their lives. The feeling of the
great majority of men has not changed; it is primitively sexual; in the
state of mind which is called _to be in love_ it is centred on an
individual woman, to be, after a time, gradually stifled by other
interests. The emotional life of the majority of women, on the other
hand, is still what it was in remotest antiquity. Love impels woman into
the arms of a man to whom she remains faithful, until slowly her
instincts are transformed into love for her children. But in the case
even of the average woman, body and soul are equally affected; there is
no more terrible moment in a woman's life than the one in which she
discovers that the man to whom she has given herself has merely used her
as a means for gratification. Harmoniously organised woman has given
herself to a merely sexual man who sought in her only the satisfaction
of his senses. This also is the cause of the horror with which the
normal woman regards the prostitute, for the latter has made of herself
a means for the gratification of male sexuality, losing thereby her
inherent harmony and individuality. And it is also the reason why, in
spite of ethical convictions and logical conclusions, we should have
different standards for the loyalty of the husband and the loyalty of
the wife; in man sexuality is a distinct element, an element, it is
true, which we do not value, but which nevertheless exists and has, as
we have seen, a historical root. When a man gives way to his instincts,
his individuality is not only not destroyed, but it is hardly affected.
It is very different in the case of the woman; with her, emancipated
sexuality is synonymous with inward annihilation, for it has not the
support of the past and cannot exist independently. A man's spiritual
annihilation from the emotional sphere is unthinkable because his
organisation is naturally heterogeneous. The mere sexualist represents a
past stage of male eroticism which has been largely overcome, but he is
rarely so completely under the spell of sexuality that he cannot highly
develop other parts of his entity. The _double morality_ has, therefore,
an objective reason (though perhaps not a higher justification), and
would only be unjustifiable if man had achieved a complete erotic unity.

The more complicated life becomes, the more numerous and complex are the
relations between individuals and groups. A man is a member of a trades
union; he has political, artistic, sporting and social relations; he may
be a collector or interested in certain social phenomena, etc. In modern
civilisation every component part of the human personality is separated
from the entire personality and brought into a systematic connection
with similar component parts of other entities. Our social principle is
division of labour, not only in the community but also in the
individual. With one man one can talk only philosophy, with another
music, with a third personal matters, and so on. But because in this way
only one part of man, and never the whole being, can be satisfied at a
time, the desire to expend one's whole personality in one great
achievement, or in connection with another individual, is increasing
exactly in proportion as specialisation is increasing in the community
and in the individual. The more richly endowed and synthetic a man, the
more inappeasable will be his yearning to find the talents scattered
broadcast over humanity combined in one personality, and to give himself
wholly and entirely to that personality. The splitting up of man caused
by our social conditions is one of the principal causes of the longing
for the great and strong love which we hear so much discussed. The
yearning for the absolute, for perfection, no longer separating and
selecting but embracing man as a whole, annihilating body and soul in a
higher intuition, the longing for mutual self-surrender, for giving and
receiving an undivided self, is growing stronger and stronger. The idea
of modern love, a love embracing the whole breadth of human development,
is unequalled in human history. A single person shall stand for all
mankind. The lover has always been all the world to woman, but man has
possessed many things in addition to the beloved. Our age claims
(wherever it understands its own eroticism) that woman, on her part,
shall give to man all things in existence in a higher and purer form;
not only complete satisfaction of the senses, not only the lofty emotion
of spiritual love, but also friendship as a fellow-man; she shall be to
him the friend who meant so much to the Greek and the ancient Teuton. It
is self-evident that the true erotic of our time has very little to
spare for friendship, while on the other hand the man who is not erotic
in the true sense of the word, but merely sexual, has generally a poor
idea of woman and a great appreciation of male friendship. But modern
love does not only seek to combine all human relationships; it would
fain include work, recreation, art. The instinctive jealousy of every
occupation which she does not share with her lover, is nothing more than
a loving woman's fear that the things which belong to him exclusively
may become a danger to the unity of love. Whether such an all-absorbing
love is possible in richly-endowed natures, and whether it will not be
the cause of new conflict, are questions which cannot here be entered
upon. But one thing is certain: the great love cannot find its
consummation on earth.




