CHAPTER III

PERVERSIONS OF METAPHYSICAL EROTICISM

_(a) The Brides of Christ_


Hitherto I have confined myself to the analysis of the emotional life of
man, but there are two other points which must be taken into account.
The first is the question of woman's attitude towards the lofty position
assigned to her by man; the second and more important one is the
question as to whether the women of that period exhibit in their
emotional life any traces of a feeling akin to the deification of their
sex? The reply to the first question is simple enough. Naturally the
adoration and worship of their lovers could not have been anything but
pleasant to women. There is a poem by the talented Provencal Countess
Beatrix de Die, which betrays genuine sorrow at the infidelity of her
friend, and at the same time leaves no doubt that she--and probably a
great many others--took the eulogies showered upon them by the
enraptured poets, literally. Once again woman accepts the position
thrust upon her by man, not this time the position of a drudge, but that
of a perfect and godlike being. Countess Beatrix credits herself with
all the qualities with which the imagination of her worshipper had
endowed her, as if they were unquestionable facts.

     Hence all my songs will be with sadness fraught.
     My lover fills my soul with bitter woe,
     And yet is all the happiness I know.
     My grace and favour all avail me naught.
     My sparkling wit, my loveliness supreme,
     They cannot hold his love and tender thought,
     Of all my lofty worth bereft I seem.

But far more interesting than this psychological misunderstanding on the
part of the much-lauded sex, is the question as to whether the emotional
life of woman matured anything that can be called a worship of man? The
answer to this is a decided "no." At no time in the history of woman do
we find even the smallest indication of a parallel phenomenon; the
profound and tragic dualism of the Middle Ages--one result of which was
the spiritual love of woman--passed her by without touching her. In the
feminine soul conflict apparently results not in tragedy and
productivity, but in morbidness and hysteria.

It may be argued that the love of Jesus, which inspired both the nuns of
the Middle Ages and those of a later period, represents a type of
man-worship; but in examining all these more or less famous nuns and
ascetics we find, instead of genuine spirituality, a concealed and often
morbid condition, which in some cases degenerated into hysteria. The
dualistic period, the age of metaphysical love, made no impression upon
the female soul. There can be no doubt that the emotional life of woman,
in strict contrast to the emotional life of man, has had no evolution,
and can therefore have no history. It is unadulterated nature and, in
its way, it is perfect.

In studying the female mystics, we find an imitation of metaphysical
eroticism sufficiently transparent to be easily recognised, even by the
layman, as belonging to the domain of pathology. These ecstatics were
animated not by a pure, but by an impure spirit. Perverted sensualists,
they believed their hearts to be filled with spiritual love. Contrary to
the striving of the greater number of the men, who raised their love
into heaven so as to keep it pure, and made it one with their religious
aspirations, all the figures and symbols of religion were used by these
women as an outlet and a foil to their sexuality. The loving soul
repairing to the nuptial chamber is the transparent veil of desire
half-concealed by religious conceptions. Women have described similar
situations in metaphors which--for sensuous passion--leave nothing to be
desired, even the famous love-potion of Tristan is not wanting.

The material is abundant, and I have repeatedly touched upon it in
previous chapters. At the period of great mystical enthusiasm (the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries) this morbid love of God was a sinister
attendant phenomenon of true mysticism. Whole convents were seized by
epidemics of hysteria, the women writhed in convulsions, flogged each
other, sang hymns day and night and had hallucinations--for all of which
the love of God, or the temptation of the devil, were made responsible.

Among the more notable of these pseudo-mystics are Christine Ebner (the
author of a book entitled, _On the Fullness of Mercy_), and Mary of
Oignies, a passionate worshipper of Christ who mutilated herself in her
ecstasies and who, on her deathbed, still sang: "How beautiful art Thou,
oh, my Lord God!"

A shining exception among the German nuns of that time was Mechthild of
Magdeburg, a woman of rare gifts. She was a genuine mystic, but she,
too, revelled in fervent, sensuous metaphors, and it would be an
interesting task to separate the two elements in her case; but, having
admitted her genuine mysticism in a previous chapter, I will here
restrict myself to a few quotations which show her from her other side.
Her _Dialogue between Love and the Soul_ abounds in passages like the
following: "Tell my beloved that his chamber is prepared, and that I am
sick with love of him." "The closer the embrace, the sweeter the
kisses." "Then He took the soul into His divine arms, and placing His
fatherly hand on her bosom, He gazed into her face and kissed her right
well." Mechthild, too, was ready to die with love.

Everyone of the most celebrated Brides of Christ belonged to the Latin
race; they were hysterics, and as such have long been claimed by the
psychopathist.

The love of Jesus professed by Catherine of Siena (1347-1388), a clever
politician, who was in correspondence with the leading statesmen of her
time, found vent in passages like the following:

"I desire, then, that you withdraw into the open side of the Son of God,
who is a bottle so full of perfume that even the things which are sinful
become fragrant. There the bride reclines on a bed of fire and blood.
There the secret of the heart of the Son of God is revealed and made
manifest. Oh! Thou overflowing cup, refreshing and intoxicating every
loving and yearning heart." "I long to behold the body of my Lord!" And
straightway the bridegroom appeared to her, opened his side and said to
her: "Now drink as much of my blood as thou desirest."

But the saint who enjoyed the greatest fame--partly on account of her
frequent portrayal by the plastic arts--was doubtless St. Teresa
(Teresia de Jesus), a Spanish nun (1515-1582). During childhood and
early youth she suffered from serious illnesses, and on one occasion was
even believed to be dead. "Before I felt the presence of God," she says
in her biography, "I experienced for some time a very delightful
sensation, a sensation which I believe one is partly able to produce at
will (!), a pleasure which is neither quite sensuous, nor quite
spiritual, but which comes from God." She describes in her "Life" four
stages of prayer, which gradually lead the soul to God: "There is no joy
to be compared with the joy which the Lord giveth to the soul in its
exile. So great is this delight that frequently it seems that the least
thing would make it forsake the body for ever." "When the soul seeks God
in this way," the saint feels with supreme delight her strength ebbing
away and a trance stealing over her until, devoid of breath and all
physical strength she can only move her hand with great pain. The
delights experienced by her are described in great detail and very
sensuous language; hysterical conditions, such as painful convulsions,
and hallucinations, are represented as religious phenomena. "It is
dreadful what one has to suffer from confessors who do not understand
these things," she says in one of her writings with deep regret.

St. Teresa relates her life with the well-known long-winded
self-complacency of the hysterical subject. She frequently had visions
of Jesus, and again and again she emphasised the beauty of his hands.
"Standing by my side, he said to me: 'I have come to thee, my daughter,
I am here; it is I; show me thy hands.' And it seemed to me that he took
my hands in his, and laid them in his side. 'Behold my wound,' he said,
'thou art not separated from me; bear this brief exile on earth....'"
etc.

On one occasion she had a vision of an angel whom she describes as
follows: "He was not tall but small, very beautiful, his face so radiant
that he seemed to be one of the highest angels, who are, I believe, all
fire ... in his hand he held a golden spear, at the point of which was a
little flame; he appeared to thrust this spear into my heart again and
again; it penetrated my entrails, and as he drew it out he seemed to
draw them out also, and leave me on fire with a great love of God. The
pain was so intense that I could not but sigh deeply; yet so surpassing
was the sweetness of this pain that it made me wish never to be without
it. It is not physical, but spiritual pain, although the body often
suffers greatly from it. The caressing love between God and the soul is
so sweet that I implore Him of His mercy to let all those experience it
who believe that I am lying."

The treatise _Thoughts of the Love of God on some Words of the Song of
Songs_ is crowded with purely sensuous passages. In accordance with the
general custom, she interprets this naively sensual Semitic poem
allegorically, becomes tremendously excited in meditating on the kiss of
the beloved and discusses the question of what the soul should do to
"satisfy so sweet a bridegroom."

In the pamphlet _The Fortress of the Soul and its Seven Dwellings_, St.
Teresa describes similar states of mind: "The bridegroom commands the
doors of the dwellings to be closed and also the gates of the fortress
and its surrounding walls. In freeing the soul from the body, he stops
the body's breathing so that, even if the other senses are not quite
deadened, speech is impossible. At other times all sensuous perceptions
disappear simultaneously; body and hands grow rigid and it seems as if
the soul had left the body, which is scarcely breathing. This condition
is of short duration. The rigidity passes away to some extent, the body
slowly regains life, the breath comes and goes, only to die away again
and thus endow the soul with greater freedom. But this deep trance does
not endure long." She continues to describe her ecstasies and is careful
to point out the complete fusion of supreme delight and bodily pain.
Perhaps no hysterical subject has ever described her states of mind so
well. Her avowal (made in a letter to Father Rodrigue Alvarez) of her
complete unconsciousness of her body is quite in harmony with those
states of rapture. She wrote a number of spiritual love-songs which are
said to be conspicuous for their ardour and beauty; probably they have
never been translated from the original Spanish.

Finally there is the famous Madame Guyon (1648-1717), who--in addition
to many other works--wrote a very detailed autobiography. She lived with
her husband, whom she treated with coldness, finding her sole joy in her
spiritual intercourse with God. "I desire only the divine love which
thrills the soul with inexpressible bliss, the love which seems to melt
my whole being." God burns her with His fire and still trembling with
delight, she says to Him: "Oh, Lord! The greatest libertine, if Thou
didst make him experience Thy love as Thou didst make me experience it,
would forswear carnal pleasure and strive only after Thy divine love."
"I was like a person intoxicated with wine or love, unable to think of
anything but my passion," etc. The fact that she sought in this love the
pleasure of the senses is very apparent.

We are not concerned here with the problem of how far these women may be
regarded as pathological cases; all of them were filled with a vague
feminine desire for self-surrender, which they projected on a celestial
being, either because they did not come into contact with a suitable
terrestrial object, or because the impulse was abnormal from the
beginning. But their spiritual love never rose above empty
sentimentality and hysterical rapture. All of them, and some of them
were highly gifted, were thrilled with the love of Jesus, they had
visions of the "sweet wounds of the Saviour," and so on; but their
emotion did not kindle the smallest spark of creative power. The Queen
of Heaven, on the other hand, was a free creation of spiritually loving
poets and monks.

The women imitated metaphysical love and distorted it; sexual impulse,
arrogantly attempting to reach beyond the earth, reigned in the place of
spiritual, deifying love.

I have included these phenomena not for their own sakes, but to indicate
my boundary-line, for very frequently these women are cited as genuine
mystics. Even Schopenhauer mentions these "saints" in one breath with
German mystics and Indian philosophers; he calls Madame Guyon "a great
and beautiful soul whose memory I venerate." And yet there can be no
doubt that it is not the fictitious object of love which is conclusive,
but the emotion of the lover: the sensualist can approach God and the
Virgin with inflamed senses, but to the lover every woman is divine.

The result of this chapter is as far as our investigation is concerned,
negative. The deifying love of man has no parallel phenomenon in the
emotional life of woman.


(_b_) SEXUAL MYSTICS.

Sexual mysticism is a contradiction in itself, because true mysticism
has nothing whatever to do with sexuality. But frequently suppressed
sexuality, secretly luxuriating, takes possession of the whole soul, and
a religious construction is put on the results. The sexually excited
subject attributes religious motives to his ecstasy. I have no
hesitation in asserting that the majority of these ecstasies--especially
in the case of women--are rooted in sexuality, and that this so-called
mysticism is nothing but a deviation or wrong interpretation of the
sexual impulse. The same thing applies to the flagellants of the
declining Middle Ages, and some Protestant sects of modernity. The
raptures of St. Teresa and Madame Guyon, also, belong to this category,
however much the fact may be concealed by pseudo-religious conceptions.
I have no doubt that Eastern mysticism, too, grew up on a sexual
foundation, but (as I have done all along) I will limit my subject to
the civilisation of Europe.

This counterfeit mysticism, fed from dubious sources and calling itself
love of God, taints the pure intuitions of some of the genuine mystics
and metaphysical erotics; they were not always able to steer clear of
spurious outgrowths. (Here, too, the psychological naivete of mediaeval
times must to some extent be held responsible.) Conspicuous amongst
these is St. Bernard of Clairvaux, who in his _Sermones in Canticum_
took the "Song of Songs" as a base for mystically-sexual imaginings.

There is nothing really new in this direction. But I will cite a few
stanzas written by St. Bernard which might equally well have come from
one of the amorous nuns:

           TO THE SIDE-WOUND OF CHRIST.

     Lord, with my mouth I touch and worship Thee,
     With all the strength I have I cling to Thee,
     With all my love I plunge my heart in Thee,
     My very life blood would I draw from Thee,
     Oh, Jesus! Jesus! Draw me unto Thee!

     How sweet Thy savour is! Who tastes of Thee,
     Oh, Jesus Christ, can relish naught but Thee!
     Who tastes Thy living sweetness lives by Thee;
     All else is void; the soul must die for Thee,
     So faints my heart--so would I die for Thee!

                   (_Transl. by_ EMILY MARY SHAPCOTE.)

The greatest religious poet of all times after St. Bernard was Jacopone
da Todi, who also, though rarely, revelled in fervid utterances. The
Latin hymn, _Stabat Mater Speciosa_, ascribed to him, is spurious. I
quote a translation taken from the Rosary of the B.V.M.

     Other Virgins far transcending,
     Virgin, be not thou unbending,
     To thy humble suppliant's suit.

     Grant me then, to thee united,
     By the love of Christ excited,
     Here to sing my jubilee.

But he is undoubtedly the author of the following stanzas:

     Soaring upwards love-enkindled,
     Does the soul rejoice, afire
     In her glad triumphant flight.
     Earthly cares to naught have dwindled,
     Love's sweet footfall's drawing nigh her
     To espouse his heart's delight.
     All transformed and naked quite,
     Laughing low, with joy imbued,
     Pure, and like a snake renewed,
     Love divine will ever tend her.

But poems like the following undoubtedly originated in a truly religious
and pure sentiment:

     Enwrapt in love thine arms Him fast enfolding,
     So closely clasp Him that they loose Him never;
     And in thy heart His sacred image holding,
     Far from the path of sin thou'lt journey ever.
     His death in twain shall blast thy callous heart
     As once the solid rock He rent apart.

The most distinguished among the fervid lovers of God of later times
were the saints Jean de la Croix, Alfonso da Liguori, and Francois de
Sales. The _Tract of the Love of God_, written by Francois de Sales,
surpasses everything ever achieved in this direction.

I will not dilate further on this barren aspect of emotionalism so
easily traceable through the later centuries in many a Catholic and
Protestant sentimentalist, but will conclude this chapter with a brief
discussion of Novalis. If I mention this poet in this connexion it is
not because I desire to depreciate his genius, but because, possessing
as he did, in a rare degree, depth of feeling and power of expression,
he is an important witness of an unusual type. True, here and there his
poems are reminiscent of Jacopone, but he is not sufficiently ingenuous,
and is altogether too morbid to be classed with that ardent fanatic. He
shares with Jacopone and other poets the yearning to grasp
transcendental things with the senses, to approach the Deity with a love
which cannot be called anything but sensuous. Novalis' _Hymns to the
Night_ are the most magnificent example of this perfect interpenetration
of sensuous and transcendental love, and at the same time represent a
complete fusion of the love he bore to his fiancee, who died young, and
the worship of Mary. Night has opened _infinite eyes_ in us, and we
behold the secret of love unfolding itself in the heart of this poet, at
once unique and pathetic, lofty and morbid. The whole universe he
conceives as a female being for whose embrace he is longing. It is a new
emotion: neither the chaste worship of the Madonna, nor the
sexually-mystic striving to embrace with the soul. The night gives birth
to a foreboding which excites and soothes all vague desires. The lover
thus soliloquises of the night:

     In infinite space.
     Thou'dst dissolve,
     If it held thee not,
     If it bound thee not,
     And thrilled thee,
     That afire
     Thou begettest the world.
     Verily before thou art I was,
     With my sex
     The mother sent me
     To live in thy world,
     And to hallow it
     With love.

Here the ancient, mystical longing to become one with God is conceived
under the symbol of the night. (A symbol which we shall meet again,
magnified, in Wagner's _Tristan_.)

     Lo! Love has burst its prison.
     No parting now shall be,
     And life's full tide has risen
     Like to a boundless sea.
     One night of love supernal,
     Only one golden song,
     And the face of the Eternal
     To light our path along.

In addition, Novalis was a perfect woman-worshipper. He loved the Middle
Ages and Catholicism. "The reformation killed Christianity; henceforth
Christianity has ceased to exist." "Catholicism preached nothing but
love for the holy, beautiful Lady of Christianity, who, endowed with
divine virtue, was able to deliver all loyal hearts from the most
terrible dangers." He wrote hymns to Mary in the style of the pietists,
emphasising more especially the principle of motherliness:

     Oh, Mary! At thy altar
     A thousand hearts lie prone,
     In this drear life of shadows
     They yearn for thee alone.
     All hoping to recover
     From life's distress and smart,
     If thou, oh holy Mother,
     Wilt take them to thy heart.

He idolised his fiancee, who died young. "Her memory shall be my better
self, a sacred image in my heart before which a sanctuary lamp is ever
burning, and which will save me from the temptations of the Evil One."
And through the mouth of Heinrich of Ofterdingen he proclaims: "My
beloved is the abbreviation of the universe; the universe is the
elongation of my beloved." "Heaven has given you to me to worship. I
adore you, you are a saint, you are divine glory, you are eternal life!"

This sentimental worship of woman, combined with an all-transcending
insatiable sensuousness, produced the peculiar sexually-mystic
world-feeling which is so characteristic of him. Night deeply moves his
soul, longing, the memory of the beloved woman, adoration for the
Virgin, his fantastic conception of an incarnated universe are fused
into one great emotion:

     Praise to the Queen of the World!
     The lofty herald
     Of the sacred world.
     The patroness
     Of rapturous love!
     Thou art coming, beloved--
     Night has descended--
     My soul is ravished--
     Over is this earthly journey
     And thou art mine again.
     I gaze into thy dark, deep eyes,
     And see naught but love and happiness.
     We sink down on the altar of the night,
     The soft couch--
     The veil falls,
     And kindled by the rapturous embrace,
     Glows the pure fire
     Of the sweet sacrifice.

The climax and unique example of sensuousness, unsurpassed for its
symbols of the physical embrace, is the hymn: "Few know the Secret of
Love." It is too long to give in full. The following are a few stanzas:

     Would that the ocean
     Blushed!
     And in fragrant flesh
     Melted the rock!
     Infinite is the sweet repast,
     Never satisfied is love;
     Nor close, nor fast enough
     Can it hold the beloved.
     By ever more tender lips
     Transformed, the past ecstasy
     Grows closer, more intimate.
     Rapturous love
     Thrills the soul;
     Hungrier and thirstier
     Grows the heart.
     And thus the transports of love
     Endure for ever.

Here the remotest limit has been reached--sensuousness seems to flow
into eternity, voluptuousness would shatter the world to pieces and
create a new relationship of things. Before this poem all ecstasies of
sensuousness masquerading as cosmic emotion are dull and timid. The
transcendent symbols of Catholicism are used to guide the insatiable
sensuous imagination to metaphysics. "Who can say that he understands
the nature of blood?" Novalis may ask this question. It is truly blood,
human blood, longing to gush forth and pulsate through the body of the
universe.

     In time to come all will be body
     One body;
     In celestial blood,
     Float the enraptured twain.

The human blood has become _celestial blood_; the voluptuousness of man,
the voluptuousness of the world, and because the whole world is one
body, it needs no duality; sexuality which has become a cosmic law rules
over humanity, God, Christ and the universe. This hymn is the
immortalisation of voluptuousness. If the love-death is the
immortalisation of love unable to find satisfaction on earth, so its
counterpart, cosmic sensuousness is, in the last sense, orientalism.
Only a genius could invent a new, symbolic language to express feelings
so alien to the European. Earthly sensuality did not satisfy Novalis,
voluptuousness detached from man, voluptuousness in itself, was his
dream and his religion--the supremest creation ever achieved by
sexuality intensified into a cosmic emotion.

I think that I have now made clear the fact that the emotional life of
man is rooted in two elements, completely distinct from the beginning:
the sexual impulse and personal love. It is in studying the love of the
transcendental, that culminating point of so many feelings springing
from various sources, that the inherent contrast between the two
fundamental principles becomes most apparent; and that we realise why
they have always been intermingled both in theory and in reality.

We have last examined the attempt of sexuality to possess itself of the
whole universe; we will now turn our attention to the true union of both
erotic elements. This union occurred at the time when Goethe and Novalis
were bringing spiritual love and cosmic sensuousness to their highest
summit.




THE THIRD STAGE

(The Unity of Sexual Impulse and Love)

