CHAPTER IV.

_Of the Law of Inverse Variation of Extension and Intension._


§ 166. In a series of terms which fall under one another, as the
extension decreases, the intension increases, and vice versâ. Take for
instance the following series--

  Thing
    |
  Substance
    |
  Matter
    |
  Organism
    |
  Animal
    |
  Vertebrate
    |
  Mammal
    |
  Ruminant
    |
  Sheep
    |
  This sheep.

Here the term at the top possesses the widest possible extension,
since it applies to everything. But at the same time it possesses the
least possible amount of intension, implying nothing more than mere
existence, whether in fact or thought. On the other hand, the term at
the bottom possesses the greatest amount of intension, since it
implies all the attributes of, an individual superadded to those of
the class to which it belongs: but its extension is the narrowest
possible, being limited to one thing.

§ 167. At each step in the descent from the term at the top, which is
called the 'Summum genus,' to the individual, we decrease the
extension by increasing the intension.  Thus by adding on to the bare
notion of a thing the idea of independent existence, we descend to the
term 'substance,' This process is known as Determination, or
Specialisation.

§ 168. Again, by withdrawing our attention from the individual
characteristics of a particular sheep, and fixing it upon those which
are common to it with other animals of the same kind, we arrive at the
common term, 'sheep.'  Here we have increased the extension by
decreasing the intension. This process is known as Generalisation.

§ 169. Generalisation implies abstraction, but we may have abstraction
without generalisation.

§ 170. The following example is useful, as illustrating to the eye how
a decrease of extension is accompanied by an increase of intension. At
each step of the descent here we visibly tack on a fresh
attribute. [Footnote: This example is borrowed from Professor Jevons.]

  Ship
    |
  Steam-ship
    |
  Screw steam-ship
    |
  Iron screw steam-ship
    |
  British iron screw steam-ship.

Could we see the classes denoted by the names the pyramid would be
exactly inverted.

§ 171. The law of inverse variation of extension and intension must of
course be confined to the inter-relations of a series of terms of
which each can be predicated of the other until we arrive at the
bottom of the scale. It is not meant to apply to the extension and
intension of the same term. The increase of population does not add to
the meaning of 'baby.'






PART II.--OF PROPOSITIONS.




CHAPTER I.

_Of the Proposition as distinguished from Other Sentences_.


§ 172. As in considering the term, we found occasion to distinguish it
from words generally, so now, in considering the proposition, it will
be well to begin by distinguishing it from other sentences.

§ 173. Every proposition is a sentence, but every sentence is not a
proposition.

§ 174. The field of logic is far from being conterminous with that of
language. Language is the mirror of man's whole nature, whereas logic
deals with language only so far as it gives clothing to the products
of thought in the narrow sense which we have assigned to that term.
Language has materials of every sort lying strewn about, among which
the logician has to seek for his proper implements.

§ 175. Sentences may be employed for a variety of purposes--

  (1) To ask a question;

  (2) To give an order;

  (3) To express a feeling;

  (4) To make a statement.

These various uses give rise respectively to

  (1) The Interrogative Sentence;

  (2) The Imperative Sentence;

  (3) The Exclamatory Sentence;

  (4) The Enunciative Sentence; Indicative Potential.

It is with the last of these only that logic is concerned.

§ 176. The proposition, therefore, corresponds to the Indicative and
Potential, or Conditional, sentences of grammar. For it must be borne
in mind that logic recognises no difference between a statement of
fact and a supposition. 'It may rain to-morrow' is as much a
proposition as 'It is raining now.'

§ 177. Leaving the grammatical aspect of the proposition, we must now
consider it from the purely logical point of view.

§ 178. A proposition is a judgement expressed in words; and a
judgement is a direct comparison between two concepts.

§ 179. The same thing may be expressed more briefly by saying that a
proposition is a direct comparison between two terms.

§ 180. We say 'direct comparison,' because the syllogism also may be
described as a comparison between two terms: but in the syllogism the
two terms are compared indirectly, or by means of a third term.

§ 181. A proposition may be analysed into two terms and a Copula,
which is nothing more than the sign of agreement or disagreement
between them.

§ 182. The two terms are called the Subject and the Predicate (§ 58).

§ 183. The Subject is that of which something is stated.

§ 184. The Predicate is that which is stated of the subject.

§ 185. Hence the subject is thought of for its own sake, and the
predicate for the sake of the subject.




