CHAPTER IV.

1. Point out what terms are distributed or undistributed in the
following propositions:--

  (1) The Chinese are industrious.

  (2) The angle in a semi-circle is a right angle.

  (3) Not one of the crew survived.

  (4) The weather is sometimes not propitious.

The same exercise may be performed upon any of the propositions in the
preceding list.

2. Prove that in a negative proposition the predicate must be
distributed.


CHAPTER V.

Affix its proper symbol to each of the following propositions:--

  (1) No lover he who is not always fond.

  (2) There are Irishmen and Irishmen.

  (3) Men only disagree,
      Of creatures rational.

  (4) Some wise men are poor.

  (5) No Popes are some fallible beings.

  (6) Some step-mothers are not unjust.

  (7) The most original of the Roman poets was Lucretius.

  (8) Some of the immediate inferences are all the forms of
  conversion.


CHAPTER VI.

1. Give six examples of terms standing one to another as genus to
species.

2. To which of the heads of predicables would you refer the following
statements? And why?

  (1) A circle is the largest space that can be contained by one line.

  (2) All the angles of a square are right angles.

  (3) Man alone among animals possesses the faculty of laughter.

  (4) Some fungi are poisonous.

  (5) Most natives of Africa are negroes.

  (6) All democracies are governments.

  (7) Queen Anne is dead.


CHAPTER VII.

1. Define the following terms--

  Sun          inn-keeper   tea-pot
  hope         anger        virtue
  bread        diplomacy    milk
  carpet       man          death
  sincerity    telescope    mountain
  poverty      Senate       novel.

2. Define the following terms as used in Political Economy--

  Commodity    barter     value
  wealth       land       price
  money        labour     rent
  interest     capital    wages
  credit       demand     profits.

3. Criticise the following as definitions--

  (1) Noon is the time when the shadows of bodies are shortest.

  (2) Grammar is the science of language.

  (3) Grammar is a branch of philology.

  (4) Grammar is the art of speaking and writing a language with
  propriety.

  (5) Virtue is acting virtuously.

  (6) Virtue is that line of conduct which tends to produce happiness.

  (7) A dog is an animal of the canine species.

  (8) Logic is the art of reasoning.

  (9) Logic is the science of the investigation of truth by means of
  evidence.

  (10) Music is an expensive noise.

  (11) The sun is the centre of the solar system.

  (12) The sun is the brightest of those heavenly bodies that move
  round the earth.

  (13) Rust is the red desquamation of old iron.

  (14) Caviare is a kind of food.

  (15) Life is the opposite of death.

  (16) Man is a featherless biped.

  (17) Man is a rational biped.

  (18) A gentleman is a person who has no visible means of
  subsistence.

  (19) Fame is a fancied life in others' breath.

  (20) A fault is a quality productive of evil or inconvenience.

  (21) An oligarchy is the supremacy of the rich in a state.

  (22) A citizen is one who is qualified to exercise deliberative and
  judicial functions.

  (23) Length is that dimension of a solid which would be measured by
  the longest line.

  (24) An eccentricity is a peculiar idiosyncrasy.

  (25) Deliberation is that species of investigation which is
  concerned with matters of action.

  (26) Memory is that which helps us to forget.

  (27) Politeness is the oil that lubricates the wheels of society.

  (28) An acute-angled triangle is one which has an acute angle.

  (29) A cause is that without which something would not be.

  (30) A cause is the invariable antecedent of a phenomenon.

  (31) Necessity is the mother of invention.

  (32) Peace is the absence of war.

  (33) A net is a collection of holes strung together.

  (34) Prudence is the ballast of the moral vessel.

  (35) A circle is a plane figure contained by one line.

  (36) Superstition is a tendency to look for constancy where
  constancy is not to be expected.

  (37) Bread is the staff of life.

  (38) An attributive is a term which cannot stand as a subject.

  (39) Life is bottled sunshine.

  (40) Eloquence is the power of influencing the feelings by speech or
  writing.

  (41) A tombstone is a monument erected over a grave in memory of the
  dead.

  (42) Whiteness is the property or power of exciting the sensation of
  white.

  (43) Figure is the limit of a solid.

  (44) An archdeacon is one who exercises archidiaconal functions.

  (45) Humour is thinking in jest while feeling in earnest.


