CHAPTER XXIII.

_Of the Disjunctive Syllogism_.


§ 760. Roughly speaking, a Disjunctive Syllogism results from the
combination of a disjunctive with a simple premiss. As in the
preceding form, the complex proposition is regarded as the major
premiss, since it lays down a hypothesis, which is applied to fact in
the minor.

§ 761. The Disjunctive Syllogism may be exactly defined as follows--

  A complex syllogism, which has for its major premiss a disjunctive
  proposition, either the antecedent or consequent of which is in the
  minor premiss simply affirmed or denied.

§ 762. Thus there are four types of disjunctive syllogism possible.

_Constructive Moods._

  (1) Either A is B or C is D. (2) Either A is B or C is D.
      A is not B.                  C is not D.
      .'. C is D.                  .'. A is B.

  Either death is annihilation or we are immortal.
  Death is not annihilation.
  .'. We are immortal.

  Either the water is shallow or the boys will be drowned.
  The boys are not drowned.
  .'. The water is shallow.

_Destructive Moods_.

  (3) Either A is B or C is D. (4) Either A is B or C is D.
      A is B.                      C is D.
      .'. C is not D.              .'. A is not B.

§ 763. Of these four, however, it is only the constructive moods that
are formally conclusive. The validity of the two destructive moods is
contingent upon the kind of alternatives selected. If these are such
as necessarily to exclude one another, the conclusion will hold, but
not otherwise. They are of course mutually exclusive whenever they
embody the result of a correct logical division, as 'Triangles are
either equilateral, isosceles or scalene.'  Here, if we affirm one of
the members, we are justified in denying the rest. When the major thus
contains the dividing members of a genus, it may more fitly be
symbolized under the formula, 'A is either B or C.' But as this admits
of being read in the shape, 'Either A is B or A is C,' we retain the
wider expression which includes it. Any knowledge, however, which we
may have of the fact that the alternatives selected in the major are
incompatible must come to us from material sources; unless indeed we
have confined ourselves to a pair of contradictory terms (A is either
B or not-B). There can be nothing in the form of the expression to
indicate the incompatibility of the alternatives, since the same form
is employed when the alternatives are palpably compatible. When, for
instance, we say, 'A successful student must be either talented or
industrious,' we do not at all mean to assert the positive
incompatibility of talent and industry in a successful student, but
only the incompatibility of their negatives--in other words, that, if
both are absent, no student can be successful. Similarly, when it is
said, 'Either your play is bad or your luck is abominable,' there is
nothing in the form of the expression to preclude our conceiving that
both may be the case.

§ 764. There is no limit to the number of members in the disjunctive
major. But if there are only two alternatives, the conclusion will be
a simple proposition; if there are more than two, the conclusion will
itself be a disjunctive. Thus--

  Either A is B or C is D or E is F or G is H.
  E is not F.
  .'. Either A is B or C is D or G is H.

§ 765. The Canon of the Disjunctive Syllogism may be laid down as
follows--

  To deny one member is to affirm the rest, either simply or
  disjunctively; but from affirming any member nothing follows.




CHAPTER XXIV.

_Of the Reduction of the Disjunctive Syllogism._

§ 766. We have seen that in the disjunctive syllogism the two
constructive moods alone are formally valid. The first of these,
namely, the denial of the antecedent, will in all cases give a simple
syllogism in the first figure; the second of them, namely, the denial
of the consequent, will in all cases give a simple syllogism in the
second figure.

  _Denial of Antecedent_ = Barbara.

    Either A is B or C is D.
    A is not B.
    .'.C is D

  is equal to

    If A is not B, C is D.
    A is not B.
    .'. C is D.

  is equal to

    All cases of A not being B are cases of C being D.
    This is a case of A not being B.
    .'. This is a case of C being D.


  _Denial of Consequent_ = Camestres.

    Either A is E or C is D.
    C is not D.
    .'. A is B.

  is equal to

    If A is not B, C is D.
    C is not D.
    .'. A is B.

  is equal to

    All cases of A not being B are cases of C being D.
    This is not a case of C being D.
    .'. This is not a case of A being B.

§ 767. The other moods of the first and second figures can be obtained
by varying the quality of the antecedent and consequent in the major
premiss and reducing the quantity of the minor.

§ 768. The invalid destructive moods correspond with the two invalid
types of the partly conjunctive syllogism, and have the same fallacies
of simple syllogism underlying them. Affirmation of the antecedent of
a disjunctive is equivalent to the semi-conjunctive fallacy of denying
the antecedent, and therefore involves the ordinary syllogistic
fallacy of illicit process of the major.

Affirmation of the consequent of a disjunctive is equivalent to the
same fallacy in the semi-conjunctive form, and therefore involves the
ordinary syllogistic fallacy of undistributed middle.

  _Affirmation of Antecedent_ = _Illicit Major_.

    Either A is B or C is D.
    A is B.
    .'. C is not D.

  is equal to

    If A is not B, C is D.
    A is B.
    .'. C is not D.

  is equal to

    All cases of A not being B are cases of C being D.
    This is not a case of A not being B.
    .'. This is not a case of C not being D.


  _Affirmation of Consequent_ = _Undistributed Middle_.

    Either A is B or C is D.
    C is D.

  is equal to

    If A is not B, C is D.
    C is D.

  is equal to

    All cases of A not being B are cases of C being D.
    This is a case of C being D.

§ 769. So far as regards the consequent, the two species of complex
reasoning hitherto discussed are identical both in appearance and
reality. The apparent difference of procedure in the case of the
antecedent, namely, that it is affirmed in the partly conjunctive, but
denied in the disjunctive syllogism, is due merely to the fact that in
the disjunctive proposition the truth of the consequent is involved in
the falsity of the antecedent, so that the antecedent being
necessarily negative, to deny it in appearance is in reality to assert
it.




