The Project Gutenberg eBook of Deductive Logic
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Deductive Logic

Author: St. George William Joseph Stock


        
Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6560]
                Most recently updated: December 29, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/6560

Credits: Produced by Arno Peters, David Moynihan, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team






Produced by Arno Peters, David Moynihan, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





[Transcriber's Note: In this plain-text rendering,
 .'. means therefore
 [alpha], [beta], ..., [Alpha], [Beta], ... for Greek symbols]





DEDUCTIVE LOGIC

BY

ST. GEORGE STOCK, M.A.

PEMBROKE COLLEGE, OXFORD




PREFACE.

One critic, who was kind enough to look at this book in manuscript,
recommended me to abandon the design of Publishing it, on the ground
that my logic was too like all other logics; another suggested to me
to cut out a considerable amount of new matter. The latter advice I
have followed; the former has encouraged me to hope that I shall not
be considered guilty of wanton innovation.  The few novelties which I
have ventured to retain will, I trust, be regarded as legitimate
extensions of received lines of teaching.

My object has been to produce a work which should be as thoroughly
representative of the present state of the logic of the Oxford Schools
as any of the text-books of the past. The qualities which I have aimed
at before all others have been clearness and consistency. For the task
which I have taken upon myself I may claim one qualification--that of
experience; since more than seventeen years have now elapsed since I
took my first pupil in logic for the Honour School of Moderations, and
during that time I have been pretty continuously engaged in studying
and teaching the subject.

In acknowledging my obligations to previous writers I must begin with
Archbishop Whately, whose writings first gave me an interest in the
subject. The works of Mill and Hamilton have of course been freely
drawn upon. I have not followed either of those two great writers
exclusively, but have endeavoured to assimilate what seemed best in
both. To Professor Fowler I am under a special debt. I had not the
privilege of personal teaching from him in logic,--as I had in some
other subjects; but his book fell into my hands at an early period in
my mental training, and was so thoroughly studied as to have become a
permanent part of the furniture of my mind. Much the same may be said
of my relation to the late Professor Jevons's Elementary Lessons in
Logic.  Two other books, which I feel bound to mention with special
emphasis, are Hansel's edition of Aldrich and McCosh's Laws of
Discursive Thought. If there be added to the foregoing Watts's Logic,
Thomson's Outlines of the Laws of Thought, Bain's Deductive Logic,
Jevons's Studies in Deductive Logic and Principles of Science,
Bradley's Principles of Logic, Abbott's Elements of Logic, Walker's
edition of Murray, Ray's Text-book of Deductive Logic, and
Weatherley's Rudiments of Logic, I think the list will be exhausted of
modern works from which I am conscious of having borrowed. But, not to
forget the sun, while thanking the manufacturers of lamps and candles,
I should add that I have studied the works of Aristotle according to
the measure of my time and ability.

This work has had the great advantage of having been revised, while
still in manuscript, by Mr. Alfred Robinson, Fellow of New College, to
whom I cannot sufficiently express my obligation. I have availed
myself to the full of the series of criticisms which he was kind
enough to send me. As some additions have been made since then, he
cannot be held in anyway responsible for the faults which less kindly
critics may detect.

For the examples at the end I am mainly indebted to others, and to a
large extent to my ingenious friend, the Rev. W. J. Priest of Merton
College.

My thanks are due also to my friend and former pupil, Mr. Gilbert
Grindle, Scholar of Corpus, who has been at the pains to compose an
index, and to revise the proofs as they passed through the press.

And last, but not least, I must set on record my gratitude to
Commander R. A. Stock, R.N., one of Her Majesty's Knights of Windsor,
without whose brotherly aid this work might never have been written,
and would certainly not have assumed exactly its present shape.

OXFORD,

_October_ 22, 1888.




CONTENTS.

PREFACE.

INTRODUCTION, §§ 1-56.

PART I. Of Terms, §§ 57-171.

  CHAP. I. Of the Term as distinguished from other words, §§ 57-76.

  II. Of the Division of Things, §§ 77-85.

  III. Of the Divisions of Terms, §§ 86-165.

  IV. Of the Law of Inverse Variation of Extension and Intension, §§
  166-171.

