CHAPTER VIII.

1. Divide the following terms--

  Soldier    end           book
  church     good          oration
  apple      cause         school
  ship       government    letter
  vehicle    science       verse.

2. Divide the following terms as used in Political Economy--

  Requisites of production, labour, consumption, stock, wealth,
  capital.

3. Criticise the following as divisions--

  (1) Great Britain into England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland.

  (2) Pictures into sacred, historical, landscape, and mythological.

  (3) Vertebrate animals into quadrupeds, birds, fishes, and reptiles.

  (4) Plant into stem, root, and branches.

  (5) Ship into frigate, brig, schooner, and merchant-man.

  (6) Books into octavo, quarto, green, and blue.

  (7) Figure into curvilinear and rectilinear.

  (8) Ends into those which are ends only, means and ends, and means
  only.

  (9) Church into Gothic, episcopal, high, and low.

  (10) Sciences into physical, moral, metaphysical, and medical.

  (11) Library into public and private.

  (12) Horses into race-horses, hunters, hacks, thoroughbreds, ponies,
  and mules.

4. Define and divide--

  Meat, money, virtue, triangle;

and give, as far as possible, a property and accident of each.


PART III.


CHAPTERS I-III.

1. What kind of influence have we here?

  The author of the Iliad was unacquainted with writing.
  Homer was the author of the Iliad.
  .'. Homer was unacquainted with writing.

2. Give the logical opposites of the following propositions--

  (1) Knowledge is never useless.

  (2) All Europeans are civilised.

  (3) Some monks are not illiterate.

  (4) Happy is the man that findeth wisdom.

  (5) No material substances are devoid of weight.

  (6) Every mistake is not culpable.

  (7) Some Irishmen are phlegmatic.

3. Granting the truth of the following propositions, what other
propositions can be inferred by opposition to be true or false?


  (1) Men of science are often mistaken.

  (2) He can't be wrong, whose life is in the right.

  (3) Sir Walter Scott was the author of Waverley.

  (4) The soul that sinneth it shall die.

  (5) All women are not vain.

4. Granting the falsity of the following propositions, what other
propositions can be inferred by opposition to be true or false?--

  (1) Some men are not mortal.

  (2) Air has no weight.

  (3) All actors are improper characters.

  (4) None but dead languages are worth studying.

  (5) Some elements are compound.


