CHAPTER XXV.

_The Disjunctive Syllogism regarded as an Immediate Inference_.


§ 770. If no stress be laid on the transition from disjunctive
hypothesis to fact, the disjunctive syllogism will run with the same
facility as its predecessor into the moulds of immediate inference.

§ 771.

  _Denial of Antecedent_.       Subalternation.

  Either A is B or C is D,       Every case of A not being B
                                 is a case of C being D.
  .'. A not being B, C is D.     .'. Some case of A not being B
                                 is a case of C being D.

§ 772.

  _Denial of Consequent_.      Conversion by Contraposition
                                    + Subalternation.

  Either A is B or C is D.       All cases of A not being B
                                 are cases of C being D.
  .'. C not being D, A is B      .'. All cases of C not being D are
                                 cases of A being B.
                                 .'. Some case of C not being D is
                                 a case of A being B.

§ 773. Similarly the two invalid types of disjunctive syllogism will
be found to coincide with fallacies of immediate inference.

§ 774.

  _Affirmation of Antecedent_.   Contraposition without
                                      Conversion.

  Either A is B or C is D.         All cases of A not being B are
                                   cases of C being D.
  .'. A being B, C is not D        .'. All cases of A being B are
                                   cases of C not being D.

§ 775. The affirmation of the antecedent thus comes under the
formula--

  All not-A is B,
  .'. All A is not-B,

a form of inference which cannot hold except where A and B are known
to be incompatible. Who, for instance, would assent to this?--

  All non-boating men play cricket.
  .'. All boating men are non-cricketers.

§ 776.

  _Affirmation of Consequent_.   Simple Conversion of A.

  Either A is B or C is D.          All cases of A not being B are
                                    cases of C being D.
  .'.C being D, A is not B.         .'. All cases of C being D are
                                    cases of A not being B.

§ 777. We may however argue in this way--

                                     Conversion of A per accidens.
  Either A is B or C is D.           All cases of A not being B
                                     are cases of C being D.
  .'. C being D, A is sometimes B.   .'. Some cases of C being D are
                                     cases of A not being B.

  The men who pass this examination must have either talent or industry.
  .'. Granting that they are industrious, they may be without talent.




CHAPTER XXVI.

_Of the Mixed Form of Complex Syllogism_.


§ 778. Under this head are included all syllogisms in which a
conjunctive is combined with a disjunctive premiss. The best known
form is



_The Dilemma_.


§ 779. The Dilemma may be defined as--

  A complex syllogism, having for its major premiss a conjunctive
  proposition with more than one antecedent, or more than one
  consequent, or both, which (antecedent or consequent) the minor
  premiss disjunctively affirms or denies.

§ 780. It will facilitate the comprehension of the dilemma, if the
following three points are borne in mind--

  (1) that the dilemma conforms to the canon of the partly conjunctive
  syllogism, and therefore a valid conclusion can be obtained only by
  affirming the antecedent or denying the consequent;

  (2) that the minor premiss must be disjunctive;

  (3) that if only the antecedent be more than one, the conclusion
  will be a simple proposition; but if both antecedent and consequent
  be more than one, the conclusion will itself be disjunctive.

§ 781. The dilemma, it will be seen, differs from the partly
conjunctive syllogism chiefly in the fact of having a disjunctive
affirmation of the antecedent or denial of the consequent in the
minor, instead of a simple one. It is this which constitutes the
essence of the dilemma, and which determines its possible
varieties. For if only the antecedent or only the consequent be more
than one, we must, in order to obtain a disjunctive minor, affirm the
antecedent or deny the consequent respectively; whereas, if there be
more than one of both, it is open to us to take either course. This
gives us four types of dilemma.

§ 782.

  (1). _Simple Constructive._

    If A is B or C is D, E is F.
    Either A is B or C is D.
    .'. E is F.

  (2). _Simple Destructive._

    If A is B, C is D and E is F.
    Either C is not D or E is not F.
    .'. A is not B.

  (3). _Complex Constructive._

    If A is B, C is D; and if E is F, G is H.
    Either A is B or E is F.
    .'. Either C is D or G is H.

  (4). _Complex Destructive_.

    If A is B, C is D; and if E is F, G is H.
    Either C is not D or G is not H.
    .'. Either A is not B or E is not F.

§ 783.

  (1). _Simple Constructive_.

    If she sinks or if she swims, there will be an end of her.
    She must either sink or swim.
    .'. There will be an end of her.

  (2). _Simple Destructive_.

    If I go to Town, I must pay for my ticket and pay my hotel bill.
    Either I cannot pay for my ticket or I cannot pay my hotel bill.
    .'. I cannot go to Town.

  (3). _Complex Constructive_.

    If I stay in this room, I shall be burnt to death, and if I jump
    out of the window, I shall break my neck.
    I must either stay in the room or jump out of the window.
    .'. I must either be burnt to death or break my neck.

  (4). _Complex Destructive_.

    If he were clever, he would see his mistake; and
    if he were candid, he would acknowledge it.
    Either he does not see his mistake or he will not acknowledge it.
    .'. Either he is not clever or he is not candid.

§ 784. It must be noticed that the simple destructive dilemma would
not admit of a disjunctive consequent. If we said,

  If A is B, either C is D or E is F,
  Either C is not D or E is not F,

we should not be denying the consequent. For 'E is not F' would make
it true that C is D, and 'C is not D' would make it true that E is F;
so that in either case we should have one of the alternatives true,
which is just what the disjunctive form 'Either C is D or E is F'
insists upon.

§ 785. In the case of the complex constructive dilemma the several
members, instead of being distributively assigned to one another, may
be connected together as a whole--thus--

  If either A is B or E is F, either C is D or G is H.
  Either A is B or E is F.
  .'. Either C is D or G is H.

In this shape the likeness of the dilemma to the partly conjunctive
syllogism is more immediately recognisable.  The major premiss in this
shape is vaguer than in the former. For each antecedent has now a
disjunctive choice of consequents, instead of being limited to
one. This vagueness, however, does not affect the conclusion. For, so
long as the conclusion is established, it does not matter from which
members of the major its own members flow.

§ 786. It must be carefully noticed that we cannot treat the complex
destructive dilemma in the same way.

  If either A is B or E is F, either C is D or G is H.
  Either C is not D or G is not H.

Since the consequents are no longer connected individually with the
antecedents, a disjunctive denial of them leaves it still possible for
the antecedent as a whole to be true. For 'C is not D' makes it true
that G is H, and 'G is not H' makes it true that C is D. In either
case then one is true, which is all that was demanded by the
consequent of the major. Hence the consequent has not really been
denied.

§ 787. For the sake of simplicity we have limited the examples to the
case of two antecedents or consequents.  But we may have as many of
either as we please, so as to have a Trilemma, a Tetralemma, and so
on.

TRILEMMA.

  If A is B, C is D; and if E is F, G is H; and if K is L, M is N.
  Either A is B or E is F or K is L.
  .'. Either C is D or G is H or K is L.

§ 788. Having seen what the true dilemma is, we shall now examine some
forms of reasoning which resemble dilemmas without being so.

§ 789. This, for instance, is not a dilemma--

  If A is B or if E is F, C is D.
  But A is B and E is F.
  .'. C is D.

  If he observes the sabbath or if he refuses to eat pork, he is a
  Jew.
  But he both observes the sabbath and refuses to eat pork.
  .'. He is a Jew.

What we have here is a combination of two partly conjunctive
syllogisms with the same conclusion, which would have been established
by either of them singly.  The proof is redundant.

§ 790. Neither is the following a dilemma--

  If A is B, C is D and E is F.
  Neither C is D nor E is F.
  .'. A is not B.

  If this triangle is equilateral, its sides and its angles will be
  equal.
  But neither its sides nor its angles are equal.
  .'. It is not equilateral.

This is another combination of two conjunctive syllogisms, both
pointing to the same conclusion. The proof is again redundant. In this
case we have the consequent denied in both, whereas in the former we
had the antecedent affirmed. It is only for convenience that such
arguments as these are thrown into the form of a single
syllogism. Their real distinctness may be seen from the fact that we
here deny each proposition separately, thus making two independent
statements--C is not D and E is not F. But in the true instance of the
simple destructive dilemma, what we deny is not the truth of the two
propositions contained in the consequent, but their compatibility; in
other words we make a disjunctive denial.

§ 791. Nor yet is the following a dilemma--

  If A is B, either C is D or E is F.
  Neither C is D nor E is F.
  .'. A is not B.

  If the barometer falls there will be either wind or rain.
  There is neither wind nor rain.
  .'. The barometer has not fallen.

What we have here is simply a conjunctive major with the consequent
denied in the minor. In the consequent of the major it is asserted
that the two propositions, 'C is D' and 'E is F' cannot both be false;
and in the minor this is denied by the assertion that they are both
false.

§ 792. A dilemma is said to be rebutted or retorted, when another
dilemma is made out proving an opposite conclusion. If the dilemma be
a sound one, and its premisses true, this is of course impossible, and
any appearance of contradiction that may present itself on first sight
must vanish on inspection. The most usual mode of rebutting a dilemma
is by transposing and denying the consequents in the major--

  If A is B, C is D; and if E is F, G is H.
  Either A is B or E is F.
  .'. Either C is D or G is H.

The same rebutted--

  If A is B, G is not H; and if E is F, C is not D.
  Either A is B or E is F.
  .'. Either G is not H or C is not D.
    = Either C is not D or G is not H.

§ 793. Under this form comes the dilemma addressed by the Athenian
mother to her son--'Do not enter public life: for, if you say what is
just, men will hate you; and, if you say what is unjust, the gods will
hate you' to which the following retort was made--'I ought to enter
public life: for, if 1 say what is just, the gods will love me; and,
if 1 say what is unjust, men will love me.' But the two conclusions
here are quite compatible. A man must, on the given premisses, be both
hated and loved, whatever course he takes. So far indeed are two
propositions of the form

  Either C is D or G is H,
  and Either C is not D or G is not H,

from being incompatible, that they express precisely the same thing
when contradictory alternatives have been selected, e.g.--

  Either a triangle is equilateral or non-equilateral.
  Either a triangle is non-equilateral or equilateral.

§ 794. Equally illusory is the famous instance of rebutting a dilemma
contained in the story of Protagoras and Euathlus
(Aul. Gell. Noct. Alt. v. 10), Euathlus was a pupil of Protagoras in
rhetoric. He paid half the fee demanded by his preceptor before
receiving lessons, and agreed to pay the remainder when he won his
first case.  But as he never proceeded to practise at the bar, it
became evident that he meant to bilk his tutor. Accordingly Protagoras
himself instituted a law-suit against him, and in the preliminary
proceedings before the jurors propounded to him the following
dilemma--'Most foolish young man, whatever be the issue of this suit,
you must pay me what I claim: for, if the verdict be given in your
favour, you are bound by our bargain; and if it be given against you,
you are bound by the decision of the jurors.'  The pupil, however, was
equal to the occasion, and rebutted the dilemma as follows. 'Most
sapient master, whatever be the issue of this suit, I shall not pay
you what you claim: for, if the verdict be given in my favour, I am
absolved by the decision of the jurors; and, if it be given against
me, I am absolved by our bargain.' The jurors are said to have been so
puzzled by the conflicting plausibility of the arguments that they
adjourned the case till the Greek Kalends. It is evident, however,
that a grave injustice was thus done to Protagoras. His dilemma was
really invincible. In the counter-dilemma of Euathlus we are meant to
infer that Protagoras would actually lose his fee, instead of merely
getting it in one way rather than another. In either case he would
both get and lose his fee, in the sense of getting it on one plea, and
not getting it on another: but in neither case would he actually lose
it.

§ 795. If a dilemma is correct in form, the conclusion of course
rigorously follows: but a material fallacy often underlies this form
of argument in the tacit assumption that the alternatives offered in
the minor constitute an exhaustive division. Thus the dilemma 'If pain
is severe, it will be brief; and if it last long it will be slight,'
&c., leaves out of sight the unfortunate fact that pain may both be
severe and of long continuance. Again the following dilemma--

  If students are idle, examinations are unavailing; and, if
  they are industrious, examinations are superfluous,
  Students are either idle or industrious,
  .'. Examinations are either unavailing or superfluous,

is valid enough, so far as the form is concerned. But the person who
used it would doubtless mean to imply that students could be
exhaustively divided into the idle and the industrious. No deductive
conclusion can go further than its premisses; so that all that the
above conclusion can in strictness be taken to mean is that
examinations are unavailing, when students are idle, and superfluous,
when they are industrious--which is simply a reassertion as a matter
of fact of what was previously given as a pure hypothesis.




