CHAPTER VII. AT THE STEVENS PLACE

When the excitement of the outrage had been pushed aside by the
insistent routine of everyday living, Thurston found himself thrust from
the fascination of range life and into the monotony of invalidism, and
he was anything but resigned. To be sure, he was well cared for at the
Stevens ranch, where Park and the boys had taken him that day, and Mrs.
Stevens mothered him as he could not remember being mothered before.

Hank Graves rode over nearly every day to sit beside the bed and curse
the Wagner gang back to their great-great-grandfathers and down to more
than the third generation yet unborn, and to tell him the news. On the
second visit he started to give him the details of Bob's funeral; but
Thurston would not listen, and told him so plainly.

“All right then, Bud, I won't talk about it. But we sure done the right
thing by the boy; had the best preacher in Shellanne out, and flowers
till further notice: a cross uh carnations, and the boys sent up to
Minot and had a spur made uh--oh, well, all right; I'll shut up about
it, I know how yuh feel, Bud; it broke us all up to have him go that
way. He sure was a white boy, if ever there was one, and--ahem!”

“I'd give a thousand dollars, hard coin, to get my hands on them
Wagners. It would uh been all off with them, sure, if the boys had run
acrost 'em. I'd uh let 'em stay out and hunt a while longer, only old
Lauman'll get 'em, all right, and we're late as it is with the calf
roundup. Lauman'll run 'em down--and by the Lord! I'll hire Bowman
myself and ship him out from Helena to help prosecute 'em. They're dead
men if he takes the case against 'em, Bud, and I'll get him, sure--and
to hell with the cost of it! They'll swing for what they done to you and
Bob, if it takes every hoof I own.”

Thurston told him he hoped they would be caught and--yes, hanged; though
he had never before advocated capital punishment.

But when he thought of Bob, the care-naught, whole-souled fellow.

He tried not to think of him, for thinking unmanned him. He had the
softest of hearts where his friends were concerned, and there were
times when he felt that he could with relish officiate at the Wagners'
execution.

He fought against remembrance of that day; and for sake of diversion he
took to studying a large, pastel portrait of Mona which hung against the
wall opposite his bed. It was rather badly; done, and at first, when he
saw it, he laughed at the thought that even the great, still plains of
the range land cannot protect one against the ubiquitous picture
agent. In the parlor, he supposed there would be crayon pictures of
grandmothers and aunts-further evidence of the agent's glibness.

He was glad that it was Mona who smiled down at him instead of a
grand-mother or an aunt. For Mona did smile, and in spite of the cheap
crudity the smile was roguish, with little dimply creases at the corners
of the mouth, and not at all unpleasant. If the girl would only look
like that in real life, he told himself, a fellow would probably get to
liking her. He supposed she thought him a greater coward than ever now,
just because he hadn't got killed. If he had, he would be a hero now,
like Bob. Well, Bob was a hero; the way he had jumped up and begun
shooting required courage of the suicidal sort. He had stood up and
shot, also and had succeeded only in being ridiculous; he hoped nobody
had told Mona about his hitting that steer. When he could walk again he
would learn to shoot, so that the range stock wouldn't suffer from his
marksmanship.

After a week of seeing only Mrs. Stevens or sympathetic men
acquaintances, he began to wonder why Mona stayed so persistently away.
Then one morning she came in to take his breakfast things out. She did
not, however, stay a second longer than was absolutely necessary, and
she was perfectly composed and said good morning in her most impersonal
tone. At least Thurston hoped she had no tone more impersonal than that.
He decided that she had really beautiful eyes and hair; after she had
gone he looked up at the picture, told himself that it did not begin
to do her justice, and sighed a bit. He was very dull, and even her
companionship, he thought, would be pleasant if only she would come down
off her pedestal and be humanly sociable.

When he wrote a story about a fellow being laid up in the same house
with a girl--a girl with big, blue-gray eyes and ripply brown hair--he
would have the girl treat the fellow at least decently. She would read
poetry to him and bring him flowers, and do ever so many nice things
that would make him hate to get well. He decided that he would write
just that kind of story; he would idealize it, of course, and have the
fellow in love with the girl; you have to, in stories. In real life it
doesn't necessarily follow that, because a fellow admires a girl's hair
and eyes, and wants to be on friendly terms, he is in love with her.
For example, he emphatically was not in love with Mona Stevens. He only
wanted her to be decently civil and to stop holding a foolish grudge
against him for not standing up and letting himself be shot full of
holes because she commanded it.

In the afternoons, Mrs. Stevens would sit beside him and knit things
and talk to him in a pleasantly garrulous fashion, and he would lie and
listen to her--and to Mona, singing somewhere. Mona sang very well, he
thought; he wondered if she had ever had any training. Also, he wished
he dared ask her not to sing that song about “She's only a bird in a
gilded cage.” It brought back too vividly the nights when he and Bob
stood guard under the quiet stars.

And then one day he hobbled out into the dining-room and ate dinner with
the family. Since he sat opposite Mona she was obliged to look at
him occasionally, whether she would or no. Thurston had a strain of
obstinacy in his nature, and when he decided that Mona should not only
look at him, but should talk to him as well, he set himself diligently
to attain that end. He was not the man to sit down supinely and let a
girl calmly ignore him; so Mona presently found herself talking to him
with some degree of cordiality; and what is more to the point, listening
to him when he talked. It is probable that Thurston never had tried so
hard in his life to win a girl's attention.

It was while he was still hobbling with a cane and taxing his
imagination daily to invent excuses for remaining, that Lauman, the
sheriff, rode up to the door with a deputy and asked shelter for
themselves and the two Wagners, who glowered sullenly down from their
weary horses. When they had been safely disposed in Thurston's bedroom,
with one of the ranch hands detailed to guard them, Lauman and his man
gave themselves up to the joy of a good meal. Their own cooking, they
said, got mighty tame especially when they hadn't much to cook and dared
not have a fire.

They had come upon the outlaws by mere accident, and it is hard telling
which was the most surprised. But Lauman was, perhaps, the quickest man
with a gun in Valley County, else he would not have been serving his
fourth term as sheriff. He got the drop and kept it while his deputy
did the rest. It had been a hard chase, he said, and a long one if you
counted time instead of miles. But he had them now, harmless as rattlers
with their fangs fresh drawn. He wanted to get them to Glasgow before
people got to hear of their capture; he thought they wouldn't be any too
safe if the boys knew he had them.

If he had known that the Lazy Eight roundup had just pulled in to the
home ranch that afternoon, and that Dick Farney, one of the Stevens
men, had slipped out to the corral and saddled his swiftest horse, it
is quite possible that Lauman would not have lingered so long over his
supper, or drank his third cup of coffee--with real cream in it--with so
great a relish. And if he had known that the Circle Bar boys were camped
just three miles away within hailing distance of the Lazy Eight trail,
he would doubtless have postponed his after-supper smoke.

He was sitting, revolver in hand, watching the Wagners give a practical
demonstration of the extent of their appetites, when Thurston limped in
from the porch, his eyes darker than usual. “There are a lot of riders
coming, Mr. Lauman,” he announced quietly. “It sounds like a whole
roundup. I thought you ought to know.”

The prisoners went white, and put down knife and fork. If they had never
feared before, plainly they were afraid then.

Lauman's face did not in the least change. “Put the hand-cuffs on,
Waller,” he said. “If you've got a room that ain't easy to get at from
the outside, Mrs. Stevens, I guess I'll have to ask yuh for the use of
it.”

Mrs. Stevens had lived long in Valley County, and had learned how to
meet emergencies. “Put 'em right down cellar,” she invited briskly.
“There's just the trap-door into it, and the windows ain't big enough
for a cat to go through. Mona, get a candle for Mr. Lauman.” She turned
to hurry the girl, and found Mona at her elbow with a light.

“That's the kind uh woman I like to have around,” Lauman chuckled. “Come
on, boys; hustle down there if yuh want to see Glasgow again.”

Trembling, all their dare-devil courage sapped from them by the menace
of Thurston's words, they stumbled down the steep stairs, and the
darkness swallowed them. Lauman beckoned to his deputy.

“You go with 'em, Waller,” he ordered. “If anybody but me offers to lift
this trap, shoot. Don't yuh take any chances. Blow out that candle soon
as you're located.”

It was then that fifty riders clattered into the yard and up to the
front door, grouping in a way that left no exit unseen. Thurston,
standing in the doorway, knew them almost to a man. Lazy Eight boys,
they were; men who night after night had spread their blankets under the
tent-roof with him and with Bob MacGregor; Bob, who lay silently out
on the hill back of the home ranch-house, waiting for the last, great
round-up. They glanced at him in mute greeting and dismounted without a
word. With them mingled the Circle Bar boys, as silent and grim as their
fellows. Lauman came up and peered into the dusk; Thurston observed that
he carried his Winchester unobtrusively in one hand.

“Why, hello, boys,” he greeted cheerfully. But for the rifle you never
would have guessed he knew their errand.

“Hello, Lauman,” answered Park, matching him for cheerfulness. Then:

“We rode over to hang them Wagners.” Lauman grinned. “I hate to
disappoint yuh, Park, but I've kinda set my heart on doing that little
job myself. I'm the one that caught 'em, and if you'd followed my trail
the last month you'd say I earned the privilege.”

“Maybe so,” Park admitted pleasantly, “but we've got a little personal
matter to settle up with those jaspers. Bob MacGregor was one of us, yuh
remember.”

“I'll hang 'em just as dead as you can,” Lauman argued.

“But yuh won't do it so quick,” Park lashed back. “They're spoiling the
air every breath they draw. We want 'em, and I guess that pretty near
settles it.”

“Not by a damn sight it don't! I've never had a man took away from me
yet, boys, and I've been your sheriff a good many years. You hike right
back to camp; yuh can't have 'em.”

Thurston could scarcely realize the deadliness of their purpose. He knew
them for kind-hearted, laughter-loving young fellows, who would give
their last dollar to a friend. He could not believe that they would
resort to violence now. Besides, this was not his idea of a mob; he
had fancied they would howl threats and wave bludgeons, as they did in
stories. Mobs always “howled and seethed with passion” at one's doors;
they did not stand about and talk quietly as though the subject was
trivial and did not greatly concern them.

But the men were pressing closer, and their very calmness, had he known
it, was ominous. Lauman shifted his rifle ready for instant aim.

“Boys, look here,” he began more gravely, “I can't say I blame yuh,
looking at it from your view-point. If you'd caught these men when yuh
was out hunting 'em, you could uh strung 'em up--and I'd likely uh had
business somewhere else about that time. But yuh didn't catch 'em; yuh
give up the chase and left 'em to me. And yuh got to remember that I'm
the one that brought 'em in. They're in my care. I'm sworn to protect
'em and turn 'em over to the law--and it ain't a question uh whether
they deserve it or not. That's what I'm paid for, and I expect to go
right ahead according to orders and hang 'em by law. You can't have
'em--unless yuh lay me out first, and I don't reckon any of yuh would go
that far.”

“There's never been a man hung by law in this county yet,” a voice cried
angrily and impatiently.

“That ain't saying there never will be,” Lauman flung back. “Don't yuh
worry, they'll get all that's coming to them, all right.”

“How about the time yuh had 'em in your rotten old jail, and let 'em get
out and run loose around the country, killing off white men?” drawled
another-a Circle-Bar man.

“Now boys.”

A hand--the hand of him who had stood guard over the Wagners in the
bedroom during supper--reached out through the doorway and caught his
rifle arm. Taken unawares from behind, he whirled and then went down
under the weight of men used to “wrassling” calves. Even old Lauman was
no match for them, and presently he found himself stretched upon the
porch with three Lazy Eight boys sitting on his person; which, being
inclined to portliness, he found very uncomfortable.

Moved by an impulse he had no name for, Thurston snatched the sheriff's
revolver from its scabbard. As the heap squirmed pantingly upon the
porch he stepped into the doorway to avoid being tripped, which was the
wisest move he could have made, for it put him in the shadow--and
there were men of the Circle Bar whose trigger-finger would not have
hesitated, just then, had he been in plain sight and had they known his
purpose.

“Just hold on there, boys,” he called, and they could see the glimmer of
the gun-barrel. Those of the Lazy Eight laughed at him.

“Aw, put it down, Bud,” Park admonished. “That's too dangerous a toy for
you to be playing with--and yuh know damn well yuh can't hit anything.”

“I killed a steer once,” Thurston reminded him meekly, whereat the laugh
hushed; for they remembered.

“I know I can't shoot straight,” he went on frankly, “but you're taking
that much the greater chance. If I have to, I'll cut loose--and there's
no telling where the bullets may strike.”

“That's right,” Park admitted. “Stand still, boys; he's more dangerous
than a gun that isn't loaded. What d'yuh want, m'son?”

“I want to talk to you for about five minutes. I've got a game leg, so
that I can neither run nor fight, but I hope you'll listen to me. The
Wagners can't get away--they're locked up, with a deputy standing over
them with a gun; and on top of that they're handcuffed. They're as
helpless, boys, as two trapped coyotes.” He looked down over the crowd,
which shifted uneasily; no one spoke.

“That's what struck me most,” he continued. “You know what I thought of
Bob, don't you? And I didn't thank them for boring a hole in my leg; it
wasn't any kindness of theirs that it didn't land higher--they weren't
shooting at me for fun. And I'd have killed them both with a clear
conscience, if I could. I tried hard enough. But it was different then;
out in the open, where a man had an even break. I don't believe if I
had shot as straight as I wanted to that I'd ever have felt a moment's
compunction. But now, when they're disarmed and shackled and altogether
helpless, I couldn't walk up to them deliberately and kill them could
you?

“It could be done, and done easily. You have Lauman where he can't do
anything, and I'm not of much account in a fight; so you've really only
one deputy sheriff and two women to get the best of. You could drag
these men out and hang them in the cottonwoods, and they couldn't raise
a hand to defend themselves. We could do it easily--but when it was done
and the excitement had passed I'd have a picture in my memory that I'd
hate to look at. I'd have an hour in my life that would haunt me. And
so would you. You'd hate to look back and think that one time you helped
kill a couple of men who couldn't fight back.

“Let the law do it, boys. You don't want them to live, and I don't;
nobody does, for they deserve to die. But it isn't for us to play judge
and jury and hangman here to-night. Let them get what's coming to them
at the hands of the officers you've elected for that purpose. They won't
get off. Hank Graves says they will hang if it takes every hoof he owns.
He said he would bring Bowman down here to help prosecute them. I don't
know Bowman--”

“I do,” a voice spoke, somewhere in the darkness. “Lawyer from Helena.
Never lost a case.”

“I'm glad to hear it, for he's the man that will prosecute. They haven't
a ghost of a show to get out of it. Lauman here is responsible for their
safe keeping and I guess, now that he knows them better, we needn't be
afraid they'll escape again. And it's as Lauman said; he'll hang them
quite as dead as you can. He's drawing a salary to do these things, make
him earn it. It's a nasty job, boys, and you wouldn't get anything out
of it but a nasty memory.”

A hand that did not feel like the hand of a man rested for an instant on
his arm. Mona brushed by him and stepped out where the rising moon shone
on her hair and into her big, blue-gray eyes.

“I wish you all would please go away,” she said. “You are making mamma
sick. She's got it in her head that you are going to do something awful,
and I can't convince her you're not. I told her you wouldn't do anything
so sneaking, but she's awfully nervous about it. Won't you please go,
right now?”

They looked sheepishly at one another; every man of them feared the
ridicule of his neighbor.

“Why, sure we'll go,” cried Park, rallying. “We were going anyway in a
minute. Tell your mother we were just congratulating Lauman on rounding
up these Wagners. Come on, boys. And you, Bud, hurry up and get well
again; we miss yuh round the Lazy Eight.”

The three who were sitting on Lauman got up, and he gave a sigh of
relief. “Say, yuh darned cowpunchers don't have no mercy on an old man's
carcass at all,” he groaned, in exaggerated self-pity. “Next time yuh
want to congratulate me, I wish you'd put it in writing and send it by
mail.”

A little ripple of laughter went through the crowd. Then they swung up
on their horses and galloped away in the moonlight.



