BOOK V


The movements of the atmosphere form the subject of discussion in
this part of the treatise. In the first chapter the author seeks
for an exact definition of the term “Wind” (_ventus_), and ends by
adopting one which is obviously inaccurate--“wind is air flowing in
one direction,”--for as he afterwards speaks of whirlwinds he was
well aware that the movement may be in every direction, or vorticose.
Dismissing the opinion of Democritus as to the origin of wind, he
states that in his judgment wind may arise from four different causes.
First; The earth itself breathes forth a vast amount of air from its
interior, where there are large rivers and lakes, and where the moist
air naturally gives rise to blasts of wind. Second; Long-continued
evaporation carries the terrestrial emanations aloft, where the
intermingling of the breath results in wind. Third; Much more important
is the fact that the air in its very constitution possesses an innate
power of motion; we cannot imagine that while we ourselves are endowed
with a capacity of movement--and water has this power also--the
atmosphere should be left inert and immovable (197). Fourth; Sometimes
the sun is itself the cause of wind, when he loosens and expands the
thick air (198).

In this enumeration allusion is made to one or two features of natural
history which the author appears to accept as fact. He thinks there
must be some vital force in water, otherwise it could not bring forth
animals and plants, as we know it does. But not only water; fire, too,
which devours everything, possesses this generative capacity, for,
unlikely as it might be thought, it is nevertheless true that fire
gives birth to some animals. The air, too, has some vital energy, as it
alternately thickens, contracts, and expands, and rids itself of its
impurities. The portion of it contained within the earth is asserted
in a later part of the volume to be the source of the life of the
vegetation at the surface (244).

The local winds, now known as “land and sea breezes,” are next
discussed (198). Instead of the simple explanation which in our own day
has shown these aerial currents to be beautiful examples of the results
of diurnal variations of atmospheric pressure, the ancient theory
represented that during the day the exhalations from the land are borne
on high to supply the sun with nourishment, while at night, as they are
not needed for that purpose, they accumulate until they have filled
up a given space enclosed by mountains. When in such a space there is
no more room, they move towards the quarter to which they can most
easily escape; hence the wind. It is curious, however, to note that
Seneca only describes the land breeze, which falls away as the morning
advances. He does not specially refer to the equally characteristic
sea breeze, which springs up after the other dies down, and continues
during the day, until in the evening it is again replaced by the land
breeze.

The important Etesian or northerly winds, with all their important
local modifications in the Mediterranean basin, must have been a
subject of constant observation to the Greeks and Romans. There was
a general belief that as these winds reappeared regularly in summer,
they were in some way connected with the position of the sun in the
firmament. Seneca, after briefly stating this opinion, dissents
from it on the ground that, as the sun reduces the strength of the
morning or land breeze, it cannot be through his influence that the
Etesian winds then begin to blow. But he does not explain how he would
himself account for their occurrence. They are now known to be further
illustrations of the influence of atmospheric pressure. In summer, when
the hot region of the Sahara becomes a vast area of low pressure, the
air streams into it from the north across the Mediterranean basin.

The account given of cloud winds (203) is an excellent illustration
of the utter ignorance of the philosophers of antiquity of the very
rudiments of meteorology, and, at the same time, of the confidence
with which they offered their explanations of the phenomena of the
atmosphere. Even now, after prolonged investigation, the laws that
regulate the production of furious winds and gusts connected with
clouds are far from being fully understood. The boldest meteorologist
of to-day, with all his detailed experience, would hesitate to express
his opinion as dogmatically as is done in the text. The idea that air
accumulating either above ground or below acquires a vast disruptive
force, obtained wide credence in early times. It was this pent-up
accumulation which was supposed to burst clouds asunder and produce
thunder-storms, while the same energy in caverns under ground led to
earthquakes and the eruptions of volcanoes.

The occurrence of whirlwinds is explained by Seneca from the analogy
of eddies in a river. As the water meets with impediments in its flow,
it is driven back and made to whirl round before it can continue the
onward current, so the wind, as long as it meets with no obstacle,
sweeps on, but when it is thrown back by any projection in its course,
or is collected together into a highly inclined narrow pipe, it whirls
round upon itself like the eddies of a river. But the cause of the
vorticose movement where there is no visible impediment is, of course,
left unaccounted for.

In the fifteenth chapter of this Book a story is told of Philip of
Macedon, who sent down a party of miners to examine an old mine. The
men brought back to daylight a wonderful tale of vast caverns with high
over-arching roofs, and filled with huge rivers and vast lakes. If the
author’s intention was to connect the spaciousness of these underground
chambers with the operations of ancient miners, he was sadly mistaken,
since at no time has metal-mining led to the excavation of huge
caverns; on the contrary, it has always been pursued in narrow shafts
and passages. If the report brought back to the king was veracious,
his emissaries had only come upon a series of natural grottos and
tunnels, such as are of common occurrence in limestone districts, and
which have no connection whatever with mining.[117] But the narrative
served Seneca’s purpose, since it furnished him with the occasion
for a diatribe against the cursed love of gold, which had apparently
been rampant in days long before those of Philip, and allowed him to
supply from his own imagination some additional lurid horrors of the
underground world.

  [117] It is possible that these ancient mines were driven in search
  of metal seams or veins traversing limestone, like those of lead
  among the caverned limestones of Derbyshire.

When he gets back to his subject, he enters upon an enumeration of the
various winds known to the ancients. He himself thinks that as the
heavens are divided into twelve sections, so there are twelve distinct
winds, not all felt everywhere, but never exceeding that number. He
does not attempt, however, to account for them. In his reference to
the names given to the various winds, he gives a quotation from Ovid’s
_Metamorphoses_, in which the more conspicuous winds from the different
quarters are mentioned. To this quotation he adds a line from Virgil’s
graphic picture of the storm in the first book of the _Aeneid_, where
Aeolus opens his cave and the south-east, south, and south-west winds
rush out in fury upon the sea. Seneca remarks, in passing, that such a
collocation of winds as Virgil enumerates could never have happened in
a single tempest. The poet, however, has made no mistake. In a great
cyclonic storm the wind veers round with the compass from south-east
by south to south-west. And even if Virgil had added the north wind,
which the philosopher says he left out, he would only have followed
the invariable course of the winds in the cyclones of the northern
hemisphere, which circle round towards the north as the storm area is
passing eastward.

In conclusion, the author points out the teleological significance
of the winds, and is thence led to repeat the time-honoured reproach
against human iniquity which turns the winds from their beneficent
intention to purposes of war.




