BOOK II


In this division of his work the author discusses various aspects of
the atmosphere and offers an explanation of the phenomena which he
describes. He distinguishes between the very bright ether on high,
and the moist, denser atmosphere which underlies it, but thinks that
they must pass insensibly into each other (66). The atmosphere he
regards as a continuous non-composite body, capable of great range in
tension, and forming the vehicle through which the exhalations from
the earth pass outwards to the sky. It does not everywhere possess
the same qualities. In its lower parts next the earth it is dense and
misty, owing to the terrestrial exhalations, and is there warmed by the
earth’s breath, by the reflection of the sun’s rays from the ground,
and from the fires, artificial and subterranean, as well as from the
warmth communicated by living animals and plants, for life cannot exist
without heat. The highest portions of the atmosphere are exceedingly
dry, hot, and attenuated, owing to their nearness to the eternal fires
and the heat of the heavenly bodies. The middle parts, on the contrary,
are intermediate in character, but colder than what lies above and
below them (60, 61). It is the lower portions that are subject to the
greatest changes, for they receive the earthly elements which involve
such constant turmoil. The instability of the air arises also in part
from the motions of the earth and from those of the sun, moon, and
stars, to which cold, rain, and other atmospheric disturbances are due
(56, 61).

Seneca, in passing on to discuss the nature and origin of thunder and
lightning, divides the phenomena into three kinds--lightning-flashes,
thunderbolts, and thunderings (62). After citing and commenting on the
opinions of various philosophers he proceeds to give his own views
regarding these appearances. The lightning flash (_fulguratio_) he
looks upon as fire widely spread out, the thunderbolt (_fulmen_) as
fire condensed and hurled with violence (66). The difference between
the two is in force rather than character; a flash is a bolt without
strength enough to reach the earth, while a thunderbolt is lightning
in its most intense form (69). With regard to the origin of the fire
he points out that fire may be artificially produced in two ways:
either by percussion, as when stones are struck; or by friction, as
when two bits of wood are rubbed against each other. He thinks that
probably in both of these ways clouds may emit fire, and that in the
violence of storms a source of energy is supplied whereby the warm or
smoky exhalations from the earth may be kindled and fall with a fierce
glow to the earth (70, 101). These exhalations contain dry and moist
bodies, to which heavier elements may be added. A combination of such
materials will form a thicker and more solid cloud than one of pure
air, and such a cloud may burst with a loud report (78). There can be
no peal of thunder unless the hollow clouds are broken up with great
violence (76). The characteristic path of the thunderbolt is determined
by the oblique current of air in which, while the natural tendency of
the fire is upward, the violence of its discharge presses it downwards
and compels it to take up a zig-zag course. The peculiar ozone odour
noticed during thunderstorms, and long popularly known as the smell of
sulphur, is alluded to by Seneca (69, 97) and by Lucretius.[111]

  [111] Similar views on thunder and lightning are expressed in the _De
  Rerum Natura_:

  semina quod nubes ipsas permulta necessust
  ignis habere.--vi. 206.

  post ubi conminuit vis eius et impetus acer,
  tum perterricrepo sonitu dat scissa fragorem.--_Ibid._ 128.

  ... notaeque gravis halantis sulpuris auras.--_Ibid._ 221.


The discussion of these subjects leads on to a disquisition on the
portents that may be drawn from different kinds of thunder and various
forms of lightning. Seneca infers from the effects produced by it that
lightning possesses an inherent divine power. Among these effects he
enumerates some in which he seems to have thoroughly believed, such,
for instance, as the smashing of a wine jar already quoted, and the
freezing of the wine for the space of three days thereafter. He is
thus disposed to attach credit to the opinion that future events are
foretold by both lightning and thunder. Yet he cannot change his Stoic
faith that fate, that is, the necessity for the happening of all things
and all actions, can be set aside by no force, can be altered by no
portents, nor averted by any prayer or sacrifice. Though he admits that
vows and supplications may be useful to the worshippers, he knows that
even these also are included in the decrees of fate.

These reflections lead the philosopher to a characteristic peroration
on the moral lessons to be derived from the subjects he has been
discussing. From the dangers incident to thunderstorms he passes to
the enforcement of the Stoic doctrine that death must be despised, and
everything which leads to death will then cease to have any terror.




BOOK III


The subjects comprised in this section of the treatise have reference
chiefly to the springs and rivers which appear on the surface of the
earth or flow underneath it. The Book begins with a preface, which
may have been originally designed to stand at the beginning of the
volume. It bears internal evidence of having probably been written at
the time of the author’s resolve to take up the discussion of physical
problems, as it speaks of old age pressing upon him and leaving him but
a short while to cover the immense field which he wished to survey. The
years lost among vain pursuits must be repaired by diligence in the
task now undertaken; night must be added to day, and every social or
business care which can possibly be set aside must be abandoned. The
contemplation of the work before him then leads the philosopher into
his moralising mood, wherein he inquires what should be the principal
object of human life, concluding with the reflection that the best
thing a man can set before himself, among the ups and downs of this
world, is courage to accept them calmly and to be ready to meet death
boldly whenever summoned. To the acquisition of such a courage a
contemplation of nature will greatly conduce.

Seneca begins his discussion of the various forms of water by grouping
them into two chief classes, standing in collected sheets, as in lakes,
or running in channels, as rivers above ground and springs underneath.
After a brief enumeration of various qualities of water, he inquires
whence the vast volume of water comes that is carried down by rivers
to the sea, and how it happens that neither is the earth sensible of
this daily loss, nor does the ocean show any perceptible gain. He
merely notices the opinion which some philosophers had expressed that
the sea does not get larger because it restores to the earth as much
water as it receives, allowing its own saline water to sink through
endless subterranean winding passages wherein it is purged of its
saltness and rises on the land as pure fresh water.[112] Another view,
that most of the water supplied by rain eventually finds its way into
the rivers, is approximately that at which modern research has arrived,
but it meets with our philosopher’s strong opposition. His first
objection is derived from his own observation. He tells us that, as a
diligent digger among his vines, he can confidently affirm that even
the heaviest rain does not penetrate to a depth of more than ten feet
from the surface. What is not absorbed by the upper crust of the ground
runs at once into river channels, and thence into the sea. He next
asks how rain, which immediately flows off the surface of naked rocks,
can possibly be the source of the springs and rivers that issue from
bare crags, or how springs that appear on the very summit of mountains
can be due to rain. Though he could not but be aware of the close
connection everywhere observable between evaporation, rainfall, and the
volume of springs and rivers, he does not seem to have reflected on
its meaning--how in seasons of drought the surface waters fail first,
how by degrees the springs begin to lessen and even to cease, how the
rivers dwindle until in many cases their beds become almost or quite
dry, and yet how, when welcome rains set in, the springs and rivers
gradually resume the bulk they had before the dry weather impoverished
them. He had made no study of the way in which rain percolates through
the soil, subsoil, and rocks underneath, though there are places, such
as his vineyard may have been, where, from some impervious material,
only a feeble or inappreciable flow of moisture descends beyond a few
feet from the surface. Nor was he aware of the innumerable lines of
joint by which the most solid rocks are traversed, and which serve
as passages for the descent and ascent of water. Had he climbed many
mountains, he would have failed to find a spring on the summit of any
one of them, unless there had been a sufficient area of higher ground
at hand to serve for the supply of the water.

  [112] This is the view expressed by Lucretius:

      ... ut in mare de terris venit umor aquai,
  in terras itidem manare ex aequore salso;
  percolatur enim virus, retroque remanat
  materies umoris et ad caput amnibus omnis
  confluit, inde super terras redit agmine dulci.
                        --_De Rer. Nat._ vi. 633.


The origin of underground water is regarded by Seneca as due to
three causes. The earth itself contains moisture which it forces out
at the surface; it includes also air which in the darkness of the
subterranean wintry cold is condensed into moisture; by the principle
of interchangeability, whereby one element passes into another, the
earth in its interior resolves itself into moisture. If it be urged
that the rivers are too vast to draw their supplies from these sources,
the ready answer comes that the internal reservoir is quite spacious
enough for the purpose, and that it might as well be matter of surprise
that, with all the winds that constantly blow, the supply of air does
not fail, or that a single wave of the sea should be left to follow
so many breakers. If the questioner, still unsatisfied, should demand
to know how water is produced, he is met with the query how air is
produced on earth. There are in nature four elements, and he is not
entitled to ask where one of them comes from. Each is a fourth part of
nature, and it is obvious that what has an element as its source cannot
fail. Hence the philosopher in pronouncing water to be an element has
given it enough, and more than enough, of strength. In short, rain may
give rise to a torrent, but not a river flowing steadily between its
banks. Heavy rains will swell such a river, but cannot produce it.

Having, as he believed, cleared the ground in this way, Seneca proceeds
to consider the distribution of water within the earth. He opines that
as in our body, so in the earth, there are channels by which both air
and liquids flow. He states his conviction that the earth contains not
only veins of water, but also large streams, and in a later part of the
volume he speaks of both underground rivers, huge lakes, and a hidden
sea from which rivers at the surface are supplied (154, 233, 235).
He is aware that some of these subterranean reservoirs contain fish,
about which he has some incredible tales to tell. He makes mention
of rivers that sink underground and reappear, as if a matter for
great astonishment. But examples of it may be found in many limestone
districts, where the solution of the rock by underground water has
given rise to tunnels, passages, and caverns into which, when their
roofs give way, surface streams may be engulfed, to break out again
from other openings at lower levels (141). The author concludes this
part of his argument by asking if anybody is ignorant that there are
some standing waters which have no bottom, whence, he contends, it is
shown that this water is the perpetual source of large rivers.

The various kinds of taste possessed by natural waters are then
discussed, and some marvellous illustrations are given of their
effects. Allusion is made to medicinal springs, to petrifying
waters, to some with extraordinary dyeing properties, and to others
with neither taste nor smell, but rapidly fatal to the drinker by
immediately hardening and binding the intestines. Reference is also
included to certain kinds of springs, of which the volcanic tracts of
Italy supply good examples. Such were those which killed visitors who
peered down into the caverns where their waters lurk, and suffocated
birds that flew over them. Doubtless many tales were told of the
effects of such emanations of carbonic acid gas, like that of the
Grotto del Cane which, near Naples, still preserves their classic
reputation (134, 261). Again, the same volcanic districts furnished
instances of warm, sometimes even boiling, springs, and in alluding to
them the author quotes the opinion of Empedocles, who was doubtless
familiar with them in Sicily. To complete his record of marvels, the
author cites some lakes on which islands float to and fro, of which
good illustrations, due to a matted growth of vegetation, were then
well known in the Vadimonian Lake (Lago di Bassano),[113] and he
mentions other lakes in which he had equal faith, with water so heavy
that brickbats would float upon it, and nothing, however heavy, not
even hard solid stones, would go to the bottom.

  [113] Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ ii. 96. Pliny the Younger, _Epist._ viii.
  20.

Seneca is inclined to agree with some philosophers that certain rivers
of peculiar and inexplicable character were created along with the
world, and he specially cites the Danube and Nile as examples, these
vast streams being too remarkable to have had the same origin as other
rivers. Accordingly he reserves the Nile for consideration in a later
part of his volume (166). There is another kind of water which, with
his Stoic brethren, he places at the beginning of the world--the great
ocean and every sea that flows from it between the lands. Yet he found
no place in any part of the treatise for a discussion of the phenomena
of the ocean.

The Book closes with a vivid description of the probable catastrophe
by which the end of the world will be brought about. That the present
condition of things will be swept away to make room for another and
better race of men he assumes as a matter of certainty, and he tries
to picture by what physical means the destruction will probably be
effected. He is certain that it will be by no one agency, but that
all the energies of the world will be called forth to compass the
destruction of the human race, nothing being difficult to nature,
especially when she is hurrying towards her end. The picture which
is given of the progress of the great deluge forms by far the
most striking piece of writing in the volume. It ends somewhat
inartistically in some gibing criticism of a quotation from Ovid. But
the poetic afflatus had not been quite quenched. The author immediately
returns to the subject in the succeeding and final chapters, and after
enumerating the different agencies that may be called out to effect the
destruction of the world, he draws a lurid scene when a single day will
see the burial of the whole human race.[114] After this act of divine
wrath has been accomplished, the waters will disappear below ground,
the sea will retire to its own abode, and on the renovated earth every
animal will be created afresh, and a new race of men will be installed,
ignorant of sin and born under better auspices.

  [114] So Lucretius:

                ... maria ac terras caelumque--
          una dies dabit exitio.
                 --_De Rer. Nat._ v. 92, 94.




