NOTES ON SENECA’S “QUAESTIONES NATURALES”

By Sir ARCHIBALD GEIKIE, K.C.B., Pres.R.S.


The treatise of which the present volume is a translation possesses
a twofold interest. In the first place, it is probably the last
literary work of a man who filled a large space in the Roman world of
his day. After a varied career as philosopher, barrister, politician,
statesman, courtier, and man of letters, he at last incurred the
implacable enmity of Nero, to whom he had been tutor. Having in his
youth paid some attention to physical inquiries, he had then been
led to prepare and publish a book on earthquakes. But in subsequent
years the absorbing cares of State probably left him little leisure to
continue these studies, for which, however, he had retained his taste.
Hence, when in his last days he sought in retirement to devote himself
to philosophical pursuits, he naturally turned to some of the physical
problems that had interested him in earlier life. The earthquake
which on 5th February A.D. 63 had done much damage to the towns of
Campania, revived his youthful enthusiasm for the investigation of
such phenomena, and may possibly have suggested to him the preparation
of another volume dealing with this and other scientific matter. We
know at least from the book itself that he wrote a part, if not the
whole, of it after that date (221, 230),[101] and that he took pains
to collect information about the catastrophe. As he was in the habit
of sojourning on the shores of the Bay of Naples, he probably visited
the scene of destruction himself for the purpose of his book. We learn
from Tacitus that it was immediately after his return from Campania
to his villa near Rome, bringing with him, we may suppose, his nearly
completed manuscript, that Seneca received the Emperor’s order to
commit suicide.

  [101] The numbers within parentheses throughout these Notes refer to
  the pages of the Translation.

In the second place, Seneca’s work on _Natural Questions_ stands out as
one of the few treatises on physical science which have come down to us
from antiquity. It is interesting alike for the quotations it contains
from the works of previous authors, some of which have not survived,
and for the criticisms and opinions which he himself expresses on
the various subjects of which he treats. It can hardly, however, be
regarded as an original contribution to science. Its author’s life had
been spent in other and widely different pursuits, which led him far
away from scientific inquiry. But as a summary of the general state
of knowledge in his day, made by a man of strong intellect, who had
been trained in the legal and philosophical schools of the time, and
had read widely and reflected much on these matters, the book may be
taken to afford a fair presentation of the manner in which a number
of questions in astronomy, meteorology, and physical geography were
regarded by thoughtful minds in the first century of our era.

In judging of the intrinsic merit of such a work as the present, the
modern reader finds a difficulty in realising from the broad platform
of natural knowledge which, after the labours of the intervening
centuries, has now been laid, how exceedingly narrow was the circle
of ascertained fact available to the student two thousand years ago.
The spirit of scientific observation and experiment had not then been
developed, yet the familiar phenomena of everyday life pressed, as
they still do, for explanation. Man’s knowledge of nature was then too
limited to furnish a basis for distinguishing what was fact from what
was mere guesswork. In the infancy of our race, as in the childhood
of the individual, the tendency of the human mind is to perceive
resemblances rather than differences. Analogies are readily observed
and, in default of knowledge of the facts involved, are mistaken for
identical sequences of cause and effect. Throughout the interpretations
of natural phenomena given by the philosophers of antiquity, it is
remarkable to what a large extent the meaning of one appearance is
explained by comparing it with another to which in reality it may bear
no resemblance. Seneca’s volume abounds in examples of this use of
analogy.

The authority of great names exercised a wonderful fascination on the
minds of the early investigators of nature. Generation after generation
of writers were led to accept with little or no modification the dicta
of eminent philosophers who had preceded them. An observer might
sometimes recognise the erroneousness of the opinion of a predecessor,
and yet lack the means of detecting the falsity of his own, which
nevertheless he propounded with full assurance of its truth. In such
circumstances criticism had no secure foundation, while credulity,
rampant in the world outside, could hardly fail to show itself in
philosophic circles. Even the most cautious and truth-seeking inquirer
might easily and almost inevitably be led to accept statements which
did not seem to him unreasonable, and which no previous experience of
his own or others warranted him to disbelieve or even to suspect.

It behoves us, therefore, to be on our guard lest, from our much higher
standard of knowledge, we may be tempted to look with amused contempt
on the puerile conceptions of nature to be met with in the writings of
the ancients--the grave assertion of absurdities as actual facts, the
inept analogies, the confident explanations which are no explanations
at all, and the complete absence of any attempt to test by examination
or experiment the validity of statements which with but little trouble
could have been disproved.

These evidences of the exceedingly imperfect knowledge of his time
are fully illustrated in Seneca’s chapters. He quotes some two dozen
of previous writers who had dealt with the same or cognate subjects.
It is needless to say that they were Greeks, no place having yet
been found in Latin literature for treatises on Science. The author
most frequently cited by him is Aristotle, whose _Meteorologica_
he had evidently studied with care. He gives frequent quotations
from that work, but even where he does not specifically quote, his
views generally accord with those of the great philosopher and
naturalist.[102] Almost the only quotations from the works of his own
countrymen are verses from some of the poets, especially from Virgil
and Ovid. It is remarkable that he makes only one quotation from
Lucretius, although he would have found in that poet’s noble work many
passages more apposite to his subject than those which he has taken
from the _Aeneid_, the _Georgics_, and the _Metamorphoses_. We may
suppose that these works were favourites with him, and that he knew
much of them by heart, but that he was less familiar with the _De Rerum
Natura_.

  [102] Seneca’s indebtedness to Aristotle is emphatically expressed
  by Barthélemy Saint-Hilaire in the Dissertation prefixed to his
  translation of the _Meteorologica_ (_Météorologie d’Aristote_, 1863,
  pp. lxix-lxx).

It is manifest from the present volume that its author, like Lucretius
before him, had a lofty conception of the dignity and moral influence
of the study of nature. This pursuit seemed to him to raise us above
the sordid things of life and to withdraw the mind from the body--a
dissociation so eminently beneficial to our higher aspirations. He
believed that in the study of the hidden phenomena of the universe a
mental alacrity is developed which will be found to be not without
practical utility in the conduct of affairs that lie nearer the surface
(113).

With this clear recognition of the importance of his theme he resolved
in his old age to enter upon a task which other less worthy pursuits
had hindered him from pursuing. He would now attempt to survey the
universe, unravel its secrets, and give the results of his studies to
the world (109). It was not, however, his aim to compose a systematic
treatise on Natural Philosophy, but rather to take up some special
subjects and deal with them in the light of what had already been
written upon them, and of what his own reflections suggested. His
undertaking assumed the form of a series of epistolary essays addressed
to his friend Lucilius Junior, procurator of Sicily. The literary shape
thus selected allowed the use of an unconstrained, almost colloquial,
style which would not have been suitable to a more ambitious work.

Had Seneca designed to prepare a formal or methodical treatise, he
would doubtless have planned it to include the three sections which he
regarded as comprising every inquiry that can arise as to the nature
and constitution of the Universe (_Universum_)--celestial, atmospheric,
and terrestrial (_Caelestia, Sublimia, Terrena_, 51). The world
(_Mundus_) in his view comprehends all things that come or can come
within our cognisance (54). Instead of entering upon a full discussion
of any one of his three sections, he selected from them a few topics
which had probably more particularly engaged his attention. Most of
these belong to the second or atmospheric division of his scheme of
arrangement, to which he devotes six of his seven books, the remaining
one being given to the discussion of some celestial phenomena. Certain
subjects which we should naturally range in the terrestrial series,
such as the source and flow of rivers and the nature and origin of
earthquakes, he explicitly includes among his atmospheric phenomena
(51).

It appears to be probable that Seneca had neither finished nor revised
his manuscript at the time of his death. Parts of the work are
obviously incomplete, though some of these gaps may be due to defects
of transcription or to the subsequent loss of parts of the text. The
obscurities of language, which are not infrequent, may likewise have
partly arisen from lack of the author’s revision of his original copy.
His discussion of the problem of the rise of the Nile suddenly breaks
off in such an abrupt manner as to suggest the loss of a portion of the
original volume. One of the most important omissions is the absence of
any account of the phenomena of volcanoes. The author does indeed refer
in several places to this subject, but with Aetna before him, of which
so many Greek and Latin poets had sung, and which had so often been
referred to in the writings of the philosophers, he could hardly have
meant to offer no commentary on so notable a feature in the geography
and history of his own country. We know indeed that he was keenly
interested in this mountain, and that he wrote to Lucilius to ascend
the volcano and send him particulars about it. In the letter conveying
this request he alludes to some of the Roman poets who had sung of its
wonders, and urges that a description of Aetna should form part of a
poem on which his correspondent appears to have been then engaged.[103]
Another important subject in physical geography finds no place in
Seneca’s volume--the Sea. Of the outer ocean it was not to be expected
that he could have had much to say, but we can hardly suppose that he
would have considered his essay complete without some discussion of the
various phenomena presented by the Mediterranean Sea.

  [103] Seneca, _Epist._ lxxix.

A century before Seneca’s prime, the immortal _De Rerum Natura_ of
Lucretius had appeared at Rome, wherein the origin and constitution
of the world were sung with the intense earnestness, brilliant
imagination, and resounding cadence of a great poet and with the grasp
and penetration of a great philosopher. In this splendid work some of
the problems discussed by Seneca were considered, and explanations
were given of them with the usual undoubting confidence of olden
time. In literary quality the two writers stand far apart, yet it is
not uninteresting to compare their respective views of nature. The
vivid and often majestic diction of the one is not more diverse from
the somewhat familiar and conversational tone of the other than are
their respective creeds. Lucretius was a convinced and enthusiastic
Epicurean, and in accordance with the teachings of his master denied
the existence of any divine co-operation in the plan and government of
the Universe,

  nequaquam nobis divinitus esse paratam
  naturam rerum,[104]

  [104] _De Rerum Natura_, v. 198.

although no writer either of ancient or modern time has had a more
overpowering sense of the beauty, majesty, and order of this world. It
was his earnest purpose to show men how, by a contemplation of the face
and ordered scheme of nature, they could free themselves from the bond
of religious superstition and the fear of death.[105]

  [105]

  rursus in antiquas referuntur religiones
  et dominos acres adsciscunt, omnia posse
  quos miseri credunt, ignari quid queat esse,
  quid nequeat, finita potestas denique cuique
  quanam sit ratione atque alte terminus haerens.--_Op. cit._ v. 86.

  hunc igitur terrorem animi tenebrasque necessest
  non radii solis neque lucida tela diei
  discutiant, sed naturae species ratioque.--i. 146.


Seneca, on the other hand, held the Stoic belief in an all-wise and
omnipotent Creator. In an eloquent exordium to his volume, and in a
peroration near its end, he affirms his conviction that this Divine
Being is all in all, at once within and without his works; He has
clothed himself with creation, but is hidden from our eyes and can
be perceived only by thought (3, 7, 305). Our philosopher could not
conceive of anything more beautiful, more orderly, and more consistent
everywhere in plan than the world around us. That such a world should
have resulted from the tumult of chaos, by the mere chance collocation
of atoms, appeared to him the madness of vulgar error. Yet it was
only too true, though it might be thought hardly credible, that even
philosophers had been tainted with this pernicious doctrine. Hence it
would be in the author’s judgment a profitable task to inquire into the
truth concerning these matters. To explore this world, he remarks, is
far more than enough for a single lifetime. Whether what we may be led
to believe regarding it shall be true must be decided by those who may
attain the knowledge of the truth; we can but examine and conjecture,
with no certain assurance of discovery, yet not without hope (304).
It behoves us to be ever watchful against forming conclusions rashly,
disrespectfully, or ignorantly, and of being knowingly untrue. In this
quest after knowledge, while much may be found out which will be of
practical usefulness, we are encouraged to advance, not by any hope
of gain, but by the wonder with which the inquiry fills the soul. To
obtain a knowledge of Nature is the highest reward to which the mind of
man can aspire (230, 304). Seneca’s practical conclusion was thus much
the same as that of Lucretius. He does not, however, attempt in this
volume to enforce it with the solemn earnestness shown by the poet,
though he loses no opportunity of inveighing against the follies and
vices of his time. In discussing natural phenomena his first desire is
to explain them, and in so doing to animadvert on the explanations of
previous writers, with perhaps a not unnatural wish to show his own
ability as a critic and expositor.

It was in due accordance with the principles of his school, as well as
with his own natural temperament, that Seneca should continually be led
to draw ethical lessons from the physical phenomena which he discussed.
The interpolation of some of these reflections may occasionally seem
to a modern reader rather irrelevant and far-fetched, but there can be
no question as to the spirit of reverence with which he approached his
subject. Like other philosophers who had preceded him, he maintained
this spirit, while at the same time he had discarded the crowded and
confused polytheism of the prevalent mythology. But he here keeps
this antagonism in due restraint, only occasionally expressing his
dissent from the popular creed. He would not admit that even the old
philosophers could have been so foolish as to credit the gods with some
of the acts which had been popularly attributed to them. He refused to
believe that the guardian and ruler of the Universe hurled thunderbolts
with his own hand. Still less could he suppose that the gods had
lighter bolts with which they amused themselves in play. His expression
(fulminibus lusoriis, 91) recalls the bitter irony of Lucretius and the
sarcasm of his question whether, when the gods aim at lonely places or
at the sea, they are only at practice to strengthen their arms.[106]
But Seneca held with Lucretius that in the contemplation of nature we
obtain the courage and elevation of mind which fit us for the trials
of life and the coming of death (113).

  [106] an tum bracchia consuescunt firmantque lacertos?--vi. 397.

In the treatment of scientific problems Seneca displays the same
unhesitating assurance of the truth of his opinions, which was
characteristic of the philosophers of antiquity. These writers had
hardly a glimmering conception of nature’s infinite complexity, of
the extreme diversity and intricacy of natural processes, of the
unbroken and endlessly ramifying relations of cause and effect, of
the long and patient investigation by which alone these relations
could be unravelled, and of the caution and diffidence with which
conclusions regarding them should at least for a time be formulated.
Seneca frequently passes caustic criticisms on the views expressed by
his predecessors. He styles the philosophers, as a body, “a credulous
folk.” Some of them he even goes so far as to accuse of perpetrating
deliberate falsehoods (276, 286, 289). Nor does he hesitate to banter
his brethren of the Stoic School, whose “absurdities,” as he calls
them, he cannot refrain from quoting.

Yet when his own opinions are examined in the light of the present
day, they are found to be in many cases no nearer the truth than those
which he rejected with contempt. It is, indeed, sometimes difficult to
realise the mental position of a man who could adopt and propound them.
In many cases he accounts for a phenomenon by the analogy of another
to which it has no real affinity, as where he explains halos by the
circular undulations produced on a surface of water into which a stone
is thrown (13). He sometimes suggests an experiment to prove the truth
of his assertion, but if he had made the experiment he would have found
how completely it failed to support him, as, for instance, when he
states that a large pond of water reflects only one image of the sun,
but that, if it is divided into several smaller ponds by the insertion
of partitions, it will show as many images as there are divisions
(18). Striking also and numerous are the examples of his credulous
acceptance of statements which, had it occurred to him to test them
by actual examination, he could easily have found to be erroneous.
He affirms, for instance, more than once, that while lightning melts
metals, it freezes wine, and he gravely alleges that when the wine is
thawed and imbibed, it either kills or drives mad those who partake
of it (79, 97). He asserts that the waters of certain rivers have the
power of dyeing whole flocks of sheep, black fleeces being changed
into white, and white into black (137), that some waters are so dense
that even the heaviest objects will not sink in them (138); that the
heat of the sun in the Nile valley is so great as to melt silver and
the joints of statues (173). When he proceeds to explain the reason of
such abnormalities he expresses no hesitation, but delivers his opinion
with the assurance of a professor who has obtained the experimental
demonstration in his laboratory.

It is remarkable that although some progress had been made in
astronomy, especially by Greek philosophers, before the beginning
of the Christian era, the conclusions arrived at by these observers
regarding the relations of the earth to the other heavenly bodies met
with but little acceptance for many centuries, even among reflecting
minds. Lucretius, for example, still believed the earth to be the
centre of the Universe to which all the heavier materials had
converged, while the fire-laden ether escaped to the outer boundaries
of space, sun, moon, and stars occupying an intermediate place. He did
not think that the sun can be much larger than it looks to be to our
senses, nor was he quite sure whether it is the same sun which, passing
under the earth, reappears in the morning, or if at the close of each
day the sun is extinguished and a new collection of fires makes a
fresh sun in the morning. He was quite aware of the different views of
Chaldaean sages and astronomers, but in such questions he could see no
reason why one theory should be better than another.[107]

  [107] _De Rer. Nat._ v. 564, 650, 680, 727.

Seneca, however, had, on the whole, a more advanced appreciation of
the relations of the earth to the heavenly bodies. He believed the sun
to be larger than our globe, and that a thousand stars might be put
together without equalling his mass (284, 288). He thought the heavens
to be so vast as to afford space for the swiftest of the planets to
rush along with uninterrupted speed during full thirty years (7). He
showed his enlightened outlook upon astronomical possibilities when he
surmised that comets may have orbits that carry them far beyond the
Zodiac, and when he conjectured that other planets than those then
known remained to be discovered (296–299). And yet, sharing these more
enlarged conceptions, he clung with curious pertinacity to some of the
old childish faith which was natural in the infancy of mankind. He
knew that some philosophers held that it is the earth which revolves
and not the heavens, and though he does not deliberately reject this
opinion, it is evident that he still held that the heavens circle
round the earth.[108] Again and again he expresses his conviction that
the force which sustains the energy of the sun and the stars consists
of the exhalations that arise from the surface of the earth. These
exhalations, he says, are the pasturage of the heavenly bodies, the
breath of the world. It would be impossible, he asserts, for the earth
to furnish so ample a store of nourishment to bodies larger than itself
unless it were full of breath which is passing off from every part of
its surface both by day and night. To the obvious objection that the
supply of this energy would soon become exhausted, he has the reply
that this exhaustion would certainly take place were it not that the
elements are in a condition of continual transformation, issuing in
one form, passing into each other, and returning to their original
positions, thence to begin their cycle anew (55, 198, 244–5). In this
universal transmutation water passes into air, air into water; air
likewise is changed into fire, fire into air, while earth is formed
from water, and water from earth (120).

  [108] See _postea_, Notes on Book VII.

In his general conception of the universe, Seneca, as a Stoic
philosopher, recognised a principle of evolution. He believed that the
world embraces in its constitution everything that it is destined to
experience from its beginning to its end. As a human embryo contains
the germ of the future man, so at the first creation of the universe,
sun and moon, the changes of the stars, and the birth of living things
were all embraced. And there were likewise included the forces whereby
the earth is affected, and which will ultimately lead to the final
destruction of the globe (151).[109]

  [109] Lucretius, too, had his views on evolution, which are well
  expressed in four lines of verse:

      mutat enim mundi naturam totius aetas,
      ex alioque alius status excipere omnia debet,
      nec manet ulla sui similis res: omnia migrant,
      omnia commutat natura et vertere cogit.
                       --_De Rer. Nat._ v. 828.

With regard to the earth itself, whether it is to be regarded as a
soul or as an organised body, Seneca announced his conviction that it
has been constructed much after the plan of our human bodies. As in
these bodies, veins and arteries are provided for the reception of
blood and breath, so in the earth there are passages, some for the
transport of water, others for the flow of air (126). He was sure,
also, that everything on the surface of the earth has its counterpart
beneath--caves, mountains, lakes, and rivers.




