BOOK VII

WHICH TREATS OF COMETS




I


No man is so utterly dull and obtuse, with head so bent on earth,        1
as never to lift himself up and rise with all his soul to the
contemplation of the starry heavens, especially when some fresh
wonder shows a beacon-light in the sky. As long as the ordinary
course of heaven runs on, custom robs it of its real size. Such is
our constitution that objects of daily occurrence pass us unnoticed
even when most worthy of our admiration. On the other hand, the sight
even of trifling things is attractive if their appearance is unusual.
So this concourse of stars, which paints with beauty the spacious        2
firmament on high, gathers no concourse of the nation. But when there
is any change in the wonted order, then all eyes are turned to the
sky. The sun has no observer unless he is in eclipse. No one watches
the moon unless she suffer obscuration. But then whole cities cry out,
groundless superstition drives every one into panic. And yet how much
greater are the ordinary movements of the sun! He takes, so to speak,    3
as many steps as there are days, completing the year in his circuit.
From the summer solstice he turns back to the lessening days, from the
solstice he slopes his rays,[90] and gives more room to the nights; he
occults the planets; though so much larger than the earth he does not
burn it up, but cheers it by his heat, which he so regulates as to make
it alternately more intense and more subdued. He never fills up with
light, nor yet obscures, the moon, except when she is right opposite     4
to him. All this we allow to pass unnoticed as long as the usual order
is preserved. But if there is any disturbance or any extraordinary
light displayed in the sky, we gaze at it, ask questions, and point
it out to our neighbours. So natural is it to admire what is strange
rather than what is great.

  [90] There is some corruption in the text, but no probable
  restoration has been suggested. From the Latin words it would appear
  that this clause is merely an explanation of the previous one,
  inserted by some officious copyist and therefore spurious.

The same thing holds in regard to comets. If one of these infrequent
fires of unusual shape have made its appearance, everybody is eager to
know what it is. Blind to all the other celestial bodies, each asks
about the newcomer; one is not quite sure whether to admire or to        5
fear it. Persons there are who seek to inspire terror by forecasting
its grave import. And so people keep asking and wishing to know whether
it is a portent or a star. But, by my honour, no one could embark on a
more exalted study, or master a more useful branch of knowledge than
that which treats of the nature of the stars and planets. Are they a
concentration of flame as our vision avers, and as the very light that
streams from them,[91] and the heat that descends from them suggest?     6
Or are their orbs not of flame, but, as it were, solid bodies of earth
that glide through tracts of fire, and having no light of their own
draw thence their brightness and heat? That is an opinion that has been
held by great men who have believed the stars to be compact of hard
material, and to be nourished by fire that is not their own. Flame by
itself, they argue, would be dissipated and would have nothing to hold
or to be held by. If it were merely massed and not attached to a solid
body, the universe would assuredly long since have scattered it in its
impetuous whirl.

  [91] The common reading, _aliis_ = others, seems an error for _illis_
  = them.




II


In view of this inquiry it will be well to ask whether comets are        1
wholly analogous to stars and planets. They seem to have certain
elements in common with them--for example, rising and setting--as well
as their general form, although comets are more scattered, and end in
a longer tail. They are alike, too, in their fiery bright appearance.
So, if all the stars are earthy bodies, comets must share the same
lot. But if the stars are pure fire and nothing else, remaining for      2
six months at a time unbroken by the rapid whirl of the universe, then
comets, too, may consist of some rarefied material, which is not broken
up by the constant revolution of the sky. It will also tend to clear up
this point if we endeavour to ascertain whether the earth stands still
while the universe revolves round it, or whether the converse is the
truth, the universe standing still while the earth revolves. There have
been persons who made bold to say that it is we that all unwitting are
borne round by the frame of things, that risings and settings are not
produced by a movement of the heavens, but that we ourselves rise and
set. The subject well deserves our study, if we are to know where we     3
really stand, whether the abode we have obtained as ours is the most
sluggish or the swiftest of motion, whether God causes all things to
revolve round us or causes us to revolve. Now, for this it is essential
that we have a record of all the appearances of comets in former times.
For, on account of their infrequency, their orbit cannot as yet be
discovered or examined in detail, to see whether they observe periodic
laws, and whether some fixed order causes their reappearance at the
appointed day. Such a development of astronomy is recent, having been
lately introduced into Greece.




III


Democritus, the most acute of all the ancient philosophers, says he      1
suspects there are several stars whose orbits are erratic. But he has
given neither their number nor their names, as the motions of the five
planets were not in his time understood. Eudoxus was, in fact, the
first to import from Egypt into Greece the knowledge of these motions,
though he says nothing about comets. From this it becomes plain
that, even among the Egyptians, the people that bestowed most care
on observation of the sky, the portion of astronomy that relates to
comets had not been worked out. Subsequently Conon, who was himself a    2
careful investigator, made a record of the sun’s eclipses that had been
observed by the Egyptians; but he made no mention of comets, though he
would certainly not have omitted anything definite on the subject that
he had learned in Egypt. So much is certain; two authors, Epigenes and
Apollonius of Myndus, the latter highly skilled in casting horoscopes,
who say that they studied among the Chaldaeans, are at variance in
their accounts. The latter asserts that comets are placed by the         3
Chaldaeans among the number of the wandering stars (_i.e._ planets),
and that their orbits have been determined. Epigenes, on the contrary,
asserts that the Chaldaeans have ascertained nothing regarding comets,
which are thought by them to be fires produced by a kind of eddy of
violently rotating air.




IV


In the first place, if it like you, let us set down the views of the     1
last-mentioned author and refute them. He supposes that the planet
Saturn has most influence in determining all motions of the heavenly
bodies. When it presses upon the constellations next Mars, or crosses
to the neighbourhood of the moon, or encounters the rays of the sun,
being naturally cold and windy, it contracts and masses the atmosphere
at more than one place. By and by, if Saturn absorb all the sun’s rays,
there is thunder and lightning. If he has Mars in agreement, the         2
lightning is forked. Moreover, he continues, forked and sheet lightning
contain different materials. Evaporation from water or other moisture
produces only gleams that threaten but stop short of striking. The
hotter and drier exhalation of the earth forges the bolts of forked
lightning. Beam meteors and torches, which differ from one another       3
only in size, are produced in this same way. When any ball of air--what
we call a whirlwind--encloses moist earthy matter, wherever it rushes
it presents the appearance of an extended line of fire, which lasts
just so long as the mass of air remains, which carries within it the
supply of moist earthy matter.




V


This account of Epigenes is a tissue of falsehoods. To begin with the    1
nearest one, the last, it is not true that torch and beam meteors are
due to the violent action of a whirlwind. The whirlwind is formed in
the neighbourhood of the earth, and there it runs its course. This is
the reason why it tears up trees by the roots, and wherever it swoops
down it lays bare the soil, carrying off in the meanwhile woods and
roofs of houses; as a rule, it is lower than the clouds, and assuredly
never higher. But, on the contrary, it is the more exalted part of
heaven that displays beam meteors, and so they never intervene between
us and the clouds. Besides, a whirlwind is borne along more swiftly
than any cloud, and rotates as on a pivot. And in addition to this, it   2
ceases all of a sudden, bursting by its own force. “Beams,” on the
contrary, do not run or fly across, like torches, but remain shining
for some time in the same quarter of the sky. Charimander, too, in the
book he wrote on comets, asserts that a great and unusual light in
the sky of the size of a large beam was once seen by Anaxagoras, and
continued to shine for a long period. Callisthenes puts it on record
that a similar appearance of a trail of fire was observed before the
sea swallowed up Buris and Helice. Aristotle says it was not a “beam,”   3
but a comet; the characteristic dispersion of the fire was not seen
at first on account of its excessive brightness, but, in process of
time, when the glare began to die down, it recovered the distinctive
appearance of a comet. In this fiery phenomenon there were many points
worthy of remark, none more so than this, that, immediately it shone in
the sky, the sea came over Buris and Helice. Did Aristotle, then, one    4
may ask, believe that not merely that beam but all beams are comets?
Surely not, for there is this difference, that beams have their fire
continuous, while in the other bodies it is dispersed. Beams have a
regular flame, not interrupted or dull at any point, while in the end
parts it is condensed, just like what Callisthenes describes the one to
have been, to which I referred a moment ago.




VI


There are, Epigenes goes on to say, two classes of comets. One kind      1
sheds its light on all sides without changing its position; the other
extends a loose kind of fire in one direction, after the fashion of
hair, and passes through among the stars; of the latter kind were the
two seen in our own days. The former variety, with hair on all sides,
that do not move, are usually low down, and arise from the same causes
as beams and torches, that is, from a distempered thick atmosphere that
carries in it many of the earth’s exhalations, both dry and moist. Air
driven out through narrow apertures is capable of setting on fire        2
the atmosphere situated over it, which is full of elements suitable
for feeding a fire; and it is able after that to drive it forward from
the clear space, lest from any cause it should fall back and relax its
force. After that, it can rise again on the next and following days
and set fire to the same spot. As presumptive proof of this, we see
winds return during several days at their set time. Rain, too, and
storms in other forms recur according to appointment. His opinion may
be briefly expressed by saying that he supposes comets to be formed      3
pretty much in the same way as fires excited by whirlwind. There is
this one difference, that those whirlwinds are pressed down to earth
from a higher region, while these others are raised from earth to the
upper regions.




VII


A great deal can be urged against this view. First of all, if wind       1
were responsible, a comet would never make its appearance without wind.
As a matter of fact, it appears when the air is perfectly still. In the
next place, if it were due to wind, it would fall with the wind; and
if it began through wind, would increase with increase of wind, and
would be the brighter the more furious the wind was. This point, too,
has to be added to the foregoing: while the wind impels many parts of
the atmosphere, a comet appears in one spot. The wind does not mount
up high, but comets are seen higher up than the winds are permitted
to go. Epigenes afterwards goes on to speak of the comets that, he       2
says, have a more definite resemblance to stars, traversing an orbit
and passing through the zodiacal signs. He attributes their origin to
the same causes as produce those that he called lower comets, the only
difference being that the earth’s exhalations in this case contain many
dry elements, and therefore seek the higher region, and are driven by
the north wind toward the more exalted portions of the heavens. But,
surely, if the north wind urged them, they would always be borne toward
the south, whither this wind urges its course. And yet, as a fact, they  3
have had different movements, some to east, others to west, all in
a curved path, a direction which the wind could not impart. Besides,
if the impulse which produced the comet carried up on high those north
winds from the earth, comets would not arise when other winds blew; yet
they do arise.




VIII


Let us now refute this other explanation of Epigenes, for he employs     1
two. He believes that when all the moist and dry exhalations of the
earth unite, the mere discord of the different bodies turns the air
into whirlwind. Then the force of that wind as it revolves sets fire by
its rapid motion to all that it embraces in itself, and raises it on
high. The gleam of the fire that is thus extracted remains as long as
there is sufficient nutriment; when the fuel fails, the fire subsides
too. Now, one who talks thus pays no attention to the nature of the      2
course of whirlwinds as compared with that of comets. The career of
the former is swift and violent, more rapid than the winds themselves.
But a comet’s movement is so gradual as to render imperceptible the
space traversed during a day and a night. Besides, whirlwinds have
an erratic, disorderly, and, to use a word of Sallust’s, eddying,
motion. Comets have a regular course, which observes the appointed
track. Surely none of us will believe that either the moon or the
five planets are carried by the wind or spun round by the whirlwind.
I trow not. And why? Just because they have not an irregular and         3
unrestrained motion. Let us apply the principle to comets. They do not
move in confusion or irregularity so as to justify the belief that they
are impelled by unruly and fickle forces. Besides, even if those eddies
could enclose moist earthy elements, and had power to raise them from
the depths to the heights, still they could not carry them up higher
than the moon. All their force is spent when they reach the region of
clouds. But as for the comets, we see them sailing through the upper
regions, mingling with the very stars. It is, therefore, improbable
that a whirlwind could persist over such a long distance, for the
greater it is, the more rapidly is it spent.




IX


Let Epigenes, therefore, make his choice of the two alternatives:        1
if the force is small, it cannot reach so high; if it is great and
violent, it will the more quickly break up. But further, according to
the opinion of people like Epigenes, these lower comets do not mount
higher because they have too much earthiness in them. Their weight
keeps them in the neighbourhood of earth. And yet these other comets,
which are higher and last longer, must have a more abundant material.
For they could not last so long were their supplies not replenished
from a larger stock. I said a moment ago that the whirlwind’s eddy       2
could not long endure, nor could it mount higher than the moon, or as
far as the place of stars. Of course, the whirlwind is caused by the
mutual struggle of several winds, and the contest cannot be kept up
for any long time. When the wandering uncertain air assumes a rotatory
form, in the last instance the force of all the winds yields to the
single strongest one. No hurricane lasts long. The more strength         3
squalls have, the shorter their duration. When winds reach their
maximum, they quickly abate all their violence. By that headlong speed
they must needs hasten to their own destruction. So no one has ever
seen a whirlwind last a whole day, or even an hour. Its velocity is
astonishing, its brevity no less astonishing. Moreover, on the earth
and near it, its rotation is swifter and more violent; the higher it     4
is, the less condensed and compact is it, and that is the reason of
its more rapid dissipation. Add the fact, too, that even if it reached
the highest region where the stars’ path lies, it would most certainly
be broken up by the motion which causes the universe to revolve. For
what can compare in rapidity with the revolution of the world? Thereby
the strength of all the winds combined in one would be shattered, aye,
and the strong solid chain that binds the earth, not to say a wisp of
whirling air.




X


Again, a fire carried along by a whirlwind cannot remain on high         1
unless the whirlwind also remain. But then what is so inconceivable as
any prolonged duration in a whirlwind? Above all, the whirlwind motion
is neutralised by the opposite motion of the heavens. That region on
high to which it is alleged to mount has an eddying motion of its own,
which carries onward the sky,

  And drags the lofty stars, and turns them in rapid whirl.

And even though one grant some duration to whirlwinds, which is quite
contrary to the fact, yet what is to be said of the comets that have
continued in sight for six months? Then, as hinted above, there          2
must be two motions in the same spot--one that constant motion of
the heaven, accomplishing its task without intermission, the other a
strange new motion conveyed by the whirlwind. The one must inevitably
obstruct the other. And yet that motion we see of the moon in her
orbit, and of the other heavenly bodies that pass above the moon, is
irrevocable. It nowhere falters or stops, nor does it convey to us
the slightest suggestion of an obstacle being ever placed in its way.
It is utterly beyond belief that a whirlwind, the most violent and       3
unruly species of storm, should reach the very centre of the ranks of
the stars, and should find a sphere for its boisterous activity in that
ordered peace of heaven. Supposing that the revolution of a whirlwind
kindles fire, which is shot up to the heights, furnishing apparent
ground for the belief that what we see is a trail of fire; yet surely
the shape of the fire ought to be something like that which produces
it. Now a whirlwind is round in appearance; it remains in the same       4
track, and revolves after the fashion of a rotating pillar. The fire,
therefore, that is enclosed ought to resemble it in shape. But in
reality it is a trail of scattered fire, and resembles anything rather
than fire gathered into a ball.




XI


Let us now say good-bye to Epigenes, and proceed to examine the          1
opinions of other writers. But before beginning to set them forth, I
must first, by way of preface, remark that comets are not observed only
in one part of the sky, nor merely in the zodiac, but in the east as
well as in the west, more frequently, however, toward the north. Nor is  2
their shape uniform. The Greeks, indeed, distinguished three classes
of them: those from which the flame hangs down, after the fashion of
a beard; those that shoot out what looks like hair round them on all
sides; and those which have a scattered kind of fire, which, however,
stretches toward an apex.[92] But all the classes have a common
characteristic, and are rightly called comets (_i.e._ long-haired). As
the different shapes present themselves only at long intervals, it is
difficult to compare them with one another. Even at the time of their
appearance spectators are not agreed as to their shape. According        3
as one’s eyesight is keener or duller, one asserts that the comet is
brighter or redder, and that its hair is compressed toward the interior
of the star, or spread out toward its sides. But whether or not there
are any differences in comets, they must all be produced by the same
method. The one fact about which there ought to be agreement is, that    4
a star of strange unwonted appearance is beheld which drags along with
it scattered fire. Some of the ancients are convinced of the truth of
this explanation: When one of the planets has come into conjunction
with another, the light of the two blends in one, producing the
appearance of a more elongated star. This happens not merely when star
touches star, but even when one approaches another. The space between
the two is in that case lit up by both, and seems aflame, producing the
trail of fire.

  [92] _I.e._ are cone-shaped.




XII


Our first answer to this theory is that the number of moving stars       1
(planets) is fixed. It is quite usual for them and comets to appear
at the same time; whence it is manifest that the comet is not due to
the conjunction of planets, but is a distinctive independent star.
Besides, it is a matter of frequent occurrence for a star to come under
the orbit of a more elevated star. Saturn, for example, is sometimes
above Jupiter; Mars looks down in a straight line on Venus or Mercury.
But yet no comet is formed from this movement whereby the one planet     2
approaches the other. Were it otherwise, there would be a comet every
year, for every year there are planets in the same constellation.
Again, if the approach of star to star produced a comet, the latter
would cease to be in a moment. The transit of stars takes place with
the utmost rapidity, thence all eclipse of heavenly bodies is of brief
duration; by the same motion they are as swiftly separated as they
were brought together. The sun and the moon, as we see, part company     3
within a brief space after the eclipse has begun. How much swifter
must be the separation of stars, which are so much smaller? Yet comets
last for six months at a time, which would not happen if they sprang
from the union of two stars. The stars cannot stick to one another
for any long time, and the law of their swift motion must ever drive
them asunder. Besides, those stars appear to us to be close to one       4
another, but in reality are separated by immense distances. How, then,
could the one star transmit fire to the other so that the two should
seem in union, when they are thus parted by an immense tract? The light
of the two stars, it is replied, mixes, furnishing the appearance of
one. I suppose this means that the phenomenon is much the same as when
a cloud takes a ruddy colouring from the rays of the sun striking on
it, or as when there is the golden glow of evening or morning, or as
when the bow is painted in its varied hues, but only in sunshine.

Well, my first criticism is that all the instances mentioned are the     5
result of great force. It is the sun that lights them up. The stars do
not possess anything like the same power. My second remark is that none
of the phenomena arises except below the moon in the vicinity of the
earth. The upper regions are pure and spotless, always retaining their
own colour. I remark further, that if anything of the kind did occur,
it would not last but would speedily disappear, as halos which surround
the sun or moon fade in a very brief space of time. Even the rainbow     6
does not long remain. If there was anything of the kind supposed, to
unite the space between the two stars, it would disappear with equal
rapidity. In any case it would not remain as long as comets are in the
habit of doing. The planets have their orbits within the zodiac, they
lie near this circle; but comets are seen in all parts of the sky.
Their time of appearance is no more certain than the limits of the
space which they may not exceed.




XIII


In reply to arguments like mine it is urged by Artemidorus that the      1
five planets are not the only stars with erratic courses, but merely
the only ones of the class that have been observed. But innumerable
others revolve in secret, unknown to us either by reason of the
faintness of their light, or the situation of their orbit being such
that they become visible only when they reach its extremities. It is
thus, he says, that certain new stars enter our field of vision,         2
mingling their light with the fixed stars, but displaying a brightness
greater than is usual in stars. This is the least serious of his lies:
his account of the universe is from end to end a shameless tissue of
lies. For instance, if we are to believe him, the upper regions of
heaven are perfectly solid--a lofty thick vault, as hard as the roof
of a house, formed by the accumulation of masses of atoms. The surface
immediately above it is of fire so compact that it cannot be broken
up or altered. Nevertheless, it has certain ventilators, and, as         3
it were, windows through which portions of the fire stream from the
outer part of the universe, but not so large as to cause commotion
in the inner; and again the fires pass from the world back into the
outer spaces. These extraordinary appearances, therefore, Artemidorus
supposes, have streamed in from that mass of matter which lies outside
the world. To set about disproving such a theory is nothing short of
beating the air for the sake of exercising the muscles!




XIV


Still, I will descend to the task. Let the man who has placed such a     1
solid roof on the world tell me what reason there is for believing his
statement that the heavens have such a thickness. What was it that took
all these solid bodies up there and kept them there? Then, a firmament
of such thickness must necessarily be of immense weight too. How is
it that heavy bodies remain aloft? How is it that the huge mass does
not come down and smash itself by its own weight? It is, I imagine, a    2
physical impossibility that such a vast weight as Artemidorus has
brought to the support of the heavens should hang suspended, or be
supported by a slight foundation. Nor can it be alleged that there are
stays[93] of some kind outside by which it is prevented from falling.
Nor again can there be any support in the centre[94] to receive and
prop up the threatening mass. And again, no one will venture to
assert that the universe is being constantly carried down through the
immensities of space, falling all the time, though it is not evident
that it falls, because its headlong course is to all eternity, having
no final obstacle with which to collide. This is indeed a statement
people have made about the earth, when they could discover no            3
explanation for a mass standing poised in air. It is borne down, say
they, for ever; but it is not evident that it falls because the space
into which it falls is endless.

  [93] The word is usually applied to a flexible fastening, hawser,
  cable, or the like.

  [94] Or, between the earth and it.

Well, what argument[95] then justifies the assertion that it is not
merely the five planets that move, but that there are many such in many
quarters of the universe? Or if there is no probable proof of this,
one may rejoin: What is there to prevent one from saying either that
all the stars move or that none of them does? Besides, your argument     4
is in no way helped by that crowd of stars which you assume to be
everywhere roaming about! For the more there are of them, the oftener
will they meet with others; whereas comets are rare, and for that
reason marvellous. And will not every age give evidence against you by
noting and recording for the use of posterity the emergence of such
stars?

  [95] The argument is resumed from the beginning of XIII. after the
  digression about the “firmament.”




XV


After the death of Demetrius, king of Syria, whose kingdom was           1
divided by his sons Demetrius and Antiochus, a little before the
Achaean War, a comet blazed forth not inferior to the sun in size.
Its orb was at first fiery red, and emitted a bright light sufficient
to dispel the darkness of night. By and by its size was gradually
reduced and its brightness waned. Finally it went completely out. How
many stars, suppose you, would require to combine to make up such a
huge mass? You might collect in one a thousand of them without ever      2
matching the size of the sun. In the reign of Attalus a comet appeared,
moderately small in size to begin with. By and by it mounted up and
spread out and moved as far as the equator, equalling in the extent of
its immense length the whole quarter of the sky which we call the Milky
Way. How many planets must have combined to occupy with an unbroken
line of fire such a long tract of the sky?




XVI


I have refuted the argument; I must now discredit its authors. It        1
requires no great effort to strip Ephorus of his authority; he is a
mere chronicler. Some of his class seek to recommend their narrative by
incredible stories, and by their marvels try to interest the reader,
who would probably soon find some other occupation if he were called
on to wade through their tedious narrative of ordinary events. Some,
again, are too credulous, some too careless, some are deluded, some
delighted, by falsehood. The former do not shun it, the latter go in
quest of it. The whole clan of them have this in common; they fancy      2
their work cannot merit approval, and become popular unless they freely
interlard it with lies. Ephorus is not a person of any scrupulous
honour; he is often duped, often he tries to dupe. For example, he
asserts that the great comet which, by its rising, sank Helice and
Buris, which was carefully watched by the eyes of the whole world since
it drew issues of great moment in its train, split up into two stars;
but nobody besides him has recorded it. Who, I wonder, could observe
the moment at which the comet broke up and was resolved into two         3
parts? And if there is any one who saw it split up into two, how is it
that no one saw it first formed out of the two? And why did Ephorus not
add the names of the two stars into which it was broken up, since they
must have been some of the five planets?




XVII


Apollonius of Myndus differs in his view from Epigenes. He asserts       1
that a comet is not one star made up of many planets, but that
many comets are planetary. A comet, he goes on, is not an illusion
nor a trail of fire produced on the borders of two stars, but is a
distinctive heavenly body, just as the sun or the moon is. Its shape
is not limited to the round, but is somewhat extended and produced
lengthwise. On the other hand its orbit is not visible. It cuts          2
(‍=‍intersects) the upper part of the universe, but only emerges when
at length it reaches the lowest portion of its course. There is no
reason to suppose that the same comet reappears; for instance that the
one seen in the reign of Claudius was the same as the one we saw in
the reign of Augustus; or that the recent one which appeared during
the reign of Nero Caesar--which has redeemed comets from their bad
character--was similar to the one which burst out after the death of
the late Emperor Julius Caesar, about sunset on the day of the games to
Venus Genetrix. Comets are as varied as they are numerous. They are      3
unequal in size, unlike in colour. Some are ruddy without any light;
others are bright with a pure clear light; others are flame-coloured,
but the flame is not a pure thin flame, but is enveloped in a mass
of smoky fire. Some are blood-stained and threatening, bringing
prognostication of bloodshed to follow in their train. They wax and
wane like other planets. They are brighter when they come down toward
us, and show larger from a nearer point, smaller when they depart from
us, and dimmer when they retire to a greater distance.




XVIII


The reply is ready to this last statement, that the same thing does      1
_not_ happen in comets as in the other stars. Some comets attain their
maximum on the very first day of their appearance. But, according to
the argument, they ought to increase the nearer they approach. As it
is, their first aspect remains until they begin to fade. Besides, what
has been said in reply to former authorities applies here too: If the
comet had an erratic orbit, and were a true planet, it would move
within the limits of the zodiac, within which all the planets confine
their orbits. Again, a star is never seen through another star.          2
Our sight cannot pierce through the centre of a planet so as to view
through it what lies beyond. But through a comet the further regions
are discerned as through a cloud. Whence it is evident that it is no
planet but an insubstantial, irregular fire.




XIX


The following is the opinion of our Stoic sage Zeno. He is convinced     1
that the stars act in concert, and unite their rays with one another--a
partnership in light which creates the image of a more elongated star.
Therefore some persons suppose that comets have no real existence, and
that it is only the appearance of them that is reproduced through the
reflection of neighbouring stars or the union of stars that stick        2
together. Some, again, say that comets are true stars, but with orbits
of their own, and that after certain periods they come out into the
view of mankind. Some allow their existence but refuse them the title
of stars, because they glide out of sight without long duration, and
within a brief space are scattered to the winds.




XX


Most of our Stoic brethren entertain another view, which they do not     1
regard as inconsistent with fact. Let me explain it. We observe many
species of fire engendered on high, now the heavens ablaze, now

  Long glistening trains of flame behind,

now huge torches of fire being hurried along. The lightning itself,
whose velocity is so marvellous that it at once blinds, and at the
same instant restores, the sight, is fire arising from the friction
of air that suffers more violent internal pressure than usual. That
is why it does not remain long, but glides off once it issues from       2
the cloud, forthwith perishing. But other fiery appearances remain for
a considerable time, and do not break up until all the fuel on which
they fed has been used up. Here belong the strange sights recorded
by Posidonius--pillars and shields all ablaze, and other flames of
marvellous strangeness. They would attract no attention if they ran
their course after customary laws; but now the sight of them sends all
men agape. They bring down sudden fire from the heights of heaven,       3
sometimes producing a flash which is gone in a moment, sometimes
compressing the air, which is forced into a glow; it is a miracle all
the same. Yes, and is not sometimes a gulf opened in the ether, which
seems to retire on all sides, with a great glare of light in the hollow
centre? You are ready to cry out. What is this?

  ... I see the very centre of heaven open,
  And the stars wandering in the sky....

These stars sometimes do not wait for night to show their light, but
burst out in the full light of day. The reason, however, for the stars
showing at a time not their own is different from that alleged; it       4
is well known that they are there all the time, though hidden. Many
comets, too, we cannot see because they are obscured by the sun’s rays.
Posidonius, in fact, tells us that during an eclipse of the sun a comet
once appeared which the sun’s proximity had hitherto concealed. Often,
when the sun has just set, straggling fires[96] are seen close to him.
No doubt the nucleus of the comet is bathed in sunlight, and therefore
cannot be discerned; but the tail escapes the effect of the sun’s rays.

  [96] _I.e._ the tail of a comet.




XXI


Our Stoic friends, therefore, are satisfied that, like trumpet meteors   1
and beams, and other portents of the sky, comets are formed by dense
air. They appear in greatest number toward the north, because there
is most of the sluggish air there. Why, then, you naturally ask,
does the comet not remain stationary, but advance in the sky from
day to day? Let me explain. The comet, according to this account,
pursues its fuel just as fires do. Although its tendency is to rise
to the upper regions, still, if material fail it, it retrogrades and
sinks. In the air, too, it does not pursue a direct path to right or
left. It has no particular route assigned to it; wherever the supply     2
of its fuel leads it, thither it crawls; it does not advance in its
orbit as a star, but feeds as a fire. Why, then, does it appear for a
long period, and why is it not quickly extinguished? For the recent
one which we saw during this joyous reign of Nero displayed itself to
view for six months, revolving in the opposite direction to the former
one in Claudius’ time. That one rising from the north up toward the
zenith made for the east, always growing dimmer. This one began in the
same quarter, but making toward the west, turned finally toward the
south, where it withdrew from view. No doubt the former found moister
elements, more suitable for its fire, and pursued them; the latter       3
in turn chose a richer and more substantial district. So they descend
toward the direction in which they are invited by their material, and
not by a definite path, which in the two we have seen was different,
since the one moved off toward the right and the other toward the left.
Now all stars[97] have their orbit in one direction, namely, contrary
to the motion of the universe. The latter moves from east to west,
the stars go from west to east. For this reason they have a double
motion,--one, their own proper motion; the other, which carries them
round along with the heavens.

  [97] Planets may be specially referred to; the Latin word is the
  generic one, _stella_.




XXII


I do not agree with my school here, for I cannot think a comet is a      1
sudden fire, but I rank it among Nature’s permanent creations. First of
all, everything that the atmosphere creates is short-lived; such things
arise in an element that is fugitive and changeable. How can anything
continue the same for long in the air, which itself never remains the
same? It is always in a state of flux, and its quiet is short-lived. It
changes within a brief moment to another condition from that in which
it had been. It is now rainy, now clear, now alternates from one to      2
the other. The clouds, so intimately connected with it, into which it
collects and from which it is released again, now gather, now disperse,
but never remain at rest. Fire cannot possibly abide securely in a
volatile body, nor can it keep its place so persistently as does a fire
that Nature has fixed never to be dislodged. Further, if the fire stuck
close to its fuel, it would always sink. For the air is the thicker,     3
the nearer it is to the earth. But a comet is never depressed to the
lowest strata of the atmosphere, nor does it ever approach the ground.
Besides, fire either goes in the direction its nature prompts, that is,
upwards, or else in the direction in which it is drawn by the material
on which it has fastened, and on which it feeds.




XXIII


In none of the ordinary fires in the sky is the route curved; it         1
is distinctive of a star (planet) that it describes a curve in its
orbit. Whether other comets had this circular orbit I cannot say.
The two in our own age at any rate had. Again, everything kindled by
a temporary cause quickly gives out. Thus torches gleam only while
they flit across the sky; thus lightning has strength for just one
stroke; thus so-called shooting and falling stars fly past, cutting
through the air. No fires have any considerable duration unless          2
their strength is inherent. I mean the divine fires which the universe
maintains eternally, because they are its parts and works. These, I
say, are always active; they have an orbit the even tenor of which they
preserve, and they are uniform. They would on alternate days be larger
or smaller if the fire was merely casual, the sudden outcome of some
accidental cause. Such a fire would be greater or less according as it
was fed more abundantly or more scantily. I said a moment ago that no
fire could be lasting which arose from some defect in the atmosphere. I
have now to add further, that it can by no means be fixed and steady.    3
Both torch and lightning and shooting star, and any other kind of fire
forced out of the air by pressure, are in flight; none of them is
visible save in the course of its fall. But a comet has its own settled
position. For that reason it is not expelled in haste, but steadily
traverses its course; it is not snuffed out, but takes its departure.
If it were a wandering star (_i.e._ planet), says some one, it would
be in the zodiac. Who, say I, ever thinks of placing a single bound to
the stars? or of cooping up the divine into narrow space? These very     4
stars, which you suppose to be the only ones that move, have, as every
one knows, orbits differing one from another. Why, then, should there
not be some stars that have a separate distinctive orbit far removed
from them? What reason is there why there should not be passages into
the heavens at some part of them?[98] But if you are convinced that
every star (planet) cannot but touch the zodiac, then I say the comet
might have such a wide orbit that at some point it may coincide with
the zodiac. This is not necessary, but it is possible.

  [98] The meaning seems to be, there may be passages--inlets and
  outlets--by which occasional visitants like comets may temporarily
  enter the heavens as we know them, and subsequently pass out of them.
  The text is doubtful.




XXIV


Consider whether it is not more in keeping with the size of the          1
universe that it be supposed to be divided into many routes, and do not
keep this one beaten track while every other portion is a waste. Do
you suppose that in this great and fair creation, among the countless
stars that adorn the night with varied beauty, never suffering the
atmosphere to become empty and sluggish, there are only five stars that
are allowed to move freely, while all the rest stand still, a fixed,
immovable crowd? Should any one here ask me: Why, then, has their        2
course not been observed like that of the five planets? my answer to
him shall be: There are many things whose existence we allow, but whose
character we are still in ignorance of. We shall all admit that we have
a mind, by whose behest we are urged forward and called back; but what
that mind is which directs and rules us, no one can explain any more
than he can tell where it resides. One will say that it is breath;
another, a kind of harmony; another, a divine force and part of God;
another, subtlest air; another, disembodied power. Some will even be
found to call it blood, or heat. So far is the mind from being clear on
all other subjects that it is still in search of itself.




XXV


Why should we be surprised, then, that comets, so rare a sight in the    1
universe, are not embraced under definite laws, or that their beginning
and end are not known, seeing that their return is at long intervals?
It is not yet fifteen hundred years since Greece

  Counted the number of the stars and named them every one.

And there are many nations at the present hour who merely know the       2
face of the sky and do not yet understand why the moon is obscured in
an eclipse. It is but recently indeed that science brought home to
ourselves certain knowledge on the subject. The day will yet come when
the progress of research through long ages will reveal to sight the
mysteries of nature that are now concealed. A single lifetime, though
it were wholly devoted to the study of the sky, does not suffice for
the investigation of problems of such complexity. And then we never
make a fair division of the few brief years of life as between study
and vice. It must, therefore, require long successive ages to unfold
all. The day will yet come when posterity will be amazed that we         3
remained ignorant of things that will to them seem so plain. The five
planets are constantly thrusting themselves on our notice; they meet us
in all the different quarters of the sky with a positive challenge to
our curiosity. Yet it is but lately we have begun to understand their
motions, to realise what their morning and evening settings mean, what
their turnings when they move straight toward us, why they are driven
back from us. We have learned but a few years ago whether Jupiter would
rise or set, or whether he would retrograde--the term that has been
applied to his retirement from us. People have been found bold enough    4
to say to us: You are mistaken in thinking that any star ever stops or
wheels in its course. The heavenly bodies may not stand or turn away.
All advance; once the signal is given they start on their race. Their
career will end only with their existence. This eternal creation has
motions that suffer no recall. Should they once be arrested, they will
encounter obstacles in front which are meantime held in place by the
ordered, regular march of the universe.




XXVI


What then is the reason, you may ask, for the apparent retrogression     1
of some heavenly bodies? The appearance of slowness in their motion
is caused by their encountering the sun, as well as by the character
of their paths and the position of their orbits, which are at certain
periods calculated to deceive the eye. Ships in the same way moving
under full sail seem withal to be stationary. Men will some day be
able to demonstrate in what regions comets have their paths, why their
course is so far removed from the other stars, what is their size and
constitution. Let us be satisfied with what we have discovered, and
leave a little truth for our descendants to find out.

We cannot, Apollonius says, see through the stars what is beyond, but
sight passes easily through the comets. Well, in the first place, if     2
that is the case, it is not so in the part of the body which consists
of dense solid fire, but only where the dispersed glow extends as it
breaks up into the appearance of hair. One can see through the gaps in
the fire and not through the fire itself. Stars again, it is said, are
all round, comets extended; whence it is plain that they are not true
stars. But who, pray, will allow that comets are long? Their tendency
like that of other stars is to a globe shape, only the light from them
is prolonged. The sun shoots out his rays far and wide, but has himself
a shape different from that of the light that streams from him. So
in comets, the body is rounded, but the glow from them presents the
appearance of being longer than that of the other stars.




XXVII


Why is this so, you ask. Do you tell me first why the light the          1
moon receives is wholly unlike the sun although she receives it from
the sun. Why is it now ruddy, now pale? why is her colour ashen or
black when she is cut off from the sun’s view? Or tell me why all the
stars have aspects to some extent dissimilar to one another and all as
different as possible from the sun. It is no hindrance to their being
true stars that they are not all alike; so there is nothing to prevent
comets from being permanent through all time, sharing the same destiny
as the other stars, even though they have not an appearance like
theirs. Besides, is not the universe, if you will only examine it        2
carefully, made up of contrarieties? Why is it that the sun should be
always blazing hot in Leo, scorching the ground with his fierce glow,
while in Aquarius he brings winter’s chain and closes the rivers with
ice? The one constellation is subject to the same law as the other,
though its characteristics and influence are so different. Aries again
rises in a moment, Libra lifts its scales very slowly; yet the one
sign is of the same nature as the other, though that one mounts in a
brief space, this comes forth very deliberately. Do you not see, too,
how contrary the elements are to one another? They are heavy and         3
light, cold and hot, moist and dry. The whole concord of the universe
is a harmony of discords. You say a comet is not a star, because its
form does not correspond to the type, but is unlike other stars. You
can see, no doubt, how very like that star that returns to its place
after thirty years is to this which revisits its haunt within the
year! Nature does not turn out her work according to a single pattern;
she prides herself upon her power of variation. She has made some        4
things larger, some swifter than others; some stronger, some more
limited in power; some she has separated from the crowd, that their
splendid isolation might render their progress conspicuous; some she
has consigned to a place in the common herd. He has little conception
of nature’s power who thinks that she may not do exceptionally what
she does not do repeatedly. She does not often display comets; she
has assigned them a different place, different periods from the other
stars, and motions unlike theirs. She wished to enhance the greatness
of her work by these strange visitants whose form is too beautiful to
be thought accidental, whether you consider their vastness or their
brightness that surpasses in size and brilliance all other stars. Their
appearance has, in truth, an exceptional distinction; they are not
cribbed and cabined within narrow bonds, but let loose to roam freely,
to range over the region of many stars.




XXVIII


According to Aristotle, comets give indications of storm and disturb-    1
ances that bring wind and rain. Well, then, are you of opinion it is
not a star because it foretells what is coming? True the comet is not
a sign of storm in the same way as it is a sign of coming rain when

  The oil splutters, and rotten fungus covers the wick;

or in the same way as it is a forecast of a raging sea--if

                                          the sea
  Coots[99] sport on land; her haunts in the marshes
  Are deserted by the heron, and she soars above the heights of cloud:

  [99] Perhaps cormorants: the identity of the bird is difficult to
  determine.

but in the same way as the equinox is a sign of the turn of the year     2
toward cold or heat, or as the predictions of the Chaldaean soothsayers
who tell what sorrow or joy is determined at birth by the natal star,
are indications of coming events. To convince you of the truth of this,
I must warn you that the rising of a comet does not convey a threat of
wind and rain in the immediate future, as Aristotle says, but casts
suspicion over the whole year. Hence it is plain that the comet has not
derived prognostications from its immediate surroundings to reveal for
the immediate future, but that it has them stored up and buried deep
within by the laws of the universe. The comet which appeared in the
consulship of Paterculus and Vopiscus fulfilled the anticipations of
this kind entertained by Aristotle, and for that matter by

Theophrastus; for there were everywhere severe and prolonged storms,     3
while in Achaia and Macedonia cities were overturned by earthquakes.
The slowness of the comets’ motion, Aristotle says, is a proof that
they are rather heavy, containing much earthy matter. So are their
orbits too, for they are usually confined to the neighbourhood of the
poles.




XXIX


Both statements are false. Let me take them in their order. Well, it     1
is asserted, is it, that all bodies are heavy that move more slowly?
What! is the planet Saturn, which accomplishes its circuit most slowly
of all the planets, heavy? It has, in fact, a proof of lightness
in being higher than all the rest. But, you say, it takes a wider
sweep, and does not go more slowly than the others, but only a longer
distance. Let me suggest that I can make the same statement of the
comets; even if their course is more sluggish, they have farther to go.
But it is a falsehood to assert that they move more slowly. For this     2
last comet traversed within six months half the span of heaven; the
previous one withdrew from sight in a shorter period. But again, it is
urged, on account of their weight, they are borne down lower. Well, in
the first place, a comet is not borne down, but round. In the second,
this recent one began its motion in the north, and passing by way of
the west, reached the southern quarters, and was elevating its orbit
when it faded from sight. That other one, in Claudius’ reign, also       3
first appeared in the north, and continued without intermission to rise
straight up to a higher elevation until it disappeared. Such are the
matters relating to comets which have had weight with others and with
myself. Whether they are true or not, those who attain knowledge of the
truth must decide. We are permitted only to conjecture and grope in the
dark, with no assurance of discovery, and yet not without hope.




XXX


Aristotle has finely said that we should never be more reverent          1
than when we are treating of the gods. We enter a temple with all
due gravity, we lower our eyes, draw up our toga, and assume every
token of modesty when we approach the sacrifice. How much more is all
this due when we discuss the heavenly bodies, the stars, the nature
of the gods, lest in ignorance we make any assertion regarding them
that is hasty, or disrespectful; or lest we wittingly lie. Let us not    2
be surprised that what is buried so deeply should be unearthed so
slowly. Panaetius and others, who will have it that a comet is not an
ordinary star but the mere counterfeit of a star, have bestowed careful
treatment on the question whether all seasons of the year are equally
fitted to produce comets, and whether all quarters of the sky are
equally suitable for their creation. They have inquired, too, whether
they can be formed in all regions through which they can pass, and
have discussed other points of a like kind. But all these questions
are foreclosed by my statement that they are not accidental fires, but
inwoven in the texture of the universe, directed by it in secret, but
not often revealed. And how many bodies besides revolve in secret,       3
never dawning upon human eyes? Nor is it for man that God has made all
things.[100] How small a portion of His mighty work is entrusted to us?
But He who directs them all, who established and laid the foundations
of all this world, who has clothed Himself with creation, and is the
greater and better part of His work, He is hidden from our eyes, He can
be perceived only by thought.

  [100] Another reading runs: Nor has God revealed all things to man.




XXXI


Many things, moreover, akin to highest deity or holding power near       1
it, are still obscure. Or, perhaps, one may be still more surprised to
find that they at once fill and elude our sight. Either their subtlety
is too great for human vision to grasp, or such exalted majesty
conceals itself in the holier sanctuary, and rules its kingdom, which
is itself, without permitting access to any power except the spirit.
What that is, without which nothing is, we cannot know: and when God,
the greatest part of the universe, is an unknown God, we are surprised,
are we, that there are some specks of fire we do not fully understand?
How many animals we have come to know for the first time in our own      2
days! Many, too, that are unknown to us, the people of a coming day
will know. Many discoveries are reserved for the ages still to be,
when our memory shall have perished. The world is a poor affair if it
do not contain matter for investigation for the whole world in every
age. Some of the sacred rites are not revealed to worshippers all at
once. Eleusis retains some of its mysteries to show to votaries on
their second visit. Nature does not reveal all _her_ secrets at once.
We imagine we are initiated in her mysteries: we are, as yet, but
hanging around her outer courts. Those secrets of hers are not opened    3
to all indiscriminately. They are withdrawn and shut up in the inner
shrine. Of one of them this age will catch a glimpse, of another, the
age that will come after.

When, then, it may be asked, will all these things come to our full
knowledge? Great schemes mature slowly, especially if effort is
relaxed. There is one object we are bent on, heart and soul,--to be
as wicked as possible--and we have not yet attained perfection. Vice
is still making progress. Luxury is constantly discovering some new      4
outlet for its madness, indecency some new form of insult on itself.
Dissolute effeminacy and corruption are constantly discovering some
more refined and delicate means of self-destruction. We have not yet
wholly cast off our vigour. We are still doing our best to extinguish
any spark of virtue that is left. By the smoothness and polish of our
bodies we men have outdone the refinements of women; we have adopted
the colours of harlots, that even an honest woman would not put on.
With delicate mincing step we check our gait; we do not walk, with       5
measured pace we go. We adorn our fingers with rings. A precious stone
sparkles on every joint. Day by day we devise means of wronging and
degrading our manhood, vexed that we cannot strip it off. One becomes
a eunuch, another assumes the scandalous part of a gladiator, and,
hired for death, arms for disgrace. The very pauper selects a victim on
whom to sate his morbid lust.




XXXII


Do you wonder that wisdom has not yet attained her perfect work? Why,    1
vice has not wholly revealed itself. It is still in its infancy, and
yet on it we bestow all our efforts; our eyes and our hands are its
slaves. Who attends the school of wisdom now? Who thinks it worth while
to have more than a bowing acquaintance with her? Who has regard for
philosophy or any liberal pursuit, except when a rainy day comes round
to interrupt the games, and it may be wasted without loss? And so the
many sects of philosophers are all dying out for lack of successors.     2
The Academy, both old and new, has left no disciple. Who is there to
hand down the precepts of Pyrrho? That famous school of Pythagoras,
despised of the rabble, can find no master. The new sect of the Sextii,
which contained the vigour of Rome, started with great enthusiasm, but
on the very threshold of its career is also dead.

But what anxious care we bestow that the name of no actor may be         3
lost! The house of Pylades and Bathyllus stands in a long line of
successors. For arts of that kind there are plenty of pupils and
plenty of teachers. The actor’s platform resounds in every private
house in the whole city. On it men and women alike practise the ballet
step. Husbands and wives vie in paying court to actors. By and by,
when the brow is rubbed smooth by long wearing of the mask, the
transition to the brothel is easy and natural. Philosophy gets never     4
a thought. And so it comes to pass that, far from advance being made
toward the discovery of what the older generations left insufficiently
investigated, many of their discoveries are being lost. But yet, on my
soul of honour, if we urged on this task with all our powers, if our
youth in sobriety braced themselves to it, if the elder taught it and
the younger learned it, even then scarce should we reach the bottom
of the well in which truth lies. As it is, we search for her on the
surface, and with a slack hand.




