VI

PHILO AS A PHILOSOPHER


Save for a few monographs of no great importance, because of the
absence of original thought, Philo's works form avowedly an exegesis
of the Bible and not a series of philosophical writings. Nor must the
reader expect to find an ordered system of philosophy in his separate
works, much more than in the writings of the rabbis. As Professor
Caird says,[234] "The Hebrew mind is intuitive, imaginative, incapable
of analysis or systematic connection of ideas." Philo's philosophical
conceptions lie scattered up and down his writings, "strung on the
thread of the Bible narrative which determines the sequence of his
thoughts." Nevertheless, though he has not given us explicit treatises
on cosmology, metaphysics, ethics, psychology, etc., and though he was
incapable of close logical thinking, he has treated all these subjects
suggestively and originally in the course of his commentary, and his
readers may gather together what he has dispersed, and find a
co-ordinated body of religious philosophy. However loosely they are
set forth in his treatises, his ideas are closely connected in his
mind. Herein he differs from his Jewish predecessors, for the notion
of the old historians of the Alexandrian movement, that there was a
systematic Jewish philosophy before Philo, does not appear to have
been well-founded. All that Aristeas and Aristobulus and the
Apocryphal authors had done was to assimilate certain philosophemes to
their religious ideas; they had not re-interpreted the whole system of
philosophy from a Jewish point of view or traced an independent
system, or an eclectic doctrine in the Holy Scriptures. This was the
achievement of Philo. His thought is not original in the sense of
presenting a new scheme of philosophy, but it is original in the sense
of giving a fresh interpretation to the philosophical ideas of his age
and environment. He ranges them under a new principle, puts them in a
new light, and combines them in a new synthesis. This again is
characteristic of the Jewish mind. Intent on God, it does not endeavor
to make its own analysis of the universe by independent reasoning, but
it utilizes the systems of other nations and endeavors to harmonize
them with its religious convictions. Hence it is that nearly all
Jewish philosophy appears to be eclectic; its writers have ranged
through the fields of thought of many schools and culled flowers from
each, which they bind together into a crown for their religion. They
do not, with few exceptions, pursue philosophy with the purpose of
widening the borders of secular knowledge; but rather in order to
bring the light of reason to illuminate and clarify faith, to
harmonize Judaism with the general culture of its environment, and to
revivify belief and ceremony with a new interpretation. All this
applies to our worthy, but at the same time he was a philosopher at
heart, because he believed that the knowledge of God came by
contemplation as well as by practice, and, further, because he had a
firm faith in the universalism of Judaism; and he believed that this
universal religion must comprehend all that is highest and truest in
human thought. Like most Jewish philosophers he is synthetic rather
than analytic, believing in intuition and distrusting the discursive
reason, careless of physical science and soaring into religious
metaphysics. Again, like most Jewish philosophers, he is deductive,
starting with a synthesis of all in the Divine Unity, and making no
fresh inductions from phenomena. It has been said that, though Philo
was a philosopher and a Jew, yet Saadia was the first Jewish
philosopher. But Philo's philosophical ideas are in complete harmony
with his Judaism; and if by the criticism it is meant that most of the
content of his works is based upon Greek models, it is true on the
other hand that the spirit which pervades them is essentially Jewish,
and that by the new force which he breathed into it he reformed and
gave a new direction to the Greek philosophy of his age.

Philo's philosophy is certainly eclectic in some degree, and we find
in it ideas taken from the schools of Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras,
and the Stoics. Its fixed point was his theology, and wherever he
finds anything to support this he adapts it to his purpose. He
approached philosophy from a position opposed to that of the Greeks:
they brought a questioning and free mind to the problems of the
universe; he comes full of religious preconceptions. Yet in this lies
his strength as well as his limitation, for he gains thus a point of
certainty and a clear end, which other eclectic systems of the day did
not possess. He welds together all the different elements of his
thought in the heat of his passion for God. His cosmology and his
ontology are a philosophical exposition of the Jewish conception of
God's relation to the universe, his ethics and his psychology of the
Jewish conception of man's relation to God.

The religious preconceptions of Philo drew him to Plato above all
other philosophers, so that his thought is essentially a religious
development of Platonism. It is not too much to say that Philo's work
has a double function, to interpret the Bible according to Platonic
philosophy and to interpret Plato in the spirit of the Bible. The
agreement was not the artificial production of the commentator, for in
truth Plato was in sympathy with the religious conscience as a whole.
The contrast between Hellenism and Hebraism is true, if we restrict it
to the average mind of the two races. The one is intent on things
secular, the other on God. But the greatest genius of the Hellenic
race, influenced perhaps by contact with Oriental peoples, possessed,
in a remarkable degree, the Hebraic spirit, which is zealous for God
and makes for righteousness. Plato was not only a great philosopher,
but also a great theologian, a great religious reformer, and a great
prophet, the most perfectly developed mind which the world, ancient or
modern, has known. His "Ideas," which are the archetypes of sensible
things, were not only logical concepts but also a kingdom of Heaven
connected with the human individual by the Divine soul. And as he grew
older so his religious feeling intensified, and he translated his
philosophy into theology and positive religion. Platonism, it has been
well said, is a temper as much as a doctrine; it is the spirit that
turns from the earth to Heaven, from creation to God. In his last
work, "The Laws," wherein he designs a theocratic state, which has
striking points of resemblance with the Jewish polity, he says: "The
conclusion of the matter is this, which is the fairest and truest of
all sayings, that for the good man to sacrifice and hold converse with
the Deity by means of prayers and service of every kind is the noblest
thing of all and the most conducive to a happy life, and above all
things fitting."[235]

This is typical of Plato's attitude towards life in his old age; and
further, his metaphysical system of monistic idealism is the most
remarkable approach to Hebrew monotheism which the Greek world made.
The Patristic writers in the first centuries of the Christian era were
so struck by this Hebraism in the Greek thinker, that they attributed
it to direct borrowing. Aristobulus had written of a translation of
the Pentateuch older than the Septuagint, which Plato was supposed to
have studied. Clement called him the Hebrew philosopher, Origen and
Augustine comment on his agreement with Genesis, and think that when
he was in Egypt he listened to Jeremiah.[236] Eusebius worked out in
detail his correspondences with the Bible. Some early neo-Platonist,
perhaps Numenius, declared that Plato was only the Attic Moses; and in
more modern times the Cambridge Platonists of the sixteenth century
harbored similar ideas, and Nietzsche spoke bitterly of the day when
"Plato went to school with the Jews in Egypt."

Of Philo, then, we may say, as Montaigne said of himself, that he was
a Platonist before he knew who Plato was. Yet he was the first
Hellenistic Jew who perceived the fundamental harmony between the
philosopher's idealism and Jewish monotheism, and he was the first
important commentator of Plato who developed the religious teaching of
his master into a powerful spiritual force.

It is true that the seeds of neo-Platonism, _i.e._, the religious
re-interpretation of Platonism under the influence of Eastern thought,
had been sown already; and Philo must have received from his
environment to some extent the mystical version of the master's
system, with its goal of ecstatic union with God, and its tendency to
asceticism as a means thereto. But the earlier products of the
movement had been crude, and had lacked a powerful moving spirit. This
was provided by Philo when he introduced his overmastering conception
of God. The popular saying, "Either Plato Philonizes or Philo
Platonizes"[237] contains a deep truth in its first as well as in its
second part. It not only marks the likeness in style of the two
writers, but it suggests that Philo, on the one hand, made fruitful
the religious germ in Plato's teaching by his Hebraism, and, on the
other, nourished the philosophical seed in Judaism by his Platonism.
Plato's teaching falls into two main classes, the dialectical and the
mythical, and it is with the latter that Philo is in specially close
connection. For in his myths Plato tries to achieve a synthesis by
imaginative flight where he had failed by discursive reason. He
unifies experience by striking intuitions, something in the spirit of
a Hebrew prophet. Moreover his style, as well as his thought, has here
affinity with Jewish modes of thought. As Zeller says, speaking of the
myths: "From the first, in the act of producing his work he thinks in
images. They mark the point where it becomes evident that he cannot be
wholly a philosopher because he is still too much of a poet." And this
is true of all Philo's writings, and to generalize somewhat widely, of
most Jewish philosophy. In "The Timæus," particularly, Plato,
throughout, is the poet-philosopher, writing imaginative myths, which
present pictorially an idealistic scheme of the universe; and "The
Timæus" is for Philo, after the Bible, the most authoritative of
books, the source of his chief philosophical ideas.

The dominant philosophical principle of Plato is what is known as the
Theory of Ideas. He imagined a world of real existences, invisible,
incorporeal, eternal, grasped only by thought, prior to the objects of
the physical universe, and the models or archetypes of them. In "The
Timæus," which is a system of cosmology at once religious and
metaphysical, the "Ideas" are represented as the thoughts of the one
Supreme Mind, the intermediate powers by which the Supreme Unity,
known as the "Idea of the Good," or "the Creator," evolves the
material universe. Thus the universe is seen as the manifestation of
one Beneficent Spirit, who brings it into existence and rules over it
through His "ideal" thoughts. Philo adopts completely and uncritically
this theory of transcendental ideas in his philosophical exegesis of
the cosmogony in Genesis. "Without an incorporeal archetype God brings
no simple thing to fulfilment."[238] There is an idea of stars, of
grass, of man, of virtue, of music. And the Platonic conception
receives a religious sanction. The ideas are a necessary step between
God and the material universe, and those who deny them throw all
things into confusion.[239] "God would not touch matter Himself, but
He did not grudge a share of His nature to it through His powers, of
which the true name is ideas." We have already noticed[240] how
ingeniously Philo deduces the Theory of Ideas from the Biblical
account of the creation, and associates it with the Hebraic conception
of the ministerial Wisdom and Word. He, however, gives a new direction
to the Platonic theory, owing to his Hebraic conception of God. The
ideas with him are not the thoughts of an impersonal mind, but the
emanations of a personal, volitional Deity. Keeping close to Jewish
tradition, he says that they are the words of the Deity speaking. As
human speech consists of incorporeal ideas, which produce an effect
upon the minds of others, so the Divine speech is a pattern of
incorporeal ideas which impress themselves upon a formless void, and
so create the material world.[241] In this way Philo associates his
cosmology with his theology. The creative "Ideas" are equated
collectively with the Supreme Logos,[242] individually with the Logoi
which represent God's particular activities. Thus the Logos represents
the whole ideal or noetic world, "the kingdom of Heaven"; and it is in
this metaphysical sense that the Logos is the first creation, "the
first-born son of God," prior to the physical universe, which is His
grandson. The whole universe is thus seen as the orderly manifestation
of one principle. Philo, expanding a favorite image of the Haggadah,
illustrates God's creation by the simile of a king founding a city.
"He gets to him an architect, who first designs in his mind the parts
of the perfect city, and then, looking continually to his model,
begins to construct the city of stones and wood. So when God resolved
to found the world-city, He first brought its form into mind, and
using this as a model he completed the visible world."[243]

The theory of religious idealism is the centre of Philo's philosophy,
and provides the basis of his explanation of the material universe.
Physics, indeed, he considered of small account, because he believed
there could be no certainty in such speculations.[244] His mind was
utterly unscientific; but as a religious philosopher he found it
necessary to give a theory of the creation. Jewish dogma held that the
world had been called into being out of nothing; the Greek
philosophers repudiated such an idea, and held that creation must be
the result of a reasonable process; Aristotle had imagined that matter
was a separately existent principle with mind, and that the world was
eternal; and the Stoics held that matter was the substance of all
things, including the pantheistic power itself:

  "All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
  Whose body nature is, and God the soul."

Philo impugns both these theories,[245] the one because it denies the
creative power of God, the other because it confuses the Creator with
His creation. He looked for a system which should satisfy at once the
Jewish notion that the world was brought out of nothing by the will of
God, and the philosophical concept that God is all reality; and he
found in Plato's idealism a view of the creation which he could
harmonize with the religious view. Plato declared that the material
world had been created out of the _Non-Ens_ ([Greek: mê on]) _i.e._,
that which has no real existence. He conceived space and matter as the
mere passive receptacle of form, which is nothing till the form has
given it quality. Though Philo's language is vague, this seems to be
his view when he is speaking philosophically. It is, perhaps, a slight
deviation from the earlier religious standpoint of the Jews, which
looks to a direct and deliberate creation of the world-stuff, rather
than to the informing of space by spirit, and regards the world as
separate from God, and not as a manifestation of His being. But the
more philosophical conception appears likewise in the Wisdom of
Solomon. "For Thine all-powerful hand that created the world out of
formless matter," says the author (xi. 17), establishing before Philo
the compromise between two competing influences in his mind. More
emphatically Philo rejects the notion of creation in time.[246] Time,
he says, came into being after God had made the universe, and has no
meaning for the Divine Ruler, whose life is in the eternal present.

Summing up, we may say that Philo regards the universe as the image of
the Divine manifestation or evolution in thought produced by His
beneficent will; and this view is true to the religious standpoint of
traditional Judaism in spirit if not in letter.

In his conception of the human soul, Philo again harmonizes the simple
Jewish notion with the developed Greek psychology by means of the
Platonic idealism. The soul in the Bible is the breath of God; in
Plato it is an Idea incarnate, represented in "The Timæus" as a
particle of the Supreme Mind. Philo, following the psychology of his
age, divides the soul into a higher and a lower part: (1) the Nous;
(2) the vital functions, which include the senses. He lays all the
stress upon the former, which gives man his kinship with God and the
ideal world, while the other part is the necessary result of its
incarnation in the body. He variously describes the Nous as an
inseparable fragment of the Divine soul, a Divine breath which God
inspires into each body, a reflection, an impression, or an image of
the blessed Logos, sealed with its stamp.[247] Following the Platonic
conception, Philo occasionally speaks of the Divine soul as having a
prenatal existence,[248] holding, as the English poet put it, that

  "The soul that rises with us, our life's star,
    Hath had elsewhere its setting
  And cometh from afar."

Here, too, he follows an older Jewish-Hellenistic tradition, which
appears in the Wisdom of Solomon (viii. 19 and 20), where it is
written: "A good soul fell to my lot. Nay rather, being good, I came
into a body undefiled." The Nous is in fact the god within, and it
bears to the microcosm Man the relation which the infinite God bears
to the macrocosm.[249] Indeed, it is the Logos descended from above,
but yearning to return to its true abode. Thus Philo sings its Divine
nature:

     "It is unseen, but sees all things: its essence is unknown,
     but it comprehends the essence of all things. And by arts
     and sciences it makes for itself many roads and ways, and
     traverses sea and land, searching out all things within
     them. And it soars aloft on wings, and when it has
     investigated the sky and its changes it is borne upwards
     towards the æther and the revolutions of the heavens. It
     follows the stars in their orbits, and passing the sensible
     it yearns for the intelligible world."

The Nous is the king of the whole organism, the governing and unifying
power, and hence is often called the man himself. The senses,
resembling the powers of God, are only the bodyguard, subordinate
instruments, and inferior modes of the Divine part.[250] So Philo
explains that all our faculties are derived from the Divine principle,
and he draws the moral lesson that our true function is to bend them
all to the Divine service, so as to foster our noblest part. The aim
of the good man is to bring the god within him into union with the God
without, and to this end he must avoid the life of the senses,[251]
which mars the Divine Nous, and may entirely crush it. The Divine
soul, as it had a life before birth, so also has a life after death;
for what is Divine cannot perish. Immortality is man's most splendid
hope. If the Divine Presence fills him with a mystic ecstasy, he has,
indeed, attained it upon this earth, but this bliss is only for the
very blessed sage; and he, too, looks forward to the more lasting union
with the Godhead after this terrestrial life is over.[252] True at
once to the principles of Platonism and Judaism, Philo admits no
anthropomorphic conception of Heaven or of Hell. He is convinced that
there is a life hereafter, and finds in the story of Enoch the
Biblical symbol thereof,[253] but he does not speculate about the
nature of the Divine reward. The pious are taken up to God, he says, and
live forever,[254] communing alone with the Alone.[255] The unrighteous
souls, Philo sometimes suggests, in accordance with current Pythagorean
ideas, are reincarnated according to a system of transmigration within
the human species ([Greek: palengenesia]).[256] Yet the sinner
suffers his full doom on earth. The true Hades is the life of the
wicked man who has not repented, exposed to vengeance, with uncleansed
guilt, obnoxious to every curse.[257] And the Divine punishment is to
live always dying, to endure death deathless and unending, the death
of the soul.[258]

The Divine Nous constitutes the true nature of man; Philo, however,
insists with almost wearisome repetition, that the god within us has
no power in itself, and depends entirely on the grace and inspiration
of God without for knowledge, virtue, and happiness.[259] The Stoic
dogma, that the wise man is perfectly independent and self-contained
([Greek: autarchês]) appears to him as a wicked blasphemy. "Those
who make God the indirect, and the mind the direct cause are guilty of
impiety, for we are the instruments through which particular
activities are developed, but He who gives the impulse to the powers
of the body and the soul is the Creator by whom all things are
moved."[260] All thought-functions, memory, reasoning, intuition, are
referred directly to Divine inspiration, which is in Platonic
terminology the illumination of the mind by the ideas. Thus, finally,
all human activity is referred back to God.

This guiding principle determines Philo's attitude to knowledge,
involving, as it does, that we only know by Divine inspiration, or, as
he says, by the immanence of the Logoi.[261] The possibility of
knowledge was one of the burning questions of the age, and it was the
failure of the old dogmatic schools to answer it which led to a great
religious movement in Greek philosophy. How can man attain to true
knowledge, it was asked, about the universe, seeing that perceptions
vary with each individual, and of conceptions we have no certain
standard? The old Hebrew attitude to this question is expressed by the
verse of the Psalmist: "The heavens are the heavens of the Lord, but
the earth hath He given to the sons of men" (Psalm cxv), which implies
that man must not try to penetrate the secrets of the universe. Philo
is sufficiently a philosopher to desire knowledge about things Divine
and human, but at the same time he has a complete distrust in the
powers of human sense and human reason. About the physical universe he
is frankly a skeptic,[262] but his religious faith leads him to hold
that God vouchsafes to man some knowledge of Himself and of the proper
way of life, _i.e._, ethics. "Man knows all things in God."[363] Plato
similarly had despaired of knowledge of the physical world, and had
turned to the heavenly ideas as the true object of thought. Moreover,
in his early period, while his theory was still poetical and mystical,
he had conceived that knowledge was made possible in the subject, by
the entrance of "forms," or emanations, from the ideas. This theory
Philo adapts to his Jewish outlook. Like Plato, he turns away from the
physical to the ideal world,[264] and he regards the ideas of wisdom,
virtue, bravery, etc., which are theologically powers of God, as
continually sending forth Logoi, forms or forces (the angels of
popular belief), to inform and enlighten our minds. Throughout, God is
the cause of all knowledge as well as of being, for these effluences
are but an expression of God's activity. In Philo's theory, object and
subject are really one. What can be known are the modes or attributes
of God, which philosophically are "Ideas"; what knows is the emanation
of the Idea, which God sends into the human soul that is prepared to
receive it by pious contemplation. "Through the heavenly Wisdom,
wisdom is seen, for wisdom sees itself." "Through God, God is known,
for He is His own light."[265]

Thus all knowledge is intuition, and man's function is not so much to
reason as to lead a life of piety and contemplate the Divine work in
the hope of being blessed with inspiration. It would be a mistake,
however, to take Philo's words quite literally. He does not deny the
need of human effort and striving for knowledge; for the Divine
influence is not vouchsafed till we have prepared for it and
consecrated all our faculties to God. But, devout mystic as he is,
he ascribes every consummation to the direct help of the Deity. "The
mind is the cause of nothing, but rather the Deity, who is prior to
mind, generates thought."[266] The Greek philosopher had ascribed the
final synthesis of knowledge to a superhuman force. Philo ascribes to
God all the intermediate steps from sense-perception. It may be
admitted that his passive notion of philosophy involves the
abandonment of the Greek ideal, the eager searching of Plato after
truth. He lived in an age in which, through loss of intellectual
power, man had come to despair of the attainment of knowledge by human
effort, and to rely entirely upon supernatural means, Divine
revelations, visions, and the like. It is consistent with his whole
position that the crown of life is represented, not as an intellectual
state, but as a superhuman ecstasy of the Nous, wherein it is freed
not only from the body but from the rest of the soul, and is, so to
say, led out of itself.[267] He comments on the verse, "And the sun
went down and a deep sleep fell on Abraham" (Gen. xv. 12). "When the
Divine light," he says, "shines upon the mortal soul, the mortal light
sinks, and our reason is driven out at the approach of the Divine
spirit."[268] This is the Alexandrian interpretation of [Hebrew: shkina]
and [Hebrew: nboah], and though it is much affected by Greek mystical
ideas, yet at the same time it is broadly true to the spirit of Jewish
mysticism, as we see it presented in writers of all ages, and as the
Psalmist expressed it, "to abide under the shadow of the Almighty."

Philo's ethics, like the rest of his philosophy, exhibits the
transfusion of Greek ideas with his Hebrew spirit. The Greek
philosophers had evolved a rational plan of life, while the Jewish
teachers were impregnated with burning ardor for the living God; and
Philo brings the two things together, making ethics dependent on
religion. The Stoics, who were the most powerful school of his day,
regarded as the ideal of goodness life according to unbending reason
and in complete independence of God or man. Philo understands God as a
personal power making for righteousness, and man's excellence,
accordingly, which is likeness to God, is piety and charity.[269]
Above all he insists upon Faith ([Greek: pistis]) and he defines
virtue as a condition of soul which fixes its hopes upon the truly
Existent God. The Stoics also professed to honor faith or confidence
above all things, but the virtue which they meant was reliance upon
man's own powers. Philo's virtue is almost the converse of this. Man
must feel completely dependent upon God, and his proper attitude is
humility and resignation. So only can he receive within his soul the
seed of goodness, and finally the Divine Logos.[270] Yet at the same
time Philo remains loyal to the Jewish ideal of conduct: faith without
works is empty, and, as he puts it, "The true-born goods are faith and
consistency of word and action."[271]

The attainment of the highest excellence demands severe discipline,
save for those few blessed souls whom God perfects without any effort
on their part. The rest can only secure self-realization by
self-renunciation; they must avoid the bodily passions and bodily
lusts.[272] At times the Divine enthusiasm causes Philo, like many a
Jewish saint and like his master Plato, to scorn all bodily
limitations and recommend "insensibility" ([Greek: apatheia])[273]
by which he means that man should crush his physical desires and
repress his feelings. Not that the good life seems to him to imply
absence of pleasure. On the contrary, it is filled with the purest of
joy, for when man rises to the love of God "in calm of mind, all
passion spent," then and then alone has he tasted true joyousness. The
symbol of this bliss is Isaac ([Hebrew: ytshk]), the laughter of the
soul.

It was noticed in the second chapter that Philo modified his ethical
ideas during his life. In the earlier period he insists more strongly
on the need of ascetic self-denial, and has almost a horror of the
world. Maturer experience, however, taught him that man is made for
this world, and that a wise use of its goods was a surer path to
happiness and to God than flight from all temptations. In his later
writings, therefore, he exhibits a striking moderation. He reproaches
the ascetics for their "savage enthusiasm,"[274] probably hinting at
the extreme sects of the Essenes and the Therapeutæ. "Those who follow
a gentler wisdom seek after God, but at the same time do not despise
human things."

     "Truth will properly blame those who without discrimination
     shun all concern with the life of the State, and say that
     they despise the acquisition of good repute and pleasure.
     They are only making grand pretensions, and they do not
     really despise these things. They go about in torn raiment
     and with solemn visage, and live the life of penury and
     hardship as a bait, to make people believe that they are
     lovers of good conduct, temperance, and self-control."[275]

Philo's aphorism, which follows, "Be drunk in a sober manner," is
characteristic. The Stoic extreme of passionlessness is almost as
false as the Epicurean hedonism, and the mean between them is the
ideal Jewish life, in which godliness and humanity are blended.

We have now examined the main divisions of Philo's philosophy, and we
see that his metaphysics, cosmology, theory of knowledge, and ethics
are all religious in tone, and all determined in their main lines by
his Jewish outlook. His Hebraism is a seal which stamps all that
enters his mind from Greek sources, and the Bible, spiritually
interpreted, is the canon of all his wisdom.

There remains one minor aspect of his work which must be briefly
examined, because it has become closely associated with his name. This
is his number-symbolism, by which he ascribes important powers to
certain numbers, so that they are regarded as holy themselves and
sanctifying that to which they are attached. This feature of his
thought is commonly ascribed to Pythagorean influence, which was
strong at Alexandria, and, indeed, throughout the world, at this era.
The exact details of the holiness of four, seven, ten, fifty, etc.,
Philo may have borrowed from neo-Pythagorean sources, but the general
tendency was the natural result of his environment and his stage of
thought. It was a feature of the recurring childishness of ideas and
the renascence of wonder at common things which is apparent on many
hands. To have denied the powers of numbers would have seemed as
absurd and eccentric then as to deny the powers of electricity to-day.
And in all ages people have been found to regard numbers mystically as
a link between God and earth, and a means of solving all physical and
metaphysical problems. The Hebrew intellect, primitive as it was,
tended particularly to the reverence of the numerical powers. Witness
the Bible itself, which emphasizes certain numbers; and witness also
the fifth chapter of the Pirke Abot, with its lists ranged under four,
seven, and ten, which is only typical of the rabbinical attitude.
Philo is not original in his views concerning numbers, not above nor
below the loose thinking of his age. He accepts unquestioningly the
potency of seven, because of its marvellous mathematical properties,
ratios, etc., its geometrical efficacy, and because of the seven
periods of life from infancy to old age, of the seven parts of the
body, the seven motions, the seven strings of the lyre, the seven
vowels, and the very name, which is connected with worship ([Greek:
sebasmos]). All this is trifling and trite, but what is of
importance is the use which Philo makes of the sentiment. He converts
it throughout to the support and glorification of Jewish institutions.
Thus, if a man honors seven, he says, he will devote the Sabbath to
meditation and philosophy.[276] Further, as seven is the symbol of
rest and tranquillity, the Sabbath must be a day of perfect rest. Ten
is magnified so as to honor the Decalogue,[277] fifty so as to honor
the Feast of Pentecost. So, too, the Pythagoreans' mathematical
conceptions of God as "the beginning and limit of all things," or,
again, as the principle of equality, are approved by Philo, "because
they breed in the soul the fairest and most nourishing fruit--piety."
In short, Philo's Pythagoreanism only emphasizes his commanding
purpose--to deepen and recommend the Jewish God-idea and the Jewish
method of life.

Jewish influences throughout are the determining element of Philo's
teaching; they are the dynamic forces working upon the Greek matter
and producing the new Platonism, which constitutes Philo's
contribution to Greek philosophy. It may, indeed, be said that his
Hebraism makes Philo anti-philosophical, because he has no desire or
hope of adding to positive knowledge, but aims only at the calm of the
individual soul in union with its God. The Platonic Theory of Ideas,
metaphysical in origin, plays a very important part in his works, but
it is adapted mystically, and turned from an ideal of the human
intellect to a support of monotheism and piety. Here Philo is at once
the leader and the child of his generation; men were no longer
satisfied with rational systems, but wanted a religious philosophy,
based upon a transcendental principle and a Divine revelation which
could give them some certainty and some positive hope in life.
Doubtless, the strong mystical tendency in Philo destroyed the balance
between the intuitive and the discursive reason which makes the
perfect philosopher. In his overpowering passion for God, he distrusts
overmuch the analytical efforts of the human mind. Nevertheless, his
acquired Hellenism gives his Jewish conceptions a philosophical
impress, and this has made him the model of the school of religious
philosophers. The ministerial "Word" became the "ideal" expression of
God's mind, the governing reason, the world-soul; the angels were
spiritualized as a kingdom of Ideas. Piety received an intellectual as
well as a religious value, and the Mosaic law was raised to a higher
dignity as an ethical code of universal validity.

A complete harmony between the Hellenic and the Hebraic outlook upon
life was impossible, but Philo at least accomplished a harmony between
Hebraic monotheism and Greek metaphysics. He desired to show that
faith and philosophy were in agreement, and that the imaginative and
reflective conceptions of God and the Divine government were in
unison. And he may be considered to have realized his desire in his
synthesis of Jewish theology and Platonic idealism. He is through and
through a great interpreter, elucidating points of unity between
distinct systems of thought. In him the fusion of cultures, which
began with the Septuagint translation, reached its culmination. It
reached its zenith and straightway the severance began.

In the next chapter we shall trace Philo's place in Jewish thought;
here we may glance at his place in the development of Greek
philosophy. The fusion between Eastern and Western thought, which he
himself so strikingly illustrates, continued to dominate philosophy
for the next four hundred years; and Plato, who, with his deep
religious spirit, had a broad affinity with the Oriental conception of
the universe, was the supreme philosophical master. All the chief
teachers looked to him for the intellectual basis of their ideas and
read into his works their particular religious beliefs; but they
failed to maintain a true harmony between the two. The cultures of all
countries and races mingled, even as their peoples mingled under the
Roman Empire, but they were so combined as to lose the purity and
individuality of each element. The Eastern Platonists who followed
Philo brought to their interpretation less noble conceptions of the
Godhead, the Gnosticism of Syria, the dualism of Persia, the
impersonal pantheism of India, and the theurgies of Egypt, and
produced strange hybrids of the human mind. The one point of agreement
between them is that they conceive the Supreme God as impersonal and
entirely inactive, "a deified Zero," and endeavor by a system of
emanation to trace the descent of this baffling principle into man and
the universe. Philo was as unfortunate in his philosophical as in his
religious following, who both transformed his poetical metaphors into
fixed and rigid dogmas. His doctrine of the Logos was, on the one
hand, the forerunner of the Trinity of the Church, on the other of the
Trinity of the Alexandrian neo-Platonists. It is difficult, indeed, to
trace with certainty the connection between Philo and the later school
of Alexandrian Platonists, but there appears to be at least one clear
link in the teaching of the Syrian Numenius, who flourished in the
middle of the second century. To him are attributed the two sayings:
"Either Plato Philonizes or Philo Platonizes," and "What is Plato but
the Attic Moses?" Modern scholars have questioned the correctness of
the reference, but be this as it may, it is certain that Numenius used
the Bible as evidence of Platonic doctrines. "We should go back," he
says, in a fragment, "to the actual writings of Plato and call in as
testimony the ideas of the most cultured races; comparing their holy
books and laws we should bring in support the harmonious ideas which
are to be found among the Brahmans and the Jews."[278] Origen tells
us,[279] moreover, that he often introduced excerpts from the books of
Moses and the Prophets, and allegorized them with ingenuity. In one of
the few remains of his writings which have come down to us, we find
him praising the verse in the first chapter of Genesis, "The spirit of
God was upon the waters"; because, as Philo had interpreted
it--following perhaps a rabbinical tradition--water represents the
primal world-stuff. And elsewhere he mentions the efforts of the
Egyptian magicians to frustrate the miracles of Moses, following
Philo's account in his life of the Jewish hero.

The work of Philo helped to spread a knowledge of the Hebrew
Scriptures far and wide and to give them general authority as a
philosophical book; but it did not succeed in spreading the pure
Hebrew monotheism. The exalted Hebrew idea of God was still too
sublime for the pagan nations, even for their philosophers. The world
in truth was decaying morally and intellectually, and most of all in
powers of imagination; and its hunger for God found expression in
crude and stunted conceptions of His nature. Unable any longer to soar
to Heaven, it sullied the majesty of the Deity, and divided the
Godhead in order to bridge the gap. Numenius represents in philosophy
the Gnostic ideas about God which were widely held by the heretics,
Jewish and Christian, of the second century. He divides the Godhead
into two separate powers: (1) the impersonal Being behind all reality,
free from all activity whatsoever; (2) the Demiurge or active governor
of the universe, who again is subdivided into a transcendent and an
immanent power.

The teaching of Plotinus, the most famous of the later Alexandrian
neo-Platonists, shows a further step in the development of religious
Platonism. Viewed from its higher side it is an attempt to explain
everything as the emanation of the One. But philosophy in the third
century debased itself in order to support the tottering polytheistic
religion of the pagan world against the modified Hebraic creed,
Christianity, which was fast demolishing its power. Against the
Trinity of the Church the philosophers set up a heavenly Trinity of
so-called reason: the Ineffable One, the Demiurgic Mind, and the World
Soul; and between this Trinity and man they placed intermediate
hierarchies of gods, angels, and demons--in fact, the whole fugitive
army of Greek polytheism thinly disguised. All the vulgar fancies and
superstitions which Philo had intellectualized, these later Eastern
Platonists sought to revive and justify by conceptions of physical
emanation blended of false science and mysticism. They hoped to found
a universal religion by finding room in one system for the deities of
all nations!

From Plotinus down to Proclus, neo-Platonism became more
unintellectual, more insane, more pagan, and, finally, with its vapid
dreams, it brought the history of Greek philosophy to an inglorious
close. Its finer teachings, however, deeply affected mediaeval
philosophy, and not least the Arab-Jewish school. The theory of
emanations and spiritual hierarchies pervades the writings of Ibn
Ezra, Ibn Gabirol, and Ibn Daud, and thus indirectly provides a
connection between the culture of Alexandrian Judaism and the culture
of Spanish Judaism. The praise of God known as the [Hebrew: ktr mlkot] by
Ibn Gabirol is a splendid example of the Hebraizing of neo-Platonic
doctrines, which, though probably quite independent of his teaching,
recalls constantly the ideas of Philo.

By his place at the head of the neo-Platonic school Philo enters the
broad stream of the world's philosophical development, but his more
lasting influence was exercised over the religious philosophy of
Christianity. He was the direct master of what is known as the
Patristic school, which sought to combine the intellectual conceptions
of Plato with the religious ideas of the Gospels. Its most celebrated
teachers were Clement and Origen, both of Alexandria, who flourished
in the second century. They resorted largely to allegorical
interpretation, learning from Philo to trace in the Bible principles
of universal thought and profound philosophy; but they used his method
and his lessons to support notions of God and the Logos which were
alien to his spirit. He had possessed pre-eminently the soaring
imagination of poetry, which is the crown of the intellectual and of
the religious mind, and unites them in their highest excellence; but
they bounded their philosophy within the narrow limits of dogma, and
thereby destroyed the harmony between Hebraism and Hellenism which he
had contrived to effect. The controversy of Origen and Celsus began
again the battle between reason and faith, "which was to destroy for
centuries the independence of philosophy and to break the continuity
of civilization." Had Philo really been ploughing the sand, and was an
agreement between faith and reason, between religion and philosophy,
impossible? Can the two finest creations of the mind only be combined
on the terms that one is subordinate, or rather servile, to the other?
In Judaism, if anywhere, the combination should be possible, for
Judaism has as its basis an intuitional conception of God, which is in
harmony with the philosophical conception of the universe, and it has
little dogma besides. The neo-Platonists and the Church Fathers failed
to carry on the ideal of Philo, but it was to be expected that among
his own people, the nation of philosophers, as he had called them, he
would have found true successors. Yet the use made of his work by the
Christians compelled his people to regard him as a betrayer of the law
and to avoid his goal as a treacherous snare. For centuries Greek
philosophy was banned from Jewish thought, and Philo's works are not
mentioned by any Jewish writer. Strangers possessed his inheritance,
and his name alone, "Philo-Judæus," bore witness to his nationality.
It is an interesting speculation to consider how different might have
been the history, not only of the Jews, but of the world, if the
Hellenistic Judaism of Philo had prevailed in the Roman-Greek world
instead of "the impurer Hellenism of Christianity." When, in the tenth
century, the leaders of Jewish thought broke the bonds of seclusion,
and brought anew to the interpretation of their religion the culture
of the outer world, Greek philosophy became again a powerful
influence, though it was Aristotle rather than Plato whom they
studied. The harmonizing spirit of Philo, which may be accounted part
of the genius of the race, lives on in Saadia, Maimonides, Ibn Ezra,
Ibn Gabirol, and Judah Halevi. But the difference between him and the
Arabic school is marked. They do not inherit his whole object, for
they aimed not at a philosophical Judaism which should be a
world-religion, but at a philosophical Judaism for the more
enlightened Jews alone. Philo's work was the culminating point,
indeed, of a great development in Judaism, produced by the mingling of
the finest products of human reason and human imagination, but it was
particularly the expression of his own commanding genius. He lacked a
true successor, for those who shared his aim did not inherit his
Jewish outlook, and those who shared his Jewish outlook did not
inherit his aim. What is characteristic of and peculiar to Philo is
the combination of the missionary and the philosopher. Living at a
time when the Jewish genius expanded most brilliantly, and when
Judaism exercised its greatest influence, he hoped to make his
religion universal by showing it to be philosophical, and to bring
about by the aid of Plato the ideal of the prophets.

       *       *       *       *       *




