VII

PHILO AND JEWISH TRADITION


We have seen from time to time how Philo's interpretation of the Bible
corresponds with Palestinian Jewish tradition; and we must now
consider more in detail the relations of the two schools of Jewish
learning. Until the last century it was commonly supposed that no
close relation existed, and that the Alexandrian and Palestinian
schools were independent and opposed; Scaliger, the greatest scholar
of the seventeenth century, wrote[280] that "Philo was more ignorant
of Hebraic and Aramaic lore than any Gaul or Scythian," and this was
the opinion generally held. The researches of Freudenthal and
Siegfried[281] have shown the falsity of these views; and, most
important of all, Philo refutes them out of his own mouth. He refers
in many different parts of his works[282] to the tradition and the
wisdom of his ancestors, he tells us how on the Sabbath the Jews
studied in their synagogues their special philosophy,[283] and he
commences his "Life of Moses" by declaring that against the false
calumnies of Greek writers he will set forth the true account which he
has learnt from the sacred writings and "from certain elders of his
race." In support of his statement we have the remark of Eusebius, the
Christian historian, and our chief ancient authority for Philo's
work,[284] that he set forth and expounded not only the laws of the
Bible, but many institutions and opinions of his fathers. Apart from
these direct references, the numerous points of correspondence between
Philo's interpretations and those of the Talmud and later Midrash
would compel us to admit a connection between Alexandria and
Jerusalem.

The break between the two schools did not show itself till after the
time of Philo. Up to the first century of the Christian era the rabbis
encouraged the union of Shem and Japheth--the two good sons of one
parent--and the stream of ideas flowed quite freely between the
teachers in Palestine and the Hellenized colony in Egypt.[285] Hence
the Palestinian Jews, on the one hand, received the first fruits of
this mingling of cultures, and the Alexandrian Jews, on the other,
must have inherited the early tradition of the rabbinical interpreters
embodied in ancient Halakah and Haggadah. By this common heritage,
rather than by any direct borrowing, it seems more reasonable to
account for the correspondence in the two Midrashim. It should be
remembered that until the second century of the common era the mass of
Jewish tradition was a floating and developing body of opinion not
consigned to writing or formalized, but handed down by word of mouth
from teacher to pupil, and preacher to congregation: in this way it
was diffused throughout the mind of the race, indefinitely and, to
some extent, unconsciously shaping its thought. The detailed points of
agreement between Philo and the Talmud and Midrash are not of great
moment in themselves, but they are the signs of a unity of development
and the catholicity of Judaism in the East and West. Doubtless the
development was more national and at the same time more legal in
Judæa, in Alexandria more Hellenistic and philosophical, but there is
a common spiritual bond between the two expressions, pious images,
fancies, similes, interpretations which they share. They are, as it
were, children of one family, and despite the varying influences of
environment they maintain a family resemblance. With the Sibylline
oracles we may compare Daniel and the Psalms of Solomon; with Aristeas
and his fellow-Apologists, Josephus; with the allegorical commentaries
of Philo, the Midrashim. Modern scholars have gone far to prove that
Philo was the expounder of an Hellenic Midrash upon the Bible, in
which were gathered the thoughts and ideas that had been brought to
Egypt by the Jewish settlers, modified, no doubt, by Greek influences,
but still bearing the stamp of their origin. Philo, then, appears in
the direct line of the tradition which from the time of the Great
Synagogue was disseminated through two channels, the schools of
Palestine and the writers of Alexandria. He developed the national
Jewish theology in a literary form, which made it available for the
world, but with him the tradition as a Jewish tradition ends; in its
further Hellenistic development it departed entirely from its original
principles.

It is natural that the larger number of parallels between Philo and
the rabbis is to be found in the Haggadic portions of Talmudic
teaching, for the Haggadah represents the same spirit as underlies
Philo's work, though in a more peculiarly Jewish form; it is an
allegory, a play of fancy, a tale that points a moral, or illustrates
a question. It had, too, largely the same origin, for it gathered
together the popular discourses given in the synagogue on the
Sabbaths. Yet the relation of Philo to the other domain of the Talmud,
the code of life, or the Halakah, is of great interest; for, as we
have seen,[286] the Alexandrian community had a Sanhedrin of their
own, of which Philo's brother was the president, and he himself
probably a member; and in his exposition of the "Specific Laws" he has
preserved for us the record of certain interpretations of the Jewish
code, which are illuminating as much by their difference from, as by
their agreement with, the practices of Palestine. The general aim of
Philo's exegesis of the law was to show its broad principles of
justice and humanity rather than to formulate its exact detail. It is
true, he makes it an offence[287]--unknown to the rabbis--for
a Jew to be initiated into the Greek mysteries, but usually he is
concerned to recommend the Halakah to the world rather than expand it
for his own community. This is shown in his treatment of the civil as
much as the moral law. The great system of jurisprudence in his day,
with which every code claiming to have universal value had necessarily
to challenge comparison, was Roman Law. That part of it which was
applied throughout the Empire, the _jus gentium_, was regarded as
"written reason." It is probable that contact with Roman jurisprudence
had affected the practical interpretations which the Alexandrian
Sanhedrin put upon the Biblical legislation, and was the cause of some
of their differences from the Palestinian Halakah. In treating the
ethical law, Philo's object was to show its agreement with the
loftiest conceptions of Greek philosophers, and, indeed, its
profounder truth; in treating the civil law of the Bible, his object
likewise was to show its agreement with the highest principles of
jurisprudence and its superiority to pagan codes. If at times he
supports a greater severity than the Palestinian rabbis eventually
allowed, that is where greater severity implies a closer relation to
Roman Law. Thus he has not the horror of capital punishment which the
Jerusalem Sanhedrin exhibited; he would condemn to death the man who
commits wilful homicide, whether by his own hand or by poison;[288]
whereas the other Halakah allows it only in the former case. He who
commits perjury also is to suffer capital punishment.[289] He adds a
law which finds no place in the Palestinian tradition, making the
exposure of children a capital crime.[290] Again, following the text
of the Biblical law literally (see Deut. xxi. 18), he gives power of
life and death to parents over their rebellious children, whereas the
Jewish law demands a trial before a court to make the death sentence
legal. He approves of the _lex talionis_, "an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth," agreeing here, indeed, with the opinion of earlier
rabbis like R. Eliezer (see Baba Kama 84, [Hebrew: 'yn tht 'yn mmsh],
"the law of eye for eye is to be taken literally"), and disagreeing with
the later Halakic interpretation, which says that the law of Moses means
the award of the value of an eye for an eye, etc.

This is one instance among many of Philo's adoption of the older
tradition, established probably under the Sadducæan predominance,
which was modified in the rabbinical schools of the first and the
second century. Paradoxically, in his exposition of the law, Philo
follows the letter more closely as the expression of justice, while
the later rabbis often allegorize it in order to support their humaner
interpretation. Thus, commenting on the passage in Exodus xxii. 3
about the law of theft, "If the sun be risen upon him, blood shall be
shed for blood," he, like R. Eliezer, interprets [Hebrew: dbrim kktbm][291]
_i.e._, literally. "If," he says, "the owner catches the thief before
sunrise, he may kill him, but after the sun has risen he must bring him
before the court."[292] This also was the Roman law, but the Halakah
interprets more artificially: "If it were as clear as sunlight that
the thief would not have killed the owner, then the owner may not kill
him." Philo would justify the old law; the rabbis explain it away. On
the other hand, in his treatment of the law relating to slaves, Philo
extends the liberality both of the Bible and the Halakah. He declares
that the slave is to be set free when by his master's violence he loses
an eye or even a tooth.[293] The Bible and the Talmud direct emancipation
only where the slave loses a limb; but Philo writes eloquently of the
humanity of which man is deprived by the loss of sight; and he would
apparently condemn the master who injured his slave more seriously to the
full penalties of the ordinary law.[294] Maimonides, in his exposition of
the law, approves the milder practice,[295] and this suggests that it
had an old tradition behind it. Beautiful is Philo's stray maxim,
"Behave to your servants as you pray that God may behave to you. For
as we hear them, so shall we be heard, and as we regard them, so shall
we be regarded."[296] In his whole treatment of slavery, Philo shows
remarkable enlightenment for his age. He objects, indeed, to the
institution altogether, and he tempers it continually with ideas of
equality. Thus, following the Halakah, he directs the redemption of a
slave seven years after his purchase, and he treats the laws of the
seventh-year rest to the land and of the jubilee as of universal
validity.

Coming to the more specifically religious laws we find that Philo,
missionary as he is, prohibits altogether marriage with Gentiles,[297]
and that though, in the opinion of certain rabbinic teachers, the
Biblical prohibition extended only to marriage with the Canaanite
tribes, and unions with other Gentiles were permitted.[298] Philo
recognizes how dangerous such unions are for the cause which he had so
dearly at heart, the spreading of Judaism. "Even," says he, "if you
yourself remain true to your religion through the influence of the
excellent instruction of your parents, yet there is no small danger
that your children by such a marriage may be beguiled away by bad
customs to unlearn the true religion of the one only God."[299]
Throughout, Philo is true to the mission of Israel in its highest
sense. That mission is not assimilation, and it is to be brought about
by no easy method of mixing with the surrounding people. It can be
effected only by holding up the Torah in its purity as a light to the
nations, and by offering them examples of life according to the law.

Of the special ordinances for Sabbaths and festivals Philo mentions
only those consecrated by the Biblical law or ancient tradition, which
probably were the only ones settled in his day. He lays down the
prohibition to kindle fire,[300] to make or return deposits, or to
plead in the law courts on the Sabbath; he speaks of the reading of
the Haggadah and Hallel on the night of Passover, of the bringing of a
barley cake during the 'Omer and of the first fruits to the Temple on
the Feast of Weeks, of the Shofar at New Year, and of the Sukkah, but
not of the Lulab at Tabernacles. It should be remembered that the
Halakah was not consolidated till the second or third century, and in
Philo's time it was in the process of formation by different schools
of rabbis. But the passage quoted in an earlier chapter, about adding
to the law, proves his reverence for the oral law.[301]

Though his statement of the civil and religious law is of great
interest to the student of Halakic development, Philo's work presents
greater correspondence, on the whole, with the Haggadah, which in a
primitive way draws philosophical and ethical lessons from the Bible
narrative. It is a free interpretation of the Scriptures, the
expression of the individual moralist; it loves to point a moral and
adorn a tale, and in many cases it is in agreement with the
Hellenistic school. To take a few typical examples: An early
interpretation explains the story of the Brazen Serpent, as Philo
does,[302] to mean that as long as Israel are looking upward to the
Father in Heaven they will live, but when they cease to do so they
will die. Another, like him again, finds the motive of the command to
bore the ear of the slave who will not leave his master at the seventh
year of redemption, in the principle that men are God's servants, and
should not voluntarily throw away their precious freedom. So, too, the
Haggadah agrees in numerous points with Philo's stories about the
patriarchs.[303] If one were to go through the Midrashic
interpretations of the Five Books of Moses, he would find in nearly
every section interpretations reminiscent of Philo. In some cases,
however, there are striking contrasts in the two commentaries. Thus
the Midrash[304] tells that the four rivers of Eden symbolize the four
great nations of the old world; to Philo, they represent the four
cardinal virtues established by Greek philosophers. The Palestinian
commentators were prone to see an historical where Philo saw a
philosophical image.

The question may be asked, Who is the originator and who the borrower
of the common tradition? And it is a question to which chronology can
give no certain answer, and for which dates or records have no
meaning. For the Haggadah was not committed to writing till many
generations had known its influences, and it was not finally compiled
till many generations more had handed it down with continuous
accretions. The Haggadah in fact is part of the permanent spirit of
the race going back to a hoary past, and stretching down "the echoing
grooves of time" to the tradition of Judaism in our own day. The
Hebrew Word means, and the thing is, "what is said": the utterances of
the inspired teacher, some tale, some happy play of fancy, some moral
aphorism, some charming allegory which captivated the hearers, and was
handed down the generations as a precious thought. It is significant
in this regard that the Haggadah is remarkable for the number of
foreign words which it contains, Greek, Persian, and Roman terms
jostling with Hebrew and Aramaic. For while the Halakah was the
production of the Palestinian and Babylonian schools alone, the
Haggadah brought together the harvest of all lands; and scraps of
Greek philosophy found their way to Palestine before the Alexandrian
school developed its systematic allegory. In the Mishnah, the earliest
body of Jewish lore which was definitely formulated and written down,
one section is Haggadic, the passages we know as the "Ethics of the
Fathers." Now, we cannot place the date of this compilation before the
first century,[305] and thus it would seem to be contemporary with
Philo's work, to which it affords numerous parallels. But the great
mass of the Haggadah, the Pesikta, the Mekilta, and the other
Midrashim, were all later compilations, some of them as late as the
fifth and the sixth century. Are we to say, then, that where they
correspond to Philo they show his influence? At first this would
appear the natural conclusion.

There is a better test of priority, however, than the date of
compilation, the test of the thought itself and its expression. And
judged by this test we see that the Haggadah is the more ancient, the
primal development of the Hebrew mind. The "Sayings of the Fathers"
are typical of the finest and most concentrated wisdom of the
Haggadah, and exhibit thought in its impulsive, unsystematic, gnomic
expression, neither logical nor illogical, because it knows not logic.
Beautiful ethical intuitions and profound guesses at theological truth
abound; anything like a definite system of ethics and theology is not
to be found, whence it is said, "Do not argue with the Haggadah." Even
more so is this the case with the bulk of the Midrash. There, pious
fancy will weave itself around the history and ideals of the people,
and suddenly one comes across a sage reflection or a philosophical
utterance. With Philo it is otherwise. Compared with the Greeks he is
unsystematic, inaccurate, wanting in logic, exuberant in imagination.
Compared with the rabbis he is a formal and accurate philosopher, an
exact and scholarly theologian. The floating poetical ideas of the
Haggadah are woven by him into the fabric of a Jewish philosophy and a
Jewish theology, and knit together with the rational conceptions of
Aristotle's "Metaphysics" and Plato's "Timæus." We may say, then,
almost with certainty, that Philo derives from the early Jewish
tradition, though at the same time he introduced into that tradition
many an idea taken from the Greek thinkers, which found its way to the
later Palestinian schools of Jamnia and Tiberias, and was recast by
the Hebraic imagination.

Over and over again we find that he adopts some fancy of his ancestors
and develops it rhetorically and philosophically in his commentary. To
give many examples or references to examples of this feature of
Philo's work is not within the scope of this book, but of his
development of an old Palestinian tradition the following passage may
serve as a typical instance:

     "There is an old story," he writes, "composed by the sages
     and handed down by memory from age to age.... They say that,
     when God had finished the world, he asked one of the angels
     if aught were wanting on land or in sea, in air or in
     heaven. The angel answered that all was perfect and
     complete. One thing only he desired, speech, to praise God's
     works, or to recount, rather than praise, the exceeding
     wonderfulness of all things made, even of the smallest and
     the least. For the due recital of God's works would be their
     most adequate praise, seeing that they needed no addition of
     ornament, but possessed in the sincerity of truth the most
     perfect eulogy. And the Father approved the angel's words,
     and afterwards appeared the race gifted with the muses and
     with song. This is the ancient story; and in accord with it,
     I say that it is God's peculiar work to do good, and the
     creature's work to give Him thanks."[306]

Now this legend and moral appear in another form in the collection of
Midrash, the Pirke Rabbi Eliezer, which apparently had ancient sources
that have disappeared. There it is told: "When the Holy One, blessed
be He, consulted the Torah as to the completeness of the work of
creation, she answered him: 'Master of the future world, if there be
no host, over whom will the King reign, and if there be no creatures
to praise him, where is the glory of the King?' And the Lord of the
world was pleased with her answer and forthwith He created man."[307]

The Haggadah is rich also in allegorical speculation, of which there are
traces in the Biblical books themselves. In the book of Micah, for
example, we find that the patriarchs are taken as types of certain
virtues, Abraham of Kindness, [Hebrew: hsd], and Jacob of Truth,
[Hebrew: 'mt] (vii. 20). And when the ideas of the people expanded
philosophically in Palestine and in Alexandria, the profounder
conceptions were attached to Scripture by the device of allegorical
interpretation, and certain rabbis attributed a higher value to the
inner than to the literal meaning. Thus Akiba, who wrote an elaborate
allegorical work upon the Song of Songs,[308] held that the book was the
most profound in the Bible, and Rabbi Judah similarly regarded the book
of Job.[309] The Palestinian allegorists took to themselves a wider
field than the Alexandrian, and looked for the deeper meanings rather in
the Wisdom Literature than in the Pentateuch, which was to them
essentially the Book of the Law, and, therefore, not a fit subject for
Mashal, _i.e._, inner meanings.[310] Hence, their allegorism was more
natural, more real, and truer to the spirit of that which they
interpreted. They allegorized when an allegory was invited, whereas
Philo and his school often forced their philosophical meanings in face
of the clear purport of the text, and without regard to the Hebrew. In
the one case allegory was a genuine development, and might have been
adopted by the original prophet: in the other, it was reconstruction;
and the artificial un-Hebraic character of the Hellenistic commentary
was one of the causes of its disappearance from Jewish tradition. While
the Palestinian allegorists based their continuous philosophical
interpretation upon the Wisdom Books, they, at the same time, looked for
secondary meanings wherever opportunity offered, and found lessons in
letters and teachings in names. An early school of commentators was
actually known as [Hebrew: dorsh rshomot][311] or interpreters of signs,
and their method was by examination of the letters of a word, or by
comparison of different verses, to explore homilies. For instance, the
verse, "And God showed Moses a tree" (Exod. xvi. 26), by which he
sweetened the waters at Marah, symbolized, by a play on the word
[Hebrew: vyvrhu],[312] that God taught Moses the Torah, of which it is
said, "She is a tree of life" (Prov. iii. 18). Another happy example of
this method occurs in the sixth section of the Pirke Abot, where the
names in the itinerary, [Hebrew: mmtna nhlial, vmnhlial bmot] (Numb.
xxi. 19), are invested with a spiritual meaning. Whoever believes in the
Torah, it is written, shall be exalted, as it is said, "From the gift of
the law man attains the heritage of God, and by that heritage he reaches
Heaven."

In this passage of Palestinian allegorism, it may be noticed that the
Torah is regarded as a spiritual bond between man and God, and as a
sort of intermediary power between them. This feature is almost as
frequent in the Midrash as the Logos-idea in Philo, so that it may be
said that rabbinic theology finds an idealism in the Torah which
corresponds to the idealism of the Philonic Word. It is expressed, no
doubt, naïvely and fancifully, even playfully, without attempt at
philosophical deductions. It is informed by the same spirit as the
Alexandrian allegory, but it is essentially poetical and impulsive,
and set forth in mythical personification, not in deliberate
metaphysics. The Torah to the rabbis was the embodiment of the Wisdom
which the writer of Proverbs had glorified, and it takes its
prerogatives. God gazes upon the Torah before He creates the
world.[313] The Torah, though the chief, is not, however, the only
object of rabbinic idealism. God and His name, it is said, alone
existed before the world was created,[314] and in a Talmud legend
relating the birth of man, the ideal power is identified with Truth,
which, like the Logos, is pictured as God's own seal.

  "From Heaven to Earth, from Earth once more to Heaven
  Shall Truth, with constant interchange, alight
  And soar again, an everlasting link
  Between the world and Sky."

  (Translation of Emma Lazarus.)[315]

Correspondingly, Philo identifies the Logos with the name of God and
with Truth.

Of another piece of Talmudic idealism we catch a trace in Maimonides'
"Guide of the Perplexed,"[316] where he says that the rabbis explained
the designation of God, [Hebrew: lrubb b'rbot] [rendered in the authorized
version, "He who rideth on the heavens" (Ps. lxviii. 4)], to mean that
He dwelt in the highest sphere of heaven amid the eternal ideas of
Justice and Virtue, as it is said: "Justice and Righteousness are the
base of Thy throne" (Ps. lxxxix. 15). These fancies and
interpretations indicate that in Palestine as well as in Alexandria an
idealistic theology and a religious metaphysics were developing at
this period, though in the East it was more imaginative, more Hebraic,
more in the spirit of the old prophets.

The more serious metaphysical and theological speculation of the
rabbis was embodied in the doctrine of the "Creation," and the
"Chariot," [Hebrew: m'sha br'shit] and [Hebrew: m'sha mrkba], which in
form were commentaries on the early chapters of Genesis and the visions
of Ezekiel. They were reserved for the wisest and most learned, for the
rabbis had always a fear of introducing the student to philosophy until
his knowledge of the law was well established. They held, with Plato, that
metaphysical speculation must be the crown of knowledge, and if treated as
its foundation, before the necessary discipline had been obtained, it
would produce all sorts of wild ideas. Judaism for them was primarily
not a philosophical doctrine but a system of life. The Hellenistic
school was so far false to their standpoint that it laid stress for
the ordinary believer upon the philosophical meaning as well as upon
the law. And as events proved, this led to the neglect of the law and
the dogmatic establishment of speculative theories as the basis of a
new religion. Doubtless the consciousness that the philosophical
development led away from Judaism increased the distrust of the later
rabbis for such speculation, and made them regard esoteric as a milder
term for heretical; but the warning is already given in Ben Sira: "It
is not needful for thee to see the secret things."[317] The Talmud,
indeed, records certain ideas about the powers of God and His relation
to the universe in the names of the great masters; and in these ideas
there are striking resemblances to Philo's conceptions. The Word is
spoken of as an intermediate agency;[318] the finger of God is really
the Word; the angels are sprung from the Words of God: Ben Zoma
declared that the whole work of creation was carried out by the Word,
as it is written, "And God said."[319] But on the other hand there are
passages in which the rabbis oppose the Alexandrian attitude, and
point out in its excessive philosophizing a danger to Judaism, so that
in the end they exclude it. Rabbi Ishmael, we are told, warned his
pupils of the danger of Greek wisdom.[320] Akiba, living at a time
when the Jews were fighting for spiritual as well as for physical life
against the combined forces of the Greeks and Romans, proposed to ban
all the [Hebrew: sfrim hitsonim],[321] and the Gemara argues that among
these were included the Apocryphal works which showed Greek influence.
Again, Elisha ben Abuya, the arch-heretic, is held up to reproach because
he read [Hebrew: sfri minim],[322] under which title Greek Gnostic books
are probably implied.

At the time when this spirit shows itself, the appearance of heretical
offshoots from Judaism was already pronounced. Heresy was the
aftermath of the combination of Judaism and Hellenism, and if further
disintegration was to be avoided, the seductive Greek influence had to
be discouraged. There is always the danger in a mingling of two
cultures, that each will lose its particular excellence in a compound
which has certain qualities, but not the virtues, of either element.
Compromises may be desirable in political affairs; in affairs of
thought they are perilous. Down to the time of Philo, the fusion of
thought at Alexandria had been beneficial, and had broadened the
Jewish outlook without impairing its strength, but the dissolving
forces of civilization never operated more powerfully than in the
early centuries of the common era, when the intellect of the world was
jaded and weary, and the great movement in culture was a jumbling
together of the ideas of East and West. More especially in the
cosmopolitan towns, Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome, national life,
national culture, and national religion were undermined; and even the
Jew, despite the stronghold of his law and tradition, was caught in
the general vortex of mingling creeds and theologies. Out of this
confusion (which was in one aspect a continuation of the work of
Philo) emerged, first, fantastic Gnostic religious and philosophical
sects, and, finally, the Christian Church, which proved the system
best fitted to survive in the circumstances, but was in essence as
well as in origin a blending of different outlooks, and true to the
cardinal points of neither Hebraism nor Hellenism. The rabbis, with
remarkable intuition, saw that the Hellenistic development of Judaism,
which had vainly striven to make Judaism universal, had ended in
violating its monotheism and abrogating its law; and in that era of
disintegration, denationalization, and decomposition they determined
to keep their heritage pure and inviolate. Judaism by their efforts
was the only national culture which survived, and some sacrifice had
to be made to secure this end. The literary monuments of the
Alexandrian community from the Septuagint translation to the
philosophy of the Christian scholarchs were cut out of Jewish
tradition, and the Babylonian school was ignorant altogether of the
[Hebrew: hkma yonit] (Greek wisdom). When Ben Zoma desired to study the
[Hebrew: sfrim hitsonim], and asked of his teacher at what hour of the
day it was lawful to do so, he received the reply that it was permissible
at an hour which was neither day nor night; for the precept was to study
the Torah by day and night, as it is said, [Hebrew: ] (Josh. i. 8). Bar
Kappara, indeed, a rabbi of the third century, explained Genesis ix. 27,
"God shall enlarge Japheth and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem," to
mean that the words of the Torah shall be recited in the speech of
Japheth (_i.e._, Greek) in the synagogues and schools,[323] but by
most other teachers the union between Shem and Japheth was no longer
encouraged, because Japheth had become degraded and was allied with
the cruel children of Edom (Rome).

Besides the Talmud and the Midrash we have, in the work of Josephus,
another indication that there was in Philo's own day communication
between Alexandria and Palestine. The Jewish historian marks the
influence of Hellenic ideas in Palestine in fullest measure, and like
Philo he seeks by embellishment to recommend the histories and
Scriptures of his people to the non-Jew and to bring home their
thought to the cultured Roman-Greek world. Thus, in the preface to his
"Antiquities," he notes, as Philo noted in his commentary, that Moses
begins his laws with a philosophical cosmology; he says also that
Moses spoke some things under a fitting allegory, hiding beneath it a
very remarkable philosophical theory. The allegorical commentary which
Josephus declared that he intended to write has not--if it was
written--come down to us, but we have in his writings certain
allegorical valuations of names that agree directly with Philo. Abel
he explains as signifying mourning, Cain, [Hebrew: kin], as selfish
possession. In the priestly garments of Aaron he sees with Philo a
symbol of the universe, which the high priest supported when he
entered the Holy of Holies. And the ritual vessels of the tabernacle
have also their universal significance.

     "If," says the Palestinian Hellenist, "any man do but
     consider the fabric of the tabernacle and regard the
     vestments of the high priest, he will find that our
     legislator was a Divine man, and that we are unjustly
     reproached by those who attack us for tribal narrowness. For
     if he look upon these things without prejudice, he will find
     that each one was made by way of imitation and
     representation of the universe. When Moses ordered twelve
     loaves to be set on the table, he denoted the years as
     distinguished into so many months. By branching out the
     candlestick into seven parts, he intimated the seven
     divisions of the planets.... The vestments of the high
     priest, being made of linen, signified the earth, the blue
     color thereof denoted the sky, the pomegranates symbolized
     lightning, and the noise of the bells resembled thunder. And
     the fashion of the ephod showed that God had made the world
     of four elements."[324]

Let us now listen now to Philo: "The raiment of the priest is
altogether a representation and imitation of the universe, and its
parts are the parts of the other. His tunic is all of blue linen, the
symbol of the sky. [The rabbis had a similar fancy of the Tsitsith
(fringes).] And the flowers embroidered thereon mark the earth, from
which all things flower. And the pomegranates are a symbol of the
water, being skilfully called thus ([Greek: rhoischoi], _i.e._,
flowing fruit) because of their juice, and the bells are the symbols
of the harmony of all the elements."[325]

It is true that the symbolism of two allegorists is varied, but a
common spirit and aim underlie their interpretations. This is true
alike of their account of the ritualistic and civil law of Moses.
Either, then, there was a common source of Jewish apologetic
literature, or Josephus must have borrowed from Philo. It is
significant that he is the only contemporary of Philo that mentions
him. He speaks of him as a distinguished philosopher, the brother of
the alabarch, and the leader of the embassy to Gaius.[326] He knows
also of the anti-Semitic diatribes of Philo's great enemy Apion, and
two of his extant books are masterly reply to their outpourings. Hence
it is not rash to assume that he knew at least that part of Philo's
work which had a missionary and apologetic purpose--the "Life of
Moses" and the "Hypothetica." He makes no acknowledgment to them, it
is true, but expressions of obligation were not in the fashion of the
time. Plagiarism was held to be no crime, and citation of authorities
in notes or elsewhere was almost unknown in literature--save in the
Talmud,[327] where to tell something in the name of somebody else is a
virtue. But one can hardly doubt that the man who devoted himself to
refuting the lying calumnies of Apion first made himself master of the
classical work of Apion's opponent, which claimed to give to the Greek
world the authoritative account of the Jewish lawgiver and his
legislation.

What Josephus knew must have been known to other cultured Jews of
Palestine. Yet Philo, save in one doubtful case which will be noticed,
is not mentioned by any Jewish writer between Josephus in the first
and Azariah dei Rossi in the sixteenth century. The compilers of the
Midrashim and the Yalkut, the philosophers of the Dark and Middle
Ages, finally the Cabbalists, are continually reminiscent of his
doctrines, but they do not mention his works or his existence. The
Midrash Tadshé,[328] a tenth century compilation of allegorical
exegesis, contains definite parallels to Philonic passages, especially
in its quotations from an Essene Tannaite, Pin[h.]as ben Jaïr; but
again the trace of influence is indirect. On the other hand, the
Christian writers from the time of Clement in the second century quote
him freely, make anthologies of his beautiful sayings, and in their
more imaginative moments acclaim him the comrade of Mark and the
friend of Peter. The rise of the Christian Church, which coincided
with the downfall of the nation, caused the rabbis to emphasize the
national character of Judaism in order to preserve the old faith of
their fathers in the critical condition in which exile, persecution,
and assimilation placed it. The first century was a time of feverish
dreams and wild hopes that were not realizable: men had looked for the
coming of the days of universal peace and good-will, and the
Alexandrian Jews in particular hoped for the spreading of Judaism over
the world. The rabbis recognized that this consummation was far away,
and that Judaism must remain particularist for centuries in the hope
of a final universalism. Meantime it must hold fast to the law and, in
default of a national home, strengthen the national religious life in
each Jewish household. They regarded Greek as not only a strange but a
hostile tongue, and the allegorical exegesis of the Bible, which had
led to the whittling away of the law, as a godless wisdom. The
Septuagint translation, which had offered a starting point for
philosophical speculation, was replaced by a new Greek version of the
Old Testament made by Aquila, a proselyte, in the first century. It
gave a baldly literal translation of the Hebrew text, sacrificing form
and even lucidity to a faithful transcript. With unconscious irony the
rabbis, who rejoiced in its truth to the Hebrew, said of Aquila, "Thou
art fairer than the children of men, grace is poured into thy
lips"[329] (Ps. xlv). In truth the work was utterly innocent of
literary grace. A translation of the Bible marked the end, as it had
marked the beginning, of Jewish-Hellenistic literature, but if the
first had suggested the admission, so the other suggested the
rejection of Greek philosophy from the interpretation of Judaism and a
return to the exclusive national standpoint. The rabbinical
appreciation of Aquila's work shows that, while the Jews were in
Palestine, many still required a Greek translation of the Bible; but
when in the third century C.E. the centre of the religion was moved to
Babylon, Greek was forgotten, and the rabbis for a period lost sight
of Greek culture. It is another irony of history that our manuscripts
of Philo go back to an archetype in the library of Cæsarea in
Palestine, which Eusebius studied in the fourth century. Philo came to
the land of his fathers in the possession of his people's enemies, and
at a time when he could no longer be understood by his people.

Philo's works were not translated into Hebrew, and as Greek ceased to
be the language of the cultured, they could not, in their original
form, have influenced later Jewish philosophers. But the Christians,
in their proselytizing activity, had translated them into Latin and
Armenian before the fifth century, and through one of these means they
may possibly have exercised an influence upon the new school of Jewish
philosophy, which, opening with Saadia in the tenth century, blossomed
forth in the Arabic-Spanish epoch. The light of historical research is
beginning to illumine the obscurity of the Dark Ages, and has revealed
traces of an Alexandrian allegorist in the writings of the Persian Jew
Benjamin al-Nehawendi, himself a distinguished allegorizer of the
Bible, who wrote in the ninth century and taught that God created the
world by means of one ministerial angel.[330] Benjamin relates that
the doctrine was held by a Jewish sect known as the Maghariya, which
probably sprang up in the fourth or the fifth century, when sects grew
like mushrooms. The Karaite al-Kirkisani, who wrote fifty years later,
says that the Maghariya sect used in support of their doctrine the
"prolegomena of an Alexandrian sage" who gave certain remarkable
interpretations of the Bible; and in one of Dr. Schechter's Genizah
fragments, which is probably to be ascribed to Kirkisani, there are
contained examples of the Alexandrian's explanations of the Decalogue,
which occur, and occur only, in Philo's treatise on the "Ten
Commandments."

This connection between Philo and an obscure Jewish sect, or an
obscurer Persian-Jewish writer, may appear far-fetched and not worth
the making. In itself doubtless it is unimportant, but it serves to
keep Philo, however barely, within Jewish tradition. For it shows that
Alexandrian literature, though probably through the medium of a
Mohammedan source, was known to some Jews in the centuries of
transition. It may be that further examination of the great Genizah
collection, which has opened to Jewish scholarship a new world, will
reveal further and stronger ties to unite Philo with his philosophical
successors, of whom the first is Saadia Gaon (892-942 C.E.). Indeed
the main interest of this newly-discovered connection, if it can be
seriously so regarded, is that it suggests the possibility of Saadia's
acquaintance with Philo by means of a translation. That Saadia read
the works upon which Christian theologians relied, is certain; and a
fragment in which he refers to the teaching of Judah the
Alexandrian[331]--also unearthed from the Cairo Genizah--goes some way
to support the suggestion. The passage refers to the connection of the
number "fifty" with the different seasons of the year, and though it
does not tally exactly with any piece of the extant Philo, it is in
the Philonic manner. And Philo, who was surnamed Judæus by the Church,
would have been re-named by his own people, translating from the
Church writers, [Hebrew: yhuda]. One would the more willingly catch on to
this floating straw, because Saadia was at once a compatriot of Philo,
born in the Fayyum of Egypt, and the first Jew who strove to carry on
his work. He aimed at showing the philosophy of the Torah, and its
harmony with Greek wisdom in particular. Aristotle, who had been
translated into Arabic, had meantime supplanted Plato as the master of
philosophy for theologians, and Saadia's _magnum opus_, [Hebrew: amonot
tsd'ot], is colored throughout by Aristotelian ideas. But the difference
of masters does not obscure the likeness of aim, and, albeit
unconsciously, Saadia renews the task of the Hellenic-Jewish school.

Saadia's work was carried on and expanded in a great outburst of the
Jewish genius, which showed itself most brilliantly in the
Moorish-Spanish kingdom. The general cultural conditions of Alexandria
in the first century B.C.E. were reproduced in Spain in the tenth
century. Once again the Jews found themselves politically emancipated
amid a sympathetic environment, and again they illumined their
religious tradition with all the culture which their environment could
afford. The mingling of thought gave birth to a great literature, both
creative and critical; to a striking body of lyric poetry; to a
systematic theology, and a religious philosophy.

While the study of the old Talmudic lore was maintained, the greatest
teachers developed tradition afresh by a philosophical restatement
designed to make it appeal to the mental attitude of the enlightened.
The sermon flourished again, collections of Haggadah (Yalkut) were
made as storehouses of homilies, and metaphysical treatises modelled
upon the works of the schoolmen set forth a philosophical Judaism for
the learned world. It is notable also that these last were not written
in Hebrew or in the Talmudic dialect, but in Arabic, the language of
their cultured environment; for though the missionary spirit was dead,
the controversial activity of the period impelled the Jewish
philosophers to present their ideas in the form used by the
philosophers of the general community.

It is not only the general conditions of the Arab-Jewish period, but
also the special development of Jewish ideas, which recalls the work
of the Alexandrian school. This was, indeed, to be expected, seeing
that in both cases there was a mingling of Hebraism and Hellenism. In
Spain, however, the Jews acquired Hellenism at second hand, and
through the somewhat distorted medium of Arabic translations or
scholastic misunderstanding, and hence the harmony is neither complete
nor pure. They endeavored to show that the teachings of Aristotle are
implicit in the written and the oral law, but the interpretation is
hardly convincing even in "The Guide of the Perplexed," of Maimonides,
the monumental work which marks the culmination of mediæval Jewish
philosophy.

If there is one figure in Jewish tradition with whom Philo challenges
at once comparison and contrast, it is Maimonides, the brightest star
of the Arabic, as he was of the Hellenic, development of the Jewish
religion. Though there is nothing on which to found any direct
influence of the one on the other, the aim, the method, the scope of
their philosophical work are the same, the relation which they hold to
exist between faith and philosophy wellnigh identical. The metaphysics
of the Bible, according to both, is hidden beneath an allegory, and
is meant only for the more learned of the people. To Maimonides the
Bible is not only the standard of all wisdom, but it is "the Divine
anticipation of human discovery." In the words of Hosea, God has
therein "multiplied visions and spoken in similitudes" (xii. 11). The
duty of the Jewish philosopher is to expound these metaphors and
similes; and Maimonides, endeavoring to knit Greek metaphysics closely
with Jewish tradition, propounds a science of allegorical values,
which by exact philological study traces the inner as well as the
outer meaning of the Hebrew words. But differentiated as it is by
greater mastery of the tradition and closer adherence to the Hebrew
text, his method is nearly as artificial and his thought as extraneous
to the text as the method and thought of Philo. The content of their
philosophies is, indeed, strikingly alike, save that the one is a
Platonist, the other an Aristotelian. This involves not so much a
difference of philosophical views as a difference of temper and of
objective. The followers of Plato are mystics, yearning for the love
of God; the followers of Aristotle are rationalists, seeking for the
abstract knowledge of God. Hence in Maimonides there is less soaring
and more argument than in Philo. Everything is deduced, so far as may
be, with exactitude and logical sequence--according to the logic of
the schoolmen--and everything is formalized according to scholastic
principles. But the subjects treated are the same--the nature of God
and His attributes, His relation to the universe and man, the manner
of the creation, and the way of righteousness.

Maimonides, who is in form more loyal to Jewish tradition, is to a
larger degree than Philo dependent on authority for the philosophical
ideas which he applies to religion. To a great extent this is due to
the spirit of his age, for in the Middle Ages not only was the matter
of thought, but also its form, accepted on authority, and Aristotle
ruled the one as imperiously as the Bible ruled the other. The
differences of form and substance do not, however, obscure the
essential likeness with Philo's interpretation of Judaism. With him
Maimonides holds that the essential nature of God is incognizable.[332]
No positive predication can properly be applied to Him, but we know
Him by His activities in relation to man and the world, _i.e._, by His
attributes or by what Philo called His powers. Maimonides does not
preserve the absolute monarchy of the Divine government, but places
between God and man intermediate beings with subordinate creative
powers--the separate intelligences of the stars, which are identified
with the angels of the Bible.[333] But he maintains inviolate the sole
causality of God and His immanence in the human soul. Maimonides, like
Philo, gives in addition to a metaphysical theology a philosophical
exposition of the law of Moses, which has the same guiding principle
as the books on the "Specific Laws." Moses was the perfect
legislator,[334] whose ordinances are [Hebrew: tsdikim], _i.e._, perfectly
equitable, attaining "the mean"--the Aristotelian conception of
excellence--and identical with the eternal laws of nature.[335]
Numerous details of Maimonides' interpretations agree with those given
in the books on the "Specific Laws." Whether correspondence of thought
is merely an indication of the similar workings of Jewish genius in
similar conditions, or whether it is the effect of an early tradition
common to both, or whether, finally, there was connection, however
indirect, between the two minds, it is now impossible to say. But at
least the philosophy of Maimonides confirms the inner Jewishness of
the philosophy of Philo, and its essential loyalty to Jewish
tradition.

Not less striking than his correspondence with later Jewish religious
philosophy, though not less indefinite, is the relation of Philo to
the later Jewish mystical and theosophical literature, purporting also
to be a development of hoary tradition, and indeed calling itself
simply the tradition, [Hebrew: kbla]. Between Philo and the Cabbalah it is
as difficult to establish any direct connection as between Philo and
rabbinic Midrash, but the likeness in spirit and the signs of a common
source are equally remarkable. To trace God in all things through
various attributes and emanations, to bring God and man into direct
union, to prove that there is an immanent God within the soul of the
individual, and to show how this may be inspired with the
transcendental Deity--this is common to both. In the earliest times
the mystic doctrine appears to have been a form of Jewish Gnosticism,
speculation about the nature of God and His connection with the world.
It probably embraced the [Hebrew: m'sha br'shit] and the [Hebrew: m'sha
mrkba], though we know not what these exactly contained.[336] But it was
not till the Middle Ages that Jewish mysticism received definite and
separate literary expression, and by that time it was mixed up with a
number of neo-Platonic and magical fancies and foreign theosophies. The
later compilations of this character form what is more regularly known
as the Cabbalah; but, apart from the professions of the later writers,
a continuous train of tradition affirms the existence of secret
teachings in Judaism from the time of the Babylonian captivity. Jewish
mysticism is as much a continuous expression of the spirit of the race
as the Jewish law. We may then without rashness conclude that the
later Cabbalah is a coarser development, for a less enlightened and
less philosophical age, of the Gnostic material which Philo
refashioned in the light of Platonism for the Hellenized community at
Alexandria. Modern scholars have favored the idea that the Essenes
were the first systematizers of and the first practitioners in the
Cabbalah, and have interpreted their name[337] to mean those engaged
in secret things, but the mystic tradition itself is earlier than the
foundation of a special mystic sect. It is part of the heritage from
the Jewish prophets and psalmists and the Babylonian interaction with
Hebraism.

Philo had large sympathies with the Essenic development of Judaism, and
he speaks at times as though he had joined one of their communities, and
therein had been initiated into the great mysteries and secret
philosophies of the sages. We have noted that he offers his most
precious wisdom to the worthy few alone, "who in all humility practice
genuine piety, free from all false pretence." They, in turn, are to
discourse on these doctrines only to other members of the brotherhood.
"I bid ye, initiated brethren, who listen with chastened ears, receive
these truly sacred mysteries in your inmost souls, and reveal them not
to one of the uninitiated, but laying them up in your hearts, guard them
as a most excellent treasure in which the noblest of possessions is
stored, the knowledge, namely, of the First Cause and of virtue, and
moreover of what they generate."[338] These mysteries, it is not
unlikely, represent according to some scholars the [Hebrew: sod] of the
Talmudical rabbis, which was elaborately developed in the Zohar and
kindred writings. Be this as it may, Philo's religious intensity
expresses the spirit of the Cabbalists, his mystic soaring is the
prototype of their theosophical ecstasies; his persistent declaration
that God encloses the universe, but is Himself not enclosed by anything,
contains the root of their conception of the En Sof ([Hebrew: 'yn
sof]),[339] his Logos-idealism, with its Divine effluences, which are
the true causes of all changes, physical and mental, is companion to
their system of [Hebrew: 'olmim] and [Hebrew: sfirot], emanations and
spheres. His fancies about sex and the struggle between a male and
female principle in all things[340] are a constant theme of their
teachers, and form a special section of their wisdom, [Hebrew: sof
htsrog], the mystery of generation. His conception of the Logos as the
heavenly archetype of the human race, the "Man-himself," is the Platonic
counterpart of their [Hebrew: adm kdmon], or "primal man," who is known
in the ancient allegorizing of the Song of Songs. His number-mysticism
and his speech-idealism reappear more crudely, but not obscurely, in
their ideas of creative letters, of which the cosmogony by the
twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet in the Sefer Yezirah is
typical. Finally, his teachings of ecstasy and Divine possession are
repeated in divers ways in their descriptions of the pious life
([Hebrew: hnanot]).

Philo, indeed, viewed from the Jewish standpoint, is the Hellenizer
not only of the law but also of the Cabbalah, the philosophical
adapter of the secret traditional wisdom of his ancestors. He brings
it into close relation with Platonism and purifies it; he clears away
its anthropomorphisms and superstitious fantasies, or rather he raises
them into idealistic conceptions and sublime exaltations of the soul.
By his deep knowledge of the intellectual ideas of Greece he refined
the strange compound of lofty imagination and popular fancy, and
raised it to a higher value. Plato and the Cabbalah represent the same
mystic spirit in different degrees of intellectual sublimity and
religious aspiration; Philo endeavored to unite the two
manifestations. He lived in a markedly non-rational age given over to
mystical speculation; and Alexandria especially, by her cosmopolitan
character, "furnished the soil and seed which formed the mystic
philosophy that knew how to blend the wisdom and folly of the
ages."[341] Through the mass of apocalyptic literature that was poured
forth in the first centuries of the common era, through the later
books of the Apocrypha, through the Sefer Yezirah of the ninth and the
Zohar of the thirteenth century, and through the vast literature
inspired by these books, run the ideas that composed Philo's mystic
theology. Philo himself was unknown, but his religious interpretation
of Platonism had entered into the world's thought, and inspired the
mystics of his own race as well as of the Christian world.

After a thousand years of Latin domination the Renaissance revived the
study of Greek in Western Europe, and to the most cultured of his race
Philo was no longer a sealed book. The first Jewish writer to show an
intimate acquaintance with him and a clear idea of his relation to
Jewish tradition was Azariah dei Rossi, who lived in the sixteenth
century. His "Meor Einayim" dealt largely with the Hellenistic epoch
of Judaism, and its attitude towards it is summed up in the remark
that "all that is good in Philo agrees with our law."[342] He pointed
out many instances of agreement, and some of disagreement, but he
objected in general to the allegorizing of the historical parts of the
Torah and to the absence of the traditional interpretations in Philo's
commentaries. He shared largely the rabbinical attitude and could not
give an independent historical appreciation of Philo's work. That was
not to come for two hundred years more. To Dei Rossi we owe the Jewish
translation of Philo's name, [Hebrew: ydydim 'lksndri].[343] To the outer
world Philo was "the Jew"; to his own people, "the Alexandrian."

As soon as Greek was reintroduced into the scholarly world, Philo
began to reassert an important influence on theology. One remarkable
school of English mystics and religious philosophers, the Cambridge
Platonists, who wrote during the seventeenth century, founded upon him
their method and also their general attitude to philosophy.[344] They
were Christian neo-Platonists, who looked for spiritual allegories in
the Old and New Testaments, and combined the teachings of Jesus with
the emotional idealism of the Alexandrian interpreters of Plato. They
affirmed enthusiastically God's revelation to the universe and to
individual man through the Logos. Their imitation of Philo's
allegorism serves to mark the important place that he occupied in the
learned world during the seventeenth century; and supports, however
slightly, the suggestion that he influenced, directly or indirectly,
the supreme Jewish philosopher of the age, Baruch de Spinoza. That he
was well known in Holland at the time is shown in divers ways. He is
quoted by the famous jurist Grotius in his book which founded the
science of international law; he is quoted and criticised, as we have
seen, by Scaliger; and curiously enough, his name, "Philo-Judæus," is
applied by Rembrandt to the portrait of his own father, now in the
Ferdinandeum at Innsbruck. It is tempting to conjecture that there was
a direct connection between the Jewish philosophers of the ancient and
the modern world. Whether it existed or not, there is certainly
kinship in their ideas. Spinoza does actually refer in one place, in
his "Theologico-Political Tractate" (ch. x), to the opinion of
Philo-Judæus upon the date of Psalm lxxxviii, and there are other
places in the same book, where he almost echoes the words of the
Jewish Platonist; as where he speaks of God's eternal Word being
divinely inscribed in the human mind: "And this is the true original
of God's covenant, stamped with His own seal, namely, the idea of
Himself, as it were, with the image of His Godhead" (iv); or, again,
"The supreme reward for keeping God's Word is that Word itself."
Spinoza knew no Greek, but, master as he was of Christian theology, he
may have studied Philo in a Latin translation, and caught some of his
phrases. With or without influence, he developed, as Philo had done, a
system of philosophy, starting from the Hebrew conception of God and
blending Jewish tradition with scientific metaphysics. The Unity of
God and His sole reality were the fundamental principles of his
thought, as they had been of Philo's. He rejected, indeed, with scorn
the notion that all philosophy must be deduced from the Bible, which
was to him a book of moral and religious worth, but free from all
philosophical doctrine. Theology, the subject of the Bible, according
to him, demands perfect obedience, philosophy perfect knowledge.[345]
Both alike are saving, but the spheres of the two are distinct: and
Moses and the prophets excel in law and imagination, not in reason and
reflection. Hence Spinoza approached the Bible from the critical
standpoint; and, on the other hand, he approached philosophy with a
free mind searching for truth, independent of religious dogmatism, and
he was, therefore, the founder of modern philosophy. None the less his
view of the universe is an intellectual expression of the Hebraic
monotheism, which unites a religious with a scientific monism. He
regards God as the only reality, sees and knows all things in Him, and
deduces all things from His attributes, which are the incomplete
representations that man makes of His true nature; he explains all
thought, all movement, and all that seems material as the working of
His modes; and, finally, he places as the end of man's intellectual
progress and the culmination of his moral life the love of God. In
truth, Jewish philosophy has its unity and its special stamp, no less
than Jewish religion and tradition, from which it receives its
nurture. Thrice it has towered up in a great system: through Philo in
the classical, through Maimonides in the mediæval, through Spinoza in
the modern world. In the Renaissance of Jewish learning during the
nineteenth century, Philo was at last studied and interpreted by scholars
of his own people. The first modern writer to reveal the philosophy of
Jewish history was Nachman Krochmal (1785-1840), and his posthumous Hebrew
book, "The Guide of the Perplexed of the Time," edited by Zunz,
contained the first critical appreciation of the Hellenistic Jewish
culture by a rabbinic scholar. He knew no Greek, but he studied the
works of German writers, and in his account of Philo gives a summary
of the remarks of the theologian Neander, himself a baptized Jew. In
his own criticism he discerns the weakness and strength of Philo from
the Jewish aspect. "There are," he says, "many strange things in
Philo's exegesis, not only because he draws far-fetched allegories
from the text, but also because he interprets single words without a
sure foundation in Hebrew philology. He uses Scripture as a sort of
clay which he moulds to convey his philosophical ideas. Yet we must be
grateful to him because many of his interpretations are beautiful
ornaments to the text; and we may apply to them what Ibn Ezra said of
the teachings of the Haggadah, 'Some of them are fine silks, others as
heavy as sack-cloth.'"

Krochmal translated into Hebrew examples of Philo's allegories and
gave parallels and contrasts from the Talmud. The relation between the
Palestinian and the Alexandrian exegesis was more elaborately
considered by a greater master of Hellenistic literature, Zacharias
Frankel (1801-1875), who has been followed by a band of Jewish scholars.
Yearly our understanding of the Alexandrian culture becomes fuller.
Philo, too, has in part been translated into Hebrew. Indirect in the
past, his influence on Jewish thought in the future bids fair to be
direct and increasing.

       *       *       *       *       *




