V

PHILO'S THEOLOGY


"The most remarkable feature about Judaism," says Darmesteter, "is
that without a philosophical system it had reached a philosophical
conclusion about the government of the world and the nature of
God."[171] The same idea underlies the statement of the Peripatetic
writer Theophrastus (who lived in the latter part of the fourth
century B.C.E.) that the Jews are a people of philosophers,[172] and
the epigram of Heine, that they pray in metaphysics. Intuitively, the
lawgiver and prophets of the Hebrew race had attained a conception of
monotheism to which the greatest of the Greek philosophers had hardly
struggled by reason. The Greeks had started with separate
nature-powers, which they had finally resolved into a supreme
nature-force; the Hebrews had started with the historical God of their
fathers, whom they had universalized into the Creator of the world and
Father of all the human race. Wellhausen has suggested that the
intellectual development of Judaism with its tendency to become a
purified monotheism moved in the same direction towards which Greek
thought tended in its philosophical speculation of the universe. The
difference between the two conceptions of God, however, remained even
in their universalized aspect; the one was an impersonal world-force,
the other a personal God in direct relation with individual man.
Elsewhere than in Judæa, it has been well said, religious development
reaches unity only by sacrificing personality. But the prophets, whose
conception of God was imaginative rather than rational, preserved His
nearness while expanding His sway. Israel, to use Philo's etymology,
is the man who sees God,[173] and his religious genius gave to the
world a personal incorporeal Deity, who is both transcendent and
immanent, personal and yet above human conception. It is unnecessary
to quote evidence of this view of the Godhead in the Bible, and it
would be superfluous to adduce passages from the rabbis, did they not
bear a striking similarity to the words of Philo. God to them is not
only the Creator of the world, but also the Father of the world, the
Governor of the world, the Only One of the world, the Space of the
world, filling it as the soul fills the body.[174] Now, this Jewish
conception of God is dominant in Philo. To him also God is not only
the Creator but the Father of the universe.[175] He is the One and the
All.[176] He is ever at rest, yet he outstrippeth everything, nearest
to everyone, yet far removed, everywhere and nowhere, above and
outside the universe, yet filling creation with Himself.[177] Philo
loves to attach to the Deity these opposite predicates, for in this
way alone can we form for ourselves some conception, however
inadequate, of His Being. Strictly, God is unconditioned, and cannot
be the subject of predication, for all determination involves
negation, and hence in one aspect He is not conceivable nor
describable, nor nameable.[178] Siegfried and Zeller press this
negative attitude to the Deity, and find that there is an inherent
contradiction in Philo's system, which ruins it, in that his God, upon
whom all depends and who is the object of all knowledge, is absolutely
unknowable and unapproachable. But this is to take Philo according to
the strict letter to the neglect of the spirit, and to do that with
one so eloquent and so careless of verbal accuracy is utterly to
misunderstand him.

The Greek philosophers in their attempt to formulate an exact notion
of the First Being by abstract metaphysics had, indeed, conceived it
in this fashion; and Philo, harmonizing Greek metaphysics and Hebrew
intuition, is drawn at times into a presentation of God which appears
to deny His personality and make of Him an abstraction. What has been
said of Spinoza is true no less of Philo.[179] "The tendency to unity,
to the infinite, to religion, overbalanced itself till, by its mere
excess, it seemed to be changed into its opposite. But this is not his
spirit, only the dead ultimate result of an imperfect logic that
confuses an abstract with a concrete unity." In truth, the moment man
tries to define his conception of God's essence in words, he either
impairs and perverts his idea, or he must use words that do not really
make the idea any clearer than it was unexpressed. Thus in the Hymn of
[Hebrew: ygdl] the writer, versifying the creeds of Maimonides, seeks to
define God: "He is a Unity, but there is no Unity like His; He is
hidden and there is no end to His oneness." But nobody can claim that
this gives any adequate conception of what he means; so, too, Philo,
when he tries to analyze God's being metaphysically, only obscures the
God of his soul, who was the historical God of Israel.

The Hebraic God, like the Greek First Being, has no qualities, but
unlike the other He has ethical attributes, and it is by these that we
know Him and by these that He is related to the universe and to man.
"Failing to comprehend Him in His essence we must aim at the next best
thing, to comprehend Him as He is manifested to the world."[180] So in
the "Hymn of Unity" it is written, "In images they told of Thee, but
not according to Thy essence! They but likened Thee in accordance with
Thy works."[181] And this is the manner in which Philo conceives Him:
"God's grace and goodness it is which are the causes of creation."[182]
"The just man, seeking the nature of all things, makes this most
excellent discovery, that all things are due to the grace of God." "To
those who ask the origin of creation, one could most easily reply that
it is the goodness and grace of God which He bestowed on the race that
is after His image."[183] "For all that is in the universe and the
universe itself are the gift and bounty and grace of God."[184] Again,
"God is omnipotent; He could make all evil, but He wills only what is
best."[185] "All is due to God's grace, though nothing is worthy of
it;[186] but God looked to His own eternal goodness, and considered
that to do good befitted His own blessed and happy nature."

Philo's life-aim, as we have seen,[187] was to see God in all things
and all things in God. He is the sole principle of being, exercising
continuous causality; and yet He is always at rest, for His energy is
the expression of His being. "He never ceases to create, for creation
is as proper to Him as it is proper to fire to burn and to snow to
cause cold."[188] Further, to Him all human activity and excellence
are directly due. He fertilizes virtue by sending down the seed from
Heaven,[189] and He brings forth wisdom from the human mind by His own
Divine effluence. "It is the distinctive feature of Jewish thought,"
said Spinoza, "never to make account of particular and secondary
causes, but in a spirit of devotion, piety, and godliness to refer all
things directly to the Deity." No Jewish thinker ever applied this
principle more thoroughly than Philo; and it gives an unique color to
his work in the history of ancient philosophy. All our lives are one
unceasing miracle, due to the constant manifestation of God's power;
and the miracles of the Bible are examples of the universal working of
Divine care rather than exceptions from it.

The dominant feeling behind Greek thought is that man is the measure
of all things: Plato, attacking the standpoint of his nation, had
declared that God is the measure, and Philo repeats his maxim with a
new intensity. It means for him that man's mind is a fragment or
particle of the Divine universal mind, which, however, is impotent
till called into activity by the further Divine gift of inspiration.
Knowledge and happiness, therefore, come not through God, but from
God.[190] "The Divine Word streams down from the fount of wisdom, and
waters the plants of virtuous souls."[191] "To God alone is it fitting
to use the word 'my,'"[192] or, put in another way, man has only the
usufruct and God the ownership of his powers. Pride of intellect is
therefore a deadly sin, because it involves a false, incomplete idea
of God, and true knowledge involves reverence. The ideal of the Greek
sage, the independent reason, is a godless thing, and those in whom a
knowledge of Greek philosophy produces intellectual pride are not
disciples of Divine Wisdom. In a fine passage Philo charges with
hypocrisy those who talk in high-sounding language about the
all-powerful Deity, and yet declare that by their own intellect they
can comprehend the world.[193] This was the attitude not only of the
proud Stoic, but of certain kindred Jewish sects, which were subject
to Greek influences, such as the Gnostics and the Cainites. And upon
them Philo appears to be pouring his wrath when he exclaims: "How have
you the effrontery to go on making and listening to fine professions
about piety and the honor of God, when you have within you, forsooth,
the mind equal to God that comprehends all human things, and can
combine good and evil portions, giving to some a mixed, to others an
unmixed lot? And when anybody accuses you of impiety, you brazenly
declare that you belong to the school of that noble guide and teacher
Cain (_i.e._ insolent reason), who bade you pay honor to the secondary
rather than the primary cause."

Philo has often been reproached with intellectualism, and excessive
regard to acquired wisdom, and it may be urged that by his allegorical
method he tried to find in the Bible the sanction of two degrees of
religious faith, the higher for the philosopher and the lower for the
ordinary man. At the same time, however, before his God he retains the
childlike simplicity of the most un-Hellenic rabbi, and the perfect
humility of the Hasid. His conviction of the dependence of all upon
God's grace is the perfect corrective of his intellectual
exclusiveness. The idea of God as the unity which comprehends
everything and causes everything is the great Jewish contribution to
thought, and binds our literature together in all its manifestations.
It characterizes and unites the poetical utterance of the Bible
prophets, the pious wisdom of the rabbis, the philosophical systems of
Philo and Maimonides.

The more sublime and exalted the conception of God, the more
imperative became the need for the thinking Jew to explain how the
perfect infinite Being came into relation with the imperfect finite
world of man and matter. How can the incorporeal God be the founder of
the material universe? How can the infinite mind be present in the
finite thought of man? How can the all-good Power be the creator of
the evil which we see in the material world and of the wickedness that
flourisheth among men? These questions presented themselves to the
Israelite after he had consummated his marvellous religious intuition,
and became the starting-point of a theology which is nascent in the
Wisdom literature of the Bible. Theology is the reasoning about God
which follows always in the footsteps of religious certitude. First,
man by his intuitive reason rises to some idea of the Godhead
satisfying to his emotion; next, by his discursive reason, he
endeavors to justify that idea to his experience in analyzing God's
operations. Renan, disposing sweepingly of a great question, declares
that the Jewish monotheism excluded any true theology. But, in fact,
in Palestine, and still more in Alexandria from the third century
B.C.E., Jewish thought had as one of its constant aims to develop a
theory of the operations of the one God in the world of material
plurality. When the Jews came in contact with the cosmological
mythology of Babylon, their God seemed to soar beyond the reach of
men, and they looked to powers nearer them to bridge the widening
gulf. To some extent this aim engendered a modification in the
religious monotheism, and led to the interposition of intermediate
conceptions between the Inconceivable and man. "The whole angelology,"
says Deutsch,[194] "so strikingly simple before the Captivity and so
wonderfully complex after it, owes its quick development in Babylonian
soil to some awe-stricken desire which grows with growing culture,
removing the inconceivable Being further and further from human touch
or knowledge." Speaking generally, it may be said that reflection
about God's relations produced in Palestine the doctrine of angels, in
Alexandria the doctrine of Wisdom and the Logos. At the same time the
Wisdom and the Word were not unknown to the Palestinian Midrash, and
the hierarchies of angels to the Alexandrian, for the suggestion of
the different subordinate powers had been evolved before the two
traditions had become independent. The doctrine of angels never indeed
won recognition from the rabbis, but it was for centuries an element
of popular belief.

More philosophical than the doctrine of angels was the conception of
different attributes of God [Hebrew: mdot], which were different
manifestations of His activity, to the human mind separable and
distinguishable from each other, though absolutely they were
inseparable aspects of the Godhead. Chief among these were the
attribute of mercy and the attribute of justice, [Hebrew: mdt hrhmim]
and [Hebrew: mdt hdin],[195] by which, according to a Midrash, Adam
was driven from Eden. And these conceptions, though distrusted by the
Synagogue, entered into later parts of the Prayer Book. "Attribute of
Mercy, reveal thyself for us; make our supplication to fall at the feet of
Thy Creator; and on behalf of Thy people beseech for mercy"; thus runs
a fine prayer in the Ne'ilah service of the Day of Atonement, and many
of the other Selihot prove the persistence of this development of
Jewish belief. The theory of Divine attributes was common to Palestine
and Alexandria, and plays, as we shall see, an important part in
Philo's[196] thought; but the distinctive Hellenistic theology is the
hypostasis of the Wisdom and the Word of God. In the Bible itself, and
notably in Proverbs, we find Wisdom personified--the first vague,
poetical suggestion of a Jewish theology. As the Jews came into
contact with Hellenic influence, the tendency to develop the
personification into a power increased, and may be traced through the
first flower of Græco-Jewish culture, the Wisdom literature. The Greek
philosophers had conceived the First Cause as a ruling Mind, or
universal Reason, and influenced by this conception, yet loyal to
their monotheistic faith, the Jewish writers of the Hellenistic age
spoke of the Wisdom as the minister of God, the power by which He
ruled creation. The apocryphal books of Ecclesiasticus and the Wisdom
of Solomon exhibit Wisdom passing from the poetical personification of
the Bible to the separate hypostasis of theology. In the verse of the
Bible sage, "Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her
seven pillars" (Prov. ix. 1), she is the creation of the purely
poetical fancy, but in the Wisdom of Solomon she has become a link
between Heaven and earth, the creation of the theologian's reflection.
"She reacheth from one end of the world to the other with strength,
and ordereth all things graciously. She is settled by God on His
throne, and by her He made the world, by her the righteous were saved.
She watched over the father of the human race, and she delivered
Israel from Egypt." In Ecclesiasticus it is written, "All Wisdom is
from the Lord and is with Him forever. She cometh forth from the mouth
of the Most High, and was created before all things. God having
fashioned her from the beginning placed her over all His works. Then
she covered the earth as a mist, she pitched her tent in high places
and her palace was in a pillar of cloud. She ministered in the
tabernacle, and was established in Zion, in Jerusalem, the beloved
city." In similar strain, in the apocalyptic book of Enoch (xxx), God
says, "On the sixth day I ordered My Wisdom to make man"; and in the
Sibylline Oracles and Aristobulus she appears as the assessor of God
who ruleth over men.

Parallel with Wisdom, the Word of God was developed into something
between a poetical image and a separate power. Again the development
starts from a Biblical metaphor. "By the word of the Lord were the
heavens created, and all their host by the breath of His mouth" (Ps.
xxxiii). "God of our Fathers and Lord of Mercy, who didst make all
things by Thy word," says the writer of the Wisdom of Solomon.
Inspired again by the phrase of the Psalmist, "He sent His word, and
healed them" (Ps. cvi. 20), he hymns the Divine Logos as the
all-powerful emissary doing God's bidding among men. "It was neither
herb nor emollient that cured Israel in the wilderness (when bitten by
the fiery scorpions), but Thy Logos, O Lord, which heals all things."
Later, when he describes the destruction of the first-born in Egypt,
he rises in a pæan to a finer poetical flight: "When tranquil silence
folded all things, and night in her own swiftness was in the midst of
her course, Thy all-powerful Logos leaped from heaven, from his royal
throne, a stern warrior into the midst of the doomed land, bearing as
a sharp sword Thy Divine commandment, and having taken his stand
filled all things with death: and he touched heaven and walked upon
earth." The Jewish poet, rejecting the idea that the perfect God could
descend to earth and slay men, brushes away the anthropomorphism of
the Bible, and summons from his mind this creation mixed of Hebrew
imagination and Greek reason. So, too, Onkelos, wherever activity upon
earth was ascribed to God, wrote, in his translation (Targum) of
Scripture, "the word of the Lord," and for the material hand he
substituted the more abstract might. The same development,[197] under
the names of Memra and (less frequently) of [Hebrew: dbor], shows that
the word-agent of God appealed to certain of the rabbis in their
desire to explain away, on the one hand, expressions in the Bible
which seemed to invest the Deity with corporeal qualities, and, on the
other, so to divide His infinite perfection as to make His presence
immanent upon earth.

The teachers at Alexandria were above all others induced to develop
the Word into the active power, since they seemed thereby to find in
the Bible a remarkable anticipation of Greek philosophy. The Greek
Logos, by which "the Word" was translated in the Septuagint, meant
also thought and reason, and during the Hellenistic age was the
regular term by which the philosophical schools expressed the
impersonal world-force which governed all things. The Logos idea among
the Jews was a modification of intuitive and naïve monotheism; among
the Greeks it was a step upwards, demanded by reason, from polytheism
to a monistic view of the universe. By the first century its
recognition as the ruling power in both the physical and moral
universe had become a point of union in all philosophical schools--the
common stamp of philosophical theology. Between the Semitic
ministerial word uttered by a personal Being and the Greek pantheistic
governing reason, there was probably an early connection, due to
Eastern influences which operated upon the founders of Greek
philosophy, which later schools lost sight of. When the Hebrew
Scriptures were translated, the two coalesced more fruitfully in the
Greek term Logos, and a point of union was provided between the
philosophical and the Jewish theology. Moreover the local Egyptian
influence aided the union, for the god Thoth was also identified with
the Logos, which thus appeared as a religious conception common to all
races, the basis of a universal creed. And besides the world-reason of
the philosophers, another Greek influence no doubt tended to further
the development of the Logos in Jewish thought. One of the most marked
characteristics of the Hellenistic age is the renascence of wonder at
the institutions of human life, and more especially at numbers and
speech.

Numbers were held to contain the essence of things, and the marvellous
powers of four, seven, and ten received honor from all sects and
schools. Words, too, were regarded almost as a mystic power, distinct
from thought, incorporeal things which made thought real and gave it
expression. The mystical susceptibility of Philo to the power of
numbers has been noticed by every critic and exaggerated by not a few;
his mystical valuation of words and speech, though far more important
in his thought, has been commonly passed over. The analysis which
Greek writers made of the relation between the mental thought, the
sound which utters it, and the mind which thinks it, was invested with
special importance for the Jewish thinker, who transferred it from the
human to the Divine sphere. He applied it to interpret the constant
Biblical phrases "and God said" or "and God spoke," according to
notions in which philosophy and theology are mixed; and propounded a
mystic idealism and a mystic cosmology, in which God's thought or
comprehensive Word becomes the archetype of the visible universe, His
single words the substantive universe and the laws of nature. A
century before Philo, Aristobulus--assuming the genuineness of his
Fragments--wrote:[198] "We must understand the Word of God, not as a
spoken word, but as the establishment of actual things, seeing that we
find throughout the Torah that Moses has declared the whole creation
to be words of God." Philo, following his predecessor, says, "God
speaks not words but things,"[199] and, again, commenting on the first
chapter of Genesis, "God, even as He spake, at the same moment
created."[200] And of human speech he has this pretty conceit a little
before: "Into the mouth there enter food and drink, the perishable
food of a perishable body; out of it issue words, immortal laws of an
immortal soul, by which rational life is guided."[201] If human speech
is "immortal law," much more is the speech of God. His words are ideas
seen by the eye of the soul, not heard by the ear.[202] The ten
commandments given at Sinai were "ideas" of this incorporeal nature,
and the voice that Israel heard was no voice such as men possess, but
the [Hebrew: shkina], the Divine Presence itself, which exalted the
multitude.[203] Philo is here expanding and developing Jewish
tradition. In the "Ethics of the Fathers" (v) we read: "By ten words
was the world created"; and in the pages of the Midrash the [Hebrew:
bt-kol], i.e._, the mystic emanation of the Deity, which revealed itself
after the spirit of prophecy had ceased to be vouchsafed, is credited
with wondrous and varied powers, now revealing the Decalogue, now
performing some miracle, now appearing in a vision to the blessed, now
prophesying the future fate of the race to a pious rabbi. The
fertilizing stream of Greek philosophical idealism nourished the
growth of the Jewish pious imagination, and in the Logos of Philo the
fruit matured. It is idle to try to formulate a single definite notion
of Philo's Logos. For it is the expression of God in all His multiple
and manifold activity, the instrument of creation, the seat of ideas,
the world of thought which God first established as the model of the
visible universe, the guiding providence, the sower of virtue, the
fount of wisdom, described sometimes in religious ecstasy, sometimes
in philosophical metaphysics, sometimes in the spirit of the mystical
poet. Of his last manner let us take a specimen singled out by a
Christian and a Jewish theologian as of surprising beauty. Commenting
on the verse of the Psalmist, "The river of God is filled with water,"
Philo declares that it is absurd to call any earthly stream the river
of God.

     "The poet clearly refers to the Divine Logos that is full of
     the fountain of wisdom, and is in no part itself empty. Nay,
     it is diffused through the universe, and is raised up on
     high. In another verse the Psalmist says, 'The course of the
     river gladdens the city of God.' And in truth the continuous
     rush of the Divine Logos is borne along with eager but
     regular onset, and overflows and gladdens all things. In one
     sense he calls the world the city of God, for it has
     received the 'full cup' of the Divine draught, and has
     quaffed a perpetual, eternal joy. But in another sense he
     gave this name to the soul of the wise, wherein God is said
     to walk as in a city. And who can pour out the sacred
     measures of their joy to the blissful soul which holds out
     the holy cup, that is its own reason, save the Logos, the
     cupbearer of God, the master of the feast? Nor is the Logos
     cupbearer only, but it is itself the pure draught, itself
     the joy and exultation, itself the pouring forth and the
     delight, itself the ambrosial philtre and potion of
     bliss."[204]

Through the luxury of metaphor and imagination one may discern the
underlying thought of the mystic writer, that the Logos is the
effluence of God, either in the whole universe or the individual man,
filling the one as the other with the Divine Shekinah. It is the link
which joins God and man, the ladder of Jacob's dream, which stretches
from Heaven to earth.[205] That man can attain the Divine state by the
help of God's effluence was a cardinal thought of Philo's; this,
indeed, is the form in which he conceives the Messianic hope. God does
not come down to earth incarnate in man's form, but God's active
influence possesses the soul of man, and makes it live with God, and
if man be peculiarly blessed, carries it up to the ineffable Spirit.
Similarly his idea of the Messiah is more spiritual than that of the
popular belief. The ascent of man to God's height, not the descent of
God to man's level, will produce the age of universal peace.

There are various degrees of the Divine influence, stretching from
complete possession by the Deity Himself to the advent of single
Divine thoughts. These Philo regards as [Greek: logoi], words or
thoughts--for he does not clearly distinguish between the two--and he
resolves the realistic angels of the Bible into this spiritual
conception.[206] Thus he says, "the place" where Jacob alighted and
had the vision (Gen. xxvii. 11) is the symbol of the perfect
contemplation of God; the angels which he saw ascending and descending
are the inferior light of Divine precepts. These thoughts are
continually vouchsafed to all of us, prompting us to noble actions,
comforting us in times of sadness, inspiring lofty ideas.

     "Up and down through the whole soul the Logoi of God move
     without end; when they ascend, drawing it up with them, and
     severing it from the mortal part, and showing only the
     vision of ideal things; but when they descend, not casting
     it down, but descending with it from humanity or compassion
     towards our race, so as to give assistance and help, in
     order that, inspiring what is noble, they may revive the
     soul which is borne along on the stream of the body."[207]

Conversely, the rabbis taught that from each word that proceeded from
the mouth of God an angel was created, as it is said: "By the word of
the Lord the Heavens were made, and all the host of them by the breath
of His mouth."[208]

Apart from these sudden and occasional emanations of the Divine
Spirit, the individual man has within him a permanent Divine Logos by
which he may direct his conduct aright. Viewed in this aspect, the
Logos, _i.e._, the activity of God, is conscience, the Judge in the
soul, which is the true man dwelling within,[209] ruler and king,
judge and arbiter, witness and accuser, correcting and restraining.
Rising to bolder personification, Philo, who loves to present a
spiritual thought in a concrete image, calls it the undefiled high
priest in us.[210] In this power he finds a sure refutation of
skepticism; for in virtue of the Divine voice man may secure moral
certitude: and he finds also a philosophical value for popular
superstition. It was a common notion of the pagans as well as
the Jews of the time that an intermediate order of beings passed
between heaven and earth and brought supernatural aid to men; and also
that a familiar spirit, or Dæmon, dwelt within the soul of each man.
The finer spirit of Philo resolves the attendant Dæmon and the
messenger-dæmons or angels into the spiritual effluences of the one
Deity; save for a few places where he makes a pose of agreement with
popular notions and speaks of winged denizens of Heaven[211] who
descend to earth, he habitually expounds angels as inward revelations
of God.

As the revelation of God to the individual is a Logos, so, too, is his
revelation to the whole of mankind. It was pointed out in the last
chapter that Philo identified the Torah with the law of nature, and he
did this by regarding it as the Divine Logos. The more perfect
emanation of God is in one view the power by which He directs the
physical creation, in another the perfect law which He set up as the
model of conduct for His highest creatures. The rabbis, indeed, were
prone to glorify the law as the primal creation of God, and the
instrument of all the later creations, [Hebrew: kli hmra shbu gbrao
shmim].[212] They speak of it as the light, the pillar, and the bond
of the universe, the model whereon the architect looked;[213] and Philo
amplifies this simple poetical concept and develops it afresh in the
light of Greek idealistic and cosmical notions,[214] so that the Torah,
as the Logos of God, is equated with the source of all being, wisdom, and
knowledge, with the ideal world which is the archetype of the
material, and with all the law and order of nature. And as the Torah
is the Logos, so also its particular precepts are Logoi.

It seems difficult to trace the unity among all these different
aspects of the "Word," but in fact they are only different expressions
of the Divine activity in the universe. All these are comprehended in
the Logos, and then again divided out of it, so that it is, as it
were, a crystal prism reflecting the light of the Godhead in a myriad
different ways. One curious illustration of the universal sense in
which Philo understood the Logos is his interpretation of the manna;
it is typical also of his manner of exegesis and his habit of
spiritualizing the material. It is related in Exodus (xvi. 15) that
when the Israelites saw the heavenly food they exclaimed [Hebrew: mn
hu'], "What is it?" and hence the food obtained its name of manna. Now the
Greek Septuagint word for [Hebrew: mn] is [Greek: ti], which means not
only "what" but "anything." Philo sees in the gift of the heavenly
food a symbol of the inspiration of the chosen people by the Divine
Logos, and says that the Logos is rightly called manna, _i.e._,
anything, because it is the "most generic of all things, and that by
which man may be nourished."[215]

The central thought of Philo's system is that God is immanent in all
His work; but it would seem to him sacrilegious to apply to the
Godhead itself this universal, unceasing activity, and so he develops
the Logos as the most ideal attribute of the Deity, and the sum of all
His immanence and effluence. He preferred the Logos to the older
Wisdom, probably because he could by this conception bring his idea of
God into closer relation with Greek philosophical notions, for already
the Hellenistic world had come spontaneously to revere the cosmical
Logos. Only Philo gave to the expression of their physical and
metaphysical speculation a religious warmth new to it, when he
associated it with the word uttered by the personal God. Philosophy,
theology, and religion were all joined and harmonized in his
conception.

If we have followed thus far the spirit of Philo aright, the Logos is
only the immanent manifestation of the One God, who is both
transcendental and immanent, metaphorically, not metaphysically,
separate. In other words, it is the complete aspect of God as He
reveals Himself to the world. Above it and including it is the being
or essence of God, seen in Himself, and not in relation to His outward
activity. But it is often suggested that the Logos appears to Philo as
a second God, subordinate, indeed, to the Supreme Being, but yet a
separate personality. It is said, with truth, that he speaks of it as
a person, now calling it king, priest, primal man, the first-born son
of God, even the second God, and identifying it at other times with
some personal being, Melchizedek or Moses, and apostrophizing it as
man's helper, guide, and advocate.[216] Now we have reason to think
that Gnostic sects of Jews, both in Alexandria and in Palestine, were
at this time tending towards the division of the Godhead into separate
powers. The heresy of "Minut," frequently mentioned in the Talmud,
consisted originally, in the opinion of modern scholars, of a Gnostic
ditheism;[217] and during the latter part of the first century and
thereafter we hear of sects in Egypt and Syria which supported similar
theories. Theology here produced its fantastic offspring theosophy,
and the followers of the esoteric wisdom let their speculations carry
them away from the cardinal principle of Judaism. Influenced by
Egyptian speculation, they imagined an incarnation of the Divine
Spirit, and in the mystical thought of the day they adumbrated
theories of virgin birth.

Now these prototypes of Christian belief had undoubtedly manifested
themselves at Alexandria in Philo's day. His treatises show traces of
them,[218] and the question is whether he countenanced them or tried
to summon the theosophists of his generation back to the true Jewish
conception of God. Certain Christian and philosophical critics of
Philo, for whom the wish was perhaps father to the thought, have found
in Philo's Logos a conception which is at times impersonal, at times
personal, at times an aspect of the One God, and at times a second
independent God. If we take Philo literally, this certainly is the
case. But let it be clearly understood, this interpretation not only
involves Philo in inconsistency, but it utterly ruins and destroys his
religious and philosophical system. It means that the champion of
Jewish monotheism wanders into a vague ditheism. And in view of this,
the modern commentators of Philo, notably Professor Drummond,[219]
have examined his words more carefully and studied them in relation to
their context; and they have shown how, judged in this critical
fashion, the personality of the Logos is only figurative. It is,
indeed, probable that certain extreme passages, where the Logos is
presented most explicitly as a separate Deity, are due to
Christological interpolation. The Church Fathers found in the popular
belief in the Divine Word a remarkable support of the Trinity, and
regarding, as they did, Philo's writings as valuable testimony to the
truth of Christianity, they had every temptation to bring his passages
about the Logos still closer to their ideas. And between the first and
the fifth century, when we first hear from Eusebius of manuscripts of
Philo at the Christian monastery of Cæsarea--from which we can trace
our texts in direct line--there was no high standard in dealing with
ancient authorities. It is the Christian teachers who preserved Philo,
and they preserved him not as scholars but as missioners. The best
editors have recognized that our text has been interfered with by
evidenced-making scribes, as where a passage about the new Jerusalem
appears, agreeing almost word for word with the picture of
Revelations. Similarly, not a few passages about the Logos are
probably spurious.[220]

Yet, even when we have expurgated our text of Philo, there remain, it
will be said, numerous passages where the Logos is spoken of and
apostrophized as a person. This is so, but the conclusion which is
drawn, that the Logos is regarded as a second deity, is unjustifiable.
The Jewish mind from the time of the prophets unto this day has
thought in images and metaphors, and the personification of the Logos
is only the most striking instance of Philo's regular habit of
personifying all abstract ideas. The allegorical habit particularly
conduces to this, for as persons are constantly resolved into ideas,
so ideas come to be naturally represented as persons. There are thus
two steps in Philo's theology, which seem to some extent to counteract
each other; in the first place, he resolves the concrete physical
expressions of the Bible into spiritual ideas, in the second he
portrays those ideas in pictorial language and clothes them in
personifications. The allegorizer requires an allegorist to interpret
him aright.

Nor must it be forgotten that Philo was preaching spiritual monotheism
not only to Jews, but also to the Hellenic world, for whom it was a
vast bound from their naturalistic polytheism. Zealous as he was for
the pure faith, he realized that mankind could not attain it directly,
but must approach it by conceptions of the One God gradually
increasing in profundity and truth. The Greek thinkers had
approximated closest to the Hebraic God-idea when they conceived one
supreme, immanent reason in the universe; and Philo, in carrying his
audiences beyond this to the transcendent-immanent Being, transformed
the Greek cosmical concept into a Divine power of the One Being. For
the true believer this is the stepping-stone to the perfect idea. "The
Logos," he says, "is the God of us imperfect people, but the true
sages worship the One Being."[221] And, again, "The imperfect have as
their law the holy Logos."[222] And in this sense, it is "intermediate
([Greek: methorios]) between God and man."[223] What such passages
mean is that the separation of the Logos is a stage in man's progress
up to the true idea of God. It is a second-best Deity, so to say,
rather than a second Deity; for those who regard the Logos as God have
no conception at all of the perfect Being of which it is only the
principal attribute.

The theology of Philo is characterized throughout by a tolerant and
philosophical grasp of the difficulty of pure monotheism, and of the
necessity of a long intellectual searching before the goal can be
attained. To declare the Unity of God is simple enough; to have a real
conception of it is a very different and a very difficult thing. And
Philo's theology has a two-fold aim, in which either part complements
the other. It explains, on the one hand, how God is revealed to the
world through His powers or attributes or modes of activity, and, on
the other, how man can ascend to an ecstatic union with the Real Being
through comprehension of those powers. By the ideal ladder which
brings down God to earth, man can climb again to Heaven. The three
chief rungs of the ladder are the attributes of creation, and of
ruling power, and the Logos. The perfect unity of the Godhead is not,
of course, properly the subject of attributes, but the limited mind of
man so conceives it for its own understanding, and speaks of God's
justice, God's goodness, God's wisdom. These are, to use philosophical
terminology, categories of the religious understanding, which are
finally resolved by the perfect sage in "the synthetic apperception of
Unity."

Philo follows what may have been a Hebrew tradition in explaining the
two names of God, "Elohim" and "Jehovah," as connoting His two chief
attributes: (1) the creative or beneficent, (2) the ruling or
judicial, or, as it is sometimes called, the law-giving power.[224]
Names, as we know, were always regarded by Philo as profound symbols,
and naturally the names of God are of vital import; and the twofold
expression for the Hebrew Deity, of which the higher critics have made
much destructive use, was noticed by the earliest commentators, but
made the basis by them of a constructive theology. The ruling and the
creative attributes of God are outlined and contained in the highest
mode of all, the Logos, "the reason of God in every phase and form of
it that is discoverable and realizable by man." For by the Logos, God
is both ruler and good.[225] This is the profound interpretation of
the story in Genesis, that "God placed at the east of the garden of
Eden the two Cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way to
keep the way of the tree of life" (Gen. iv. 24). The Cherubim are the
symbols of the powers of majesty and goodness; the flaming sword is
the Logos; "because," says our author quaintly, "all thought and
speech are the most mobile and the most ardent (_i.e._, the most
intensive) of things, and especially the thought and speech of the
only Principle."[226]

To correspond with the descending attributes of God we have the
ascending dispositions of man towards Him, fear, love, and thirdly
their synthesis in loving knowledge. When we are in the first stage of
religion we obey the law in hope of reward or fear of punishment; when
we have progressed higher in thought, we worship God as the good
Creator; when we have ascended one further stage, we surpass both fear
and love in an emotion which combines them, realizing, as Browning
puts it, that "God is law and God is love." In illustration of this
scheme of Philo's we may examine two passages out of his philosophical
commentary. In the first he is commenting upon the appearance of the
three angels to Abraham as he sat outside his tent (Gen. xviii).[227]
And, by the way, it may be remarked that the Midrash commenting on
this passage notes that it begins, "And the Lord appeared unto
Abraham," and then continues, "And he lifted up his eyes and looked,
and, lo, three men stood before him." Hence we may learn that it was
really the one God who appeared to the Patriarch, and that the three
angels were but a vision of his mind. This is the dominant note of
Philo's interpretation, but he as usual elaborates the old Midrash
philosophically.

     "The words," he says, "are symbols of things apprehended by
     intelligence alone--the soul receives a triple expression of
     one being, of which one is the representative of the actual
     existent, and the other two are shadows, as it were, cast
     from this. So it happens also in the physical world, for
     there often occur two shadows of bodies at rest or in
     motion. Let no one suppose, however, that shadow is properly
     used in relation to God. It is only a popular use of words
     for the clearer understanding of our subject. The reality is
     not so, but, as one standing nearest to the truth might say,
     the middle one is the Father of the universe, who is called
     in Scripture the 'Self-existent'; and those on either side
     of Him are the two oldest and chief powers, the Creative and
     the Regal. The middle one, then, being attended by the
     others as by a bodyguard, presents to the contemplative mind
     a mental image or representation now of one and now of
     three; of one whenever the soul, being properly purified and
     perfectly initiated, rises to the idea which is unmingled
     and free from limitation, and requires nothing to complete
     it; but of three whenever it has not yet been initiated into
     the great mysteries, and still celebrates the lesser rites,
     unable to apprehend the Being in itself without
     modification, but apprehending it through its modes as
     either creating or ruling. This is, as the proverb says, a
     second-best course, but yet it partakes of godlike opinion.
     But the former does not partake of--for it _is_ itself--the
     Godlike opinion, or rather it is truth, which is more
     precious than all opinion.

     "Further, there are three classes of human character, to
     each of which one of the three conceptions of God has been
     assigned. The best class goes with the first, the conception
     of the absolute Being; the next goes with the conception of
     Him as a Benefactor, in virtue of which He is called God;
     the third with the conception of Him as a Ruler, in virtue
     of which He is called Lord. The noblest character serves Him
     who is in all the purity of His absolute Being; it is
     attracted by no other thing or aspect, but is solely and
     intently devoted to the honor of the one and only Being; the
     second is brought to the knowledge of the Father through His
     beneficent power; the third through His regal power."

In the second passage, which occurs in the treatise on flight from the
world,[228] Philo is allegorizing the law about founding six cities of
refuge (Exodus xxxii). These are but material symbols for the six
stages of the ascent of the mind to the pure God-idea. The chief city,
the metropolis, is the Divine Logos, next come the two powers already
considered, and then three secondary powers, the retributive, the
law-giving, and the prohibitive. "Very beautiful and well-fenced
cities they are, worthy refuges of souls that merit salvation." Each
of these cities is an aspect of the religious mind; when it settles in
the first it obeys the law from fear of punishment and thinks of God
as the Judge; in the second it observes the precepts in hope of reward
and conceives God as the legislator of a fixed code; in the next it is
repentant and throws itself on God's grace, marking the first step of
the spiritual life. Then it ascends in order to the idea of God as the
governor of the universe, and the emotion which the rabbis called
[Hebrew: yrat shmim], the fear of Heaven; and to the idea of God as the
Creator and the universal Providence, which has as its emotional
reflex the love of Heaven, [Hebrew: 'hbt shmim].

But even this, which is the highest stage for many men, is not an
adequate conception. Above it is the contemplation of God, apart from
all manifestations in the perceptible world, in His ideal nature, the
Logos, which at once transcends and comprehends the universe. And the
attitude of this man can be best expressed perhaps by Spinoza's
phrase, "the intellectual love of God," _amor intellectualis Dei_. The
worshipper of the Logos has grasped and has harmonized all the
manifestations of the Deity; he sees and honors all things in God; he
comprehends the universe as the perfect manifestation of one good
Being.

Is this the highest point which man can reach? Many religious
philosophers have held that it is, but Philo, the mystic, yearning to
track out God "beyond the utmost bound of human thought," imagines one
higher condition. The Logos is only the image or the shadow of the
Godhead.[229] Above it is the one perfect reality, the transcendent
Essence. Now, man cannot by any intellectual effort attain knowledge
of the Infinite as He truly is, for this is above thought. But to a
few blessed mortals God of His grace vouchsafes a mystic vision of His
nature. Thus Moses, the perfect hierophant, had this perfect
apprehension, and passed from intellectual love to holy adoration. And
the true philosopher has as the goal of his aspirations the
heaven-sent ecstasy, in which he sees God no longer through His
effects, or in the modes of His activity, but through Himself in His
own essence. The philosopher, when he receives this vision ([Greek:
epopteia]) is possessed by the Shekinah,[230] and, losing
consciousness of his individuality, becomes at one with God.

So much for Philo's theory of man's upward progress. We may add a word
about his treatment of the problem which troubled thinkers in that
age, and which has harassed theologians ever since, viz., to show how
punishment and evil could be derived from a God who was all-powerful
and all-good. The Gnostics were driven by the difficulty to imagine an
evil world-power, which was in incessant conflict with the Good God:
and popular belief had conjured up a legion of subordinate powers, who
took part in the work of creation and the government of the world.
When Philo is speaking popularly, he accepts this current theology and
speaks also of a punitive power of God[231] ([Greek: dunamis
kolastikê]); but not when he is the philosopher. For then, in
perfect faith, he denies the absolute existence of evil. "It is
neither in Paradise nor indeed anywhere whatsoever."[232] Man,
however, by his free will causes evil in the human sphere; and when
God formed in man a rational nature capable of choosing for itself,
moral evil became the necessary contrary of good.[233] Moreover, the
punitive activity of God, though it seems to cause suffering and
misery, is in truth a good, simulating evil, and if men judged the
universal process as a whole, they would find it all good. The
existence of evil involves no derogation from the perfect unity of
God.

If we have understood correctly Philo's theology, neither Logos, nor
subordinate powers, nor angels, nor demons have an objective
existence; they are mere imaginings of varying incompleteness which
the limited minds of men, "moving in worlds not realized," make for
themselves of the one and only true God. Philo's theology is the
philosophical treatment of Jewish tradition, just as Philo's legal
exegesis is the philosophical treatment of the Torah. While
maintaining and striving to deepen the conception of God's unity, he
aims at expounding to the reason how, on the one hand, that unity is
revealed in the world about us, and how, on the other, we may advance
to its true comprehension. It was, however, unfortunate that Philo
expressed his theology in the current language, which was vague and
inexact, and adapted certain foreign theosophical ideas to Judaism;
hence succeeding generations, paying regard to the pictorial
representation rather than to the principles of his thought, sought
and found in him evidence of theories of Divine government to which
Judaism was pre-eminently opposed. The first chapter of the Fourth
Gospel shows that gradual process of thought which finally made the
Logos doctrine the antithesis of Judaism. In the first verse we have a
thought which might well have been written by Philo himself: "In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God." But in the fourteenth verse there is manifest the sharp
cleavage: "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth." There may be a fine spiritual thought
beneath the letter here, but the notion of the Incarnation is not
Jewish, nor philosophical, nor Philonic. Philo's work was made to
serve as the guide of that Christian Gnosticism which, within the next
hundred years, proclaimed that Judaism was the work of an evil God,
and that the essential mission of Jesus--the good Logos--was to
dethrone Jehovah! But though the Logos conception was turned to
non-Jewish and anti-Jewish purposes, it was in Philo the offspring of
a pure and philosophical monotheism. Whatever the later abuse of his
teaching, Philo constructed a theology which, though affected by
foreign influences, was essentially true to Judaism; and more than
that, he was the first to weave the Jewish idea of God into the
world's philosophy.

       *       *       *       *       *




