CHAPTER X. THE TRIUMPH OF THE VANQUISHED


One evening in the month of May, when the fine weather had come and the
Parisians had returned to Les Aigues, Monsieur de Troisville,--who had
been persuaded to accompany his daughter,--Blondet, the Abbe Brossette,
the general, and the sub-prefect of Ville-aux-Fayes, who was on a visit
to the chateau, were all playing either whist or chess. It was about
half-past eleven o’clock when Joseph entered and told his master that
the worthless poaching workman who had been dismissed wanted to see
him,--something about a bill which he said the general still owed him.
“He is very drunk,” added Joseph.

“Very good, I’ll go and speak to him.”

The general went out upon the lawn to some distance from the house.

“Monsieur le comte,” said the detective, “nothing will ever be got out
of these people. All that I have been able to gather is that if you
continue to stay in this place and try to make the peasants renounce the
pilfering habits which Mademoiselle Laguerre allowed them to acquire,
they will shoot you as well as your bailiff. There is no use in my
staying here; for they distrust me even more than they do the keepers.”

The count paid his spy, who left the place the next day, and his
departure justified the suspicions entertained about him by the
accomplices in the death of Michaud.

When the general returned to the salon there were such signs of emotion
upon his face that his wife asked him, anxiously, what news he had just
heard.

“Dear wife,” he said, “I don’t want to frighten you, and yet it is right
you should know that Michaud’s death was intended as a warning for us to
leave this part of the country.”

“If I were in your place,” said Monsieur de Troisville, “I would not
leave it. I myself have had just such difficulties in Normandy, only
under another form; I persisted in my course, and now everything goes
well.”

“Monsieur le marquis,” said the sub-prefect, “Normandy and Burgundy are
two very different regions. The grape heats the blood far more than the
apple. We know much less of law and legal proceedings; we live among the
woods; the large industries are unknown among us; we are still savages.
If I might give my advice to Monsieur le comte it would be to sell this
estate and put the money in the Funds; he would double his income and
have no anxieties. If he likes living in the country he could buy a
chateau near Paris with a park as beautiful as that of Les Aigues,
surrounded by walls, where no one can annoy him, and where he can let
all his farms and receive the money in good bank-bills, and have no law
suits from one year’s end to another. He could come and go in three or
four hours, and Monsieur Blondet and Monsieur le marquis would not be so
often away from you, Madame la comtesse.”

“I, retreat before the peasantry when I did not recoil before the
Danube!” cried the general.

“Yes, but what became of your cuirassiers?” asked Blondet.

“Such a fine estate!”

“It will sell to-day for over two millions.”

“The chateau alone must have cost that,” remarked Monsieur de
Troisville.

“One of the best properties in a circumference of sixty miles,” said the
sub-prefect; “but you can find a better near Paris.”

“How much income does one get from two millions?” asked the countess.

“Now-a-days, about eighty thousand francs,” replied Blondet.

“Les Aigues does not bring in, all told, more than thirty thousand,”
 said the countess; “and lately you have been at such immense
expenses,--you have surrounded the woods this year with ditches.”

“You could get,” added Blondet, “a royal chateau for four hundred
thousand francs near Paris. In these days people buy the follies of
others.”

“I thought you cared for Les Aigues!” said the count to his wife.

“Don’t you feel that I care a thousand times more for your life?” she
replied. “Besides, ever since the death of my poor Olympe and Michaud’s
murder the country is odious to me; all the faces I meet seem to wear a
treacherous or threatening expression.”

The next evening the sub-prefect, having ended his visit at the chateau,
was welcomed in the salon of Monsieur Gaubertin at Ville-aux-Fayes in
these words:--

“Well, Monsieur des Lupeaulx, so you have returned from Les Aigues?”

“Yes,” answered the sub-prefect with a little air of triumph and a look
of tender regard at Mademoiselle Elise, “and I am very much afraid to
say we may lose the general; he talks of selling his property--”

“Monsieur Gaubertin, I speak for my pavilion. I can on longer endure the
noise, the dust of Ville-aux-Fayes; like a poor imprisoned bird I gasp
for the air of the fields, the woodland breezes,” said Madame Isaure, in
a lackadaisical voice, with her eyes half-closed and her head bending
to her left shoulder as she played carelessly with the long curls of her
blond hair.

“Pray be prudent, madame!” said her husband in a low voice; “your
indiscretions will not help me to buy the pavilion.” Then, turning to
the sub-prefect, he added, “Haven’t they yet discovered the men who were
concerned in the murder of the bailiff?”

“It seems not,” replied the sub-prefect.

“That will injure the sale of Les Aigues,” said Gaubertin to the
company generally, “I know very well that I would not buy the place. The
peasantry over there are such a bad set of people; even in the days of
Mademoiselle Laguerre I had trouble with them, and God knows she let
them do as they liked.”

At the end of the month of May the general still gave no sign that he
intended to sell Les Aigues; in fact, he was undecided. One night, about
ten o’clock, he was returning from the forest through one of the six
avenues that led to the pavilion of the Rendezvous. He dismissed the
keeper who accompanied him, as he was then so near the chateau. At a
turn of the road a man armed with a gun came from behind a bush.

“General,” he said, “this is the third time I have had you at the end of
my barrel, and the third time that I give you your life.”

“Why do you want to kill me, Bonnebault?” said the general, without
showing the least emotion.

“Faith, if I don’t, somebody else will; but I, you see, I like the men
who served the Emperor, and I can’t make up my mind to shoot you like a
partridge. Don’t question me, for I’ll tell you nothing; but you’ve
got enemies, powerful enemies, cleverer than you, and they’ll end by
crushing you. I am to have a thousand crowns if I kill you, and then I
can marry Marie Tonsard. Well, give me enough to buy a few acres of land
and a bit of a cottage, and I’ll keep on saying, as I have done, that
I’ve found no chances. That will give you time to sell your property and
get away; but make haste. I’m an honest lad still, scamp as I am; but
another fellow won’t spare you.”

“If I give you what you ask, will you tell me who offered you those
three thousand francs?” said the general.

“I don’t know myself; and the person who is urging me to do the thing
is some one I love too well to tell of. Besides, even if you did know
it was Marie Tonsard, that wouldn’t help you; Marie Tonsard would be as
silent as that wall, and I should deny every word I’ve said.”

“Come and see me to-morrow,” said the general.

“Enough,” replied Bonnebault; “and if they begin to say I’m too
dilatory, I’ll let you know in time.”

A week after that singular conversation the whole arrondissement, indeed
the whole department, was covered with posters, advertising the sale of
Les Aigues at the office of Maitre Corbineau, the notary of Soulanges.
All the lots were knocked down to Rigou, and the price paid amounted to
two millions five hundred thousand francs. The next day Rigou had the
names changed; Monsieur Gaubertin took the woods, Rigou and Soudry the
vineyards and the farms. The chateau and the park were sold over again
in small lots among the sons of the soil, the peasantry,--excepting the
pavilion, its dependencies, and fifty surrounding acres, which Monsieur
Gaubertin retained as a gift to his poetic and sentimental spouse.

              *     *     *     *     *

Many years after these events, during the year 1837, one of the most
remarkable political writers of the day, Emile Blondet, reached the
last stages of a poverty which he had so far hidden beneath an outward
appearance of ease and elegance. He was thinking of taking some
desperate step, realizing, as he did, that his writings, his mind,
his knowledge, his ability for the direction of affairs, had made him
nothing better than a mere functionary, mechanically serving the ends of
others; seeing that every avenue was closed to him and all places
taken; feeling that he had reached middle-life without fame and without
fortune; that fools and middle-class men of no training had taken the
places of the courtiers and incapables of the Restoration, and that the
government was reconstituted such as it was before 1830. One evening,
when he had come very near committing suicide (a folly he had so often
laughed at), while his mind travelled back over his miserable existence
calumniated and worn down with toil far more than with the dissipations
charged against him, the noble and beautiful face of a woman rose before
his eyes, like a statue rising pure and unbroken amid the saddest ruins.
Just then the porter brought him a letter sealed with black from the
Comtesse de Montcornet, telling him of the death of her husband, who had
again taken service in the army and commanded a division. The count
had left her his property, and she had no children. The letter, though
dignified, showed Blondet very plainly that the woman of forty whom he
had loved in his youth offered him a friendly hand and a large fortune.

A few days ago the marriage of the Comtesse de Montcornet with Monsieur
Blondet, appointed prefect in one of the departments, was celebrated in
Paris. On their way to take possession of the prefecture, they followed
the road which led past what had formerly been Les Aigues. They stopped
the carriage near the spot where the two pavilions had once stood,
wishing to see the places so full of tender memories for each. The
country was no longer recognizable. The mysterious woods, the park
avenues, all were cleared away; the landscape looked like a tailor’s
pattern-card. The sons of the soil had taken possession of the earth as
victors and conquerors. It was cut up into a thousand little lots, and
the population had tripled between Conches and Blangy. The levelling and
cultivation of the noble park, once so carefully tended, so delightful
in its beauty, threw into isolated relief the pavilion of the
Rendezvous, now the Villa Buen-Retiro of Madame Isaure Gaubertin; it was
the only building left standing, and it commanded the whole landscape,
or as we might better call it, the stretch of cornfields which now
constituted the landscape. The building seemed magnified into a chateau,
so miserable were the little houses which the peasants had built around
it.

“This is progress!” cried Emile. “It is a page out of Jean-Jacques’
‘Social Compact’! and I--I am harnessed to the social machine that works
it! Good God! what will the kings be soon? More than that, what will the
nations themselves be fifty years hence under this state of things?”

“But you love me; you are beside me. I think the present delightful.
What do I care for such a distant future?” said his wife.

“Oh yes! by your side, hurrah for the present!” cried the lover, gayly,
“and the devil take the future.”

Then he signed to the coachman, and as the horses sprang forward along
the road, the wedded pair returned to the enjoyment of their honeymoon.


1845.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Note: Sons of the Soil is also known as The Peasantry and is referred to
by that title when mentioned in other addendums.

     Blondet, Emile
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       Modeste Mignon
       Another Study of Woman
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Firm of Nucingen

     Blondet, Virginie
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       The Secrets of a Princess
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Another Study of Woman
       The Member for Arcis
       A Daughter of Eve

     Bourlac, Bernard-Jean-Baptiste-Macloud, Baron de
       The Seamy Side of History

     Brossette, Abbe
       Beatrix

     Carigliano, Duchesse de
       At the Sign of the Cat and Racket
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       The Member for Arcis

     Casteran, De
       The Chouans
       The Seamy Side of History
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       Beatrix

     Laguerre, Mademoiselle
       A Prince of Bohemia

     La Roche-Hugon, Martial de
       Domestic Peace
       A Daughter of Eve
       The Member for Arcis
       The Middle Classes
       Cousin Betty

     Lupin, Amaury
       A Start in Life

     Marest, Georges
       A Start in Life

     Minorets, The
       The Government Clerks

     Montcornet, Marechal, Comte de
       Domestic Peace
       Lost Illusions
       A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       A Man of Business
       Cousin Betty

     Navarreins, Duc de
       A Bachelor’s Establishment
       Colonel Chabert
       The Muse of the Department
       The Thirteen
       Jealousies of a Country Town
       Scenes from a Courtesan’s Life
       The Country Parson
       The Magic Skin
       The Gondreville Mystery
       The Secrets of a Princess
       Cousin Betty

     Ronquerolles, Marquis de
       The Imaginary Mistress
       Ursule Mirouet
       A Woman of Thirty
       Another Study of Woman
       The Thirteen
       The Member for Arcis

     Scherbelloff, Princesse (or Scherbellof or Sherbelloff)
       Jealousies of a Country Town

     Soulanges, Comte Leon de
       Domestic Peace

     Soulanges, Comtesse Hortense de
       Domestic Peace
       The Thirteen

     Steingel
       The Gondreville Mystery

     Troisville, Guibelin, Vicomte de
       The Seamy Side of History
       The Chouans
       Jealousies of a Country Town






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sons of the Soil, by Honore de Balzac

