PART II




CHAPTER I. THE LEADING SOCIETY OF SOULANGES


About six kilometres (speaking legally) from Blangy, and at the same
distance from Ville-aux-Fayes, on an elevation radiating from the long
hillside at the foot of which flows the Avonne, stands the little town
of Soulanges, surnamed La Jolie, with, perhaps, more right to that title
than Mantes.

At the foot of the hill, the Thune broadens over a clay bottom to a
space of some seventy acres, at the end of which the Soulanges mills,
placed on numerous little islets, present as graceful a group of
buildings as any landscape architect could devise. After watering the
park of Soulanges, where it feeds various other streams and artificial
lakes, the Thune falls into the Avonne through a fine broad channel.

The chateau of Soulanges, rebuilt under Louis XIV. from designs of Jules
Mansart, and one of the finest in Burgundy, stands facing the town; so
that Soulanges and its chateau mutually present to each other a charming
and even elegant vista. The main road winds between the town and the
pond, called by the country people, rather pompously, the lake of
Soulanges.

The little town is one of those natural compositions which are extremely
rare in France, where _prettiness_ of its own kind is absolutely
wanting. Here you would indeed find, as Blondet said in his letter, the
charm of Switzerland, the prettiness of the environs of Neuf-chatel;
while the bright vineyards which encircle Soulanges complete the
resemblance,--leaving out, be it said, the Alps and the Jura. The
streets, placed one above another on the slope of the hill, have but few
houses; for each house stands in its own garden, which produces a mass
of greenery rarely seen in a town. The roofs, red or blue, rising among
flower-gardens, trees, and trellised terraces, present an harmonious
variety of aspects.

The church, an old Middle-Age structure, built of stone, thanks to the
munificence of the lords of Soulanges, who reserved for themselves first
a chapel near the chancel, then a crypt as their necropolis, has, by way
of portal, an immense arcade, like that of the church at Lonjumeau, and
is bordered by flower-beds adorned with statues, and flanked on either
side by columns with niches, which terminate in spires. This portal,
often seen in churches of the same period when chance has saved them
from the ravages of Calvinism, is surmounted by a triglyph, above which
stands a statue of the Virgin holding the infant Jesus. The sides of
the structure are externally of five arches, defined by stone ribs and
lighted by windows with small panes. The apse rests on arched abutments
that are worthy of a cathedral. The clock-tower, placed in a transept of
the cross, is square and surmounted by a belfry. The church can be seen
from a great distance, for it stands at the top of the great square, at
the lower end of which the high-road passes through the town.

This square, large for the size of the town, is surrounded by
very original buildings, all of different epochs. Many, half-wood,
half-brick, with their timbers faced with slate, date back to the Middle
Ages. Others, of stone, with balconies, show the form of gable so dear
to our ancestors, which belongs to the twelfth century. Several charm
the eye with those old projecting beams, carved with grotesque faces,
which form the roof of a sort of shed, and recall the days when the
middle classes were exclusively commercial. The finest house among
them was that of the chief magistrate of former days,--a house with a
sculptured front on a line with the church, to which it forms a fine
accompaniment. Sold as national property, it was bought in by the
commune, which turned it into a town-hall and court-house, where
Monsieur Sarcus had presided ever since the establishment of municipal
judges.

This slight sketch will give an idea of the square of Soulanges, adorned
in the centre with a charming fountain brought from Italy in 1520 by
the Marechal de Soulanges, which was not unworthy of a great capital.
An unfailing jet of water, coming from a spring higher up the hill, was
shed by four Cupids in white marble, bearing shells in their arms and
baskets of grapes upon their heads.

Literary travellers who may pass this way (should any such follow Emile
Blondet) might imagine the spot to have inspired Moliere and the Spanish
drama, which held its footing so long on French boards, showing that
comedy is native to warm countries where so much of life is passed in
the public streets. The square of Soulanges is all the more a reminder
of that classic stage because the two principal streets, opening just on
a line with the fountain, afford the exit and entrances so necessary for
the dramatic masters and valets whose business it is either to meet or
to avoid each other. At the corner of one of these streets, called the
rue de la Fontaine, shone the notarial escutcheon of Maitre Lupin. The
houses of Messieurs Sarcus, Guerbet the collector, Brunet, Gourdon,
clerk of the court, and that of his brother the doctor, also that of old
Monsieur Gendrin-Vatebled, the keeper of the forests and streams,--all
these houses, kept with extreme neatness by their owners, who held
firmly to the flattering surname of their native town, stand in
the neighborhood of the square and form the aristocratic quarter of
Soulanges.

The house of Madame Soudry--for the powerful individuality of
Mademoiselle Laguerre’s former waiting-maid took the lead of her husband
in the community--was modern, having been built by a rich wine-merchant,
born in Soulanges, who, after making his money in Paris, returned
there in 1793 to buy wheat for his native town. He was slain as an
“accapareur,” a monopolist, by the populace, instigated by a mason, the
uncle of Godain, with whom he had had some quarrel about the building of
his ambitious house. The settlement of his estate, sharply contested by
collateral heirs, dragged slowly along until, in 1798, Soudry, who had
then returned to Soulanges, was able to buy the wine-merchant’s palace
for three thousand francs in specie. He then let it, in the first
instance, to the government for the headquarters of the gendarmerie. In
1811 Mademoiselle Cochet, whom Soudry consulted about all his affairs,
strongly objected to the renewal of the lease, making the house
uninhabitable, she declared, with barracks. The town of Soulanges,
assisted by the department, then erected a building for the gendarmerie
in a street running at right angles from the town-hall. Thereupon Soudry
cleaned up his house and restored its primitive lustre, not a little
dimmed by the stabling of horses and the occupancy of gendarmes.

The house, only one story high, with projecting windows in the roof, has
a view on three sides; one to the square, another to a lake, the third
to a garden. The fourth side looks on a courtyard which separates the
Soudrys from the adjoining house occupied by a grocer named Wattebled,
a man of the SECOND-CLASS society of Soulanges, father of the beautiful
Madame Plissoud, of whom we shall presently have occasion to speak.

All little towns have a renowned beauty, just as they have a Socquard
and a Cafe de la Paix.

It will be apparent to every one that the frontage of the Soudry mansion
on the lake must have a terraced garden confined by a stone balustrade
which overlooks both the lake and the main road. A flight of steps
leads down from the terrace to the road, and on it an orange-tree,
a pomegranate, a myrtle, and other ornamental shrubs are placed,
necessitating a greenhouse. On the side toward the square the house
is entered from a portico raised several steps above the level of
the street. According to the custom of small towns the gate of the
courtyard, used only for the service of the house or for any unusual
arrival, was seldom opened. Visitors, who mostly came on foot, entered
by the portico.

The style of the Hotel Soudry is plain. The courses are indicated by
projecting lines; the windows are framed by mouldings alternately broad
and slender, like those of the Gabriel and Perronnet pavilion in the
place Louis XV. These ornaments in so small a town give a certain solid
and monumental air to the building which has become celebrated.

Opposite to this house, in another angle of the square stands the
famous Cafe de la Paix, the characteristics of which, together with
the fascinations of its Tivoli, will require, somewhat later, a less
succinct description than that we have given of the Soudry mansion.

Rigou very seldom came to Soulanges; everybody was in the habit of going
to him,--Lupin and Gaubertin, Soudry and Gendrin,--so much were they
afraid of him. But we shall presently understand why any educated man,
such as the ex-Benedictine, would have done as Rigou did, and kept
away from the little town, after reading the following sketch of the
personages who composed what was called in those parts “the leading
society of Soulanges.”

Of its principal figures, the most original, as you have already
suspected, was that of Madame Soudry, whose personality, to be duly
rendered, needs a minute and careful brush.

Madame Soudry, respectfully imitating Mademoiselle Laguerre, began by
allowing herself a “mere touch of rouge”; but this delicate tint had
changed through force of habit to those vermilion patches picturesquely
described by our ancestors as “carriage-wheels.” The wrinkles growing
deeper and deeper, it occurred to the ex-lady’s-maid to fill them up
with paint. Her forehead becoming unduly yellow, and the temples too
shiny, she “laid on” a little white, and renewed the veins of her youth
with a tracery of blue. All this color gave an exaggerated liveliness to
her eyes which were already tricksy enough, so that the mask of her face
would seem to a stranger even more than fantastic, though her friends
and acquaintances, accustomed to this fictitious brilliancy, actually
declared her handsome.

This ungainly creature, always decolletee, showed a bosom and a pair of
shoulders that were whitened and polished by the same process employed
upon her face; happily, for the sake of exhibiting her magnificent
laces, she partially veiled the charms of these chemical products. She
always wore the body of her dress stiffened with whalebone and made in
a long point and garnished with knots of ribbon, even on the point! Her
petticoats gave forth a creaking noise,--so much did the silk and the
furbelows abound.

This attire, which deserves the name of apparel (a word that before
long will be inexplicable), was, on the evening in question, of costly
brocade,--for Madame Soudry possessed over a hundred dresses, each
richer than the others, the remains of Mademoiselle Laguerre’s enormous
and splendid wardrobe, made over to fit Madame Soudry in the last
fashion of the year 1808. Her blond wig, frizzed and powdered, sustained
a superb cap with knots of cherry satin ribbon matching those on her
dress. If you will kindly imagine beneath this ultra-coquettish cap the
face of a monkey of extreme ugliness, on which a flat nose, fleshless as
that of Death, is separated by a strong hairy line from a mouth filled
with false teeth, whence issue sounds like the confused clacking of
hunting-horns, you will have some difficulty in understanding why
the leading society of Soulanges (all the town, in fact) thought
this quasi-queen a beauty,--unless, indeed, you remember the succinct
statement recently made “ex professo,” by one of the cleverest women
of our time, on the art of making her sex beautiful by surrounding
accessories.

As to accessories, in the first place, Madame Soudry was surrounded
by the magnificent gifts accumulated by her late mistress, which the
ex-Benedictine called “fructus belli.” Then she made the most of her
ugliness by exaggerating it, and by assuming that indescribable air
and manner which belongs only to Parisian women, the secret of which is
known even to the most vulgar among them,--who are always more or less
mimics. She laced tight, wore an enormous bustle, also diamond earrings,
and her fingers were covered with rings. At the top of her corsage,
between two mounds of flesh well plastered with pearl-white, shone a
beetle made of topaz with a diamond head, the gift of dear mistress,--a
jewel renowned throughout the department. Like the late dear mistress,
she wore short sleeves and bare arms, and flirted an ivory fan, painted
by Boucher with two little rose-diamonds in the handle.

When she went out Madame Soudry carried a parasol of the true
eighteenth-century style; that is to say, a tall cane at the end of
which opened a green sun-shade with a green fringe. When she walked
about the terrace a stranger on the high-road, seeing her from afar,
might have thought her one of Watteau’s dames.

In her salon, hung with red damask, with curtains of the same lined with
silk, a fire on the hearth, a mantel-shelf adorned with bibelots of the
good time of Louis XV., and bearing candelabra in the form of lilies
upheld by Cupids--in this salon, filled with furniture in gilded wood of
the “pied de biche” pattern, it is not impossible to understand why the
people of Soulanges called the mistress of the house, “The beautiful
Madame Soulanges.” The mansion had actually become the civic pride of
this capital of a canton.

If the leading society of the little town believed in its queen, the
queen as surely believed in herself. By a phenomenon not in the least
rare, which the vanity of mothers and authors carries on at all
moments under our very eyes in behalf of their literary works or their
marriageable daughters, the late Mademoiselle Cochet was, at the end
of seven years, so completely buried under Madame Soudry, the mayoress,
that she not only did not remember her past, but she actually believed
herself a well-bred woman. She had studied the airs and graces, the
dulcet tones, the gestures, the ways of her mistress, so long that when
she found herself in the midst of an opulence of her own she was able to
practice the natural insolence of it. She knew her eighteenth century,
and the tales of its great lords and all their belongings, by heart.
This back-stairs erudition gave to her conversation a flavor of
“oeil-de-boeuf”; her soubrette gossip passed muster for courtly wit.
Morally, the mayoress was, if you wish to say so, tinsel; but to savages
paste diamonds are as good as real ones.

The woman found herself courted and worshipped by the society in which
she lived, just as her mistress had been worshipped in former days. She
gave weekly dinners, with coffee and liqueurs to those who came in after
the dessert. No female head could have resisted the exhilarating
force of such continual adulation. In winter the warm salon, always
well-lighted with wax candles, was well-filled with the richest people
of Soulanges, who paid for the good liqueurs and the fine wines which
came from dear mistress’s cellars, with flatteries to their hostess.
These visitors and their wives had a life-interest, as it were, in this
luxury; which was to them a saving of lights and fuel. Thus it came
to pass that in a circuit of fifteen miles and even as far as
Ville-aux-Fayes, every voice was ready to declare: “Madame Soudry does
the honors admirably. She keeps open house; every one enjoys her salon;
she knows how to carry herself and her fortune; she always says the
witty thing, she makes you laugh. And what splendid silver! There is not
another house like it short of Paris--”

The silver had been given to Mademoiselle Laguerre by Bouret. It was a
magnificent service made by the famous Germain, and Madame Soudry had
literally stolen it. At Mademoiselle Laguerre’s death she merely took it
into her own room, and the heirs, who knew nothing of the value of their
inheritance, never claimed it.

For some time past the twelve or fifteen personages who composed the
leading society of Soulanges spoke of Madame Soudry as the _intimate
friend_ of Mademoiselle Laguerre, recoiling at the term “waiting-woman,”
 and making believe that she had sacrificed herself to the singer as her
friend and companion.

Strange yet true! all these illusions became realities, and spread even
to the actual regions of the heart; Madame Soudry reigned supreme, in a
way, over her husband.

The gendarme, required to love a woman ten years older than himself who
kept the management of her fortune in her own hands, behaved to her in
the spirit of the ideas she had ended by adopting about her beauty. But
sometimes, when persons envied him or talked to him of his happiness,
he wished they were in his place, for, to hide his peccadilloes, he was
forced to take as many precautions as the husband of a young and adoring
wife; and it was not until very recently that he had been able to
introduce into the family a pretty servant-girl.

This portrait of the Queen of Soulanges may seem a little grotesque, but
many specimens of the same kind could be found in the provinces at
that period,--some more or less noble in blood, others belonging to the
higher banking-circles, like the widow of a receiver-general in Touraine
who still puts slices of veal upon her cheeks. This portrait, drawn from
nature, would be incomplete without the diamonds in which it is set;
without the surrounding courtiers, a sketch of whom is necessary, if
only to explain how formidable such Lilliputians are, and who are the
makers of public opinion in remote little towns. Let no one mistake me,
however; there are many localities which, like Soulanges, are neither
hamlets, villages, nor little towns, which have, nevertheless, the
characteristics of all. The inhabitants are very different from those
of the large and busy and vicious provincial cities. Country life
influences the manners and morals of the smaller places, and this
mixture of tints will be found to produce some truly original
characters.

The most important personage after Madame Soudry was Lupin, the notary.
Though forty-five springs had bloomed for Lupin, he was still fresh
and rosy, thanks to the plumpness which fills out the skin of sedentary
persons; and he still sang ballads. Also, he retained the elegant
evening dress of society warblers. He looked almost Parisian in
his carefully-varnished boots, his sulphur-yellow waistcoats, his
tight-fitting coats, his handsome silk cravats, his fashionable
trousers. His hair was curled by the barber of Soulanges (the gossip of
the town), and he maintained the attitude of a man “a bonne fortunes” by
his liaison with Madame Sarcus, wife of Sarcus the rich, who was to his
life, without too close a comparison, what the campaigns of Italy were
to Napoleon. He alone of the leading society of Soulanges went to Paris,
where he was received by the Soulanges family. It was enough to hear him
talk to imagine the supremacy he wielded in his capacity as dandy and
judge of elegance. He passed judgment on all things by the use of three
terms: “out of date,” “antiquated,” “superannuated.”[*] A man, a woman,
or a piece of furniture might be “out of date”; next, by a greater
degree of imperfection, “antiquated”; but as to the last term, it was
the superlative of contempt. The first might be remedied, the second was
hopeless, but the third,--oh, better far never to have left the void of
nothingness! As to praise, a single word sufficed him, doubly and trebly
uttered: “Charming!” was the positive of his admiration. “Charming,
charming!” made you feel you were safe; but after “Charming, charming,
charming!” the ladder might be discarded, for the heaven of perfection
was attained.


     [*] “Croute,” “crouton,” and “croute-au-pot,”
      untranslatable, and without equivalent in English. A
     “croute” is the slang term for a man behind the age.--Tr.


The tabellion,--he called himself “tabellion,” petty notary, and keeper
of notes (making fun of his calling in order to seem above it),--the
tabellion was on terms of spoken gallantry with Madame Soudry, who had
a weakness for Lupin, though he was blond and wore spectacles. Hitherto
the late Cochet had loved none but dark men, with moustachios and hairy
hands, of the Alcides type. But she made an exception in favor of Lupin
on account of his elegance, and, moreover, because she thought her
glory at Soulanges was not complete without an adorer; but, to Soudry’s
despair, the queen’s adorers never carried their adoration so far as to
threaten his rights.

Lupin had married an heiress in wooden shoes and blue woollen stockings,
the only daughter of a salt-dealer, who made his money during the
Revolution,--a period when contraband salt-traders made enormous profits
by reason of the reaction that set in against the gabelle. He prudently
left his wife at home, where Bebelle, as he called her, was supported
under his absence by a platonic passion for a handsome clerk who had no
other means than his salary,--a young man named Bonnac, belonging to the
second-class society, where he played the same role that his master, the
notary, played in the first.

Madame Lupin, a woman without any education whatever, appeared on great
occasions only, under the form of an enormous Burgundian barrel dressed
in velvet and surmounted by a little head sunken in shoulders of a
questionable color. No efforts could retain her waist-belt in its
natural place. “Bebelle” candidly admitted that prudence forbade her
wearing corsets. The imagination of a poet or, better still, that of an
inventor, could not have found on Bebelle’s back the slightest trace of
that seductive sinuosity which the vertebrae of all women who are women
usually produce. Bebelle, round as a tortoise, belonged to the genus of
invertebrate females. This alarming development of cellular tissue no
doubt reassured Lupin on the subject of the platonic passion of his fat
wife, whom he boldly called Bebelle without raising a laugh.

“Your wife, what is she?” said Sarcus the rich, one day, when unable to
digest the fatal word “superannuated,” applied to a piece of furniture
he had just bought at a bargain.

“My wife is not like yours,” replied Lupin; “she is not defined as yet.”

Beneath his rosy exterior the notary possessed a subtle mind, and he had
the sense to say nothing about his property, which was fully as large as
that of Rigou.

Monsieur Lupin’s son, Amaury, was a great trouble to his father. An
only son, and one of the Don Juans of the valley, he utterly refused
to follow the paternal profession. He took advantage of his position as
only son to bleed the strong-box cruelly, without, however, exhausting
the patience of his father, who would say after every escapade, “Well,
I was like that in my young days.” Amaury never came to Madame Soudry’s;
he said she bored him; for, with a recollection of her early days, she
attempted to “educate” him, as she called it, whereas he much preferred
the pleasures and billiards of the Cafe de la Paix. He frequented the
worst company of Soulanges, even down to Bonnebault. He continued
sowing his wild oats, as Madame Soudry remarked, and replied to all
his father’s remonstrances with one perpetual request: “Send me back to
Paris, for I am bored to death here.”

Lupin ended, alas! like other gallants, by an attachment that was
semi-conjugal. His known passion, in spite of his former liaison with
Madame Sarcus, was for the wife of the under-sheriff of the municipal
court,--Madame Euphemie Plissoud, daughter of Wattebled the grocer, who
reigned in the second-class society as Madame Soudry did in the first.
Monsieur Plissoud, a competitor of Brunet, belonged to the under-world
of Soulanges on account of his wife’s conduct, which it was said he
authorized,--a report that drew upon him the contempt of the leading
society.

If Lupin was the musician of the leading society, Monsieur Gourdon, the
doctor, was its man of science. The town said of him, “We have here
in our midst a scientific man of the first order.” Madame Soudry (who
believed she understood music because she had ushered in Piccini and
Gluck and had dressed Mademoiselle Laguerre for the Opera) persuaded
society, and even Lupin himself, that he might have made his fortune
by his voice, and, in like manner, she was always regretting that the
doctor did not publish his scientific ideas.

Monsieur Gourdon merely repeated the ideas of Cuvier and Buffon, which
might not have enabled him to pose as a scientist before the Soulanges
world; but besides this he was making a collection of shells, and he
possessed an herbarium, and he knew how to stuff birds. He lived upon
the glory of having bequeathed his cabinet of natural history to the
town of Soulanges. After this was known he was considered throughout
the department as a great naturalist and the successor of Buffon. Like a
certain Genevese banker, whose pedantry, coldness, and puritan propriety
he copied, without possessing either his money or his shrewdness,
Monsieur Gourdon exhibited with great complacency the famous collection,
consisting of a bear and a monkey (both of which had died on their way
to Soulanges), all the rodents of the department, mice and field-mice
and dormice, rats, muskrats, and moles, etc.; all the interesting birds
ever shot in Burgundy, and an Alpine eagle caught in the Jura. Gourdon
also possessed a collection of lepidoptera,--a word which led society
to hope for monstrosities, and to say, when it saw them, “Why, they are
only butterflies!” Besides these things he had a fine array of fossil
shells, mostly the collections of his friends which they bequeathed to
him, and all the minerals of Burgundy and the Jura.

These treasures, laid out on shelves with glass doors (the drawers
beneath containing the insects), occupied the whole of the first floor
of the doctor’s house, and produced a certain effect through the oddity
of the names on the tickets, the magic effect of the colors, and the
gathering together of so many things which no one pays the slightest
attention to when seen in nature, though much admired under glass.
Society took a regular day to go and look at Monsieur Gourdon’s
collection.

“I have,” he said to all inquirers, “five hundred ornithological
objects, two hundred mammifers, five thousand insects, three thousand
shells, and seven thousand specimens of minerals.”

“What patience you have had!” said the ladies.

“One must do something for one’s country,” replied the collector.

He drew an enormous profit from his carcasses by the mere repetition
of the words, “I have bequeathed everything to the town by my will.”
 Visitors lauded his philanthropy; the authorities talked of devoting
the second floor of the town hall to the “Gourdon Museum,” after the
collector’s death.

“I rely upon the gratitude of my fellow-citizens to attach my name to
the gift,” he replied; “for I dare not hope they would place a marble
bust of me--”

“It would be the very least we could do for you,” they rejoined; “are
you not the glory of our town?”

Thus the man actually came to consider himself one of the celebrities of
Burgundy. The surest incomes are not from consols after all; those our
vanity obtains for us have better security. This man of science was, to
employ Lupin’s superlatives, happy! happy!! happy!!!

Gourdon, the clerk of the court, brother of the doctor, was a pitiful
little creature, whose features all gathered about his nose, so that the
nose seemed the point of departure for the forehead, the cheeks, and
the mouth, all of which were connected with it just as the ravines of a
mountain begin at the summit. This pinched little man was thought to be
one of the greatest poets in Burgundy,--a Piron, it was the fashion to
say. The dual merits of the two brothers gave rise to the remark: “We
have the brothers Gourdon at Soulanges--two very distinguished men; men
who could hold their own in Paris.”

Devoted to the game of cup-and-ball, the clerk of the court became
possessed by another mania,--that of composing an ode in honor of an
amusement which amounted to a passion in the eighteenth century. Manias
among mediocrats often run in couples. Gourdon junior gave birth to his
poem during the reign of Napoleon. That fact is sufficient to show
the sound and healthy school of poesy to which he belonged; Luce de
Lancival, Parny, Saint-Lambert, Rouche, Vigee, Andrieux, Berchoux were
his heroes. Delille was his god, until the day when the leading society
of Soulanges raised the question as to whether Gourdon were not superior
to Delille; after which the clerk of the court always called his
competitor “Monsieur l’Abbe Delille,” with exaggerated politeness.

The poems manufactured between 1780 and 1814 were all of one pattern,
and the one which Gourdon composed upon the Cup-and-Ball will give an
idea of them. They required a certain knack or proficiency in the art.
“The Chorister” is the Saturn of this abortive generation of jocular
poems, all in four cantos or thereabouts, for it was generally admitted
that six would wear the subject threadbare.

Gourdon’s poem entitled “Ode to the Cup-and-Ball” obeyed the poetic
rules which governed these works, rules that were invariable in their
application. Each poem contained in the first canto a description of
the “object sung,” preceded (as in the case of Gourdon) by a species of
invocation, of which the following is a model:--

  I sing the good game that belongeth to all,
  The game, be it known, of the Cup and the Ball;
  Dear to little and great, to the fools and the wise;
  Charming game! where the cure of all tedium lies;
  When we toss up the ball on the point of a stick
  Palamedus himself might have envied the trick;
  O Muse of the Loves and the Laughs and the Games,
  Come down and assist me, for, true to your aims,
  I have ruled off this paper in syllable squares.
  Come, help me--

After explaining the game and describing the handsomest cup-and-balls
recorded in history, after relating what fabulous custom it had formerly
brought to the Singe-Vert and to all dealers in toys and turned ivories,
and finally, after proving that the game attained to the dignity of
statics, Gourdon ended the first canto with the following conclusion,
which will remind the erudite reader of all the conclusions of the first
cantos of all these poems:--

  ‘Tis thus that the arts and the sciences, too,
  Find wisdom in things that seemed silly to you.

The second canto, invariably employed to depict the manner of using “the
object,” explaining how to exhibit it in society and before women, and
the benefit to be derived therefrom, will be readily conceived by the
friends of this virtuous literature from the following quotation, which
depicts the player going through his performance under the eyes of his
chosen lady:--

  Now look at the player who sits in your midst,
  On that ivory ball how his sharp eye is fixt;
  He waits and he watches with keenest attention,
  Its least little movement in all its precision;
  The ball its parabola thrice has gone round,
  At the end of the string to which it is bound.
  Up it goes! but the player his triumph has missed,
  For the disc has come down on his maladroit wrist;
  But little he cares for the sting of the ball,
  A smile from his mistress consoles for it all.

It was this delineation, worthy of Virgil, which first raised a doubt as
to Delille’s superiority over Gourdon. The word “disc,” contested by
the opinionated Brunet, gave matter for discussions which lasted eleven
months; in fact, until Gourdon the scientist, one evening when all
present were on the point of getting seriously angry, annihilated the
anti-discers by observing:--

“The moon, called a _disc_ by poets, is undoubtedly a ball.”

“How do you know that?” retorted Brunet. “We have never seen but one
side.”

The third canto told the regulation story,--in this instance, the
famous anecdote of the cup-and-ball which all the world knows by heart,
concerning a celebrated minister of Louis XVI. According to the sacred
formula delivered by the “Debats” from 1810 to 1814, in praise of these
glorious words, Gourdon’s ode “borrowed fresh charms from poesy to
embellish the tale.”

The fourth canto summed up the whole, and concluded with these daring
words,--not published, be it remarked, from 1810 to 1814; in fact, they
did not see the light till 1824, after Napoleon’s death.

  ‘Twas thus that I sang in the time of alarms.
  Oh, if kings would consent to bear no other arms,
  And people enjoyed what was best for them all,
  The sweet little game of the Cup and the Ball,
  Our Burgundy then might be free of all fear,
  And return to the good days of Saturn and Rhea.

These fine verses were published in a first and only edition from the
press of Bournier, printer of Ville-aux-Fayes. One hundred subscribers,
in the sum of three francs, guaranteed the dangerous precedent of
immortality to the poem,--a liberality that was all the greater because
these hundred persons had heard the poem from beginning to end a hundred
times over.

Madame Soudry had lately suppressed the cup-and-ball, which usually lay
on a pier-table in the salon and for the last seven years had given rise
to endless quotations, for she finally discovered in the toy a rival to
her own attractions.

As to the author, who boasted of future poems in his desk, it is enough
to quote the terms in which he mentioned to the leading society of
Soulanges a rival candidate for literary honors.

“Have you heard a curious piece of news?” he had said, two years
earlier. “There is another poet in Burgundy! Yes,” he added, remarking
the astonishment on all faces, “he comes from Macon. But you could
never imagine the subjects he takes up,--a perfect jumble, absolutely
unintelligible,--lakes, stars, waves, billows! not a single
philosophical image, not even a didactic effort! he is ignorant of the
very meaning of poetry. He calls the sky by its name. He says ‘moon,’
bluntly, instead of naming it ‘the planet of night.’ That’s what the
desire to be thought original brings men to,” added Gourdon, mournfully.
“Poor young man! A Burgundian, and sing such stuff as that!--the pity
of it! If he had only consulted me, I would have pointed out to him the
noblest of all themes, wine,--a poem to be called the Baccheide; for
which, alas! I now feel myself too old.”

This great poet is still ignorant of his finest triumph (though he owes
it to the fact of being a Burgundian), namely, that of living in the
town of Soulanges, so rounded and perfected within itself that it knows
nothing of the modern Pleiades, not even their names.

A hundred Gourdons made poetry under the Empire, and yet they tell us
it was a period that neglected literature! Examine the “Journal de
la Libraire” and you will find poems on the game of draughts, on
backgammon, on tricks with cards, on geography, typography, comedy,
etc.,--not to mention the vaunted masterpieces of Delille on Piety,
Imagination, Conversation; and those of Berchoux on Gastromania and
Dansomania, etc. Who can foresee the chances and changes of taste,
the caprices of fashion, the transformations of the human mind? The
generations as they pass along sweep out of sight the last fragments
of the idols they found on their path and set up other gods,--to be
overthrown like the rest.

Sarcus, a handsome little man with a dapple-gray head, devoted himself
in turn to Themis and to Flora,--in other words, to legislation and a
greenhouse. For the last twelve years he had been meditating a book
on the History of the Institution of Justices of the Peace, “whose
political and judiciary role,” he said, “had already passed through
several phases, all derived from the Code of Brumaire, year IV.; and
to-day that institution, so precious to the nation, had lost its power
because the salaries were not in keeping with the importance of its
functions, which ought to be performed by irremovable officials.” Rated
in the community as an able man, Sarcus was the accepted statesman of
Madame Soudry’s salon; you can readily imagine that he was the leading
bore. They said he talked like a book. Gaubertin prophesied he would
receive the cross of the Legion of honor, but not until the day when, as
Leclercq’s successor, he should take his seat on the benches of the Left
Centre.

Guerbet, the collector, a man of parts, a heavy, fat, individual with
a buttery face, a toupet on his bald spot, gold earrings, which were
always in difficulty with his shirt-collar, had the hobby of pomology.
Proud of possessing the finest fruit-garden in the arrondissement, he
gathered his first crops a month later than those of Paris; his hot-beds
supplied him with pine-apples, nectarines, and peas, out of season. He
brought bunches of strawberries to Madame Soudry with pride when the
fruit could be bought for ten sous a basket in Paris.

Soulanges possessed a pharmaceutist named Vermut, a chemist, who was
more of a chemist than Sarcus was a statesman, or Lupin a singer, or
Gourdon the elder a scientist, or his brother a poet. Nevertheless, the
leading society of Soulanges did not take much notice of Vermut, and
the second-class society took none at all. The instinct of the first may
have led them to perceive the real superiority of this thinker, who said
little but smiled at their absurdities so satirically that they first
doubted his capacity and then whispered tales against it; as for the
other class they took no notice of him one way or the other.

Vermut was the butt of Madame Soudry’s salon. No society is complete
without a victim,--without an object to pity, ridicule, despise, and
protect. Vermut, full of his scientific problems, often came with his
cravat untied, his waistcoat unbuttoned, and his little green surtout
spotted.

The little man, gifted with the patience of a chemist, could not enjoy
(that is the term employed in the provinces to express the abolition of
domestic rule) Madame Vermut,--a charming woman, a lively woman, capital
company (for she could lose forty sous at cards and say nothing), a
woman who railed at her husband, annoyed him with epigrams, and declared
him to be an imbecile unable to distil anything but dulness. Madame
Vermut was one of those women who in the society of a small town are the
life and soul of amusement and who set things going. She supplied the
salt of her little world, kitchen-salt, it is true; her jokes were
somewhat broad, but society forgave them; though she was capable of
saying to the cure Taupin, a man of seventy years of age, with white
hair, “Hold your tongue, my lad.”

The miller of Soulanges, possessing an income of fifty thousand francs,
had an only daughter whom Lupin desired for his son Amaury, since he had
lost the hope of marrying him to Gaubertin’s daughter. This miller, a
Sarcus-Taupin, was the Nucingen of the little town. He was supposed to
be thrice a millionaire; but he never transacted business with others,
and thought only of grinding his wheat and keeping a monopoly of it;
his most noticeable point was a total absence of politeness and good
manners.

The elder Guerbet, brother of the post-master at Conches, possessed
an income of ten thousand francs, besides his salary as collector. The
Gourdons were rich; the doctor had married the only daughter of old
Monsieur Gendrin-Vatebled, keeper of the forests and streams, whom the
family were now _expecting to die_, while the poet had married the niece
and sole heiress of the Abbe Taupin, the curate of Soulanges, a stout
priest who lived in his cure like a rat in his cheese.

This clever ecclesiastic, devoted to the leading society, kind and
obliging to the second, apostolic to the poor and unfortunate, made
himself beloved by the whole town. He was cousin of the miller and
cousin of the Sarcuses, and belonged therefore to the neighborhood and
to its mediocracy. He always dined out and saved expenses; he went to
weddings but came away before the ball; he paid the costs of public
worship, saying, “It is my business.” And the parish let him do it,
with the remark, “We have an excellent priest.” The bishop, who knew the
Soulanges people and was not at all misled as to the true value of the
abbe, was glad enough to keep in such a town a man who made religion
acceptable, and who knew how to fill his church and preach to sleepy
heads.

It is unnecessary to remark that not only each of these worthy burghers
possessed some one of the special qualifications which are necessary to
existence in the provinces, but also that each cultivated his field in
the domain of vanity without a rival. Pere Guerbet understood finance,
Soudry might have been minister of war; if Cuvier had passed that way
incognito, the leading society of Soulanges would have proved to him
that he knew nothing in comparison with Monsieur Gourdon the doctor.
“Adolphe Nourrit with his thread of a voice,” remarked the notary
with patronizing indulgence, “was scarcely worthy to accompany the
nightingale of Soulanges.” As to the author of the “Cup-and-Ball” (which
was then being printed at Bournier’s), society was satisfied that a poet
of his force could not be met with in Paris, for Delille was now dead.

This provincial bourgeoisie, so comfortably satisfied with itself, took
the lead through the various superiorities of its members. Therefore
the imagination of those who ever resided, even for a short time, in a
little town of this kind can conceive the air of profound satisfaction
upon the faces of these people, who believed themselves the solar plexus
of France, all of them armed with incredible dexterity and shrewdness to
do mischief,--all, in their wisdom, declaring that the hero of Essling
was a coward, Madame de Montcornet a manoeuvring Parisian, and the Abbe
Brossette an ambitious little priest.

If Rigou, Soudry, and Gaubertin had lived at Ville-aux-Fayes, they would
have quarrelled; their various pretensions would have clashed; but
fate ordained that the Lucullus of Blangy felt too strongly the need
of solitude, in which to wallow at his ease in usury and sensuality, to
live anywhere but at Blangy; that Madame Soudry had sense enough to
see that she could reign nowhere else except at Soulanges; and that
Ville-aux-Fayes was Gaubertin’s place of business. Those who enjoy
studying social nature will admit that General Montcornet was pursued by
special ill-luck in this accidental separation of his dangerous enemies,
who thus accomplished the evolutions of their individual power and
vanity at such distances from each other that neither star interfered
with the orbit of the other,--a fact which doubled and trebled their
powers of mischief.

Nevertheless, though all these worthy bourgeois, proud of their
accomplishments, considered their society as far superior in attractions
to that of Ville-aux-Fayes, and repeated with comic pomposity the local
dictum, “Soulanges is a town of society and social pleasures,” it
must not be supposed that Ville-aux-Fayes accepted this supremacy. The
Gaubertin salon ridiculed (“in petto”) the salon Soudry. By the manner
in which Gaubertin remarked, “We are a financial community, engaged
in actual business; we have the folly to fatigue ourselves in making
fortunes,” it was easy to perceive a latent antagonism between the earth
and the moon. The moon believed herself useful to the earth, and the
earth governed the moon. Earth and moon, however, lived in the closest
intimacy. At the carnival the leading society of Soulanges went in a
body to four balls given by Gaubertin, Gendrin, Leclercq, and Soudry,
junior. Every Sunday the latter, his wife, Monsieur, Madame, and
Mademoiselle Elise Gaubertin dined with the Soudrys at Soulanges. When
the sub-prefect was invited, and when the postmaster of Conches arrived
to take pot-luck, Soulanges enjoyed the sight of four official equipages
drawn up at the door of the Soudry mansion.




