CHAPTER VIII. RURAL VIRTUE


That night Marie Tonsard was stationed on the road to Soulanges, sitting
on the rail of a culvert waiting for Bonnebault, who had spent the day,
as usual, at the Cafe de la Paix. She heard him coming at some distance,
and his step told her that he was drunk, and she knew also that he had
lost money, for he always sang if he won.

“Is that you, Bonnebault?”

“Yes, my girl.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I owe twenty-five francs, and they may wring my neck twenty-five times
before I can pay them.”

“Well, I know how you can get five hundred,” she said in his ear.

“Oh! by killing a man; but I prefer to live.”

“Hold your tongue. Vaudoyer will give us five hundred francs if you will
let him catch your mother at a tree.”

“I’d rather kill a man than sell my mother. There’s your old
grandmother; why don’t you sell her?”

“If I tried to, my father would get angry and stop the trick.”

“That’s true. Well, anyhow, my mother sha’n’t go to prison, poor old
thing! She cooks my food and keeps me in clothes, I’m sure I don’t know
how. Go to prison,--and through me! I shouldn’t have any bowels within
me; no, no! And for fear any one else should sell her, I’ll tell her
this very night not to kill any more trees.”

“Well, my father may say and do what he likes, but I shall tell him
there are five hundred francs to be had, and perhaps he’ll ask my
grandmother if she’ll earn them. They’ll never put an old woman
seventy-eight years of age in prison,--though, to be sure, she’d be
better off there than in her garret.”

“Five hundred francs! well, yes; I’ll speak to my mother,” said
Bonnebault, “and if it suits her to give ‘em to me, I’ll let her have
part to take to prison. She could knit, and amuse herself; and she’d
be well fed and lodged, and have less trouble than she has at Conches.
Well, to-morrow, my girl, I’ll see you about it; I haven’t time to stop
now.”

The next morning at daybreak Bonnebault and his old mother knocked at
the door of the Grand-I-Vert. Mother Tonsard was the only person up.

“Marie!” called Bonnebault, “that matter is settled.”

“You mean about the trees?” said Mother Tonsard; “yes, it is all
settled; I’ve taken it.”

“Nonsense!” cried Mother Bonnebault, “my son has got the promise of an
acre of land from Monsieur Rigou--”

The two old women squabbled as to which of them should be sold by her
children. The noise of the quarrel woke up the household. Tonsard and
Bonnebault took sides for their respective mothers.

“Pull straws,” suggested Tonsard’s wife.

The short straw gave it in favor of the tavern.

Three days later, in the forest of Ville-aux-Fayes at daybreak, the
gendarmes arrested old Mother Tonsard caught “in flagrante delicto” by
the bailiff, his assistants, and the field-keeper, with a rusty file
which served to tear the tree, and a chisel, used by the delinquent to
scoop round the bark just as the insect bores its way. The indictment
stated that sixty trees thus destroyed were found within a radius of
five hundred feet. The old woman was sent to Auxerre, the case coming
under the jurisdiction of the assize-court.

Michaud could not refrain from saying when he discovered Mother Tonsard
at the foot of the tree: “These are the persons on whom the general and
Madame la comtesse have showered benefits! Faith, if Madame would only
listen to me, she wouldn’t give that dowry to the Tonsard girl, who is
more worthless than her grandmother.”

The old woman raised her gray eyes and darted a venomous look at
Michaud. When the count learned who the guilty person was, he forbade
his wife to give the money to Catherine Tonsard.

“Monsieur le comte is perfectly right,” said Sibilet. “I know that
Godain bought that land three days before Catherine came to speak to
Madame. She is quite capable, that girl, of pretending she is with
child, to get the money; very likely Godain has had nothing to do with
it.”

“What a community!” said Blondet; “the scoundrels of Paris are saints by
comparison.”

“Ah, monsieur,” said Sibilet, “self-interest makes people guilty of
horrors everywhere. Do you know who betrayed the old woman?”

“No.”

“Her granddaughter Marie; she was jealous of her sister’s marriage, and
to get the money for her own--”

“It is awful!” said the count. “Why! they’d murder!”

“Oh yes,” said Sibilet, “for a very small sum. They care so little
for life, those people; they hate to have to work all their lives. Ah
monsieur, queer things happen in country places, as queer as those of
Paris,--but you will never believe it.”

“Let us be kind and benevolent,” said the countess.

The evening after the arrest Bonnebault came to the tavern of the
Grand-I-Vert, where all the Tonsard family were in great jubilation.
“Oh yes, yes!” said he, “make the most of your rejoicing; but I’ve just
heard from Vaudoyer that the countess, to punish you, withdraws the
thousand francs promised to Godain; her husband won’t let her give
them.”

“It’s that villain of a Michaud who has put him up to it,” said Tonsard.
“My mother heard him say he would; she told me at Ville-aux-Fayes where
I went to carry her some money and her clothes. Well; let that countess
keep her money! our five hundred francs shall help Godain buy the land;
and we’ll revenge ourselves for this thing. Ha! Michaud meddles with our
private matters, does he? it will bring him more harm than good. What
business is it of his, I’d like to know? let him keep to the woods! It’s
he who is at the bottom of all this trouble--he found the clue that day
my mother cut the throat of his dog. Suppose I were to meddle in the
affairs of the chateau? Suppose I were to tell the general that his wife
is off walking in the woods before he is up in the morning, with a young
man.”

“The general, the general!” sneered Courtecuisse; “they can do what they
like with him. But it’s Michaud who stirs him up, the mischief-maker! a
fellow who don’t know his business; in my day, things went differently.”

“Ah!” said Tonsard, “those were the good days for all of us--weren’t
they, Vaudoyer?”

“Yes,” said the latter, “and the fact is that if Michaud were got rid of
we should be left in peace.”

“Enough said,” replied Tonsard. “We’ll talk of this later--by
moonlight--in the open field.”

Towards the end of October the countess returned to Paris, leaving the
general at Les Aigues. He was not to rejoin her till some time later,
but she did not wish to lose the first night of the Italian Opera, and
moreover she was lonely and bored; she missed Emile, who was recalled by
his avocations, for he had helped her to pass the hours when the general
was scouring the country or attending to business.

November was a true winter month, gray and gloomy, a mixture of snow and
rain, frost and thaw. The trial of Mother Tonsard had required witnesses
at Auxerre, and Michaud had given his testimony. Monsieur Rigou had
interested himself for the old woman, and employed a lawyer on her
behalf who relied in his defence on the absence of disinterested
witnesses; but the testimony of Michaud and his assistants and the
field-keeper was found to outweigh this objection. Tonsard’s mother was
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment, and the lawyer said to her son:--

“It was Michaud’s testimony which got her that.”




CHAPTER IX THE CATASTROPHE


One Saturday evening, Courtecuisse, Bonnebault, Godain, Tonsard, his
daughters, wife, and Pere Fourchon, also Vaudoyer and several mechanics
were supping at the tavern. The moon was at half-full, the first snow
had melted, and frost had just stiffened the ground so that a man’s step
left no traces. They were eating a stew of hare caught in a trap;
all were drinking and laughing. It was the day after the wedding of
Catherine and Godain, and the wedded pair were to be conducted to their
new home, which was not far from that of Courtecuisse; for when Rigou
sold an acre of land it was sure to be isolated and close to the woods.
Courtecuisse and Vaudoyer had brought their guns to accompany the bride.
The neighborhood was otherwise fast asleep; not a light was to be seen;
none but the wedding party were awake, but they made noise enough. In
the midst of it the old Bonnebault woman entered, and every one looked
at her.

“I think she is going to lie-in,” she whispered in Tonsard’s ear. “_He_
has saddled his horse and is going for the doctor at Soulanges.”

“Sit down,” said Tonsard, giving her his place at the table, and going
himself to lie on a bench.

Just then the gallop of a horse passing rapidly along the road was
heard. Tonsard, Courtecuisse, and Vaudoyer went out hurriedly, and saw
Michaud on his way to the village.

“He knows what he’s about,” said Courtecuisse; “he came down by the
terrace and he means to go by Blangy and the road,--it’s the safest
way.”

“Yes,” said Tonsard, “but he will bring the doctor back with him.”

“He won’t find him,” said Courtecuisse, “the doctor has been sent for to
Conches for the postmistress.”

“Then he’ll go from Soulanges to Conches by the mail-road; that’s
shortest.”

“And safest too, for us,” said Courtecuisse, “there’s a fine moon, and
there are no keepers on the roads as there are in the woods; one can
hear much farther; and down there, by the pavilions, behind the hedges,
just where they join the little wood, one can aim at a man from behind,
like a rabbit, at five hundred feet.”

“It will be half-past eleven before he comes past there,” said Tonsard,
“it will take him half an hour to go to Soulanges and as much more to
get back,--but look here! suppose Monsieur Gourdon were on the road?”

“Don’t trouble about that,” said Courtecuisse, “I’ll stand ten minutes
away from you to the right on the road towards Blangy, and Vaudoyer
will be ten minutes away on your left towards Conches; if anything comes
along, the mail, or the gendarmes, or whatever it is, we’ll fire a shot
into the ground,--a muffled sound, you’ll know it.”

“But suppose I miss him?” said Tonsard.

“He’s right,” said Courtecuisse, “I’m the best shot; Vaudoyer, I’ll go
with you; Bonnebault may watch in my place; he can give a cry; that’s
easier heard and less suspicious.”

All three returned to the tavern and the wedding festivities went on;
but about eleven o’clock Vaudoyer, Courtecuisse, Tonsard, and Bonnebault
went out, carrying their guns, though none of the women took any notice
of them. They came back in about three-quarters of an hour, and sat
drinking till past one o’clock. Tonsard’s girls and their mother and the
old Bonnebault woman had plied the miller, the mechanics, and the two
peasants, as well as Fourchon, with so much drink that they were all
on the ground and snoring when the four men left the tavern; on their
return, the sleepers were shaken and roused, and every one seemed to
them, as before, in his place.

While this orgy was going on Michaud’s household was in a scene of
mortal anxiety. Olympe had felt false pains, and her husband, thinking
she was about to be delivered, rode off instantly in haste for the
doctor. But the poor woman’s pains ceased as soon as she realized that
Michaud was gone; for her mind was so preoccupied by the danger her
husband ran at that hour of the night, in a lawless region filled with
determined foes, that the anguish of her soul was powerful enough
to deaden and momentarily subdue those of the body. In vain her
servant-woman declared her fears were imaginary; she seemed not to
comprehend a word that was said to her, and sat by the fire in her
bed-chamber listening to every sound. In her terror, which increased
every moment, she had the man wakened, meaning to give him some order
which still she did not give. At last, the poor woman wandered up and
down, coming and going in feverish agitation; she looked out of all the
windows and opened them in spite of the cold; then she went downstairs
and opened the door into the courtyard, looking out and listening.
“Nothing! nothing!” she said. Then she went up again in despair. About
a quarter past twelve, she cried out: “Here he is! I hear the horse!”
 Again she went down, followed by the man who went to open the iron gate
of the courtyard. “It is strange,” she said, “that he should return by
the Conches woods!”

As she spoke she stood still, horrorstruck, motionless, voiceless. The
man shared her terror, for, in the furious gallop of the horse, the
clang of the empty stirrups, the neigh of the frightened animal, there
was something, they scarcely knew what, of unspeakable warning. Soon,
too soon for the unhappy wife, the horse reached the gate, panting and
sweating, but alone; he had broken the bridle, no doubt by entangling
it. Olympe gazed with haggard eyes at the servant as he opened the gate;
she saw the horse, and then, without a word, she ran to the chateau
like a madwoman; when she reached it she fell to the ground beneath the
general’s windows crying out: “Monsieur, they have murdered him!”

The cry was so terrible it awoke the count; he rang violently, bringing
the whole household to their feet; and the groans of Madame Michaud, who
as she lay on the ground, gave birth to a child that died in being born,
brought the general and all the servants about her. They raised the poor
dying woman, who expired, saying to the general: “They have murdered
him!”

“Joseph!” cried the count to his valet, “go for the doctor; there may
yet be time to save her. No, better bring the curate; the poor woman is
dead, and her child too. My God! my God! how thankful I am that my wife
is not here. And you,” he said to the gardener, “go and find out what
has happened.”

“I can tell you,” said the pavilion servant, coming up, “Monsieur
Michaud’s horse has come back alone, the reins broke, his legs bloody;
and there’s a spot of blood on the saddle.”

“What can be done at this time of night?” cried the count. “Call
up Groison, send for the keepers, saddle the horses; we’ll beat the
country.”

By daybreak, eight persons--the count, Groison, the three keepers, and
two gendarmes sent from Soulanges with their sergeant--searched the
country. It was not till the middle of the morning that they found the
body of the bailiff in a copse between the mail-road and the smaller
road leading to Ville-aux-Fayes, at the end of the park of Les Aigues,
not far from Conches. Two gendarmes started, one to Ville-aux-Fayes for
the prosecuting attorney, the other to Soulanges for the justice of the
peace. Meantime the general, assisted by the sergeant, noted down the
facts. They found on the road, just above the two pavilions, the print
of the stamping of the horse’s feet as he roared, and the traces of his
frightened gallop from there to the first opening in the woods above the
hedge. The horse, no longer guided, turned into the wood-path. Michaud’s
hat was found there. The animal evidently took the nearest way to reach
his stable. The bailiff had a ball though his back which broke the
spine.

Groison and the sergeant studied the ground around the spot where the
horse reared (which might be called, in judicial language, the theatre
of the crime) with remarkable sagacity, but without obtaining any clue.
The earth was too frozen to show the footprints of the murderer, and all
they found was the paper of a cartridge. When the attorney and the judge
and Monsieur Gourdon, the doctor, arrived and raised the body to make
the autopsy, it was found that the ball, which corresponded with the
fragments of the wad, was an ammunition ball, evidently from a military
musket; and no such musket existed in the district of Blangy. The judge
and Monsieur Soudry the attorney, who came that evening to the chateau,
thought it best to collect all the facts and await events. The same
opinion was expressed by the sergeant and the lieutenant of the
gendarmerie.

“It is impossible that it can be anything but a planned attack on the
part of the peasants,” said the sergeant; “but there are two districts,
Conches and Blangy, in each of which there are five or six persons
capable of being concerned in the murder. The one that I suspect most,
Tonsard, passed the night carousing in the Grand-I-Vert; but your
assistant, general, the miller Langlume, was there, and he says that
Tonsard did not leave the tavern. They were all so drunk they could not
stand; they took the bride home at half-past one; and the return of
the horse proves that Michaud was murdered between eleven o’clock and
midnight. At a quarter past ten Groison saw the whole company assembled
at table, and Monsieur Michaud passed there on his way to Soulanges,
which he reached at eleven. His horse reared between the two pavilions
on the mail-road; but he may have been shot before reaching Blangy and
yet have stayed in the saddle for some little time. We should have to
issue warrants for at least twenty persons and arrest them; but I know
these peasants, and so do these gentlemen; you might keep them a year in
prison and you would get nothing out of them but denials. What could you
do with all those who were at Tonsard’s?”

They sent for Langlume, the miller, and the assistant of General
Montcornet as mayor; he related what had taken place in the tavern, and
gave the names of all present; none had gone out except for a minute or
two into the courtyard. He had left the room for a moment with Tonsard
about eleven o’clock; they had spoken of the moon and the weather, and
heard nothing. At two o’clock the whole party had taken the bride and
bridegroom to their own house.

The general arranged with the sergeant, the lieutenant, and the civil
authorities to send to Paris for the cleverest detective in the service
of the police, who should come to the chateau as a workman, and behave
so ill as to be dismissed; he should then take to drinking and frequent
the Grand-I-Vert and remain in the neighborhood in the character of an
ill-wisher to the general. The best plan they could follow was to watch
and wait for a momentary revelation, and then make the most of it.

“If I have to spend twenty thousand francs I’ll discover the murderer of
my poor Michaud,” the general was never weary of saying.

He went off with that idea in his head, and returned from Paris in the
month of January with one of the shrewdest satellites of the chief of
the detective police, who was brought down ostensibly to do some work
to the interior of the chateau. The man was discovered poaching. He was
arrested, and turned off, and soon after--early in February--the general
rejoined his wife in Paris.




