CHAPTER X.

The reader must imagine a lapse of five years.

Hiram Meeker sits by an open window of his front parlor. It is the first
week in June; and, although early in the afternoon, the avenue is
beginning to be thronged with the fashionable world.

Hiram sits, idly regarding the passers by. If you observe particularly,
you will perceive that the chair in which he is sitting is of a peculiar
construction. It is made so as to be wheeled from one point to another,
without disturbing the occupant.

If you regard his countenance with a little more scrutiny, you will find
it greatly changed. There is no longer that firm texture of the skin
which indicates the vigor of health, and which shows that the muscles
are under full control. One side of the face is a very little out of
shape; not enough, however, to affect the appearance of the mouth, and
probably not to interfere with articulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reader, the 'evil days' have come to Hiram. They _have_ come, but, as
one might say, gently, without aggravating circumstances or attending
misfortunes. Still, the evil days have come. The 'years,' too, draw nigh
when he shall have no pleasure in them.

It is a twelvemonth now since the fatal, long-dreaded _paralysis_ came.
The stroke was a mild one, but there it was. All that care, and
forethought, and the best medical advice could accomplish, had been put
in requisition, and not without effect; but the millionnaire could not
neglect his vast interests, nor fail to mature plans which his fertile
brain originated.

The machine gave occasional token of the wear and tear to which it was
subjected. Then Hiram would intermit his labor; would ride farther and
sharper of a morning; would subject himself to an extra amount of
friction. Presently the brain would work bravely on again, as of yore,
just the same--exactly the same. Hiram could perceive no
difference--none. Then would come another premonitory symptom, which
would be followed by other extra rides and various new courses of
treatment, till all worked well again. During these periods, Doctor
Frank, under whose charge Hiram had at length placed himself, would urge
on his brother the necessity of some relief from his self-imposed
labors. But, as I have intimated, the advice was heeded only while
danger was apparent.

When the fearful visitor _did_ appear, Hiram bitterly regretted tasking
his brain so severely. He was now quite willing to obey every injunction
and follow every suggestion of his physician.

To this is owing his present comfortable state and tolerable degree of
health. But privately let me tell you that he is failing--not fast, but
gradually, surely failing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us return to the window.

Mrs. Meeker's carriage is at the door. In a few moments Arabella herself
comes out and enters it, and drives away. Positively she does not appear
in the least changed since we last saw her. In fact, her health was
never so good as at present.

'She will outlive me,' mutters Hiram--'she will outlive me, though she
is more than two years older than I am. Let me see, from April to
November is seven months. Yes, it is nearer three years than two. She
will outlive me, though.

'I say, Williams!'

'Yes, sir.'

'Williams, have you heard how Mr. Hill is to-day? I am told he is not
expected to live.'

'No more he wasn't sir; but I met his man this morning, at market, and
he says as how Mr. Hill is very much better, sir, very much better.'

'Humph!

'Williams, who was that young man I saw come to the door this morning?'

'I really couldn't say, sir--I didn't know of any, sir--oh, now I
recollect, sir: it was a messenger from the Doctor, sir, with the new
friction gloves.'

'Humph!--

'You understand, Williams, if _that_ young man ever comes near the
house--you know who I mean--I say, you--you understand what I told you?'

'Oh, yes, sir--certainly, sir.'

'That will do, Williams.--Hill is getting better, is he?' pursues Hiram
to himself. 'Let me see--Hill must be at least four years older than I.
Yes, I recollect perfectly when he was at Joslin's, the time I came down
from Burnsville. Why, I was a mere boy, then, and Hill--Hill was a young
man of five-and-twenty. Yes, I recollect perfectly'--and Hiram smiled,
as if his encounter with Joslin and his clerk was fresh in his mind. 'So
Hill is better to-day,' he continued. 'He will outlive me too. Yet he is
certainly four years older--four years older.'

       *       *       *       *       *

There may be some of my readers who have taken sufficient interest in
'that scapegrace Hill' to wish to know something about him during these
last thirty years.

I will say, therefore, that when Hiram jilted Emma Tenant, Hill took a
perfect disgust toward him. He presently quit drinking and swearing, and
married a pretty--indeed, a very charming--rosy-cheeked girl, whose only
fault was, as he said, that she was foolish enough to love him. This
girl was the daughter of his landlady, and not worth a penny--in money.
Till Hiram's 'affair' with Emma Tenant, he had exercised sufficient
influence over Hill to prevent his committing himself. That resulted in
Hill's throwing off the yoke, and announcing his independence. Hill was
no fool. The fact is, Hiram, to a certain extent, was in his power. The
parties never quarrelled. But all accounts were closed between them the
following season. I am constrained to add Hill continued in the liquor
business, in which he amassed a pretty large fortune. He was afterward
made President of the Globe Bank, one of the largest in the city, as all
know, which office he continues to hold. He has proved a good husband, a
kind father, and a useful member of society. The phrase is a stereotyped
one, but it is true of Hill.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leaving Hiram Meeker to pursue his soliloquy, I will endeavor to put the
reader in possession of such facts as may be necessary for the better
understanding of the narrative, and the present situation of affairs in
Hiram's own house.

After the departure of Belle, I remarked that Hiram was busily engaged
for more than a week in preparing his will. With the defection of his
son and the elopement of his favorite daughter, Hiram's ideas took a new
and distinctive turn.

He at one time had considerable pride in the idea of building up the
family name in his children, 'even unto his children's children.' This
he thought a laudable ambition, since he found the phrase in Scripture.
But when Belle deserted him, and he found himself not only forsaken but
duped, his feelings underwent an entire change.

When Harriet, in her anxiety to induce her father to bring back her
sister, said, 'Give her my share--I shall not require it,' there was
stirred in Hiram's heart the old demon of Calculation and
Acquisitiveness. It seemed as if something had been saved to him by
Harriet's untimely departure from the world. It is difficult fully to
understand this, since, while he lived, certainly he would retain
control of all his property; and after his death, what could it avail
him? Nevertheless, I but recount the simple truth.

That night he conceived the idea of a magnificent disposition of his
vast estate, to take place on his decease. Now he began to regard his
afflictions in a providential light. These were chastenings, at present
not joyous but grievous; but they would work out for him a more eternal
weight of glory.

The consequence was, that by his will be founded three distinct public
institutions, all bearing his name; and prepared, at the same time,
minute directions how to carry his bequests into effect. These
institutions were not what are called charitable, neither did their
establishment indicate a heart easily touched by human misfortune. They
were calculated, however, to adorn and ornament the city, and to blazon
forth _H. Meeker_ to the world so long as they stood.

One thing threatened to interfere with Hiram's arrangements. His wife
would have a right of dower in all his real estate, in case she survived
him. This annoyed Hiram greatly.

He got along with the matter in a business way. Arabella herself was
called in. Hiram announced, in general terms, what he proposed to do,
and suggested that he was ready to leave her a sum certain, provided she
would relinquish her rights in the real estate.

Under ordinary circumstances Arabella would have been indignant; but her
thoughts were of her son, now a wanderer from his home. She was
tolerably familiar with the laws which regulate property. She knew if
she insisted on her dower, which she had a right to do, that however
affluent she would be while she lived, she would have nothing to leave
her child. She did not give Belle a thought.

After a good deal of haggling, it was agreed that Hiram should give her
by his will three hundred thousand dollars (just about the sum, by the
way, she brought her husband), together with the household furniture,
plate, horses, carriages, and so forth, and the use of the house during
her life.

This settled, Hiram was left free to follow out his ambitious plans for
raising a monument to--himself.

These occupy him entirely. So much so, that he has no time to look
forward to the great future which cannot now be very far off to him.
Indeed, strange as one may think, although Hiram feels well assured of
his title to the kingdom, he _thinks_ very little about it; neither does
the prospect give him the least satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, where is Harriet? What has become of Belle! How did Gus turn
out?

Harriet survived longer than one would have imagined, considering the
progress disease had made when we first became acquainted with her.
While she lived, she could not fail to impart her influence--the
influence of a gentle and a chastened spirit--over the whole household.

I have already intimated that there was a new tie between her and her
mother--the worldly minded and fashionable Arabella. It was in the
interest which both felt in Gus. It seemed to be the chief object of
Harriet in living, to bring back her brother to his home, and to see him
in the right path. The mother longed to bring about the same thing, but
probably for very different reasons from those which actuated the dying
girl. But here their sympathies met, and they could act in concert. Gus
had always been sensibly alive to Harriet's regard for him. He loved her
with real affection; and when, in a foreign land, he read her letters,
fraught with the strongest expressions of love and sympathy, and filled
with the most earnest appeals from his 'dying sister, whose every breath
was a prayer for him,' it was impossible for his nature to resist.

In a few months, Gus had taken his resolution. He abhorred trade. His
four years in college were not altogether lost on him. He felt quite
sure that his father would never relent. He believed he discovered in
himself a taste for the medical profession. So, after a short period,
Gus established himself in a very quiet way in Paris, and became a very
persevering and devoted student. His mother, of course, managed to keep
him in funds; but his drafts on her were very moderate. His reformation
seemed complete.

After devoting about eighteen months to the study of medicine abroad, he
returned to New York. This was the season before Harriet died. He said
he could not endure the idea of her passing out of the world without his
seeing her again, and telling her what was in his heart.

Hiram all this time remained, or professed to remain, profoundly
ignorant of what was going on. He continued to speak of his 'reprobate
son,' among his acquaintances in the church. The least attempt on
Harriet's part to introduce the forbidden subject was met by the most
stern repulse.

But Gus came back. He was obliged to enter his own home stealthily and
in secret, where he deserved to be welcomed back in honor and with
reward. But he came. What was the joy, the intense satisfaction of
Harriet, to see him again! And Arabella--it was a strange sight indeed
to see _her_ give way to any real emotion.

Perhaps, before this, you have guessed that Doctor Frank has had
something to do with Gus's return. He has had a great deal to do with
it. Doctor Frank is an old man. He has no boys--living. He wants Gus to
live with him. He will give him the benefit of his large experience, and
Gus in return will relieve the doctor of much of the hard work which is
constantly accumulating. This is Doctor Frank's plan. It has been
carried out, and Gus is now 'the young doctor.' Bravo Gus! God bless
you!

       *       *       *       *       *

Poor Belle!

At the end of a single year, she was obliged to quit her husband. Quit
her husband, did I say? I mean that her husband quitted her. After
spending a few weeks in travelling, the two set off for Europe; and,
going to Paris, they gave themselves up to the enjoyment of the gay
scenes which this remarkable city affords.

'When the ocean shall be between us, papa will no longer hold out--I
know he will not.'

So Belle said to her husband. But Belle was mistaken. Months passed, and
destitution stared the couple in the face. Then the various articles of
jewelry went, one by one--and then the crisis arrived.

When Signor Filippo Barbone became fully satisfied that his
father-in-law was not to be turned from his resolution: when it became
apparent that the mother was not to be influenced, he came to the
conclusion that he had made a bad bargain, and resolved to escape as
soon as possible from the consequences of it.

Belle, on her part, began to be disenchanted. Then all the elements of
her imperious, passionate nature, broke out in the fiercest, most
vehement, most vindictive manner. She heaped reproaches, taunts, and
maledictions on the head of the signor, who bore them with more
equanimity than would be supposed, but who determined not to have
another such tempest. One night he decamped, taking with him the few
remaining valuables the miserable girl possessed.

Belle had not communicated with Gus, or even permitted him to know her
whereabouts. Now she wrote him a note, imploring him to come to her. He
responded at once, and instantly made what arrangements he could for her
comfort. After a season, and by the joint efforts of Gus and Harriet and
Doctor Frank, Belle was enabled to go back to New York. Her father would
not see her; her mother would not permit her to enter the house; but a
small weekly stipend was allowed, to enable her to board in a
respectable place, and to dress decently.

Her unfortunate marriage has had very little effect on her. She never
was so handsome in her life. She enjoys exciting the sympathies of those
by whom she is surrounded, including half-a-dozen gentlemen who are
constantly dangling around her. A young lawyer, who was boarding at the
same house, undertook to institute proceedings for a divorce against the
absent signor. He was successful in his application, and Belle is now
legally free. She will probably marry some man of coarse taste, who will
be attracted by her fine form and showy appearance, to say nothing of
the effect of the prevalent belief that she will certainly be provided
for 'on old Meeker's death.'

       *       *       *       *       *

So much for the present situation of the Meeker family. While Arabella
is taking her drive, I have had time to tell the reader thus much about
it. The carriage is now approaching, and I must stop.

       *       *       *       *       *

The shadows of evening begin to gather. Along the great artery of the
city press the crowd. Their steps tend homeward.

Still Hiram sits by the window, but oblivious of the current which
sweeps by.

His thoughts go back to Hampton. He is a clerk in the 'opposition
store,' making love to Mary Jessup.

'What a pretty girl she used to be!--how much she always did for
me--what pains she took to please me!' he mutters to himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now he is thinking of Burnsville. His mind seems principally to dwell on
what was formerly of secondary importance to him.

'Those Hawkins girls--they were good girls--very kind to me always--nice
girls--handsome girls--both of them in love with me. The widow Hawkins,
too....

       *       *       *       *       *

'Sarah Burns--she was a different sort from the rest. I don't think I
ever cared so much about her--too independent--thought too much of
herself. How quick she broke the engagement! I remember it was
preparatory lecture--preparatory lecture....

       *       *       *       *       *

'Emma Tenant--_she_ wasn't proud--Emma really loved me--I always, knew
she did....'

He raised his eyes.

Was it through some species of traction, as believers in odic force
other peculiar affinities, attribute to their influences, that he did so
at that moment?

_There_ was Emma Tenant--Mrs. Lawrence--passing in her carriage,
surrounded by blooming, grown-up children.

Her attention, it seems, was directed for an instant to the window.
Their gaze met.

No outward sign that they were ever acquainted was manifested. But there
was, on both sides, a _recognition_, instantaneous and complete.

'Poor old man!' exclaimed Mrs. Lawrence, involuntarily.

'Who, mamma?'

'We have passed him now.' And no more was said.

'She loved me once,' was the soliloquy. 'That was a great while ago,
too....'

       *       *       *       *       *

Another carriage passed. A bow from a lady, accompanied by a pleasant
smile. It is Miss Innis (Mrs. Leroy), driving out with _her_ children.
Though no longer young, she is still a most attractive and elegant
woman.

'What a wife she would have made me! I should not be in this state if I
had her to look after me. She has a kind heart--always smiling, always
happy.'

'Mr. Meeker!'

The shrill voice of Arabella is heard.

Hiram groans in spirit.

'Don't you think you had better be wheeled to your room? You know I dine
out to-day.'

'I prefer to sit here. Tell Williams to come to me.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The shadows fall thicker and faster.

Still Hiram Meeker sits by the window.

Despite my real inclination, I have a morbid desire to linger by his
side.

       *       *       *       *       *

I hear the sharp ring of the prompter's bell! The curtain is about to
fall. I _cannot_ stay in the gloom alone with that man!--Good by to you,
Hiram!

       *       *       *       *       *

I breathe again--in the cheerful streets, surrounded by bustling,
earnest, sympathizing humanity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reader, what think you? WAS HE SUCCESSFUL?




APHORISMS.

NO. II.


One may effect an _absolute insurance against all real evil_ by the
adoption of a single rule, i. e., _never to do anything against
conscience_. This must be applied in our treatment of ourselves, in body
and mind--especially the former; because there we are most apt to fail.
It must be kept strictly toward the soul, in view of its endless
welfare, and in all our relations to God and man. This, I admit, may not
save us from the invasions of apparent ill; but from the entire
_reality_ of evil, the security thus furnished is absolute. Conscience
is the voice of God in the soul; and no one truly obeying this voice
will meet with permanent harm. This rule, let us further observe, is
most needed where it is least likely to be regarded, i. e., in
circumstances where the voice of conscience is not so decided as in the
case of temptations to palpable vice. Our danger is often greatest,
where we have to resist only an obscure sense of right and wrong, in
seeking the lower gratifications of life. So much the more scrupulous
must we there be.




BENEDICT OF NURSIA AND THE ORDER OF THE BENEDICTINES.


Benedict of Nursia, the founder of the celebrated order which bears his
name, gave to the Western monasticism a fixed and permanent form, and
thus carried it far above the Eastern with its imperfect attempts at
organization, and made it exceedingly profitable to the practical, and
incidentally also to the literary interests of the Catholic Church. He
holds, therefore, the dignity of patriarch of the Western monks. He has
furnished a remarkable instance of the incalculable influence which a
simple but judicious moral rule of life may exercise on many centuries.

Benedict was born of the illustrious house of Anicius at Nursia (now
Norcia), in Umbria, about the year 480, at the time when the political
and social state of Europe was distracted and dismembered, and
literature, morals, and religion seemed to be doomed to irremediable
ruin. He studied in Rome, but so early as his fifteenth year he fled
from the corrupt society of his fellow students, and spent three years
in seclusion in a dark, narrow, and almost inaccessible grotto at
Subiaco.[5] A neighboring monk, Romanus, furnished him from time to time
his scanty food, letting it down by a cord, with a little bell, the
sound of which announced to him the loaf of bread. He there passed
through the usual anchoretic battles with demons, and by prayer and
ascetic exercise attained a rare power over nature. At one time, Pope
Gregory tells us, the allurements of voluptuousness so strongly tempted
his imagination that he was on the point of leaving his retreat in
pursuit of a beautiful woman of previous acquaintance; but summoning up
his courage, he took off his vestment of skins, and rolled himself naked
on thorns and briers near his cave, until the impure fire of sensual
passion was forever extinguished. Seven centuries later, St. Francis of
Assisi planted on that spiritual battle field two rose trees, which grew
and survived the Benedictine thorns and briers. He gradually became
known, and was at first taken for a wild beast by the surrounding
shepherds, but afterward reverenced as a saint.

After this period of hermit life, he began his labors in behalf of the
monastery proper. In that mountainous region he established, in
succession, twelve cloisters, each with twelve monks and a superior,
himself holding the oversight of all. The persecution of an unworthy
priest caused him, however, to leave Subiaco, and retire to a wild but
picturesque mountain district in the Neapolitan province upon the
boundaries of Samnium and Campania. There he destroyed the remnants of
idolatry, converted many of the pagan inhabitants to Christianity by his
preaching and miracles, and in the year 529, under many difficulties,
founded upon the ruins of a temple of Apollo the renowned cloister of
Monte Cassino,[6] the alma mater and capital of his order. Here he
labored fourteen years till his death. Although never ordained to the
priesthood, his life there was rather that of a missionary and apostle
than of a solitary. He cultivated the soil, fed the poor, healed the
sick, preached to the neighboring population, directed the young monks,
who in increasing numbers flocked to him, and organized the monastic
life upon a fixed method or rule, which he himself conscientiously
observed. His power over the hearts and the veneration in which he was
held is illustrated by the visit of Jotila, in 542, the barbarian king,
the victor of the Romans and master of Italy, who threw himself on his
face before the saint, accepted his reproof and exhortations, asked his
blessing, and left a better man, but fell, after ten years' reign, as
Benedict had predicted, in a great battle with the Graeco-Roman army
under Narses. Benedict died, after partaking of the holy communion,
praying, in standing posture at the foot of the altar, on the 21st of
March, 543, and was buried by the side of his sister, Scholastica, who
had established a nunnery near Monte Cassino, and died a few weeks
before him. They met only once a year on the side of the mountain for
prayer and pious conversation. On the day of his departure two monks saw
in a vision a shining pathway of stars leading from Monte Cassino to
heaven, and heard a voice that said by this road Benedict, the well
beloved of God, had ascended to heaven.[7]

His biographer, Pope Gregory I., in the second book of his Dialogues,
ascribes to him miraculous prophecies and healings, and even a raising
of the dead.[8] With reference to his want of secular culture and his
spiritual knowledge, he calls him a learned ignorant and an unlettered
sage.[9] At all events he possessed the genius of a lawgiver, and holds
the first place among the founders of monastic orders, though his person
and life are much less interesting than those of a Bernard of Clairvaux,
a Francis of Assisi, and an Ignatius of Loyola.

The rule of St. Benedict, on which his fame rests, forms an epoch in the
history of monasticism. In a short time it superseded all contemporary
and older rules of the kind, and became the immortal code of the most
illustrious branch of the monastic army, and the basis of the whole
Roman Catholic cloister life.[10] It consists of a preface or
_prologus_, and a series of moral, social, liturgical, and penal
ordinances, in seventy-three chapters. It shows a true knowledge of
human nature, the practical wisdom of Rome, and adaptation to Western
customs; and it combines simplicity with completeness, strictness with
gentleness, humility with courage, and gives the whole cloister life a
fixed unity and compact organization, which, like the episcopate,
possessed an unlimited versatility and power of expansion. It made every
cloister an _ecclesiola in ecclesia_, reflecting the relation of the
bishop to his charge, the monarchical principle of authority on the
democratic basis of the equality of the brethren, though claiming a
higher degree of perfection than could be realized in the great secular
church. For the rude and undisciplined world of the Middle Age, the
Benedictine rule furnished a wholesome course of training and a constant
stimulus to the obedience, self-control, order, and industry which were
indispensable to the regeneration and healthy growth of social life.[11]

The spirit of the rule may be judged from the following sentences of the
_prologus_, which contains pious exhortations: 'Having thus,' he says,
'my brethren, asked of the Lord who shall dwell in His tabernacle, we
have heard the precepts prescribed to such a one. If we fulfil these
conditions we shall be heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Let us, then,
prepare our hearts and bodies to fight under a holy obedience to these
precepts; and if it is not always possible for nature to obey, let us
ask the Lord that He would deign to give us the succor of His grace.
Would we avoid the pains of hell and attain eternal life while there is
still time, while we are still in this mortal body, and while the light
of this life is bestowed upon us for that purpose, let us run and strive
so as to reap an eternal reward. We must, then, form a _school of divine
servitude_, in which, we trust, nothing too heavy or rigorous will be
established. But if, in conformity with right and justice, we should
exercise a little severity for the amendment of vices or the
preservation of charity, beware of fleeing under the impulse of terror
from the way of salvation, which cannot but have a hard beginning. When
man has walked for some time in obedience and faith, his heart will
expand, and he will run with the unspeakable sweetness of love in the
way of God's commandments. May He grant that, never straying from the
instruction of the Master, and persevering in His doctrine in the
monastery until death, we may share by patience in the sufferings of
Christ, and be worthy to share together His kingdom.'

The leading provisions of this rule are as follows:

At the head of each society stands an abbot, who is elected by the
monks, and with their consent appoints a provost (_praepositus_), and,
when the number of the brethren requires, deans over the several
divisions (_decaniae_), as assistants. He governs, in Christ's stead, by
authority and example, and is to his cloister what the bishop is to his
diocese. In the more weighty matters he takes the congregation of the
brethren into consultation; in ordinary affairs, only the older members.
The formal entrance into the cloister must be preceded by a probation or
novitiate of one year (subsequently it was made three years), that no
one might prematurely or rashly take the solemn step. If the novice
repented his resolution, he could leave the cloister without hindrance;
if he adhered to it, he was, at the close of his probation, subjected to
an examination in presence of the abbot and the monks, and then,
appealing to the saints, whose relics were in the cloister, he laid upon
the altar of the chapel the irrevocable vow, written or at least
subscribed by his own hand, and therewith cut off from himself forever
all return to the world.

From this important arrangement the cloister received its stability, and
the whole monastic institution derived additional earnestness, solidity,
and permanence.

The vow was threefold, comprising _stablitas_, perpetual adherence to
the monastic order; _conversio morum_, especially voluntary poverty and
chastity, which were always regarded as the very essence of monastic
piety under all its forms; and _obedientia coram Deo et sanctis ejus_,
absolute obedience to the abbot, as the representative of God and
Christ. This obedience is the cardinal virtue of a monk.[12]

The life of the cloister consisted of a judicious alternation of
spiritual and bodily exercises. This is the great excellence of the rule
of Benedict, who proceeded here upon the true principle that idleness is
the mortal enemy of the soul and the workshop of the devil.[13] Seven
hours were to be devoted to prayer, singing of psalms, and
meditation;[14] from two to three hours, especially on Sunday, to
religious reading; and from six to seven hours to manual labor indoors
or in the field, or, instead of this, to the training of children, who
were committed to the cloister by their parents (_oblati_).[15]

Here was a starting point for the afterward celebrated cloister schools,
and for that attention to literary pursuits which, though entirely
foreign to the uneducated Benedict and his immediate successors,
afterward became one of the chief ornaments of his order, and in many
cloisters took the place of manual labor.

In other respects the mode of life was to be simple without extreme
rigor, and confined to strictly necessary things. Clothing consisted of
a tunic with a black cowl (whence the name _Black Friars_); the material
to be determined by the climate and season. On the two weekly fast days,
and from the middle of September to Easter, one meal was to suffice for
the day. Each monk is allowed daily a pound of bread and pulse, and,
according to the Italian custom, half a flagon (_hemina_) of wine;
though he is advised to abstain from the wine, if he can do so without
injury to his health. Flesh is permitted only to the weak and sick,[16]
who were to be treated with special care. During the meal some edifying
piece was read, and silence enjoined. The individual monk knows no
personal property, not even his simple dress as such; and the fruits of
his labor go into the common treasury. He should avoid all contact with
the world as dangerous to the soul, and therefore every cloister should
be so arranged as to be able to carry on even the arts and trades
necessary for supplying its wants.[17] Hospitality and other works of
love are especially commanded.

The penalties for transgression of the rule are, first, private
admonition, then exclusion from the fellowship of prayer, next
exclusion from fraternal intercourse, and finally expulsion from the
cloister, after which, however, restoration is possible, even to the
third time.

Benedict had no presentiment of the vast historical importance which his
rule, originally designed simply for the cloister of Monte Cassino, was
destined to attain. He probably never aspired beyond the regeneration
and salvation of his own soul and that of his brother monks, and all the
talk of some later historians about his far-reaching plans of a
political and social regeneration of Europe, and the preservation and
promotion of literature and art, find no support whatever in his life or
in his rule. But he humbly planted a seed which Providence blessed a
hundredfold. By his rule, he became, without his own will or knowledge,
the founder of an order, which, until in the thirteenth century the
Dominicans and Franciscans pressed it partially into the background,
spread with great rapidity over the whole of Europe, maintained a clear
supremacy, formed the model for all other monastic orders, and gave to
the Catholic Church an imposing array of missionaries, authors, artists,
bishops, archbishops, cardinals, and popes, as Gregory the Great and
Gregory VII. In less than a century after the death of Benedict, the
conquests of the barbarians in Italy, Gaul, and Spain were reconquered
for civilization, and the vast territories of Great Britain, Germany,
and Scandinavia incorporated into Christendom or opened to missionary
labor; and in this progress of history the monastic institution
regulated and organized by Benedict's rule bears an honorable share.

Benedict himself established a second cloister in the vicinity of
Terracina, and two of his favorite disciples, Placidus and St.
Maurus,[18] introduced the 'holy rule,' the one into Sicily, the other
into France. Pope Gregory the Great, himself at one time a Benedictine
monk, enhanced its prestige, and converted the Anglo-Saxons to the Roman
Christian faith by Benedictine monks. Gradually the rule found so
general acceptance both in old and in new institutions, that, in the
time of Charlemagne, it became a question, whether there were any monks
at all who were not Benedictines. The order, it is true, has degenerated
from time to time, through the increase of its wealth and the decay of
its discipline, but its fostering care of religion, of humane studies,
and of the general civilization of Europe, from the tilling of the soil
to the noblest learning, has given it an honorable place in history and
won immortal praise.

The patronage of learning, however, as we have already said, was not
within the design of the founder or his rule. The joining of this to the
cloister life is due, if we leave out of view the learned monk Jerome,
to CASSIODORUS, who, in 538, retired from the honors and cares
of high civil office in the Gothic monarchy of Italy,[19] to a monastery
founded by himself at Vivarium[20] (Viviers), in Calabria, in Lower
Italy. Here he spent nearly thirty years as monk and abbot, collected a
large library, encouraged the monks to copy and to study the Holy
Scriptures, the works of the church fathers, and even the ancient
classics, and wrote for them several literary and theological text
books, especially his treatise _De institutione divinarum literarum_, a
kind of elementary encyclopaedia, which was the code of monastic
education for many generations. Vivarium at one time almost rivalled
Monte Cassino, and Cassiodorus[21] won the honorary title of the
restorer of knowledge in the sixth century.

The Benedictines, already accustomed to regular work, soon followed this
example. Thus, that very mode of life which in its founder, Anthony,
despised all learning, became, in the course of its development, an
asylum of culture in the rough and stormy times of the immigration and
the crusades, and a conservator of the literary treasures of antiquity
for the use of modern times.




HANNAH THURSTON.

PAUL. Well, Dorcas, now you have finished the book, what do you
think of it?

DORCAS. I must confess, my expectations on the whole have been
agreeably disappointed. From the criticisms I had read, both favorable
and adverse, I was fully prepared to quarrel with it from beginning to
end. I find in it much power and sustained interest. The descriptions of
nature are admirable--fresh, unhackneyed, and vivid. Western New York,
with its blue lakes, sloping hills, shining brooks, quiet woodlands,
spring buds, autumn flowers, winding country roads, and laden grain
fields, stands before one, clearly pictured. The characters, with their
_isms_, seem like old acquaintances, and the seething, fermenting
condition of American society is most accurately represented. There is
pathos, too, in the story, and many will read it with moistened eyes.

PAUL. So far so good, but--?

DORCAS. But there runs through the entire work a vein of
sentiment or philosophy, which wears a very suspicious resemblance to
that of a certain school just now popular in France. I need not tell
you, Uncle Paul, how distasteful to me is that school, nor how false I
think the premises upon which it is founded. I am convinced there is a
difference in the mental and moral constitution of men and women. I will
not bore you by any disquisition upon relative superiority or
inferiority, but will simply give you a portion of my idea as I find it
laid down by St. John Chrysostom: 'Do not confound _submission_ with
_slavery_,' says the golden-mouthed Greek. 'The woman obeys, but
_remains free_; she is _equal_ in honor. It is true that she is subject
to her husband; and this is her punishment for having rendered herself
guilty in the beginning. Mark it well; woman was not condemned to
subjection at the time of her creation; when God made and presented her
to her husband, He said nothing of domination; we hear nothing from the
lips of Adam which supposes it. It was only after having violated her
duty by leading him astray to whom she had been given as a support, that
she heard these words: 'Thou shalt be under thy husband's power, and he
shall have dominion over thee.''

Now, in the book under consideration, we are led to suppose that even
the 'exceptional women' find submission and dependence, not only
delightful, but absolute necessities of their being. They are only too
happy to succumb to the powerful magnetism attributed to men by reason
alone of their manhood. (A doctrine too repulsive to admit of
discussion.) I fancy that thinking, sensitive, and high-spirited women
have not yet ceased to find submission and dependence a _punishment_.
They may take up their cross cheerily, and wear it gracefully, but none
the less do they feel it to be a cross. As for pecuniary dependence, so
long as all goes smoothly and matters are so arranged that the wife is
not obliged to ask the husband for funds, the power of custom and of
legal provisions may be sufficient to prevent any disquietude; but after
the first misunderstanding, the first unkind word, _his_ money, as it
passes through _her_ hands, burns like coals of fire, and the bitterness
of her heart, as she perhaps vainly longs for some means of employment
by which to procure at least sufficient for her own personal expenses,
would cause him a new and strange sensation, did she not deem it her
_duty_ to suppress all evidence, even the existence, of such
self-assertion, and quietly shoulder this with the rest, as a portion of
the burden to be borne through the valley of humiliation into which she
has entered, and wherein, by reason of the especial power granted her of
knowing and loving God, she usually finds herself Heaven's own
missionary, the keeper and guide of souls. Now, do not misunderstand me,
Uncle Paul; when I say that marriage is a valley of humiliation, I
intend no reproach to men; I simply state a fact dependent upon the
nature of things, and upon the primal sentence passed against the pride
that, in spite of the prohibition of the Almighty, sought to know all
things, 'to become as gods.' Meekness, humility, self-abnegation,
affection, are the beautiful flowers that grow by the wayside; but the
pathway is not the less thorny, and no good can be accomplished by
denying or sugar-coating the fact.

PAUL. I do not doubt the correctness of your views, Dorcas; but
your rather vehement statement of them somewhat surprises me, as you
yourself married of your own free will, and at an age when women, if
ever, are supposed to know their own minds.

DORCAS. That my own marriage has been a happy one, and that my
good husband has striven, by recognizing my womanly as well as
individual idiosyncrasies, to render the yoke as light as it possibly
can be, is the very circumstance that gives me a right to speak and
offer my testimony against ideas which I think wholly unwarranted by the
facts in the case. The views of modern philosophers, attacking the
sanctity of Christian marriage, are to me perfectly abhorrent. Deprive
marriage of its mystical, sacramental, penitential character, and it
ceases to be the bulwark of a well-ordered society. I must again call
upon St. John Chrysostom to speak for me. He says: 'Marriage is one of
the most surprising mysteries, by reason of the sublime character which
belongs to it, of representing the alliance of Jesus Christ with His
Church. The necessary consequence of which is, that it should not be
contracted lightly and through interested motives. No, marriage is no
bargain; it is the union of the entire life.' This is what true marriage
should be; but in so far as mankind fall below the lofty standards set
before them, so far does actual marriage fail to reach its glorious
ideal. Meantime, reverence for maidenhood is one of the strongest
safeguards of the sanctity of wedded life, and no delusions of any
school, whether romantic, sentimental, Micheletic, humanitarian, or
Lutheranistic, should be permitted to obscure this reverence. Neither my
own experience, nor that of the young maidens best known to me, teaches
me that the idle hours of women are haunted by dreams of some human
lover, who must be found to save them from despair. I cannot think that
marriage is essential to, or even best for, the happiness of women. If
we enter the nearest institution of Charity Sisters, Sisters of Mercy,
or of the Poor, we cannot fail to remark the contrast between the
healthful, cheery, unsolicitous countenances of the inmates, and the
nervous, suffering, careworn faces of the wives and mothers in our
midst. Both live in the conscientious performance of equally estimable
duties, but the pleasing of a Heavenly Master would seem to be a more
peaceful and less wearing task than the gratification of an earthly
lord. Let us hearken for a moment to an eloquent French theologian:
'Woman's nature, in some exceptional cases, rises to such a height of
intellect and sensitiveness, that it ceases to be capable of accepting
that subordination which constitutes the essence of Christian marriage.
Think you there are not women athirst for the ideal; who are crushed by
the commonplace of ordinary affections; who would go beyond that narrow
circle traced round them by domestic cares? Give to such natures as
good, kind, and conscientious a husband as you will, do you think he can
ever satisfy the ardent longings of their mind and heart? Do you think
they can find in the family the realization of the brilliant dream
caressed by them from the earliest years of infancy? Do you not believe
that they will constantly feel cruel disappointments, infinite tortures,
and the deepest anguish?'

PAUL. But if such be a true statement of the case, what are
these good ladies to do?

DORCAS. The world has always need of intellect and enthusiasm,
and these, directed by the spirit of devotion and self-sacrifice,
without which nothing good or great can be accomplished, will point the
way to the fulfilment of whatever may be the especial vocation of the
individual. The author above quoted continues: 'Some heroic virgins have
played so wonderful a part that, by the sublimity of their devotion and
the power of their intellect, they have occasionally eclipsed the renown
of the most illustrious men. A St. Catherine of Sienna was the light of
doctors, the ambassadress of nations, the counsellor of popes, and the
admiration of her age. A St. Rose of Viterbo, a charming and graceful
child, became the intrepid buckler of Rome against the pretensions of
the Ghibelline emperors. A St. Clara, by her ardent love for the poor
and the Cross, was worthy of aiding the Seraph of Assisi in his
admirable reform. A St. Theresa astonished the world by the grandeur of
her character in the age of the Loyolas, the Xaviers, and the Francis
Borgias.' To these few but striking instances we may add Joan of Arc,
whose patriotism and valor saved her country from the dominion of the
foreign invader, and, in our own day, Florence Nightingale and Miss Dix,
together with hosts of courageous maidens, who in every Christian land
yearly devote themselves to the service of suffering humanity. I should
weary you, uncle, were I to pursue this subject into farther depths:
suffice it to say that it is one which no man, however tender or
talented, could ever exhaust, for there are chords in the feminine
organization beyond his comprehension--strange chords, the resolution of
which will be found only in that heaven where there shall be no marrying
nor giving in marriage.

PAUL. You mentioned Joan of Arc: did you observe that the
author of 'Hannah Thurston' notices the fact, that while she has been
poetized by Schiller, Southey, and others, no woman has ever yet made
her the theme of song?

DORCAS. I was no little surprised to find such a reproach
issuing from the lips of one who must have known that no man had yet
sung her in his verse who had not violated the truth of history and
smirched the beauty of a noble character, devoted solely to her country
and her God, by picturing her as enamored of some mortal lover.
Shakspeare must here receive his share of blame, although the national
prejudices still existent in his age may offer some excuse. Voltaire is
not to be mentioned, Schiller twaddles through a tissue of sheer
inventions and impossible absurdities, and even Southey, who strives to
be faithful to history, thinks he must invest her with a 'suppressed
attachment' in order to render her sufficiently interesting to be the
heroine of a poem. (Inconceivable and insane vanity, that imagines no
woman can live her life through without laying her heart at the feet of
one of the 'irresistibles'!) The historic character of Joan of Arc has
been terribly maltreated and misrepresented by every man who has
attempted to portray it, with the single exception of the German
historian, Guido Goerres, whose work, by the way, has been reverently
done into English by two sister women.

PAUL. Well, and the final conclusion to all this?

DORCAS. The final conclusion is, that a large portion of even
the worthier souls in this world, is drifting away into a sea of
materialism, shrouded in rose-colored mists of poetry and sentiment, and
it behooves every earnest friend of humanity to sound the alarm, and at
least strive to give warning of the danger.




GLORIOUS!


  'Far how can a man die better,
    Than in facing fearful odds.
  For the ashes of his fathers--
    And the temples of his gods!'

      MACAULAY'S _Ballads of Ancient Rome_.


  Alone--and widowed so early,
    Aged only twenty-one--
  Only so few of her years are past,
    And yet her life is quite done!

  Quite concluded her life is--
    Nothing for hopes, or for fears;
  Nothing to think of, or look to see
    But a barren desert of years!

  Slender, lithe little figure--
    Graceful and yielding form,
  Never again to be held in the close
    Clasp of a manly arm!

  Oh the sweet oval face,
    And the wonderful violet eyes!
  No more to be sealed with true kisses,
    And opened to love's paradise!

  And oh the sunny, brown hair,
    Which breaks into ripples and waves
  O'er her sad brow--like the laughter
    Of young children over graves!

  Put it away under widow's weeds--
    Draw it as straight as you can:
  Never again will the dear little head
    Be held to the heart of a man.

  Dazed, she sits in the twilight
    Of the funeral-darkened room,
  Her whole soul gathered to listen--alas!
    For a voice that is stilled in the tomb.

  Dear voice, now silent forever!
    God help her! It seems a dream!
  She hopes, even now she may waken;
    But see yonder cruel sunbeam.

  How it wanders over the carpet--
    It lights up the distant room--
  It falls on his portrait--_his_ portrait!--
    His face shines out in the gloom

  As warmly and loving as ever;--
    But, oh, there hangs under its frame
  The sword he has wielded so bravely--
    The blade that has lettered his name

  On the tablets of Glory--erected
  O'er the bodies of thousands of slain;
  Who have died to preserve the Republic!
  _Our_ loss--but the nation's great gain.

  Wring the small, white hands together--
    Clasp them close over the breast:--
  Prisoned heart, throbbing so wildly,
    Never again to know rest.

  Can you not leap and be joyful,
    Knowing the nation is free!
  Gentle-eyed Peace is but waiting
    Sure of a welcome, to be.

  Ask not for paeans of triumph
    From 'only a woman's' heart:
  Alas! in the triumph of nations
    She hath but an humble part!

  Hers to be patient, and suffer--
    While her soul goes out to the fray
  With the one who is dearer than heaven,
    To see him shot down by the way.

  Anguished, for drops of cold water
    That e'en to the vilest we give!
  Mangled and crushed and insulted!
    God! can I write it, and live!

  Fold the hands o'er the soft bosom
    Baby hands never caressed--
  Hush into patience the sweet lips
    Never to man's to be pressed.

  There on the altar of nations
    She has given the soul out of her life:
  Holocaust greater was never:
    God help the poor, little wife!




THE ISLE OF SPRINGS.


