Chapter XX.


A Truly Christian Sorrow For Sin Promotes The Daily Amendment Of The Life
    Of Man, Makes Him Meet For The Kingdom Of God, And Fits Him, In An
                   Increasing Degree, For Eternal Life.


    _Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented
    of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death._—2 COR. 7:10.


True Christianity consists solely in pure faith, love, and a holy life.
This holiness of life springs from true repentance, sorrow, and
self-knowledge; so that a man not only more and more feels his failings
and imperfections, but amends them also, and, in this order, partakes of
the righteousness and holiness of Christ by faith. 1 Cor. 1:30.

2. But in order to regulate the grand work of salvation with the better
order and care, thou oughtest now to walk in a submissive and filial fear
of God, guarding against all that would gratify the flesh. “All things are
lawful,” says the apostle, “but all things are not expedient” (1 Cor.
6:12); that is, “all things edify not.” 1 Cor. 10:23. As a dutiful child,
confined to the father’s house, does not so much as attempt to follow his
own humor in everything; but, unwilling to offend his parent, observes his
will and pleasure: so a true Christian and child of God will behave
himself in his Father’s house, in so careful a manner, as not to allow his
senses any unlawful liberty. He will neither do nor speak anything without
consulting first his Father in heaven, under whose eye he constantly
lives, knowing that He is everywhere present.

3. Most men live without any fear of God, freely indulging themselves in
worldly pleasures and satisfaction. They will not consider that it is far
better to have a constant fear of God fixed in the heart, than a constant
joy of the world. For as the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and
begets a serious frame of mind; so the joy of this world extinguishes all
good impressions, and banishes true wisdom out of the heart, together with
all godly fear and devotion.

4. By daily repentance and mortification of the flesh, man is daily
renewed in God’s image; for “though our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day” (2 Cor. 4:16); and often, in the midst of his
sorrows, is he visited with a taste of heavenly joy and sweetness.
Whereas, the pleasure and joy of the world are always attended with
heaviness of heart, and an inward sting of a wounded conscience. If the
people were but more sensible of the melancholy effects resulting from
worldly pleasure, and particularly of that damp which it puts upon
heavenly comfort, they would certainly dread all loose and worldly
enjoyments: since thereby the grace of devotion is quenched, and the soul
diverted from those purer pleasures which the Gospel of Christ affords.

5. There are two things which prevent those who seriously consider them
from being influenced either by worldly pleasures or outward calamities.
The one is, the _eternal pain of the damned_; whoever earnestly ponders
it, will almost find it impossible to be thoroughly merry after the way of
the world. The other is, _the eternal joy of the blessed in heaven_.
Whoever has a sound apprehension of so happy a state, will never be
greatly moved with the calamities of the present life; and this arises
from the consideration of the eternity of those divine enjoyments. But so
great is the levity of our hearts, that it hinders us from any serious
reflection on so important a subject. And hence it is no wonder that we
are both without this wholesome contrition and sorrow, and ignorant of all
celestial joys and comforts.

6. It is the prerogative of a true Christian to be, on the one hand, but
sparingly, if at all, moved with earthly things, or temporal advantages;
and, on the other, to be the more deeply impressed with the joys of God,
and of life eternal. Neither is he immoderately dejected in the present
adversities that may befall him; but the loss of the soul grieves him to
his very heart, and he counts it worthy of long lamentation. As for the
perishing comfort of this life, he knows it cannot be called a loss, since
he shall receive a thousand-fold for it in the world to come. But when a
soul is once cast away, it can never be restored.

7. Blessed is the man who is affected with godly sorrow, and tastes that
celestial consolation which succeeds it. But, alas! how much of our time
do we spend in worldly joy and merriment, when we have greater reason to
bewail our own misery and that of others! There is no true liberty, no
solid delight, no substantial satisfaction, but in the fear of God, and in
a quiet, serene conscience. But this blessing can never exist without
faith, and without a holy life and conversation. This faith, attended with
godly sorrow, daily proceeds more and more to correct our faults and
imperfections. Whoever neglects this daily reform of his life and manners,
wastes the most precious part of his time, which he should employ to
secure the interest of his immortal soul. He is an adversary to the new
life; he hinders the kingdom of God in himself; and he can never be cured
of the blindness and hardness of his heart, so long as he remains in that
state.

8. It follows, therefore, that he only deserves the name of a prudent and
wise man, who carefully avoids whatever he understands to be an obstacle
to the reforming of his life, and to the improving of himself in heavenly
gifts and graces. Happy is he who not only avoids such things as are
detrimental to his body and estate, but also detests those which hinder
the soul in her spiritual progress.

9. Be therefore courageous, O Man, and endure hardness as a good soldier
of Christ! 2 Tim. 2:3. An evil habit of mind must be overcome with a good
one. It is the apostle’s exhortation: “Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good.” Rom. 12:21. The cure of thy soul is not
impossible. View, in the first place, thy own corruptions, and judge them
severely, before thou presumest to censure the faults of thy neighbor. Be
not too forward in admonishing and correcting others; but endeavor to heal
first thy evils at home, before thou enterest upon the reforming of those
that are abroad.

10. Go on, therefore, O Christian, and learn the lesson of daily
repentance, sorrow, and contrition of heart. If the world despise thee
upon that account, and decry this wholesome exercise as error and as
melancholy, be not concerned at such poor and empty reflections. Grieve
rather that thou art called indeed a Christian, but that thou hast not yet
arrived at that strictness of life and purity of manners, which the Gospel
requires. Bear the contempt of the world with Christian constancy, and
consider the singular benefit which thence accrues to the whole practice
of true religion. For, if thou be scorned by the world, then God is ready
to support thee by fresh supplies of life and comfort, according to his
own declaration: “I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that
is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.” Isa. 57:15.

11. It is impossible that divine and worldly joy should, at one and the
same time, reside in the heart of man; so very contrary are they to each
other, and so inconsistent in their natures, causes, and effects. The joy
of the world is begotten in prosperity; but that which is from heaven,
springs up in the midst of crosses and adversities.

12. It is true that it is against the bent of nature to rejoice in the
time of adversity, as the apostle himself seems to intimate: “As
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things.” 2 Cor. 6:10. But then it is no
less true, that the grace of God cleanses our nature, and qualifies it for
such spiritual exercises. And it was after this change that the apostles
rejoiced, because they were “counted worthy to suffer shame for the name
of Christ.” Acts 5:41.

13. A Christian is become by the grace of God, a new creature, and hence
the tribulations of this life are made easy to him. The apostle declared,
that he even “gloried in tribulations.” Rom. 5:3. As affliction is a
grievous burden to the old man, so it gives ease and joy to the new man in
Christ. Again, that joy which is from above, infinitely surpasses that
which is from below. Nay, the very reproach and contempt which a Christian
undergoes for the sake of Christ, is attended with a secret satisfaction:
and the reason we are so little affected with these heavenly visitations,
is on account of the joy of the world, to which we are still too much
addicted.

14. A truly humble man thinks himself worthy of all manner of sufferings,
and unworthy of any divine comfort: but the more unworthy he thinks
himself in true brokenness of spirit, the more is he visited with the
goodness of God. And the more he weeps over his sin, the more is he weaned
from worldly enjoyments; for the whole world gradually becomes to him a
burden and a bitter affliction.

15. A man that seriously views himself and his inward condition, finds
more reason to mourn than to rejoice. And when he takes a survey of the
lives of others, he will undoubtedly meet with abundance of objects worthy
of pity, or of compassion, rather than of hatred and envy. Why did Christ
weep over Jerusalem, even over that Jerusalem which persecuted and slew
him? Luke 19:41. Truly their sin and blindness was the evident cause of
it. And in this he has also left us a pattern, and with deep feeling
taught us, that nothing in the world should more powerfully melt us into
tears and compassion, than our own sins, and the impenitence and carnal
security which everywhere abound.

16. Did a man as often revolve in his mind, that he must certainly die,
and appear before the judgment-seat of God, as he thinks on the concerns
of this life, and how to provide for them, surely he would be abundantly
more serious in his conversation, more diligent in the reformation of his
life, and more fervent in all the duties of repentance. Did he moreover
call to mind the unspeakable and eternal torments of hell, succeeding, as
they do, a short enjoyment of sin; this consideration would embitter to
him the sweets of this world, and in comparison, render all the
afflictions of this life, pleasant and easy to him. But alas! the
enticements of the flesh are so strong and prevalent, and our compliances
in their favor, so forward, that we seldom yield to such serious
reflections as these.

17. Upon the whole, this should be a Christian’s daily consideration: if
his body be pampered in lust and luxury; if the flesh be humored and
gratified in its inordinate cravings; then the life of the spirit loses
its vigor, and if not seasonably supported, will pine away into death and
destruction. Whereas, if the flesh be crucified with its lusts and
desires, the spirit lives and gathers strength. One is the death of the
other. If, therefore, the spirit shall live in thee, then thy body must be
certainly made a spiritual sacrifice (Rom. 12:1), and must spiritually die
to the world, and to all conformity with it.

18. This has been the constant practice of all the saints, from the
beginning of the world until now. They have with thanksgiving eaten and
drunk the bread and cup of tears, according to that declaration of David:
“Thou feedest us with the bread of tears, and thou givest us tears to
drink in great measure.” Ps. 80:5. And in another Psalm: “My tears have
been my meat day and night.” Ps. 42:3. Again, “I have eaten ashes like
bread, and mingled my drink with weeping.” Ps. 102:9.

19. This has been the “daily bread” of all the saints to this day; yet it
has, however, been sweetened to them, _faith_ being mixed with it. This is
that godly “sorrow which worketh repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of.” 2 Cor. 7:10.

20. But as this godly sorrow is attended with life and happiness, so the
“sorrow of the world worketh death” itself. 2 Cor. 7:10. This kind of
sorrow arises from the loss of honor, of temporal goods and estates, and
other things of that nature. This sorrow has proved so fatal to many, that
they have laid violent hands on themselves, and procured their own ruin
and death by various contrivances. Of this there are not wanting many
examples in the history both of Pagans and Christians: though, indeed, the
latter ought better to understand the maxims and doctrines of Christ, who
has abundantly taught us, not to set our hearts on objects so frail and
perishing. For what is the loss of a handful of fading things, to the life
of a man, with which all the goods of this world cannot be compared?

21. Be not, therefore, cast down by the loss of temporal goods, which, by
the very laws of nature, we can enjoy but a little while: but lay the more
to heart those incorruptible riches, that are laid up in the world to
come; and do whatever thou canst to prevent the loss of _them_. Death will
strip thee at last of all worldly possessions. Here shall be an end of
pomp and greatness. This law of death is equally given to all, and the
penalty of it attaches to all alike. The greatest king is seized on the
throne, and the meanest beggar on the dunghill (1 Sam. 2:8; Ps. 113:7);
for as the body of the one is, so is also the body of the other: both
putrefy and turn alike to corruption. Nevertheless, the Lord will remove
at length the veil of the shadow of death, which is spread over all
nations, and will “swallow up death in victory” (Isa. 25:8), and “wipe
away all tears from our eyes.” Rev. 7:17; Isa. 25:8.

22. Let these and the like considerations, induce thee patiently to bear
the loss of earthly things; remembering that the whole world does not come
up to the price of one soul, for which Christ vouchsafed to die. The more
thou withdrawest thy heart from temporal goods and estates, the less will
it affect thee, when thou shalt be obliged one way or other to leave them.
Thy grief will undoubtedly be the greater, the more thy love has been
wrapped up with them. Thus does the “labor of the foolish weary every one
of them” (Eccl. 10:15); as the wise man expresseth it.

23. This is the unhappy state into which the children of this world plunge
themselves. They hoard and amass their goods with assiduous pain and
labor; they possess them with fear and anxiety of mind; and quit them at
last with grief and groans, when they can no longer enjoy them. This is
the “sorrow of this world,” which begets no less an evil than _death_
itself.

24. We read, that such as adored the beast “had no rest” (Rev. 14:11): so
they that adore the great and toilsome beast of sordid and earthly Mammon,
may be said to have no rest, day nor night. This description of men, most
wretched and most unquiet as they are, may be fitly compared to camels, or
mules. These animals, traversing rocks and hills, and carrying gold and
silver, silken garments and pearls, spices and wines, draw many attendants
with them for their better security: but at night, when they are stabled,
all their precious ornaments, their embroidered garments and vestments,
are taken from them, and they, being weary and stripped, appear to be what
indeed they are, poor and miserable beasts of burden. Nothing is now seen
upon them but the prints of their stripes, and the marks of the blows
which they received upon the road. So, in like manner, that man who in
this world shone in gold and silks, in “purple and fine linen” (Luke
16:19), when the day of his death is come, has nothing left but the prints
and scars of a wounded conscience, contracted by the abuse of such riches
as were committed to his trust.

25. Therefore, O man! learn to relinquish this world, before it
relinquishes thee. If thou break not with the world, the world will break
with thee, and leave horror and anguish behind it. He who withdraws his
soul from the world, before he quits the world with his body, can joyfully
die: since he is loosed from the ties which bound him to these inferior
objects. As the Israelites, when they were about to leave the land of
Egypt, were daily afflicted with greater burdens by Pharaoh, who designed
to destroy them, and, if possible, utterly to extirpate their progeny
(Exod. 5:9); so the infernal Pharaoh, who desires to hinder our eternal
salvation, when we are now upon the very borders of life everlasting,
still attempts to load us with more of the concerns of this life, and
thereby to obstruct our passage into a better world.

26. It is certain that we cannot carry with us the least dust of all our
earthly possessions into the kingdom of heaven. Nay, our very body must be
left behind us until the day of resurrection. If we know anything, we know
that the way leading to life is so very _strait_, as to strip the soul
entirely of anything that will hinder her passage. “Narrow is the way
which leadeth to life, and few there be that find it.” Matt. 7:14. As the
husbandman separates the wheat from the chaff, so death frees the soul
from all the chaff and dross of this world, from all riches, and
greatness, and worldly attire, which now, like the chaff, are driven away.

27. Go therefore, O man, and seriously ponder in thy mind what the apostle
declares: “Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.” 2 Cor. 7:10.




