Chapter XLIX.


The Truth Of God And The Certainty Of His Promises, Ought To Dispose Us To
                                Patience.


    _I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my
    salvation; my God will hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine
    enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the
    Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the
    Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause,
    and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light,
    and I shall behold his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy
    shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where
    is the Lord thy God?_—MICAH 7:7-10.


We read in the prophet Jeremiah (chap. 9:4, etc.), that before the
Babylonish captivity and the destruction of the temple, besides the
idolatry that brought that desolation upon them, treachery, lying,
falsehood, hatred, and envy prevailed to a high degree; and that charity
was quite cold and dead amongst them. For wheresoever these abominations
prevail, there, it is plain, God is not; and that he has forsaken not only
the city or the kingdom, but also the hearts of those that dwell there;
and when God forsakes us, destruction quickly finds us. So says the
prophet (Jer. 9:4-8): “Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and trust
ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with slanders. They weary themselves to commit
iniquity. Their tongue is as an arrow shot out, it speaketh deceit; one
speaketh peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in heart he layeth
his wait.”

2. Here we may see the wretched state of Jerusalem, and what flagrant
iniquities they were which hastened its ruin. Treachery and iniquity did
so abound, that there was neither truth nor honesty left among the people.
Their only aim was to cheat and defraud one another; and their hearts
being thus set upon iniquity, they brought on themselves ruin and
destruction.

3. Something similar to this, is the complaint of the prophet Micah: “Woe
is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape
gleanings of the vintage; there is no cluster to eat; my soul desired the
first ripe fruit. The good man is perished out of the earth; and there is
none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood. They do evil with
both hands earnestly. Trust ye not in a friend.” Micah 7:1, 2, 3, 5. When
a people or nation are come to this pass, they are industriously digging a
pit, into which they design to rush boldly, and with their eyes open.
Would to God this were not the case in our own times! We, too, deeply
share in their guilt, and we must expect to share in their punishments.
For our destruction is of ourselves. O that we could at last awake,
renounce our past errors, put off our carnal minds that are at enmity
against God, and love the truth and peace. If we do not so, we are
condemned already, and cannot receive help.

4. But in order that upright and good men may not be too much discouraged
in this sad and dangerous state of things, we must consider by what means
the holy men of old supported themselves in such a state of universal
corruption. The prophet Micah (Micah 7:7, etc.), pointing out, as it were,
with his finger the fountain of true consolation, says, “Therefore I will
look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation!” That is his
first comfort. The second is, “My God will hear me.” The third is,
“Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy. When I fall, I shall arise.” The
fourth is, “When I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.”
The fifth is, “I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me.”
The sixth is, “He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.” The seventh is, “Then she that is mine enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her.”

5. First, he says, “I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of
my salvation.” In these words is contained the doctrine of faith and hope,
which are, as it were, the two watchful, never-sleeping eyes of the soul,
by which it constantly looks towards God in the greatest dangers and
necessities; the greater the calamity, the stronger ought to be our faith,
the more vigorous our hope. Then it is that we should call to mind the
words which we repeat at the beginning of the Apostles’ Creed: “I believe
in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth;” that is, I believe
that there is no misery or calamity so great, but God can and will deliver
me out of it. Let us learn, therefore, to turn away our eyes from temporal
suffering, not regarding it, but God “who worketh salvation in the midst
of the earth” (Ps. 74:12), and who alone can and will deliver us according
to Psalm 123: “Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the
heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our
eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us. Have
mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we are exceedingly filled
with contempt. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those
that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud.”

6. Moreover, as it is the way of God to help us, not at the time appointed
by us, but in his own due time; so it is not enough for us to say, “I will
look unto the Lord;” but we must add, “and wait for the God of my
salvation.” For faith, hope, and patience, have an entire relation to, and
mutual dependence upon each other; as we may see in Psalm 27; in the
beginning of which, David, looking up to God, says, “The Lord is my light
and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life,
of whom shall I be afraid?” He concludes his prayer with these words: “I
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Wait
on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
wait, I say, on the Lord.” Ps. 27:1, 14. So Psalm 130:5, 6: “I wait for
the Lord, my soul doth wait; and in his word do I hope. My soul waiteth
for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning.” “For the vision
is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie:
though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not
tarry.” Habak. 2:3. But if the sorrowing soul shall say: “Alas, I have
waited a great while!” let her know that it is necessary it should be so,
in order that her faith, hope, and patience, may be tried and approved in
the sight of God. We never please God more, than when with patience and
humility we wait for the accomplishment of his promises, and receive with
submission all his determinations concerning us.—Everything has a certain
beginning; so has everything an appointed end; and whosoever does not wait
for that, labors in vain. As the grain is exposed to all the vicissitudes
of wind and weather, before it comes to maturity, and, whenever it becomes
ripe, is the sweeter and better upon that account: so is it with the
cross. He that bears it with patience, and waits for the end of it, shall
reap “the peaceable fruit of righteousness.” Heb. 12:11. For St. Paul
affirms, “that hope maketh not ashamed” (Rom. 5:5); for when it is founded
upon divine grace, as upon a firm rock, it continues immovable in
adversity. Hence it is said, “Let none that wait on thee be ashamed.”
Psalm 25:3. “They looked unto him and were lightened; and their faces were
not ashamed.” Ps. 34:5. “In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never
be ashamed.” Ps. 31:1. “The expectation of the poor shall not perish
forever.” Ps. 9:18.

7. The second consolation is, that God will certainly hear our prayers:
“The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord hath heard my
supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer.” Ps. 6:8, 9. “In my
distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice
out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.” Ps.
18:6. “This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his troubles. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are open unto their cry.” Ps. 34:6, 15. “Because he hath set his love
upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he
hath known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him; I will
be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him.” Ps. 91:14, 15.
“O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. By terrible
things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation; who
art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar
off upon the sea.” Ps. 65:2, 5. But if thou shalt say in thine heart, “All
these were men eminent for holiness, faith, and dependence upon God; but
as for me, I am not worthy to be compared with them,” I answer, out of
Rom. 3:23—“All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;” but are
heard and accepted through grace, by repentance and faith. “The Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.
He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.” Ps. 145:18, 19. “He will regard the prayer of
the destitute, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the
generations to come.” Ps. 102:17, 18.

8. The third consolation is contained in these words: “Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy! when I fall, I shall arise.” Though the world, according
to the perverse spirit that governs it, rejoice at the sufferings of good
men (John 16:20), yet shall they at last be confounded, and the righteous
be comforted. Hence we are told, “The Lord will not cast off forever: but
though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies. For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men.” Lam. 3:31, 32, 33. “God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it.” 1
Cor. 10:13. The same God that laid the burden on you, will in due time
take it off, comfort you, and deliver you from death. “Thou hast turned
for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast put off my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness.” Ps. 30:11. “The Lord upholdeth all that fall;
and raiseth up all those that be bowed down.” Psalm 145:14. “In a little
wrath, I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness
will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.” Isa. 54:8. “It is
of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. They are new every morning.” Lam. 3:22, 23.

9. The fourth consolation is contained in these words: “When I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.” By _darkness_, he means a
state of affliction; which is darkness, indeed, wherein a man can neither
see nor be seen by his friends with the least glimpse of worldly comfort.
The sufferer sits in the very region of shame and sorrow, the valley of
the shadow of death, exposed to the violence and assaults of evil spirits
and wicked men. But dark and dismal as it is, the Lord himself will
enlighten it; the light of whose countenance shines most of all in the
dismal darkness of worldly affliction. There he appears to comfort the
disconsolate, and cheer, with the brightness of his presence, the desolate
and desponding soul. Thus it is said, “Light is sown for the righteous,
and gladness for the upright in heart.” Ps. 97:11. “Unto the upright there
ariseth light in the darkness; he is gracious, and full of compassion, and
righteous.” Ps. 112:4.

10. The fifth consolation is this: “I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
execute judgment for me.” Let the afflicted person think on this, and
remember that though from those that afflict him he may have deserved
better usage; yet from the hand of God, he has deserved a great deal
worse. Whatever befalls us, is by the permission of God. Upon this
account, the evils that we suffer from wicked men, are called in this
verse, “the indignation of the Lord.” Blessed is he that beareth this
affliction with patience, and receiveth it no otherwise than as coming
from God himself. “Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teachest him out of thy law; that thou mayest give him rest from the days
of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked.” Ps. 94:12, 13. “It
is good for a man that he sit alone and keep silence, because he hath
borne the yoke upon him. He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there
may be hope. He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him; he is filled
full with reproach.” Lam. 3:27-30. This was truly the case of David, who
might properly say, “I will bear the anger of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him.” For thus he speaks, when he commanded Zadok to carry
back the ark of God. “If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation. But if he
thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold here am I, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him.” 2 Sam. 15:25, 26. And when Shimei cursed him, he
humbly acknowledges the appointment and permission of God, saying, “Let
him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord hath bidden him.” 2 Sam. 16:11.
“Fret not (therefore) thyself because of evil-doers. Put thy trust in
God.” Psalm 37:1, 5.

11. The sixth consolation is, “He will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness.” This is a figure of speech taken from the
condition of a man that has long lain in darkness, and been as a dead man
out of mind; or of one taken out of a dark and deep prison into the light
and open air. For as these, having been long confined to darkness and
misery, are exceedingly refreshed with the cheerful light of the sun and
the splendor of the heavens; so after the patient bearing of the cross,
the light of God’s countenance breaks forth, and the beams of divine
consolation strike powerfully upon the soul, filling it with glory and joy
unspeakable. Ps. 50:2. Did not Joseph thus break through the shades of
darkness and misery, like the bright sun out of a cloud? Gen. 41:38. And
did not God bring king David out of the region of misery into a state of
joy and happiness? So also at the resurrection of the dead shall our
bodies be brought out of their dark prisons, and we shall rejoice in the
everlasting light and glory of God.

12. The seventh consolation is, “Then she that is mine enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her.” This is the proper punishment of wicked men
who rejoice at the affliction of others, that they shall be covered with
confusion. The time will certainly come, when the mockers shall be struck
with unavoidable shame, and shall be convinced by their own consciences,
of the wrong which they have done to others. This was Shimei’s case, who
could not but blush and be confounded in the presence of David and
Solomon. 2 Sam. 19:19; 1 Kings 2:44. “It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you who are
troubled, rest.” 2 Thess. 1:6, 7. “I rejoiced not at the destruction of
him that hated me, nor lifted up myself when evil found him. Neither have
I suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his soul.” Job 31:29,
30. “Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that
hate you; and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you:
that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain upon
the just and the unjust.” Matt. 5:44, 45.




