Chapter IX.


   Showing What Repentance Is, And The Manner In Which The Sinner Truly
      Repents; Also, How The Goodness Of God Leads Us To Repentance.


    _Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all
    your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:
    and rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
    your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
    great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil_.—JOEL 2:12, 13.


The Lord, whose mercy is infinite, by no means seeks our destruction, but
rather our life and happiness. He best knows the wretched and deplorable
condition into which we are fallen by sin; and he is also desirous to
reclaim us from that dangerous state, and to preserve us from everlasting
ruin. It is for this reason, that he so earnestly invites the soul to
repentance, and engages us to the same by many strong and powerful
motives.

2. Sometimes God is pleased to stir us up by terrible _threatenings_.
“Behold,” says he, “I will bring evil upon this people; because they have
not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it.” Jer. 6:19.
Again, “And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and
I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not;
therefore, will I cast you out of my sight.” Jer. 7:13, 15. This dreadful
proclamation of both temporal and eternal calamities, should strike fear
and terror into us: for the threatening of God is not an empty voice, nor
a sound that vanishes into nothing, but it is accompanied with many
terrible effects, and consuming wrath, as will in its time more fully
appear, and which we even feel already by sad experience; since miseries
and calamities, like a flood, seem to carry all before them. Nay, they
will undoubtedly multiply upon us, and exert themselves with the utmost
fury and fierceness, except we betimes prevent them by a sincere
repentance. Thus the wrath of God shall be poured forth in wars, famines,
pestilence, fire, and inundations, till he has at length destroyed our
very _foundations_, as he did once to the city of Jerusalem. Lam. 4:11.

3. But if the proclamation of wrath and judgment cannot prevail upon us,
yet ought God’s abounding _goodness_, attended as it is with so many
endearing marks of love, to melt our hearts, and to soften them into true
and earnest repentance. For thus hath the Lord spoken by the prophet:
“Return, thou backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger for
ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against
the Lord thy God.” Jer. 3:12, 13. In these words, God makes a free offer
of his grace, entreats and adjures us to return to him again, for he is
willing to accept our repentance.

4. The passages that have been quoted, are a convincing proof that God, by
his grace, mercy, patience, and clemency, strongly invites us to true
repentance. There are chiefly three things in those scriptures, which
deserve a more particular observation: namely, the _nature_ of repentance,
or what it is to repent; that is, to turn unto the Lord:—the _manner_ in
which repentance is to be wrought out; that is, by fasting, weeping, and
mourning:—the _motive_ to engage us in so holy an exercise, which is the
paternal goodness of God; “_for I am merciful_.”

As to the _first_, we know that _to repent_, is nothing else but to be
led, through the _law_ of God, to acknowledge the natural blindness of our
hearts, and that detestable impurity which lurks within. Next, we ought to
regard this as the very source whence all other sins proceed, and whereby
we depart from God, the supreme and eternal Good, deserving not only
various punishments here, but also his everlasting wrath in hell
hereafter. All this ought to awaken in us sorrow and distress, not so much
by reason of the threatened punishment, as rather on account of the
heinousness of the many provocations offered to a merciful Father, who in
his very nature is love and kindness. This being done, we may then raise
again our souls by virtue of the _Gospel_, and with a well-grounded faith,
rely on the favor of God, and on the sure remission of sin promised in
Christ Jesus. This must necessarily be attended with a serious amendment
of life, with a constant purification of the heart by faith, with a
mortification of all evil desires, and with a sincere abnegation of our
own will, so opposite to that of God. In a word, it will be accompanied
with a new life acceptable unto God in Christ, and with fruit worthy of
repentance; suitably to what God enjoins by the prophet: “Wash ye, make
you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow.” Isaiah 1:16, 18.

5. But alas! here is the difficulty! These things are much more easily
said, than reduced to practice. The reason is, because hardly any will
earnestly engage in so weighty a work, or search into the true original
cause of the many dreadful disorders that appear in our lives and conduct.
Man flatters himself with a confident opinion of his own goodness, and
cherishes the affection of the old man. There are few who care to see
their hearts in their inward and native depravity; or to be made sensible
of that vein of evil nature which runs through all their actions, even the
best and most shining. And thus Christ himself, and the grace of God,
manifested by him, are wantonly disregarded.

6. And yet Joel (2:12) requires us to “turn unto God with all our heart,
with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning.” Hereby he intimates that
we are turned away from God; have forsaken the fountain of living waters
(Jer. 2:13); and are now unable to attain life and happiness again, unless
we “_search_ our ways,” and “_return_” unto him from whom we are gone
astray. Lam. 3:40. It is for this purpose that the Prophet charges
“backsliding children” to return, with the promise annexed, that the “Lord
will heal their backslidings.” Jer. 3:22. For this verily is the will of
God, that we should see and confess our misery, in order that he may
compassionately heal it.

7. But since, by nature, we are so blind as to be utterly unable of
ourselves sufficiently to discover our own wretchedness; God has been
pleased to afford means, with a view to bringing us to a sound knowledge
of ourselves. This is done by his holy Word and the Sacraments, which are
always accompanied with his grace and Spirit. By these the Father draws,
allures, and calls us to himself, as so many lost and wandering sheep.
John 6:44. For as a straying sheep cannot of itself return, but must of
necessity be sought and brought back to the fold by the shepherd, so we
would forever go astray in the wilderness of sin and error, did not God
himself carefully seek us; and this the examples of Peter and Paul
abundantly confirm. Therefore the prophet says: “Turn thou me, O Lord, and
I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God.” Jer. 31:18. “Heal me, O
Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art
my praise.” Jer. 17:14. “For it is God,” says the apostle, “which worketh
in us, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.” Phil. 2:13.

8. When, therefore, the Lord graciously awakens us by these means, and
invites us to repentance, it is our part, not to withstand his grace and
Spirit; (as it is said, “To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts”) (Ps. 95:7, 8); but to confess the sin which he thus reproves in
us, and by no means make light of the grace offered to us in the Gospel.
Then God will assuredly have mercy upon us, as he himself declares: “Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon.” Isa. 55:7.

9. Upon this account the work of conversion, though it is entirely a work
of God’s grace, is yet in one respect ascribed to us; namely, as we _give_
up ourselves to the Lord, and to his operations, and do not wantonly
resist his Spirit, despise his grace, and cast it from us; or, as the
apostle expresses it, do not put his Word from us, nor stop our ears
against it, as did the Jews of old. Acts 13:46; 7:57. On the contrary,
when the severity of the _law_ has laid open our spiritual diseases, and
we have felt the bitterness thereof; let us avail ourselves of the
_Gospel_ as a healing remedy, and suffer our heavenly Physician to restore
us to health.

10. An image of this we have in a straying sheep. If it but hear at a
distance the voice of the shepherd, it starts back immediately, and
returns to him. And how willingly would the lost sinner follow the voice
of his Shepherd, if sin had not so perverted him, as to reduce him lower
than the very beasts in stupidity and dulness! Of this indeed the prophet
complains: “The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib: but
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.” Isa. 1:3. “Shall they
fall,” asks another prophet, “and not arise? Shall he turn away, and not
return? The stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times, and the
turtle, and the crane, and the swallow, observe the times of their coming:
but my people know not the judgment of the Lord.” Jer. 8:4, 7.

11. We ought, therefore, most fervently to implore the Lord, not to
withdraw from us his gracious assistance, without which we must certainly
go astray. For since sin and the old Adam constantly abide in our corrupt
flesh and blood, we have need of daily, yea, hourly supplies of grace, for
repressing the tyranny of sin, and for nourishing the life of God within
us. The grace of God is the life of our soul, as the soul is the life of
the body. And as the life of the body, without the free enjoyment of the
air, must soon be extinct; so the vital flame of the inward life will
speedily languish, without a daily supply of grace to support it. For this
reason Solomon prayed: “The Lord our God be with us; let him not leave us,
nor forsake us; that he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all
his ways.” 1 Kings 8:57.

12. This is a lesson which ought not to be learned in a light and general
manner, but by a close and practical application be brought home to every
one in particular. Let, therefore, every one look into his own heart and
seek its renewal, that so all may be reformed in time. Let us remember
that comfortable exhortation, and the promise annexed thereto: “Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near.” Isa.
55:6. “And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with
all your heart, saith the Lord.” Jer. 29:13.

13. But in order to true repentance, it is not enough to refrain only from
gross sins, and foul visible transgressions; but the heart, whence all
those evils proceed, is to be changed and purified; that so inward pride,
covetousness, and lust, with all sinful affections, may be mortified at
last. For whilst the heart is unchanged, unreformed, and unrenewed; that
is, whilst our own corrupt temper, our inward malice, wrath, hatred,
enmity, revenge, lying, and deceit, are quietly suffered within us; all
our boasts of, and pretences to, and formalities in, religion, are but
mere show and hypocrisy. God requires no less than a new heart, and “a new
creature in Christ Jesus.” 2 Cor. 5:17. No one is so holy, so good, and so
thoroughly cleansed, but he will still find something in his own heart to
be thrown out, or to be amended and rectified. “As a fountain casteth out
her waters, so Jerusalem casteth out her wickedness.” Jer. 6:7. This is
the first head, relating to the nature of repentance, of which more has
been said in Book I.

14. Let us now consider, in the second place, the _manner_ of our
returning to God: “with all the heart,” says the prophet, “with fasting,
with weeping, and with mourning.” Wretched mortals can weep floods of
tears for empty and perishing goods, whilst they stand unmoved at the
miserable state of their souls, and at the loss of an eternal and
incorruptible inheritance! In this they are altogether unlike David, who,
by his example, sets a most shining pattern of sincere and unfeigned
repentance before us. See Ps. 6, and Ps. 38. “For the Lord looketh on the
heart” (1 Sam. 16:7), and “trieth the heart and reins.” Ps. 7:9.

15. What the prophet says of fasting, is to be understood of a general
fast enjoined by the prophet to all the people. In such a fast the whole
body of a nation were wont to be concerned. They publicly confessed their
sins; they deplored and bewailed them; and thus humbling themselves before
God, fasted both inwardly and outwardly. And in this order they begged
remission of sin, and deprecated the judgments of God gathering over them.
Such a general fast and public repentance as this, such sincere
conversion, prayer, faith, confession, and supplication, are the most
effectual means to appease the wrath of an offended God, and to avert his
judgments from whole kingdoms and nations. This plainly appears from the
history of the defeat of the other tribes of Israel, by that of Benjamin;
in which the former having in two battles lost forty thousand men, all
went up and came before the Lord, with weeping and mourning, and there
fasted the whole day, from morning to night. Judges 20:26. A similar
illustrious example is recorded of the fast of the Ninevites (Jonah 3:5,
10): and of the children of Israel, who, being beaten by the Philistines,
kept a fast for seven days together, after Saul and Jonathan were slain in
the battle. 1 Chron. 10:12.

16. Such solemn penitential fasts were also in use in the primitive
Church, when the Christians met together, and in any great public calamity
humbled themselves before the Lord. Not, surely, to obtain remission of
sin by such performances, as so many meritorious acts of devotion; but by
a contrite, sober, and humble heart, to deprecate the judgments that were
ready to break in upon them. And such fasts might with propriety still be
observed.

17. Fasts such as these, accompanied with true repentance, would prove an
impregnable wall and fortification against all our enemies; a sovereign
medicine in all pestilential diseases; and a safeguard about all our
estates and possessions. An example of this we have in Job, who, whenever
his children had spent any day in mirth and feasting, “offered up unto God
prayers and sacrifices for them” (Job 1:4, 5); and thus, as it were,
fortified his house by prayer against the insults of wicked men and
devils.

18. In great public calamities the Lord looks out for such men as may,
like a bulwark, oppose his wrath when ready to make a breach. “I sought
for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap
before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.
Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed
them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon
their heads, saith the Lord God.” Ezek. 22:30, 31. We may also remember,
on this occasion, the intercession of Abraham. Gen. 18:23.

19. Thus the prophet Daniel was a wall of defence when he made confession
to God of the sins of all the people. Dan. 9:4, 5, etc. And the prophet
Joel, in very moving terms, describes such a penitential fast: “Blow the
trumpet in Zion; sanctify a fast; call a solemn assembly; gather the
people; sanctify the congregation; assemble the elders; gather the
children, and those that suck the breasts; let the bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Let the priests, the
ministers of the Lord, say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach.” Joel 2:15-17.

20. Such public fasts ought to be celebrated by the whole multitude,
without hypocrisy, with ardent zeal and devotion; for it is the will of
God, that every one readily confess his sins. He requires true humility,
sincere repentance, and a turning to him with our whole heart. Hence the
prophet commands the “heart, and not the garments,” to be rent. The Jews,
at the hearing of any sad or terrible evil, were accustomed to rend their
clothes, in order to evidence thereby the inward sorrow with which they
were affected. This, however, like their fasting, was often a mere
formality, and their grief was only pretended. Wherefore, the prophet
reproves them, saying, “Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a
man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to
loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house? When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thyself from thine own flesh?” Isa. 58:5-7.

21. These words explain the nature of a true fast; which is then only
kept, when, on the one hand, we abstain from sin, subdue the wanton lusts
of the flesh, and keep the old man, with all his members, under constant
restraint and subjection: and, on the other, when we are fervent in works
of charity, in the practice of patience and mercy, and of the other
virtues springing up from a contrite, sincere, and penitent heart. And it
is with regard to these inward acts of humiliation, that the prophet bids
us _rend our hearts_. For as the wounds of the heart must necessarily be
very painful; so the grief occasioned by our sins should affect us, as if
our very hearts were bruised and crushed. And this “broken spirit,” this
“contrite heart,” is that _sacrifice_ which is so highly acceptable to
God. Ps. 51:17. Such a heart has, by faith, obtained a due fitness to
receive the influence of the grace of God, the consolations of the Holy
Spirit, and the merit and blood of Jesus Christ. As a hard and massive
stone cannot be penetrated by the oil or water poured upon it, until it be
broken to pieces; so the sovereign balm of God’s grace and consolation
cannot comfort and quicken the heart, except it be first broken and
softened into humility, that so by faith it may partake of the merit of
Christ. “Not the whole, but the sick, have need of a physician.” Matt. 9:
12. Let no one think that he belongs to Christ, unless he has first
“crucified the flesh, with its affections and lusts.” Gal. 5:24. The blood
of Christ will be of no profit to any except to those who embrace it with
a contrite, afflicted, penitent, humble and believing heart.

22. As for the _motives_ to repentance, which make up the third head, they
are thus expressed by the prophet: “Turn unto the Lord, _for_ he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth
him of the evil.” Joel 2:12, 13. He lays down in these words, a gradual
display of the manifold mercies offered to returning sinners. As if he had
said, “If you think it a small thing that I am _gracious_, then know that
I am _merciful_ also: if this be not enough, I am likewise _patient_ and
_slow to anger_: if this will not yet suffice, then I am, moreover, of
_great kindness_. If, after all, you still require something more, then
understand, that I easily _repent_ of intended punishments; yea, even when
my avenging hand is lifting up, I am ready to let fall the rod, upon your
serious repentance.”

23. First, then, the prophet calls God _gracious_ (Ps. 103:8); that is,
ready to be entreated and reconciled. God is easy to be prevailed with,
forgives offences, deals not in strict justice and the rigor of the law,
according to what we have deserved. And all these marks of mercy should
lead us to repentance. There are many admirable promises, all tending to
the same end. “If thou afflict them, they will cry unto me, and I will
surely hear; for I am gracious.” Ex. 22:23, 27. “Therefore will the Lord
wait that he may be gracious unto you. Thou shalt weep no more; he will be
very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it,
he will answer thee.” Isa. 30:18. That is, the Most High is so rich in
grace, that he waits for you. In him there is _expecting grace_, by which
he readily receives those that truly return: _prevenient grace_, expressed
by the Psalmist—“Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent (_that is_, meet,
_or_ anticipate) us” (Ps. 79:8): _protecting grace_, noticed by the same
prophet; “He that trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about”
(Ps. 32:10): _preserving grace_; “Surely,” says David, “mercy shall follow
me all the days of my life.” Ps. 23:6. Of this we have given examples in
the preceding chapter. With this agree also the words of Scripture: “With
the Lord there is mercy; and with him is plenteous redemption.” Ps. 130:7.
Wherefore, let the divine clemency and grace move thee to sincere and
unfeigned repentance.

24. Secondly, the prophet declares that God is _merciful_. To be
_merciful_, is to be easily moved by the miseries of another, and from the
very heart to compassionate his case. This is to be seen in parents, who,
not only with unfeigned tenderness love their children, but are at the
same time so deeply touched with their misery and weakness, as to be
willing even to die for them, if that were possible. Thus David, when he
lamented the death of his son Absalom, mournfully exclaimed: “O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom,
my son, my son!” 2 Sam. 18:33. But these bowels of mercy, this ardent,
cordial, and tender affection, are infinitely more conspicuous in God
himself, who, from an abounding sense of love and kindness, has given up
his Son to death, and thereby transcended all the affections of earthly
parents. This is declared by the prophet: “Can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea,
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.” Isa. 49:15. And by another,
“Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against
him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled
for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.” Jer. 31:20.
And again by another, “The Lord thy God is a merciful God; he will not
forget the covenant of thy fathers, which he sware unto them.” Deut. 4:31.
And David confirms it: “The Lord is merciful and gracious.” Ps. 103:8. And
again, calling to mind this mercy, when of three punishments he had it in
his power to choose which he pleased, he answered, “Let us fall now into
the hand of the Lord; for his mercies are great.” 2 Sam. 24:14. Would to
God that his paternal mercy might also allure us to unfeigned repentance!
St. Paul himself refers to this most powerful inducement, when he
beseeches us “by the _mercies_ of God, etc.” Rom. 12:1.

25. The third appellation given to God by the prophet is, that he is
patient, or _slow to anger_. He is not easily moved to wrath; he suffers
many provocations offered him, and gives time for repentance and
conversion. All which he has abundantly evidenced by many real
demonstrations, powerful enough to convince us, that even in God himself,
“Love beareth all things, endureth all things” (1 Cor. 13:7), even as
parents bear with their children. To this purpose says St. Peter, “The
Lord is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance.” 2 Pet. 3:9. And again, “Account that
the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation.” 2 Pet. 3:15. And Paul
wishes, that “the goodness of God may lead us to repentance.” Rom. 2:4. To
this long-suffering of God it was entirely due, that he granted the old
world a hundred and twenty years in which to repent; bearing all that time
with their provocations, and waiting for repentance. Gen. 6:3. And O! how
much time hath he given us to repent in, and to work out our salvation!
But this divine grace is abused by those who only grow more wanton by
mercies, and “turn even the grace of God itself into lasciviousness.”
Jude, ver. 4. But by this they only hasten their ruin, and render more
grievous the punishment which they deserve. If one, and then another of
these many and provoking affronts, with which men offend an omnipotent
God, were daily put upon a mere mortal, nothing certainly could be
expected but the utmost severity of his resentment. How inconceivably
great then must be the patience of God, who not only pardons offences so
numerous and so heinous, but also returns all manner of kindness to the
offender himself. O! that the inconceivable patience of the Lord might
inspire us with a hatred of sin, and lead us all to repentance!

26. Fourthly, God is represented to be _of great kindness_; so great
indeed, that no sin, how great soever, can surpass it. For as God is
essentially and wholly good, so is he desirous to communicate himself
wholly to men, provided they be willing to receive and admit him. Yea, by
his nature he can be and do nothing but good. He takes a pleasure therein,
and “rejoiceth over us to do us good.” Jer. 32:41. His mercy is as great
as himself, that is, infinite. It extends to all mankind. “Thy mercy, O
Lord, is in the heavens.” Ps. 36:5. “As the heaven is high above the
earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.” Ps. 103:11. And
we read in the Lamentations: “It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not: they are new every morning:
great is thy faithfulness.” Lam. 3:22. See, therefore, O man! that a
goodness so inexpressible be no longer abused, but that it animate thee to
sincere repentance.

27. And lastly, the prophet says of the Lord, “_It repenteth him of the
evil._” This is as if he would say: “It is the nature of God, to punish
with reluctance; and when he is even constrained thereto, it is not for
our destruction, but salvation, that we be not condemned with the world.”
1 Cor. 11:32. He then doth “his strange work” (of punishment), that he may
bring to pass his own work (of mercy). Isa. 28:21. Thus he repented of the
evil he had designed against Nineveh. Jonah 3:10. And, therefore, “it is
good, that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord. For the Lord will not cast off for ever: but though he cause
grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies. For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men.” Lam. 3:26, 31-33. Therefore, repent of thy sins.

28. For as soon as thou repentest of sin, and supplicatest the Lord in
true faith, God will also repent of the punishment he intended to inflict.
The words of the Lord to Jonah are very memorable: “Doest thou well to be
angry for the gourd? Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou
hast not labored, neither madest it grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night: and should not I spare Nineveh, that great city,
wherein are more than six score thousand persons?” Jonah 4:9-11. This
boundless mercy is still the same even at this day, and will continue so
forever to penitent and returning sinners. Go, therefore, O man, and let
this overflowing mercy of God lead thee to repentance!




