Chapter XXIII.


 A Man Who Does Not Perceive His Own Emptiness, And Does Not Give All The
    Honor To God, Commits The Greatest Of Sins, And Falls Like Satan.


    _Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity._—PS.
    39:5.


To the end that man may acknowledge his own vanity, he is compared by the
Psalmist (Ps. 39; 144:4), to a shadow; and again in another place (Ps.
90:5), to a dream. Now what is a shadow? It is a lifeless resemblance of
that thing on which it depends; and has in itself neither substance nor
life, but is nothing. In like manner, man of himself has neither
substance, life, strength, nor indeed any ability whatsoever; but depends
on God, even as a shadow on the body, or as light on the sun.

2. Whosoever, therefore, so forgets himself as not to depend on God, who
alone is all in all, “thinking himself to be something when he is nothing,
he deceiveth himself.” Gal. 6:3. He falls from the true eternal and
Sovereign Being into his own nothingness; from the unchangeable Good into
vanity; from truth itself into a lie.

3. This is not only the greatest of sins, but of punishments also. For the
more man turns from God to himself, the more he approaches extreme misery
and calamity. And man by this means, even by turning himself away from
God, towards his own faculties and powers, in truth punishes thereby the
very sin which he commits. He is then accounted to turn himself away from
God, and to forsake “the rock of his salvation” (Deut. 32:15), whenever he
ascribes to himself any degree of power or strength, art or skill, wisdom,
or honor, or merit, so as to be willing to be thought somebody, and to be
much accounted of; when, in very deed, all these in no wise belong to man,
or to any creature, but to God only. Every creature is but a mere shadow,
and of itself merely nothing; even so as the life, substance, faculty,
wisdom, powers, and strength which it seems to have, are not properly its
own, but are God’s only.

4. Wherefore, as soon as a man ascribes all or any of these to himself, he
becomes guilty of apostasy from God. Nor indeed was the devil’s apostasy
aught else, but the not abiding within the bounds, duties, and properties
of a creature, which has all its life, substance, and ability in God, and
ought to hold the same from him, as the shadow does with respect to the
body and the motion thereof. For any one, therefore, to ascribe those
things to himself which are God’s; or to challenge to himself honor,
glory, wisdom, or esteem (forasmuch as none of these suit a creature, but
are all to be transferred to God alone, to whom they really appertain), is
properly to fall like Satan. Hence God permitted him to fall, not
sustaining him any longer with his grace, which was by him disowned. The
same thing must befall all men who, through pride and ambition, presume to
arrogate to themselves any of those things which are God’s. They are not
upheld by the grace of God, who arrogantly turn themselves away from God,
affecting to be as God. God alone being All in all, and moreover being the
only Good, or the _one Good_, and the _all-Good_ essentially; it would be
most unreasonable for any creature to claim to itself aught of that which
is good. Hence our blessed Lord saith, “There is none good but one, that
is God” (Matt. 19:17); meaning, that he is the essential Good, and he
alone is all that is good. This property of God, our Saviour was not
willing to take unto himself in his state of humiliation, forasmuch as he
was then held to be no more than a mere man; that thus, by his most bright
example, he might instruct us that man ought not to ascribe to himself the
things which are God’s.

5. When man does otherwise, he commits the greatest of all sins, and,
aiming at divinity, stains himself thereby with a most nefarious
sacrilege, being turned from God to himself. And as many as are in this
condition, seek help, counsel, and comfort, not from God only, as they
ought, but from creatures, and sometimes even from the devil himself. But
what greater madness, or what worse blindness is there, than to expect
good from evil, life from death, blessedness from the damned, help from
the helpless, blessedness from the accursed, and light from darkness?
Whereas, on the other hand, it is the highest wisdom to look for good from
the source of all good, to seek life from the fountain of life, to expect
blessedness from the spring of salvation, and to go for help to him who
can do all things, and “with whom nothing is impossible.” Luke 1:37.




Chapter XXIV.


  Of The Noble Virtue Of Love, And Of Its Power, Soundness, And Purity.


    _He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love._—1 JOHN
    4:8.


Love, says St. Paul, is the greatest of all virtues, and without it all
gifts are unprofitable (1 Cor. 13:13); therefore he admonishes us, saying,
“Let all your things be done with charity.” 1 Cor. 16:14. Accordingly we
are to pray with charity, as our Lord says: “If thou bring thy gift to the
altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee; go
thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother.” Matt. 5:23, 24. And in the
Lord’s Prayer, our forgiving our neighbor’s debts, or trespasses, is
strictly joined to God’s forgiving ours. Matt. 6:12, 14, 15.

2. Love is, however, so singular a virtue, that a man may mistake therein
as easily as in anything else. Therefore nothing ought to be looked upon
with a more suspicious eye than love; for there is nothing which can so
powerfully incline, force, or restrain, and so thoroughly penetrate the
mind, as love. Therefore, if love be not ruled by the true light, the Holy
Ghost, it precipitates the soul into a thousand calamities.

3. And this I do not say with respect to the love of evil; for this, as a
diabolical thing, is by all Christians to be avoided; but I speak of that
love which is betwixt God, and man, and his neighbor. Love, when not
regulated by divine wisdom, can easily be deceived, misled, and thrust out
of its due order, so as not to reach the true end. Many think they have
the love of God in their souls, and yet have the love of the world, or
their own love, nay, it may be the love of Satan.

4. Take an instance of this fact: any one that loves the Lord God only for
the sake of temporal things, that he may be preserved by him from temporal
misfortunes, loves himself more than God, and prefers his own welfare
before God. This is called inordinate love. He ought to love God more than
himself, nay, love him above all things; and all things, both good and
evil days, he ought to love for the sake of God.

5. But when man prefers himself to the love of God, he surely makes
himself God, by loving himself more than God; and whilst he loves not God
as God, for his sake, but merely for his own private interest, he has a
false and deceitful love. He that has such a love, loves all things for
his own sake, for the profit and honor which he reaps from them. He loves
also holy men, nay, the very word of God, for this reason only, that it
may afford him a show and name of holiness, but not for the sake of that
excellent Good which lies hid therein.

6. And because such a love is impure, it brings forth impure fruits, which
are self-interest, self-honor, self-lust; all which are carnal and
earthly, not heavenly and spiritual fruits. Thus many love great skill and
learning, that they may be preferred to others, and may rule over them;
not from a principle of love to God and their neighbor, but from a love to
themselves, thinking thereby to gain great honors and preferments.

7. There are others also who love God that he may spare them, and not
punish them for their sins in dreadful severity; nay, that he may be
bountiful to them in this present time; but this, alas! is a very weak
love. For these love God for their own profit, and not for his own sake,
or not by reason of his being the most excellent and highest Good.

8. Others love God that he may bestow upon them many gifts in
understanding and wisdom, whereby they might gain a great reputation.

9. Some also love virtue, not for the sake of virtue itself, but that they
may obtain a great name, and be looked upon as brave, virtuous men, and
men famous for their honesty and piety. All this is not true love, for it
tends not to the right end.

10. There is often also love betwixt some persons uniting themselves by a
love of their own, which increases in them so much that they are pleased
with everything done by him whom they love. For love always follows its
beloved, and cleaves wholly unto him. And thereby one is often involved
and drawn aside into evil; or even the lover himself allures his beloved
to it, because he knows that so it pleases him; and by this false and
deceitful love he is hindered from prayer and all other Christian virtues.

11. Therefore it is highly necessary that our love should be guided and
ruled by the Holy Spirit, and by our meditations on the whole life of
Christ and his holy sufferings, out of which nothing but _pure_ love
shines forth. He loved God purely, above all things, and not himself. He
loved man with a pure, undefiled love, and not himself. He did and spake
nothing for his own sake, but all for ours. Whatsoever he did and spoke
was for our benefit; he was not profited by it, but we were. All his pains
and labors, nay; his greatest torments and afflictions, were not too hard
or heavy for him, that we might be benefited and saved thereby; nay, his
very cross was joy unto him, that he might fulfil the will of God his
Father.

12. That is a pure, undefiled love for which nothing is too difficult,
which complains of nothing, nay, which spares not itself, but gives itself
for the beloved’s sake, even unto death. Whatsoever crosses and sufferings
God sends, this love regards as good. It sees that it is the holy will of
God, and therefore it would rather suffer much more for the same, and is
very well contented with everything that God willeth; for it knows that
God orders all things right and well.

13. And as love unites itself to the beloved, it learns also his manners,
follows him for his love’s sake, and does that which is well-pleasing unto
him: so he that loves Christ rightly learns of him his manner of life and
his virtues, for he knows it is well-pleasing unto him. He conforms
himself to his image, and remains all his life under the yoke and cross of
Christ, even as Christ, during his whole life, bore the cross of poverty,
contempt, and pains. And although no man in this frail state can attain
unto perfect love, yet every Christian is to labor, that his love be not
false, but as pure as possible, according to what St. Paul says, “Love out
of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.” 1 Tim.
1:5.

14. This pure love, derived from Christ and the Holy Ghost, works in man
every good thing, and is never idle. It is its joy to do good, for it can
do nothing else; even as the Lord God says, “I will rejoice over them to
do them good.” Jer. 32:41. Why? Because God is love itself, which can do
nothing else but that which it is in its own being. And this is a sign of
pure and true love. For this love does not say, “I am not obliged to do
this or that;” but where it has no law, there it is a law unto itself,
only that it may do much good; for otherwise love would not continue to be
love.

15. Hence it is plain why God Almighty is never weary of doing good; and
why he is that infinite Good which never ceases to be. He is everlasting
love, which cannot desist from doing good, or else he would cease to be
love. Therefore, even when he punishes and chastises, he draws all good
out of evil, directing it to a good end, even to our salvation.

16. This pure love of God causes us to pray aright. For as a friend has
his friend at his disposal in all things, so also such a lover of God is a
friend of God, and obtains from him that for which he prays. Therefore,
because Lazarus’s sister knew the Lord Jesus to be not only a friend, but
also the Son of God, she said, “I know that even now whatsoever thou wilt
ask of God, God will give it thee” (John 11:22); and because Mary loved
Jesus, she was heard by the Lord, and he restored her brother unto her. Of
such a love as obtains from God all things, holy David saith, “Delight
thyself also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine
heart.” Ps. 37:4.

17. But in order that thou mayest have a characteristic mark of this love,
observe these _four_ properties of true love. 1. Love submits itself to
the will of the beloved. 2. True love abandons all friendship which is
contrary to its beloved. 3. One friend reveals his heart unto the other.
4. A true lover endeavors to be made conformable to his beloved, in his
manners, and in all his life. Is the beloved poor, the lover will be poor
with him. Is the beloved despised, the lover also bears his contempt. Is
he sick, the lover is sick too. Thus love makes an equality between them,
so that they have the same prosperity and adversity. For there must be
such a communion between the lover and the beloved, as that each of them
shall be made partaker of the other’s good as well as ill. This, then, is
not only a communion, but a union or uniting of two minds like each other,
and of two hearts which are alike.

18. After such a manner our Lord Jesus Christ is become our Friend. For,
1. His love submitted itself to the will of man, and was obedient unto the
cross: nay, for the sake of man he submitted his will to every one, even
to his enemies. 2. He neglected all other friendship that he could have
had in the world; nay, he even forgot himself, and spared not his own body
and life for our sakes. 3. He revealed in his Gospel, his heart unto us;
therefore he says, “Henceforth I call you not servants; but I have called
you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made
known unto you.” John 15:15. 4. He was made alike unto us in all things,
sin only excepted. Phil. 2:7. He became poor as we are, and mortal even as
we.

19. If now we will be his true lovers, we must also do all these things.
And seeing he was made like unto us in all things, and in all our misery,
why would not we strive to be made like unto Him? If we thus love him, we
shall obtain from him all things by prayer, according to his saying, “Unto
him that loveth me, I will manifest myself.” John 14:21. O what a friendly
and delightful manifestation in the heart is there, when we experience
heavenly joy, wisdom, and understanding! Here is the only right way to
acquire understanding and wisdom, which are so highly praised by king
Solomon in the Proverbs.

20. We are, therefore, naturally led to the conclusion, that genuine
prayer cannot be offered without love.




