Chapter XXX.


                          Of The Fruits Of Love.


    _Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity
    vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself
    unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no
    evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;
    beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things,
    endureth all things._—1 COR. 13:4-7.


Even as the tree of life stood in the midst of Paradise (Gen. 2:9); so
Jesus Christ stands in the Paradise of the Christian Church, in order that
all believers might derive life and strength from him. The whole substance
of the Christian religion consists in _faith_ and _love_. As by _faith_ in
Christ, the life of a Christian is rendered acceptable to God (the life
which he lives being not so much his own, as the life of Christ in him);
so LOVE proves the fruitful principle of all such charitable acts as
relate to his neighbor. And so true is it, that all virtues, how shining
soever they may be, are of no account without charity; that even faith
itself is counted dead if it be without love. James 2:17. For although
faith, as it respects justification, has no regard to works, either
preceding, accompanying, or following it, but to JESUS CHRIST only, on
whom it lays hold; yet is that faith but mere show and pretence which is
not attended with love, though it should even work miracles. For as a body
destitute of a soul is dead; so the inward spiritual man, if he have not
love, is dead in all his members. Therefore hath the apostle declared,
that faith should work by love. Gal. 5:6. It is true that faith justifies
a sinner without works (Rom. 4:6); yet when it performs the functions of
mutual love among men, it will necessarily be accompanied with a train of
good works; this being the true test by which genuine faith can be
distinguished from all counterfeits. This is that faith which works by
love; this is the tree which bears abundance of fruits, as from the
following considerations will farther appear.

2. The _first_ of these fruits is long-suffering. “Charity suffereth
long.” The nature and constitution of this virtue no one ever more fully
expressed than Christ himself, the true tree of life, whose goodly and
salutary fruits we ought to eat, and to convert into our own substance and
nature. As he by his wonderful long-suffering bore the malice of the
world, that thereby sinners might be brought to repentance (Rom. 2:4); so
do thou also, O man, order thy life and manners, that it may appear
evident, that the meek and gentle Christ lives in thee, and that thou
mayest continue in him, as a member firmly united to its head.

3. The _second_ fruit is kindness. “Charity is kind.” This virtue was also
most eminently seen in Christ Jesus, and in that example which he hath set
us. David says: “Grace is poured into thy lips.” Ps. 45:2. And the
Evangelist tells us, that “they wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth.” Luke 4:22. To these words do thou give
attention, O man, and follow this great pattern of love and benignity,
that so Christ may also speak by thy mouth, and that thou mayest remain
united to him in perpetual charity.

4. The _third_ fruit is, not to be envious and revengeful, but to be ready
to remit any offence whatsoever. “Charity envieth not.” Nothing is more
agreeable to the nature of God, than to forgive. “The Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. He will not always chide,
neither will he keep his anger forever. He hath not dealt with us after
our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.” Ps. 103:8-10. “If
the wicked will turn from all his sins that he committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall
not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness that he hath done, he
shall live.” Ezek. 18:21, 22. “Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant
child? For since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still;
therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon
him, saith the Lord.” Jer. 31:20. And lastly, this divine goodness is most
clearly expressed by Isaiah, and represented as the very character of God:
“I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for my own sake,
and will not remember thy sins.” Isa. 43:25. Therefore be thou in this
respect also like unto the merciful God. Forgive, I say, and forget the
trespasses of thy neighbor, that so, in like manner, Christ may also
forgive thine offences and transgressions. It is then that the same mind
is in thee which was also in Christ. And in this order alone thou shalt
obtain fellowship with him.

5. The _fourth_ fruit is candor. “Charity vaunteth not itself.” A kind and
charitable man does not misjudge his neighbor, vaunt it over him, rashly
censure him, or disingenuously deride him before others. True love is
altogether averse to these unfair proceedings. Whoever sincerely loves his
neighbor, shows his heart in his countenance, and does all things
ingenuously, and without guile. A visible example hereof Christ himself
hath left us, whose deportment was equal both to friends and enemies, and
who from the bottom of his heart endeavored most earnestly to promote the
salvation of mankind. Let this be an example to thee, O man, and follow in
thy Master’s footsteps, that so the candor which was in Christ, may also
shine forth in thy life and conduct. As the Lord has most heartily
espoused our good and interest, so ought we in like manner, to do the same
among ourselves also; if we wish to partake of the nature of Christ, and
to be united to him, as living members to their Head and Saviour.

6. The _fifth_ fruit is, not to be “puffed up.” Charity is not of a
haughty and supercilious temper. It is not swelled with high conceit on
account of its own deeds and performances. Behold again thy Lord Jesus!
When a woman, in a great concourse of people, lifted up her voice and
said: “Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast
sucked,” “Yea,” replied he, “rather blessed are they that hear the word of
God and keep it” (Luke 11:27, 28); humbly removing from himself that
praise which was entirely due to him, and resigning it to those that truly
loved the Lord. If thou also resolvest to do this, then verily the humble
Jesus lives in thee, and thou livest in him; it being the constant
character of true charity, to transfer the praises of men to another whom
it esteems more worthy of them.

7. The _sixth_ effect of charity is, “not to behave itself unseemly.” A
man endued with love, is not easily soured with discontent, or with any
morose humor. His conversation is easy, obliging, and so concordant with
all the offices of love and humanity, that the kindness residing within
may even be read in his countenance. Of this sweetness of temper, the Lord
Jesus hath left us a most bright and holy pattern. He did all with a
spirit of mildness; and when he conversed with sinners, then pity and
compassion visibly appeared in his very mien and aspect. This sweet temper
of Christ ought also to be transfused into our souls, so that our life may
prove a transcript of this most blessed original.

8. The _seventh_ fruit of true love is, “not to seek her own.” A true
Christian has by love obtained such enlargement and liberty of soul, as to
serve his fellow-creatures freely, without any view to self-interest.
Nothing is more pleasing to him than to do good to all without the least
expectation of gain. This pure and disinterested love originally dwells in
God Almighty. He gives all things freely, without receiving any profit at
all. He commands us to fear and worship him, for no other reason than to
make us proper objects of his divine love and benignity. And, lo! what a
glorious pattern of disinterested love Christ has set before us! Matt.
20:28. As a tree, without respect of persons, imparts its fruit to all in
the most ample and universal manner; so has Christ, and God in Christ,
given himself unto us as the greatest and most excellent Good. Go now, O
man! and practise the same virtue; that so Christ, the ever-living _vine_,
may bud in thee, and that thou mayest become a fruitful plantation of the
Lord. Isaiah 61:3.

9. The _eighth_ fruit of true love is, “not to be easily provoked.” A man
that has tasted of true love, is not apt to entertain any bitterness, much
less to vent it by cursing and railing words. Contemplate again the life
of Jesus, who did not so much as open his mouth against his enemies, nor
pour forth any bitter and vehement speeches, but gave blessing and life to
those that hated him. Isaiah 11:3; 42:2. And though he, indeed, denounced
wrath against Chorazin, Capernaum, and Bethsaida, and uttered many woes
against the Pharisees (Luke 10:13; 11:42); yet this did not proceed from a
bitter or revengeful temper; but was no more than a serious and earnest
exhortation to true and unfeigned repentance, that so the offenders might
at last be saved. Therefore, let us be cautious, lest any root of
bitterness should at any time spring up in us, and so hinder our charity,
and thus many be offended. Heb. 12:15.

10. The _ninth_ fruit of charity is, “to think no evil.” This is also the
property of God Almighty, as he himself testifies: “For I know the
thoughts that I think towards you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and
not of evil, to give you an expected end. And ye shall seek me, and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.” Jer. 29:11, 13.
Whence it follows that whosoever has thoughts of peace towards his
neighbor, has the mind of Christ, and is animated and influenced by his
Spirit.

11. The _tenth_ fruit is, “Love rejoiceth not in iniquity,” nor has it
pleasure in the injury or oppression of good men, as Shimei had when David
fled before Absalom. 2 Sam. 16:5, 6. On the contrary, true love imitates
Christ Jesus, who, with a tender compassion, beholding with a mournful
countenance, the fall of Peter (Luke 22:61), raised and reclaimed him, and
thereby fulfilled the words of the Psalmist: “God raises them that are
bowed down.” Ps. 146:8. And how did he deplore the evil which was hanging
over the men of Judea, and the destruction of their temple and city! Luke
19:41; 15:4. With what fervency, with what a hearty desire, did he bring
his wandering sheep into the right way; and with what a sweet and gentle
voice did he allure them home! Let us imitate so great a master of love;
and if any one be overtaken in a fault, let us bewail his case, instruct
him in the spirit of meekness, and bear his burden, that so we may fulfil
the law of Christ. Gal. 6:2. For he did first bear himself the burden of
our sins, that we, being made his living members, might be formed to the
same temper by him, who is the Head of the Church.

12. The _eleventh_ property of charity is, that it “rejoiceth in the
truth,” and is exceedingly pleased with a Christian order of things. Of
this we have an example in Christ Jesus, who, at the return of the seventy
disciples, rejoiced in spirit and praised his Father for the success which
had attended their function. Luke 10:21. Thus also the angels in heaven
rejoice (as Christ himself teaches us), over the conversion of a sinner.
Luke 15:10. Whoever, therefore, seriously lays to heart the practice of so
Christian a virtue, manifests thereby an angelical temper of mind: nay, it
is a proof that the very mind of Christ, yea, of God himself, resides in
that soul.

13. The _twelfth_ fruit of charity is, to “bear all things,” in order to
preserve the bond of peace and of mutual friendship. Love patiently bears
the infirmities of others, after the example of St. Paul, who was made
weak with the weak, that he might profit the weak: nay, he was made all
things, if by any means he might be an instrument to save some. 1 Cor.
9:22. The same heavenly love _believeth_ all things, and suspects no evil
of its neighbor; _hopeth_ all things, praying and desiring that peace and
happiness may constantly accompany our fellow-creatures. And, lastly, true
love _endureth all things_ for the sake of benefiting a neighbor; all
which our blessed Redeemer, by his own example, has most feelingly taught
us. He bore all manner of reproaches and injuries for our sins; he
underwent most inhuman scourgings and buffetings, with extreme poverty,
that in him, and by him, we might obtain everlasting joy and honor.

14. The _thirteenth_ fruit of love is, “not to faint or be weary,” in
doing good. Herein it is like God, whose mercy is from everlasting to
everlasting upon those that fear him. Ps. 103:17; Luke 1:50. God expects
and waits that he may be gracious unto us. Isa. 30:18. In order that he
might have mercy on us, he rose up to spare us, and he loves to be exalted
in showing mercy. His love is stronger than death, which many waters are
not able to quench, and from which nothing can ever separate us. Cant.
8:7. He hath mercy on us with everlasting mercies. And though he declares,
on a certain occasion, that he is “weary with repenting” (Jer. 15:6); yet
is this confined to those only who wilfully reject the tender of his
mercy, who despise his grace, and abuse his goodness: and in no wise
affects those that heartily fear him. “The mountains shall depart, and the
hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy
on thee.” Isa. 54:10. After this standard of divine mercy, we ought also
to regulate the love we bear to our neighbor, so that it may never fail or
faint in acts of humanity and kindness; no, not even in those which we are
bound to bestow on our very enemies. As Christ did, so ought we, from a
compassionate and never-failing love, to pray, “Father, forgive them.”
Luke 23:34.

15. In a word, Love is the greatest, the best, and the noblest of all
virtues. First, because God himself is love. 1 John 4:16. Secondly,
because it is the fulfilling and the summary or comprehension of the whole
law. Rom. 13:10. Thirdly, because it is eternal and never-failing, so that
it is not like faith and hope, which vanish away when that happiness
appears which is the end of faith. 1 Cor. 13:8. Fourthly, because all good
works and services done to our neighbor without it, are vain and of no
account before God. And lastly, because love gives us an assurance here,
that by faith in Christ we shall inherit life eternal hereafter. Hence it
follows, that Christian love must excel all other gifts and graces
whatsoever, and that our main concern ought to centre in so divine a
virtue. Nothing, certainly, can be greater than experimentally to know
that love of Christ which “passeth all knowledge,” that we may be filled
with all the fulness of God, and the fruits of love. Eph. 3:19.




