Chapter X.


        Of The Wisdom Which God Has Shown In The Formation Of Man.


    _O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them
    all._—PS. 104:24.


There are three orders in the natural body. The first is to the body the
same that the husbandmen and laborers are to the state; being employed in
raising the appetite, digesting and concocting the food, separating the
juices, and in all the other inferior offices of the animal economy. This
lower faculty works night and day, for the security and preservation of
the others. For such is the constitution of human bodies, that if the
lower faculties be out of order, or cease to operate, the superior, which
depend upon them, cannot subsist.

2. The next faculty is the sensitive, diversified by the five perceptions
of seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and feeling, which are all more or
less noble, the one than the other. The sight is more noble than the
hearing, because objects are seen at a much greater distance than they are
heard. The hearing is more noble than the taste, as being capable of
exerting itself at a greater distance. And for the same reason, the taste
and smelling are more noble than the feeling, which is the weakest and
lowest of all.

3. The third order, which is the highest and most noble of all, answers to
the government in the state, and is divided into the reason, the will, and
the memory. These govern and command the faculties, having each a function
distinct from the rest. These are not corporeal, as the others, but
strictly mental faculties; and are, therefore, more noble and excellent.
Besides which, they are also endued with that perfect liberty, that they
cannot be compelled to anything. For who can force the will to desire that
for which it has no mind; or to hate that which it loves? The will is
altogether free, and cannot be forced. These are clothed with virtues
proper to each of them; as the will with righteousness; the understanding
with wisdom; the memory with eloquence, etc. This is the economy settled
by God in human nature.



Chapter XI.


              Of The Obligations Man Lies Under Towards God.


    _What hast thou that thou didst not receive?_—1 COR. 4:7.


There are two very general and comprehensive favors, for which man is
exceedingly obliged to God; the one visible and corporeal, which is this
world; the other spiritual and invisible, which is the love of God.

2. And though this latter is indeed the first, as being the foundation of
all his other blessings, which are no more than infinite rivulets flowing
from this universal fountain of divine love; yet, because it is invisible,
the folly of man hardly considers it as any mercy at all. So that man,
being delighted only with visible things, does not regard or consider that
the love which is concealed under them, is greater and better than the
things themselves. In a word, as smoke is a sign of fire, so are the
blessings of God a certain proof of his love towards us.

3. Since, then, the gifts and blessings of God are, as it were, certain
steps by which to mount up to God himself, it follows, that his love is as
great as his gifts are; and as he made the whole world for the sake of
man, and formed all creatures for his use, and regards them only as they
serve and minister to his beloved creature, man; as he has exalted and
loved him above all creatures, and as this love of God is the most
sincere, pure, safe, and in a word, the highest good, which prompted him
to form and love man, not for any advantage which He was to reap from him,
but out of the overflowings of his free grace and boundless love; from all
these considerations, I say, it is plain that man is more indebted to God
for this love, than for all the particular gifts and favors that God can
bestow, and man receive.

4. There are two things to be considered in every favor: the love that
precedes and influences the giver, and the gift itself, which is the
consequence of that love. The former is not only more noble and valuable
than the latter, but is in all respects equal to the person that shows it.
Hence, it follows, that the love of God is as infinitely good and great as
God himself. This confirms the position first laid down, that man is more
obliged to God for his love, than for any or all of his particular graces
and favors. And as man cannot subsist a moment without the favor and mercy
of God (for on Him his breath and life entirely depend), it is plain that
his obligations to God are greater than those of all the creatures
besides.



Chapter XII.


        Of Answering The Obligations Which Man Lies Under To God.


    _I will love thee, O Lord, my strength._—PS. 18:1.


As God has freely and graciously bestowed all his gifts and blessings on
man, he thereby obliges him to make some satisfaction and return for all
these mercies. Now man can offer and dedicate nothing unto God, but what
is entirely in his own power; so that all his outward goods and riches,
are not a proper offering for God.

2. But as God has bestowed on him his greatest blessing, which is his
love, so he expects to be requited with love again. And as the love of God
to man is in the highest degree of perfection, so the love that he
requires from us ought to be perfect, “with all our heart, with all our
soul, with all our mind, and with all our strength.” Mark 12:30. And how
just this return is, both nature and reason may convince us. For nothing
is more natural and reasonable than to love them that love us, and to
proportion our love to theirs; whosoever does not this, is ungrateful and
unworthy of that love which he refuses to requite. And when God does not
meet with this reciprocal love from man, as he very seldom does, he has
then just reason to complain of injustice and ingratitude; for he requires
nothing from man but love, in return for all that infinite love and mercy
which he has shown to him.

3. Moreover, such is the nature of love, so sweet, so pure, so free, and
so acceptable is it, that neither fear, nor honor, nor any other thing, is
good or desirable, but as it is sweetened with love. No man ever was so
great, as to despise the love of his inferiors; but the greater a man is,
the more does he court the love and esteem of those below him. Yea, so
true is this, that God himself, the most mighty and excellent of all
beings, is so far from despising the love of mankind, that he earnestly
courts and desires it. This then being certain, that love is the greatest
treasure any man has, he is obliged to offer it to God, who has bestowed
the fulness of his love upon man.

4. By what I have here advanced I would not be understood to mean that
this perfect love, since the fall, is wholly in our own power, or that by
it we can make a perfect return to God for all his benefits. My only
design is to show that we are convinced in our own consciences, not only
from the Word of God, but also from the light of nature, that we ought to
love God as he has loved us.



