Chapter XVI.


 A Conflict Is Constantly Maintained In The Christian Between The Spirit
                              And The Flesh.


    _I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my
    mind._—ROM. 7:23.


The two opposite principles in the heart of the real Christian, are spoken
of by the apostle under different names, viz.: _the inward and outward
man_ (2 Cor. 4:16), the _law of the mind_ and the law of the members (Rom.
7:23), and the _flesh and spirit_. “The flesh,” says he, “lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.” Gal. 5:17.

2. When the Spirit conquers the flesh, then man lives in the new nature
and is in God and in Christ: but when the flesh vanquishes the Spirit, and
thus gains the ascendency, then man lives in the devil and in the old
nature; he is under the dominion of the world, and without the kingdom of
God, and, consequently, is called _carnal_. And “to be carnally minded is
death.” Rom. 8:6.

3. It is according to the predominance of either of these principles (the
flesh and the Spirit), that a man obtains his name in Scripture, and is
called _carnal_ or _spiritual_. When the flesh and its sensual lusts are
subdued, it is an indication of the strength of the spirit, and of a man’s
proficiency in the inward life; but if a man be vanquished by the flesh,
it betrays the weakness both of his faith and spirit.

4. Solomon says, “He that ruleth his spirit (his mind), is better than he
that taketh a city.” Prov. 16:32. If, then, thou desirest to be a valiant
conqueror, and to gain an immortal victory, conquer thyself; subdue thy
passions, mortify thy pride, quell thine ambition, and destroy every
inordinate lust with which thou art assailed; and thus shalt thou
overthrow the kingdom of Satan, who, by means of such sins, ruleth in the
world. Many have signalized themselves by the capture of towns and cities;
but, alas! how few are they who, in a higher sense, may be denominated
_conquerors of the world_!

5. If thou yieldest too far to the flesh, thou destroyest thy soul. It is
surely better that the soul overcome, and that the body also be preserved,
than that, the body overcoming, both body and soul should be destroyed
together.

6. This contest, though attended with various trials and difficulties,
will, however, issue in a glorious victory and a heavenly crown: “Be thou
faithful unto death,” saith the Captain of our salvation, “and I will give
thee a crown of life.” Rev. 2:10. And the disciple that lay in his bosom
tells us, “This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.”
1 John 5:4. Thou wilt say, What is it to overcome the world? We answer, It
is the world within us, which is here principally meant. Overcome thy
_self_, and then the victory over the world is thine.

7. Some may, perhaps, be here ready to inquire, “What, if sin sometimes
closely beset me, and bear me away against my will; must I be excluded
from the number of God’s children, according to that saying of St. John,
‘He that committeth sin is of the devil’?” 1 John 3:8. To this it must be
replied: If thou feelest the conflict of the Spirit against the flesh, and
art grieved that thou sometimes doest things which thou wouldst not, it is
an evidence that, amidst the infirmities which encompass thee, thy faith
and thy spirit struggle against the flesh, and are opposed to it. St. Paul
himself teaches us that this warfare has place even in godly and believing
souls, when he says, “I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind (that is, against the new, inward man), and bringing me
into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members” (Rom. 7:23); thus
causing him sometimes to do the things which he would not. To will, was
present with him; but to perform the good which he would, he was not
always able; inasmuch as he could not do of himself the good which he
would, while to do the evil which he would not, was always easy to him.
Hence he exclaims, “O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?” Rom. 7:24. And to this agrees what Christ himself
says: “The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.” Matt. 26:41;
Mark 14:38.

8. As long, therefore, as this _conflict_ is felt in man, sin cannot be
said to _rule_ in him; for he who is continually fighting against sin,
resists its struggles for dominion; and sin cannot destroy the man who
opposes the attempts which it makes upon the soul.

9. It is the experience of all the saints, that they alike have sin,
according to the word of St. John: “If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves.” 1 John 1:8. It is not, however, the _indwelling_ sin
that condemns a man, but the _reigning_ sin. The sin with which we
contend, and to the commission of which we do not consent, is not imputed
to us; as St. Paul says: “There is therefore now no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit” (Rom. 8:1); that is, who do not permit the flesh to rule. But as
for those who are altogether strangers to this spiritual strife, this
combat of the flesh and Spirit, they are not born again, but are under the
_reigning_ influence of sin; they remain the servants of sin and Satan,
and are, consequently, damned; for “the law of the Spirit of life” hath
not made them “free from the law of sin and death” (Rom. 8:2), so long as
they thus suffer sin to rule over them, and to “reign in their mortal
body.”

10. All this is illustrated in Josh. 16:10. The remnant of the Canaanites
were permitted to dwell amongst the children of Israel, but not to have
dominion over them; and thus the Israel of God feel their remaining
imperfections, but do not allow them to gain the pre-eminence. To preserve
this pre-eminence is the duty of the new man in Christ, whose name is
Israel (that is, _a prince of God_) (Gen. 32:28); and who, as a _prince_,
hath power with God, and shall at last prevail.

11. This daily strife with the old man, is an encouraging evidence of the
existence of the new man; for it plainly indicates that there are two
contending principles in him who is the subject of it. The strength of the
spirit and the victory succeeding it, demonstrate the true Israelite; and
the warfare of the spirit indicates the real Christian. The land of Canaan
cannot indeed be gained without war: but when the flesh, like the
Canaanite of old, invades the territories of the spirit, it then becomes
the part of the spiritual and true Israel not to submit to such a master;
but, after true repentance and remission of sin, to collect new strength
in Christ, and by the grace of God to rise again from his fall, and
earnestly implore Jesus, our true Joshua, to vanquish for him and in him,
the spiritual Canaanite, the enemy of his soul. When this is accomplished,
the sinner is not only forgiven and restored to favor, but he is likewise
refreshed and strengthened in Christ, his great Captain in this spiritual
combat. With regard, therefore, to such as continue to feel many
infirmities in the flesh, and who cannot do the things which they would, I
exhort them to cleave to Jesus as sincere penitents, and to cover their
blemishes with his perfect obedience. It is in this order, and in this
order alone, that the imputation of Christ’s merits becomes salutary and
effectual; that is, when a man forsakes his sin, and by daily repentance
strives against it; repairs his former losses, and guards against future
temptations. But while the sinner remains a stranger to brokenness of
heart on account of transgression; while he continues to gratify the
unholy propensities of the flesh, nothing can be more absurd than for him
to suppose that the merits of Christ are imputed to him; for how can the
blood of Christ benefit him who treads it under foot? Heb. 10:29.




