Chapter IV.


         Of The Sun, Moon, And Stars, The Work Of The Fourth Day.


    _See_ GEN. 1:14; PS. 104:19.


The stars are bright heavenly bodies, fixed in the firmament of heaven by
the word of the Most High. They enlighten the earth, distinguish the night
from the day, and adorn the heavens; and they are signs and tokens of
nature, of judgment, of mercy, of seasons, days, and years. 1 Cor. 15:41;
Gen. 1:14.

2. “Lift up your eyes on high,” saith God, “and behold who hath created
these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all
by names.” Isa. 41:26. We ought, therefore, according to his command, to
contemplate these glorious works of his hands, and learn thence to admire
and adore the power and wisdom of him who made them. For “the heavens
declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handywork.” Ps.
19:1.

3. With regard to the magnitude of the sun and moon, St. Basil thus speaks
in his sixth Homily upon the works of the six days: “I conceive that the
sun and moon are styled by Moses great lights, not only because they
exceed the lesser stars in magnitude; but because they are so exceedingly
large that they can fill not only the whole heaven, but even the earth and
seas with their light. And as they always appear equally large, both in
their rising and setting, it follows that they must be incredibly large;
because notwithstanding the whole breadth of the earth, they always appear
of equal size.”

4. If a man were to see a globe of fire as large as a vast mountain, or a
large city in flames, moving to and fro in the air, he would look upon it
with astonishment and terror. Now it is demonstrable that the globe of the
sun is many times greater than the earth; whence we may conjecture how
great and inconceivable a space in the heavens the sun must take up. Yea,
the least of the stars in the firmament of heaven are very vast in
compass, and are greater than the earth; and yet in the firmament there
are many thousands of these stars, which by reason of their vast distance
cannot be discerned by us with the naked eye.

5. Here human reason is at a stand; for no created mind can conceive of
the dimensions of heaven. Hence it is that the Holy Scripture, speaking of
God’s infinite compassion, compares it to the greatness of heaven. “For as
the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that
fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
transgressions from us.” Ps. 103:11, 12. For though “the earth is full of
the goodness of the Lord” (Ps. 33:5), yet is the compass of it too small
to be compared with the infinite goodness of God. Hence the Holy Spirit
bids us look up to the height of heaven, furnished with innumerable
glorious bodies, all full of the goodness of God, and vastly larger than
this lower world.

6. Moreover, the incomprehensible greatness of the divine power is
manifested, not only in the bulk of the heavenly bodies, but also in their
constant and regular revolutions; for who can observe without wonder and
admiration, such prodigious bodies, not only pendent in the air, but
moving up and down in it with constant regularity? And how great and
incomprehensible a space must they have to perform their courses in, and
at the same time so determined and settled, that they never exceed their
appointed limits, nor interfere with each other in their revolutions?
David truly pronounces, that God “by wisdom made the heavens.” Ps. 136:5.
How excellent, how transcendently excellent must that wisdom be, which can
guide and govern the infinite host of heaven with such admirable order,
and call them all by their names?

7. It is wonderful also, that these vast shining bodies should have, as it
were, a motion in themselves, so that they cannot for one moment, stand
still in their courses; for the whole heavenly order would then be
disturbed, and the stars themselves, together with their motion, would
lose their vital power, even as men die, when the motion of their lungs
fails. The least star never stands still, but is perpetually in quick and
inconceivable motion.

8. If the motion of one planet only be so stupendous, what shall we say of
that innumerable multitude of stars, each of which has its particular
course and revolution? And if any man could but for an hour take a view of
all their distinct motions, he would be able to unfold to us very
surprising things.

9. The consideration of the motions and multitude of these stars may
remind us of those bright and invisible stars, the angels of God. This
seems to be hinted in the Revelation of St. John, where the Son of God
appears with seven stars in his hand (Rev. 1:16), which are the seven
spirits or angels sent forth into all the earth. To this the Book of Job
alludes, “When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy” (Job 38:7): by which the writer leads us from the natural
stars to the holy angels. For if God has created so great a multitude of
stars, who can doubt that he has a much greater multitude of celestial
spirits, who praise him without ceasing?—“Praise ye him, sun and moon;
praise him, all ye stars of light.” Ps. 148:3.

10. The revolution of the heavens is, by the all-wise Creator, appointed
as the measure of time; in which appear the stupendous providence,
economy, and wisdom of God. To this head we are to refer the ages of the
world, and their distinct epochs, the ending of monarchies, the seventy
years of the Babylonish captivity, Daniel’s seventy weeks, the periods of
kingdoms, and the times of Antichrist, both in the book of Daniel and the
Revelation, with other things of the same nature, which wonderfully
confirm and illustrate the providence and wisdom of God. And whereas our
Saviour tells us, that “it is not for us to know the times or the seasons
which the Father hath put in his own power” (Acts 1:7); this is to be
understood of such a knowledge only as was foreign to the duty of an
apostle, not serving either to the edification of the church, or the
propagation of the Gospel. The words also may mean that no time or place
ought to be prescribed to our blessed Lord for the erecting and
establishing of his kingdom; of which he himself is the only proper judge.
Our business is only to be witnesses of his kingdom, and to do our best to
promote it, leaving the times and seasons to God alone. Moreover, the
disciples at that time, had wrong views of the nature and design of his
kingdom, and those words may be looked upon as a proper rebuke of their
erroneous opinions about a temporal kingdom.

11. And as for the times and seasons of our worldly affairs, even these
are under the disposal and direction of God, whensoever we devoutly submit
our concerns to him, begging his direction and assistance; as plainly
appears in the case of Abraham’s servant, who prayed to God, that he would
“send him good speed that day.” Gen. 24:12.

12. Our blessed Saviour argues with the Jews from those signs in the
heavens, which the common experience of the times had remarked (Matt.
16:2, 3; Luke 12:54-56), thereby leading them to observations of a higher
nature, and putting them in mind of those signs which were to usher in and
attend the appearance of the Messiah. The words in St. Matthew are these:
“When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather; for the sky is red.
And in the morning, It will be foul weather to-day, for the sky is red and
lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye
not discern the signs of the times?” So that our Saviour’s conclusion runs
thus: If ye attend to the natural signs, and by the face of the sky can
judge rightly of the weather, why do ye not attend to the signs of the
present period, and conclude that the times of the Messiah are come?

13. The words in St. Luke run thus: “When ye see a cloud rise out of the
west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is. And when ye
see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it cometh to
pass. Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth;
but how is it that ye do not discern this time?” So that our Lord
concludes thus: As by the natural signs of heaven, ye judge rightly of the
weather, because ye see the effect follow; so by the signs and miracles
which ye see, ye ought to be convinced, that the Messiah is really come.
But, hypocrites as ye are, ye retain the one, and neglect the other,
though of the highest importance to you.

14. As to the operations of heaven, we must first observe, that they have
nothing in their own nature hurtful to mankind, as some pretenders would
persuade us; but that our sins and wickedness are the true cause why God
arms the creatures unto vengeance, and makes use of them to punish a
rebellious world. Thus he punished the sins of the old world by a rain of
forty days, which caused the flood. Gen. 7:12. And thus the sin of Sodom
drew down fire and brimstone from heaven. Gen. 19:24.

15. In the same manner we are punished even at this day; sometimes by
excessive heats; at other times by violent cold, rains, or drought; at
other times by thunder, hail, fire, insects, or infected air, which like
the fire that destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, fall from heaven. But as the
Egyptian plagues had no power over the children of Israel (Exod. 8:22), so
these punishments never hurt the children of God, if they live in his
faith and fear. Thus it is said, “The Lord is thy shade upon thy right
hand; the sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.” Ps.
121:5, 6. The same Psalm advises us, to “lift up our eyes unto the hills,
from whence cometh our help,” that by the grace and favor of God we may
escape these evils.

16. And as God makes use of the heavens and heavenly bodies, as
instruments of vengeance against the wicked, so he employs them sometimes
as means of protection and blessing to the righteous. Thus we read, “They
fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera”
(Judg. 5:20): not unlike to which, is the story of the Emperor Theodosius,
whose enemies were routed by a sudden tempest of wind and rain.

17. The productions of heaven God in his due time dispenses out of his
treasures, for the benefit and advantage of this lower world; God so
disposing and ordering things, that the inferior creatures receive of the
superior, and all nature hangs together, as it were, in one chain. And
this connection of nature and providence is finely described by the
prophet Hosea, “It shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, I will
hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear
the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.” Hosea
2:21, 22. In this place the prophet presents us with the entire order of
nature, beginning at the first cause, which is God. “I (saith he) will
hear the heavens,” namely, when, in the great drought, the heaven shall
scorch with excessive heat, and the channel of the heavenly influences
shall, as it were, be dried up, so that they cannot convey fruitful
seasons to the earth: then I will hear the distress of the heavens, I will
cover them with clouds.

18. And whereas the prophet adds, “The heavens shall hear the earth,” that
has relation to the secondary causes. For as the earth depends on the
heavens, it follows, that when the operations of the heavens are, as it
were, hindered, the earth can produce nothing that is good. And when the
earth is broken or chapped by excessive heat, it, as it were, opens its
mouth and entreats for rain. “And the earth shall hear the corn, and wine,
and oil;” that is, forasmuch as the vegetables depend upon the earth for
their moisture; therefore, whensoever the earth is dry and cannot supply
them with nourishment, the vegetables solicit moisture of it, as a thirsty
infant would appeal to its mother.

19. I proceed, next, to the benefits which God bestows upon us by the
light of the sun and moon. And these we must consider in the fear of God,
and show how we may enjoy and use them, both in a natural and spiritual
sense. “Tell me (saith God to Job), where is the way where light dwelleth?
and as for darkness, where is the place thereof? Canst thou bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring
forth Mazzaroth in his season, or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?
Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? Canst thou set the dominion thereof
in the earth? Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance
of waters may cover thee?” Job 38:19, 31-34. In these words God represents
to us his infinite power and wisdom, such as no mortal can search out or
account for, much less imitate. For so unable is the wisest man to form
light or darkness, that he cannot so much as produce a blade of grass.
“Not unto us (then), O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory”
(Ps. 115:1); for thou hast made all these things, and thy hand hath formed
them. “He appointed the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down”
(Ps. 104:19); alluding to the work of the fourth day, when God said, “Let
there be lights in the firmament of heaven, to divide the day from the
night: and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for
years. And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night; he made the stars also.” Gen.
1:14-16.

20. How wonderful is the increase and decrease of the moon; sometimes it
seems to be shut up in darkness, and again, in its season, to emerge by
degrees into a fulness of light. And these varieties God hath appointed
for a regular distinction of the times and seasons of the year, and of the
affairs and business of mankind. Without this distinction of the months
and other divisions of time, there could be no order in the church of God,
or in civil governments, or in the economy of private families; but all
would be disorder and confusion.

21. And how abundantly is the wisdom of God displayed, even in this
certain course of the moon, and distinction of seasons! In all states and
conditions, the chief part of prudence is to preserve good order, and to
observe the proper opportunities of acting; these are the distinguishing
accomplishments of a wise ruler, and of a prudent head of a family. This,
indeed, is the principal thing to be regarded in every action; he that
acts unseasonably, acts to little or no purpose. God himself hath ordered
all things in measure, and number, and weight; and every season has its
proper opportunities and blessings attending it. “To every thing there is
a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.” Eccles. 3:1. And
as the choosing of the proper season is truly a happiness, so it is also a
blessing from God, of whom, therefore, we ought to ask it by prayer.

22. By the words, “The sun knoweth his going down” (Ps. 104:19); the royal
prophet suggests to us the seasons of the year, spring, summer, autumn,
winter, and the distinguishing of days, being some longer, and some
shorter; all which are of very great use to mankind.

23. And who can consider these amazing acts of divine power and wisdom,
without admiration and praise to the Author of nature? This astonishing
order of nature appeared so glorious to the ancient heathens, that they
worshipped even the sun for their God, as being the greatest and most
splendid of all objects, and as enlightening all the world. This was a
conclusion for blind, corrupt reason to draw, though every part of the
creation, to pure and right reason, fully manifests and discovers the
being and excellencies of the Creator. A certain Indian king having heard
of Jesus Christ, and the necessity of believing in him, because he died
for us, gave this answer: “For my part, I had rather believe in the sun
that never dies, than in a mortal God.” This was the effect of human
blindness, against the corrupt influences and prejudices of which, God has
taken particular care to warn us: “Lest thou lift up thine eyes unto
heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all
the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them,
which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole
heaven.” Deut. 4:19.

24. As to the magnitude of the sun, moon, and stars, it is an error to
imagine that they are really no larger than they appear to us. For though
the moon and some of the planets are less than the earth, yet the sun may
be plainly and infallibly demonstrated to be many times larger; and that
it appears so small to us, is owing to the immensity of its distance.
Ocular demonstration convinces every man of this, that the more remote any
object is, the less it appears. A nice disquisition of these matters the
unlearned must leave to astronomers, and be content religiously to admire
what they do not understand.

25. And, here, how ought we to magnify and adore the omnipotence and
wisdom of God, who appointed the sun to be the light and ornament of the
day, and the moon of the night. For light is the highest beauty of all
things. If we highly admire a well-built house with a fair prospect,
furnished with good statues and pictures, and painted with great variety
of colors, how much more ought we to look up with gratitude and
astonishment to heaven, adorned with lights so many, and so stupendous.

26. How profound is the wisdom of God, who “telleth the number of the
stars, and calleth them all by their names” (Ps. 147:4, 5); to which is
immediately subjoined, “Great is our Lord, and of great power; his
understanding is infinite.” How ought we then to depend upon this wisdom,
and be satisfied with all its determinations concerning us, and not charge
him with folly, by pretending to be wiser than He is! “For the foolishness
of God is wiser than men.” 1 Cor. 1:25.

27. The certain and regular course of the sun and moon, reminds us of the
truth of God, and the certainty of his promises: such are those of sending
the Messiah, of the revolutions of certain states and kingdoms, and other
deliverances of mankind; all which appeared in their time. Thus saith the
Lord by the prophet Jeremiah, “If my covenant be not with day and night,
and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; and if ye
can break my covenant, that there should not be day and night in their
season; then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant.” Jer.
33:20, 21, 25.

28. At our blessed Saviour’s passion, the darkness that overspread the
world did, as it were, represent the terrors of his death, and all those
barbarous impieties that were acted against him (Matt. 27:45); for the sun
and moon were then as mirrors, in which might be read the sins and
iniquities of mankind; which, like the sin of Sodom, mounted up to heaven,
and drew down vengeance upon the world. Gen. 18:20. So every eclipse of
the sun points out to us that internal and spiritual blindness of heart
which reigns in every one of us; and that as plainly as if a voice should
call to us, saying, “Look upon me, for you yourselves are in the same
condition.” And when the heaven is red as blood, and seems to be on fire,
it appears to speak to us in words like these: “Look up to me, and think
on that day when I shall burn with real flames.” So, in short, we may
consider all things as upbraiding us with our iniquities, and warning us
to repent. What is the thunder, but the terrible voice of heaven, at which
the earth trembles, and by which God speaks to the impenitent world? What
is an earthquake, but a lecture of repentance? The same may be said of
storms and tempests at sea, and of all disorders in the inanimate
creation.

29. The sun, moon, and stars, are witnesses of the divine goodness, and of
that eternal light which enlightens, comforts, and refreshes every man
that cometh into the world. For as God is in himself invisible and
incomprehensible, we should, by the direction of the natural light, aspire
to the knowledge of Him that made it; and by the beauty of the created, be
drawn to the love of the uncreated light. And as we naturally take
pleasure in the outward light, as the most beautiful object in the
creation; so ought we, with our whole hearts, to love Him who is light
eternal, and to walk and rejoice in his light, by withdrawing ourselves
from the darkness of sin. “For what fellowship hath righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? and what
concord hath Christ with Belial?” 2 Cor. 6:14, 15.

30. Lastly, the visible sun should put us in mind of Jesus Christ, the
spiritual and eternal “Sun of righteousness.” Mal. 4:2. For as that shines
equally upon all men; so Christ freely bestows himself, and the light of
his grace, upon all that will receive him. Thus he saith, “I am the light
of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life.” John 8:12.



