Chapter XXXII.


  Great Gifts Do Not Demonstrate A Man To Be A Christian, But Faith That
                              Works By Love.


    _The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power._—1 COR. 4:20.


St. Paul, intending to describe a Christian in a few words, says: “The end
of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned.” 1 Tim. 1:5. As if he had said: To be
a Christian, and to render ourselves acceptable in the sight of God,
requires nothing hard and lofty; no worldly wisdom, no human learning, no
great parts, no gift of prophesying, no eloquence, no knowledge of
tongues, no miracles: but only that a man have faith in Christ; that he do
all things in love, and with a mind wholly resigned to God; and that he
suffer himself to be led and governed by the good Spirit of God.

2. We should not, therefore, regard how many languages a man speaks, or
how eloquent he is in his delivery; but how he shows forth his faith by
love, and by the mortification of the flesh. “For they that are Christ’s
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts” (Gal. 5:24): under
which are included self-esteem, self-love, covetousness, vain-boasting,
ambition, self-interest, and all else that is carnal. To which purpose
also St. Paul says, that “the kingdom of God is not in word,” or in great
gifts and endowments, “but in power” (1 Cor. 4:20); that is, in a living
exercise of Christian virtues, of faith, love, meekness, patience, and
humility.

3. Therefore, no man is in favor with God, or is saved, because he is
endued with brighter gifts than others; but because he is found in Christ
Jesus by faith, and lives in him as a new creature. 2 Cor. 5:17. Great
gifts do not make us happy. If a man had attained to gifts so
extraordinary and marvellous as never any possessed before, yet would he
be certainly cast away, unless he lived at the same time in the exercise
of daily repentance in Christ, in a ready abnegation of the world, and in
a denial of himself, and of all his selfish desires. Nay, if he did not
hate and forsake himself, so as to place his whole confidence in God
alone, and to cleave to his grace, as an infant to the breast of the
mother, he would be forever banished from the presence of God,
notwithstanding all his gifts and all his endowments.

4. It is certain that gifts and parts are not bestowed upon us in order to
make us great here, and happy hereafter; but they are wholly dispensed for
the edification of the Church. When the seventy disciples, at their
return, said with joy, “Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through
thy name” (Luke 10:17, 20); our Lord replied: “In this rejoice not (for
neither miracles nor gifts shall save you), but rejoice rather because
your names are written in heaven.” By faith Moses was saved, not by his
miracles. Aaron’s eloquence did not the more endear him to God. And
Miriam, the sister of Moses, who was endued with the gift of prophecy, and
by whom the Spirit of the Lord spoke, was struck with the leprosy. Numb.
12:10.

5. The apostles themselves did not enter into the kingdom of heaven
because of the miracles which they performed, nor on account of the gift
of tongues conferred upon them, but because they _believed_ in Christ, the
Saviour of the world. Those of the first rank, and those of the meanest
condition, must tread in the same way of faith and humility, of repentance
and mortification, and become new creatures in Christ through faith and
love; in whom Christ also may live again by this faith. Whoever neglects
this order, cannot expect to be accounted one of the family of Christ.

6. Christian love is that new vital principle by which a man is actuated
to do good. This is attended with the life of Christ, and the powerful
indwelling of the divine Spirit. To this purpose the apostle desires, that
we may be filled with all the fulness of God (Eph. 3:19): and St. John
tells us, that “God is love, and that he who dwelleth in love, dwelleth in
God, and God in him.” 1 John 4:16. Whoever, therefore, feels the love of
God shed abroad in his heart, feels no less than God himself there.
However, in order that we might not deceive ourselves with a false and
hypocritical, instead of a true and divine love, the apostle has drawn up
the character thereof, and represented it as a tree adorned with numerous
branches: “Love,” says he, “is patient, kind,” etc. 1 Cor. 13. All which
are the essential properties of Christians, and consequently the life of
the new man.

7. To sum up all in a few words, God the Father is love, God the Son is
love, God the Holy Ghost is love. The whole spiritual body of Christ,
which is the Church, is also knit together by the bond of love; so that
there is but one God, one Christ, one Spirit, one baptism, one faith (Eph.
4:5, 6); and lastly, eternal life itself shall be nothing else but eternal
love.

8. Whoever, therefore, does not live in love, is certainly a dead member
of the body of Christ. As a dead member is not supported by that natural
heat which nourishes the body and every living member thereof, nor is
sustained with proper food for its daily growth and increase; so a man who
does not live in Christian love is destitute of spiritual life, and is
dead to God and to Christ. He is without faith, a withered, lifeless
branch; he has no part in God, in Christ, and the Holy Ghost, in the holy
Christian Church, and in life eternal; and will be excluded from the
presence of that GOD, who has declared himself to be LOVE.




Chapter XXXIII.


God Has No Respect To The Works Of Any One; But Judges Of Works According
                              To The Heart.


    _Every way of a man is right in his own eyes; but the Lord
    pondereth the hearts_.—PROV. 21:2.


When the prophet Samuel, by the commandment of God, went to anoint David
king, he entered the house of Jesse, and offered to anoint his first-born:
but the Lord said to him: “Look not on his countenance, or on the height
of his stature; because I have refused him. For the Lord seeth not as man
seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on
the heart.” 1 Sam. 16:7.

2. By this example God declares, on the one hand, that he has no regard to
any man’s person, be he ever so great and eminent, when his heart is
destitute of piety, love, faith, and humility; and on the other, that he
esteems persons and works according to the inward spirit and intention of
the mind, and thence allows or disallows them, according to Prov. 21:2.
Moreover, all gifts and endowments, how considerable soever they be, and
how admirable, great, and glorious they may appear in the eyes of men, in
nowise please the Lord, unless they be accompanied with a pure heart, a
heart that has a steady respect to the honor of God and the profit and
edification of our neighbor; and which, at the same time, is freed from
pride and arrogance, from self-love, and self-interest, and any of those
sinister views which are apt to mingle with the works of a Christian.

3. Consider the example of Lucifer, the fairest and most glorious angel
which heaven contained. No sooner did he stain the gifts of God with
self-love and self-honor (not considering that he was bound to advance
thereby the glory of God, who had conferred them upon him), than he was
transformed into a devil, and, being cast down from heaven, was shut out
from the glorious presence of God.

4. If ever, therefore, our works shall be acceptable to God, they ought to
proceed from pure faith towards God, and sincere love to our neighbor,
being cleared from the spots of self-love, self-honor, and self-interest,
as much as possibly can be in this state of infirmity. To this end St.
Paul says, “Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have
not charity, I am become as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal” (1 Cor.
13:1): that is, I am altogether vain and unprofitable. In truth, God
regards not fluency of speech, but an humble heart; not arts, learning,
wit, or ability, but he weighs the _spirit_ of a man, whether it be bent
upon promoting its own honor and interest, or the glory of God and the
profit of men. Nor does God regard a faith by which mountains might be
removed, and the eyes of the beholders be attracted from all sides, if a
man seek thereby his own honor and glory. But the Lord looks with the
greater affection upon him who “is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at his word.” Isaiah 66:2. In short, if a man distribute all that
he has to the poor, or give up his body to be burned, it will be all to no
purpose, if the act be sullied with self-honor and self-complacency. It is
the heart only and the inward intention of the mind, which the Lord
regards. This fully appears from many instances recorded in Scripture.

5. Both David and Saul attended the service of God, but with a different
effect. 1 Sam. 15:9; 2 Sam. 24:25. David, Manasseh (2 Chron. 33:13),
Nebuchadnezzar, and Peter, after repentance, obtained mercy; Saul,
Pharaoh, and Judas, on the contrary, fell short of it, on account of the
different principle which swayed their minds. Pharaoh (Exod. 9:27) and
Saul (1 Sam. 15:24), no less than Manasseh, used the same prayer, “Lord, I
have sinned!” but they received different rewards. The prayer of Hezekiah,
Joshua, and Gideon (Isa. 38:7; Josh. 10:12; Judg. 6:37), by which they
required a sign from heaven, is approved and praised; the Pharisees doing
the same are rejected and reproved. Matt. 12:38; 16:4. The Publican and
the Pharisee prayed both in the temple; but both are not approved. Luke
18:14. The Ninevites fasted (Jonah 3:5, 10); the Jews and Pharisees did
the same (Matt. 6:16): but the former were received, and the latter
rejected. “Wherefore (say they) have we fasted, and thou seest not?” Isa.
58:3. The poor widow, who cast into the treasury but two mites, is praised
by Christ; whereas, he that gave more is not. Luke 21:3. Herod and
Zaccheus both rejoice at the sight of Christ; but they had most different
rewards. Luke 19:6; 23:8.

6. All this proceeds from no other cause than the heart, and that moving
principle by which it is swayed, and which God chiefly regards. He accepts
those works only which flow from unfeigned faith, sincere love, and true
humility; for whatever our gifts or works may be, if pride, self-love, and
the contagion of filthy lucre, infect them, they are at once rejected by
the Lord.




