Part II.


                        Treating Specially Of Man.



Chapter I.


                   God, An Infinite And Eternal Being.


    _Ah, Lord God! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by
    thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too
    hard for thee._—_The Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of hosts, is
    his name; great in counsel, and mighty in work._—JER. 32:17-19.


God is the origin of the life and being of all creatures: whence it
follows, that he was before all creatures, both an eternal Being, and
eternal Life itself; otherwise he could not have given life and being to
his creatures. But the infinity of God yet more plainly appears from the
mind and thoughts of man. For as the mind of man can in a moment run
through the whole circle of heaven, and comprehend in imagination all the
creatures of the universe; it follows, that God who made him, comprehends
all these things in a more perfect manner, and by consequence must be
infinite.

2. All the attributes of God are essential to him. As therefore he is
infinite, so are his essence and life also infinite. For essence and life
are inseparable from him. Moreover, as he has endued the soul of man with
wisdom and understanding, it follows that the understanding and wisdom of
God must be infinite. For whatsoever is in God, is essentially and
eternally in him. And as the unity of the divine nature is so perfect that
his wisdom cannot be separated from his essence and life, it follows that
both are alike infinite and eternal.

3. But if the wisdom of God be eternal and infinite, it will follow that
He knoweth all things from eternity. Moreover, as his essence is
unchangeable, equally filling all places; so his understanding does not
proceed by way of rational connection, or discursive operation from one
idea to another. He knoweth and understandeth all things in an instant,
and to him there is nothing past or to come, but the whole circle of
eternity is present to him. For as God stands in need of no creature to
add anything to the perfection of his being, so neither does he need any
creature with respect to his understanding. And as he is God,
independently of all creatures; so he penetrates and comprehends all
things in himself. So that the sands of the sea, and the drops of the
rain, and eternity, are alike known to him. And not so much as a bird of
the air, or a hair of our heads, can fall to the ground without him. Matt.
10:29, 30. He knoweth the days of the world, every hour and moment of
time, with its several periods and revolutions; nor is anything under the
heavens hidden from him. For as by his infinite power he created all
things, so by his infinite wisdom he understands and comprehends all
things; even the most secret thoughts of man. Ps. 139:2, &c.

4. Moreover, as his essence, life, and wisdom, so also his power is
infinite, and all are equally incapable of any addition or diminution.
Lastly, forasmuch as no creature can oppose or set bounds to his power,
therefore, he is Almighty. All which must necessarily be, forasmuch as his
essence, life, wisdom, and power, are inseparable.



Chapter II.


                          God, The Supreme Good.


    _For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things._—ROM.
    11:36.


As He must be the chief and only good, in whom all good things are
contained; it follows that glory and praise belong to God alone, because
from him, and by him, and for him, are all things.

2. All the goodness that is found scattered up and down among the
creatures, is in a most perfect and excellent manner and degree contained
in him. So that whosoever turns himself to the creatures, and cleaves unto
them, will always find himself poor, needy, and distressed: whilst he that
turneth unto God with his whole heart, pursues the chief and most perfect
good, and shall be blessed in the enjoyment of it: ever rich, ever at
ease, ever blessed in the fruition of his God. By this it appears that
perfect happiness is not to be found in the enjoyment of the creatures,
and that they who fix their hearts and desires on the world, can expect
nothing but anguish, disquiet, and disappointments, both in life and in
death; for they have not that chief good, which alone can satisfy and make
happy the soul of man.



Chapter III.


  Man, The Most Noble Of All Creatures, And Made For The Service Of God.


    _Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and
    not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his
    pasture._—PS. 100:3.


All the creatures, in their several kinds and orders, were created by God
for the use and benefit of man. Thus we see corn and pasture produced,
these feeding the living creatures, and all serving for food to mankind.
One assists another, the higher wheel setting the lower in motion, and all
in a wonderful harmony concurring to one great end, which is the use and
benefit of man.

2. Now, if all this be for his sake, he is certainly more noble than they
all; and hence he should learn what dependence he has upon God, and what
duty and service he owes to Him who has appointed all the creatures, in
their order, to minister to his necessities.

3. And, as all the creatures seem to aim at no other end than the use and
service of man, and seem to rest and be satisfied in obtaining that end;
so ought man likewise to show the same diligence and faithfulness in the
service of God, that the creatures show to him. All his works and labors
ought to be directed to this one end, namely, to accomplish the will of
God, and do nothing but that which is well-pleasing in his sight. For as
all things are incessantly employed in serving man, the noblest of all
creatures, so there is all the reason in the world that he should be as
constant and assiduous in the service of God, who is perfection itself,
and to whom alone he is indebted for that superiority which he has over
the rest of the creatures.



