Chapter XXXV.


   All Wisdom, Arts, And Sciences, Yea, Even The Knowledge Of The Whole
         Scripture, Are Vain, Without A Holy And Christian Life.


    _Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
    the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father
    which is in heaven._—MATTH. 7:21.


Since in Love are contained all the duties of a Christian, and since the
whole life of Christ was nothing but the purest and most cordial love,
therefore St. Paul, under the name of charity or love, has comprehended
the whole life of a Christian. 1 Cor. 13:1.

2. It is the property of true love, to respect _God_ alone in everything,
and not _self_. It refers all to God; it does not love or honor self; it
is not intent upon personal glory or interest; but it undertakes
everything with a free and disinterested regard to God and man. He who is
endued with Christian love, loves God and his neighbor with pure
affection, because God is the sovereign Good, to which we ought to adhere.

3. Whoever, therefore, is destitute of this love, must of necessity prove
a hypocrite amidst all his pretences and boasts. In whatever he
undertakes, he seeks himself, and not purely God, as he ought to do. For
this reason, his love is false, be his boasts what they may. If such a man
had all the Scriptures committed to memory, and could speak of them with
the tongue of angels, yet would he still prove as sounding brass, without
life and motion. For as no natural food can nourish the body, unless it be
converted into the juices and the blood; so also the Word and the
Sacraments are unavailing, if they be not converted into a man’s life; and
if a new, spiritual, and holy man, be not begotten thereby.

4. Hence St. Paul says, “Though I have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have all faith,
so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.” 1
Cor. 13:2. As if he had said, If I pursue mine own honor by those gifts
and attainments, and seek anything besides the honor of God, and the good
of my neighbor, then I am an abomination before the Lord, and not at all
acceptable in his sight.

5. This is intimated by that saying of our Lord: “Many will say to me in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name
have cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then
will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work
iniquity” (Matt. 7:22, 23): for you have not respected me alone in what
you have done, but rather your own selves.

6. This is again attested by St. Paul: “Though I bestow all my goods to
feed the poor, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.” 2 Cor.
13:3. But can it be possible (some may say), to give all to the poor, and
yet be destitute at the same time of love or charity? Yes; there may be a
love which is not altogether single in what it performs, but biased by
impure designs, and by some temporal interest, or the applause of men, or
any such selfish objects, whereby the best of actions are too often
corrupted. Of this nature was the charity of the Pharisees of old, who
offered abundance of sacrifices, and persuaded others to adorn the temple
with magnificent gifts, and to bring sacrifices of great price. But whilst
they suffered themselves to be led away by pride and ambition, which
mingled with their very worship, they forgot to show mercy to the poor,
and to practise that “undefiled religion,” whereby the fatherless and the
widows are to be supported and visited. James 1:27. For this preposterous
charity, the Lord reproved them, saying: “Woe unto you, scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence
make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.” Matt.
23:14. In this perverse religion they have many followers, even at this
time. Such are those who bequeath large legacies to temples and
monasteries, that priests and friars who enjoy them, may make long prayers
for such as bestow them. This truly is a false and deceitful love; for
those who perform these acts, do not so much regard the honor of God as
their own.

7. He that is _justified_, shall live by his _faith_ (Habak. 2:4); and
whosoever is thus justified, lives in true repentance, and by daily
mortification of his flesh, becomes himself a _sacrifice_ unto the Lord.
Rom. 12:1. He spends his time in continual acts of love and charity;
flowing from a disinterested principle, free from self-honor and
self-love, and entirely directed to advancing the glory of God. Therefore,
O man, if thou even yieldest thy body to be burnt, and yet art void at the
same time of this pure and sincere love, thou doest nothing in all such
performances. And what do they profit themselves, who torture their
bodies? They generally are puffed up with a conceit of their singular
sanctity, and, thus setting forth their own pompous religion and
will-worship, they do not regard God in what they do, so much as catch at
the applause of men. Isa. 58:3; Zech. 7:5, 6. Nay, some are blinded to
such a degree by the spirit of delusion and error, as to suffer themselves
to be burnt in defence of conceits such as these. They expect thereby to
be enrolled in the list of such martyrs as were slain for the sake of
Christ and the Gospel; when in truth they seek not Christ, but themselves,
and rise not to defend _his_ honor, but their own erroneous opinions. This
is called by St. Paul, a strong _delusion_, and a _working of Satan_. 2
Thess. 2:9, 11. It is not the punishment, but the cause, which makes a
martyr.

8. Such martyrs as these the devil has had even amongst the heathens
themselves; many of whom were so far blinded in their understandings, as
contentedly to die for the defence of their idols, and false, heathenish
religion. And is not the same done at this day amongst those who call
themselves Christians? Even as the heathens, to gain an immortal name,
persuaded themselves that they did well in what they endured, so self-love
and vainglory have so far besotted some monks, and other persons even in
our age, as that they have murdered kings and princes, to support the
better their church, or the _Catholic cause_, as they call it, which they
supposed to be in danger. If such men are made to suffer again, it is
manifest that they do not suffer for the sake of Christ, nor are they to
be accounted _his_ martyrs. They are martyrs to the pope of Rome, to their
own conceit, and to a thirst after vainglory, with which they are carried
away. Thus much concerning false love, to which man is seduced by a false
and deceitful light.

9. It remains, therefore, that without a sincere love to God and our
neighbor, and a holy and Christian life attending it, all arts and
sciences, gifts and attainments, profit nothing. Wisdom, how great soever
it may be, yea, though it be as great, or greater than that of Solomon, is
nothing; and the knowledge of the whole Scripture, if it be without love,
must necessarily degenerate into a poor, empty speculation. All works
whatsoever, and martyrdom itself (if so it be called), are to no purpose
without this essential character of love. For to know the will of God and
his word, and not to live up to them as a rule, only increases our
condemnation, as the Lord plainly affirms: “If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their
sin.” John 15:22.




