Chapter XVI.


            Showing How The Holy Spirit Operates In Our Souls.


    _I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
    dry ground._—ISA. 44:3.


If after a drought and dearth of three years and a half (such as happened
in the time of Elijah, 1 Kings 17:1; 18:45), it should please God to send
rain upon all the earth, one man’s field only excepted; he would truly
have reason to think that God was angry with him, and that his case was
most deplorably miserable. But how much more miserable and unhappy is he,
who, though hungering and thirsting, like a parched ground, after faith,
charity, and all Christian graces, yet cannot receive one drop of
spiritual consolation in the inward ground of his soul!

2. But if this ever happen, it is not God’s fault, for he is ready “to
pour out his Spirit upon all flesh” (Joel 2:28), but man’s, who prepareth
not his heart to receive it. The best preparation to receive this holy
guest, is to turn our hearts by faith and prayer from the world unto God,
as the Apostles did at Pentecost (Acts 2:4); and whensoever God shall find
us thus prepared, he will forthwith visit us with all the fulness of
spiritual blessings. On the other hand, if the heart be full of the world,
there will be no room for the Spirit of God to enter; for where the one
is, the other cannot be. As in nature there is no vacuum, so it is in the
spiritual world. Let this then be thy care, and this thy chief concern,
not to fix thy heart upon any creature, either inwardly or outwardly, not
on the love of thyself, nor upon thine own will, but upon God alone;
assuring thyself, that this is the most noble and useful exercise for
thee. As the finest work of the most skilful workman may be broken and
destroyed by a heedless child; so it often happens with the works and
gifts of God, which men destroy by their rash and unadvised management.
Thus they break and deface the most noble designs and operations of the
Spirit of God within them; they attribute that to themselves which is the
work of God, and patch their own vile rags upon the fine linen of Christ’s
righteousness. For it is most certain that we are “unprofitable servants”
(Luke 17:10), and by consequence can do nothing but what is unprofitable.
And, in the same degree, as God is more noble than man, so the works of
the Divine Spirit are more noble and precious than those of the human
spirit. Hence it follows, that if thou wouldest have God to operate more
eminently in thee, thou must surrender all the passions, affections, and
powers of thy soul, to be possessed, governed, and directed by Him. For
unless the creature be entirely still, thou canst not hear the voice of
God. Think not then that every inward motion which thou perceivest, is the
work of God; whereas some are merely the product of thy own flesh and
blood. Take heed therefore to thyself, and learn to distinguish well, lest
thou ascribe to God the very operations of the devil.

3. But in order to the more perfect operation of the Holy Ghost in thee,
there are two rules proper to be observed: first, that thou turn away
thine heart from the world, the creatures, thyself, and thine own will and
affections, that so this Holy Spirit may have room to act freely;
secondly, to receive all crosses and afflictions as coming from the hand
of God, without any respect or reference to the creatures, and to embrace
them as preparations for receiving more plentiful communications of divine
grace and blessing. Suppose, for instance, thou wert engaged in some good
work or act of devotion, and some intimate friend should break in upon
thee with abusive and reproachful language; if thou couldest bear this
with silence and patience, thou mightest be assured that that was the work
of the Holy Spirit, in order to prepare thee for greater blessings. But if
wicked thoughts be suggested to thee, by the devil, yet satisfy thyself
that they do thee no harm, because they are involuntary. Lastly, if thou
art engaged in any worldly calling or profession, see that thou perform
thy duty in it with thine eye fixed upon the glory of God, and the good of
thy neighbor. By this means all thy works shall be wrought in God, and his
Spirit.




Chapter XVII.


             Signs Of The Presence Of The Holy Spirit In Us.


    _The Comforter will reprove the world._—JOHN 16:8.


When the Holy Spirit enters into our soul; that is to say, manifests his
presence by his operations, in the first place, he forthwith reproves in
us everything that is not divine, such as the lust of the flesh, and the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life (1 John 2:16), giving us a sort of
loathing and abhorrence of them. Whosoever, therefore, lives a carnal
life, without such inward admonition of the Holy Spirit, may assure
himself that that Spirit is not in him; inasmuch as it is peculiarly his
office and character, at all times, to persuade, draw, and invite every
one that will give him room to act freely, to the duties of a Christian
life. Thus the Holy Spirit reproves sin. But everything is sin, that
opposes our obedience to the will of God. And every such act of
disobedience, or inclination to it, the Holy Spirit reproves wherever he
enters.

2. Hence, in the second place, arise spiritual sadness, grief, and inward
terrors of mind. Of this the children of this world have little
experience, though it is one of the surest signs of the presence of the
Holy Spirit in the soul. But they that are utter strangers to this godly
sorrow, who run on with delight and satisfaction in the way of the world,
upon whom all things smile, and who find here their enjoyment, and never
meet with any cross; these men, I say, are in a very dangerous state, and,
being destitute of God’s Spirit, are without God in the world. On the
contrary, they that are afflicted of God, and are reproved in their
consciences by the Spirit of God for every act of disobedience to his
will; and are led in the way of the cross, being brought under the
discipline and correction of wisdom, are those in whom the Spirit of God
prepareth himself an habitation. And this is the second sign of the
presence in us, of the Holy Spirit.

3. The third sign is, that the Divine Spirit takes away from us all the
glory of our own merit and righteousness, so that before the righteousness
of God it falls as a flower of the field, and withers as grass, when the
spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it. Isa. 40:6, 7. For the Spirit of Christ
shows us that we have no other solid and stable foundation upon which to
rest, but the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ. “Woe to our own
righteousness,” saith St. Augustine, “if it were to be tried and judged
without mercy by God.” For this reason Isaiah compares it to “filthy
rags.” Isa. 64:6.

4. The fourth token of the presence of God’s Spirit, is when a man looks
upon his neighbor’s faults with compassion, not rudely censuring or
condemning him. For a haughty desire to judge others is diabolical,
proceeding from nothing but pride, contempt of our neighbor, and
admiration of ourselves. And where these reign the Holy Spirit cannot
abide; but wheresoever He is, there a man is careful—1. Not to reprove his
neighbor but upon urgent necessity. 2. To do it in the proper time and
place, after the example of our blessed Lord. 3. Not to do it in severe
terms, but with meekness and humanity. 4. Not to despise his neighbor, nor
expose him to the scorn and contempt of others, but to do all from a pure
principle of charity. Let these things sink deeply into thy heart, that
thou mayest abide in humility, and in the grace of the Holy Spirit, and
that he may dwell in thee.




