Chapter XXIV.


                   Of The Love Of God And Our Neighbor.


    _Now the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart,
    and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned._—1 TIM. 1:5.


In this verse, the apostle sets before us love, the highest and noblest
virtue; and acquaints us at the same time, with four particulars
concerning it. _First_, that Love is the summary of all the commandments:
for “love,” says the apostle, “is the fulfilling of the law” (Rom. 13:10);
in which all the precepts are comprehended, and without which, all gifts
and virtues are unprofitable and fruitless.

2. What he says in the _second_ place, namely, that Charity must arise
from a pure heart, relates to the love of _God_, which requires a heart
void of worldly love and affection, according to that saying of St. John:
“Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world
passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God
abideth forever.” 1 John 2:15-17. Whosoever, therefore, has a heart
purified from all love to the creature, so as to depend or acquiesce in no
transient good whatsoever, can cleave most intimately to God, saying with
David, “Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that
I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart faileth; but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.” Psal. 73:25, 26. The love
of such a one, proceeds out of a “_pure heart_.” Of the same character
also, is that love which is attended with great delight, pleasure and joy
in God; of which we have an illustration in David: “I will love thee, O
Lord, my strength. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;
my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my
salvation, and my high tower.” Psal. 18:1, 2.

3. The apostle, in the _third_ place, teaches us, that love must be “out
of a good conscience.” This properly concerns the love of _our neighbor_,
who is to be loved, not for the sake of interest or worldly advantage
(which would be a false love out of a bad conscience); but for the sake of
God only, and of his commandments. Nor ought we to afflict our neighbor
either by word or deed, either secretly or openly; nor on any account,
bear envy, wrath, hatred, malice or rancor against him; that so our
conscience may not accuse us when we address ourselves in prayer to God
Almighty.

4. The _fourth_ requisite of Love is, a “faith unfeigned;” so that nothing
be done that is contrary to the rule of faith, and to our Christian
profession, and that God be not denied publicly or privately, in
prosperity or adversity. This is the substance of what is contained in
that sentence of the apostle. We shall now speak more particularly, with
respect to each of the several parts.

5. In the _first_ place, then, _Love_, according to the apostle, “is the
end of the commandment;” for that love which arises from a pure faith, is
the noblest among the fruits and effects of faith; than which a man can do
nothing better or more acceptable to God. For God does not require at our
hands great and difficult enterprises, no high performances that exceed
our capacities; but he has changed the yoke of the Old Testament service,
and its many commandments and ordinances into faith and love, and has
given us for this end the Holy Ghost, who, “shedding abroad in our hearts
the love of God” (Rom. 5:5), renders everything sweet and easy, and proves
the original spring of this heavenly virtue.

6. Love, therefore, is not a hard work, a labor attended with toil and
difficulty; on the contrary, it makes everything easy to a good man. “His
commandments are not grievous” (1 John 5:3), that is to say, they are not
so to an enlightened Christian; for wherever the Spirit of God comes, he
creates a free, willing and ready heart in the discharge of Christian
virtues. Nor does God require of his children great skill or learning: it
is only love which he regards. If this be sincere and fervent, free from
disguise and dissimulation, God takes more pleasure and delight in it,
than in all the knowledge and wisdom, in all the art and talent that any
man upon earth, in his best works, can possibly exhibit. Wherever this
divine love is wanting, there all wisdom and knowledge, all works and
gifts, are altogether unprofitable. They are accounted vain and dead, as a
mere body without life. 1 Cor. 13:1, 2.

7. As for human learning and great abilities, they are common to heathens
as well as to Christians; and great actions are performed as well by
infidels as by believers. It is _love_ only which proves the sure test of
a sound Christian, distinguishing between the false and the true. For
wherever Charity is wanting, there can be no good thing, however it may
claim the admiration of men by its specious appearances. The reason is,
because God is not there; for “God is love, and he that dwelleth in love,
dwelleth in God, and God in him.” 1 John 4:16.

8. Love is also pleasant, not only to God who gives it, but also to man,
who exercises it: whereas, all arts and sciences, all the knowledge and
wisdom which man grasps, are not attained but with great labor and study,
with much care and application, and even at the expense of bodily health.
But this heaven-born love cheers both the body and the mind. It
invigorates the spirits, confers new strength, and wonderfully improves
and exalts the mind. Nor is it attended with any loss whatever, but on the
contrary, produces many good and noble effects in the soul. Love is itself
the reward of the lover, and virtue always carries its own recompense with
it: as, on the contrary, the vicious man is punished by his own excesses,
and vice is the constant tormentor of him that commits it.

9. Again, when the other faculties of the body and mind are faint and
wearied, love faints not. Love is never weary, never ceases. Prophecy may
pass away, tongues may cease, and sciences may be destroyed; arts may be
lost, the knowledge of mysteries may vanish; yea, faith itself at last may
fail also: but yet “love never faileth,” nor can fail: for when all that
is imperfect is happily removed, then love alone abides forever, and
attains its full perfection. 1 Cor. 13:8.

10. To render anything pleasing to Almighty God, it is necessary that it
proceed from him; since he approves of nothing but what he himself works
in us. Now, God is love; it therefore follows, that all that we do, ought
to proceed from a divine faith, in order that it may be pleasing to God;
and from pure love, that it may prove profitable to men. This love must be
_pure_, without any regard to self-honor, self-interest, and those mean
designs which sometimes intrude into a Christian’s actions. In like manner
our _prayers_ should spring from a principle of love, that they may have
the more ready admittance to the God of love. Consider, therefore, how
that man’s prayer can be acceptable to God, who is full of wrath and
rancor, hatred and malice? Were such a one to repeat the whole Psalter
every day, it would be but an abomination before the Lord. True worship
consists in spirit (John 4:23, 24), in faith, in love, not in a long
recital of words. Remember the example of Christ, who, from a merciful
heart, cried, “Father, forgive them.” Luke 33:34. A man that does not love
God, is also unwilling to pour out his heart in prayer and supplication:
but to him who is affected with a sense of divine love, the duty of prayer
is easy and delightful. A man that has a cordial love to God, readily
serves him; but he that is void of this love, does not serve him at all,
though he may submit to much toil and drudgery, and even heap one mountain
upon another.

11. Upon the whole, then, nothing is more agreeable to human nature,
nothing better and more profitable, than this divine love, which,
therefore, should be stirred up in the heart of man, and when once raised
into a flame, should be carefully preserved from being ever quenched.

12. Faith should work all things in a Christian through love; and love
should be the agent of faith, as the body is the agent of the soul. The
soul sees and hears, speaks and acts, through the body, to which she is
united; so, O man! should the love of God, springing from faith, do all
things in and through thee. Whether thou eat or drink, hear or speak,
commend or reprove, let all be done _in love_, after the example of
Christ, in whom resided nothing but pure love. If thou beholdest thy
neighbor, behold him with the eyes of a compassionate friend; if thou
hearest him, hear him with love and tenderness; and if thou speakest with
him, let thy speech be seasoned with love and Christian affection.

13. Carefully preserve the root of Christian love by faith, in order that
nothing but that which is good may grow up in thy heart, and issue thence,
as from its genuine centre. 1 Cor. 16:14. Thou shalt then be enabled to
fulfil the commandments of God; since they are all comprehended in love.
Hence, a holy man has expressed himself after this manner: “O love of God
in the Holy Ghost! thou art the highest joy of souls, and the only divine
life of men. Whosoever enjoys not thee, is dead even while he lives; and
whosoever possesses thee, never dies in the sight of God. Where thou art
not, there the life of men is a continual death; but where thou art, there
life is made a foretaste of eternal happiness.” Whence it appears that
this divine love is the sum and fulfilling of all the commandments of God.

14. We consider now, in the _second_ place, that our love to God ought to
proceed “out of a pure heart.” The heart of a man who is desirous to love
God, ought first to be cleansed from all worldly love and attachment to
the creature. It is then that God becomes the chief and sovereign Good to
the soul. She can then say, “The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance,
and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.” Ps. 16:5. “The Lord knoweth the
days of the upright,” that is, those that love him out of a disinterested
heart; “and their inheritance shall be forever.” Ps. 37:18. “Delight
thyself in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.”
Ps. 37:4. In a word, God is the only fountain whence all our joy ought
constantly to spring.

15. God, therefore, should be the most beloved object of our souls, and
our hearts should rest in him alone, because he is the highest good. He is
nothing else than mercy and goodness, love and kindness, clemency and
patience, truth, comfort, peace, joy, life, and happiness. All this he has
laid up in Jesus Christ. Whoever, therefore, has Christ, is thereby put
into the possession of all these heavenly virtues. And whoever loves God,
must also of necessity love God’s truth and mercy, his goodness and
kindness, and the whole train of divine virtues.

16. For, a true lover of God has a love to all that God loves, and an
aversion to all that God hates. If any man loves God, he must love truth,
mercy, and righteousness, because God is all this himself. He must also
delight in humility and meekness, since thereby he is rendered conformable
to that meekness and lowly-mindedness which resided in Jesus. On the other
hand, a true lover of God cannot but abhor all ungodliness, with all the
works of iniquity; because all manner of impiety is enmity against God,
and is the work of the devil himself. A lover of God hates a lie, because
the devil is the father of lies, and was a liar from the beginning. And
this is the reason that every one who loves lies, injustice, and other
vicious workings of nature, must needs, in that sense, be the offspring of
the devil (see John 8:44); and again, whoever loves Christ, his Lord and
Saviour, loves also the example of his pure and holy life, his humility
and meekness, his patience, and the other heavenly virtues that appeared
in his conduct. And such a one must of necessity be adopted into the
number of the children of God.

17. This love, proceeding out of a “pure heart,” must be obtained from God
by prayer and supplication. And truly, God is willing to enkindle in us
this heavenly flame through the love of Christ, if he be but earnestly
solicited, and if the heart be every day and every moment laid open to his
divine influence. If thy love should grow cold and weak at any time,
arouse thy heart, faint not, but stir up the grace of God within thee, and
be not too much discouraged at it. In the name of God arise again, set to
work, and renew the acts of thy first love. As thou art sensible of thy
coldness in love, thou mayest be assured from that circumstance, that the
eternal light of divine love is not _wholly_ extinguished, although it be
eclipsed, and at present give but little heat. Doubt not that thy Saviour
will enlighten thee again, and fire thy heart with his love; so that thou
mayest sit once more under his shadow, and rejoice in the light of his
countenance. At the same time be earnest in prayer and supplications, lest
hereafter the flame of this heavenly love should be again deadened in thy
heart. Such is love “out of a pure heart,” unmixed with love of the world.

18. Let us now consider, in the _third_ place, Love, as arising from a
“good conscience,” and as it respects our neighbor. The love of God and
the love of our neighbor are so closely united, that they can never be
separated. The true touchstone of our love to God, is the love which we
bear to our neighbor. “If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother,
he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how
can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from
him, That he who loveth God, love his brother also.” 1 John 4:20, 21. For
the love of God cannot dwell in a man who is filled with hatred or malice,
or divested of all bowels of love and compassion. If thou hast no pity on
thy brother, who stands in need of thy help, how canst thou love God, who
needs not anything that is thine, and has commanded thee to express thy
love towards him, by bestowing marks of it upon thy brother?

19. As faith unites to God, so love unites to our neighbor; and as a man
is made up of body and soul, so faith and love (that is, the love both of
God and of our neighbor) make up a true Christian. Thus he that “dwelleth
in love, dwelleth in God.” 1 John 4:16. And since God effectually desires
the good of all men, it follows, that he who loves in like manner is of
one heart with God; and that he who is otherwise affected is against God,
and has not the mind of the Lord, but is the enemy of God as well as of
his neighbor. He is, unquestionably, an adversary to God who is an enemy
to men.

20. It is the property of this love to bewail and compassionate the
infirmities of others. Gal. 6:1. Indeed, the failings and weaknesses of
our fellow-creatures represent to us, as in a mirror, our own
imperfections, and remind us of the various defects that encumber our
nature. Therefore, when thou seest another overtaken in a fault, consider
that thou also thyself art but a man; and learn from thy own infirmities,
to bear those of others with patience, meekness, and humility. Rom. 15:7.

21. Such especially as sin, not from, malice or determined wickedness, but
who are surprised into a fault by weakness and inadvertency; and who,
coming soon to themselves again, repent of that which they have done, and
firmly resolve to watch the more against the snares of Satan for the
future; such souls as these are surely to be pitied and assisted. He that
does otherwise, shows that he has nothing in him of the merciful and
forbearing spirit of Christ. When a man hastily condemns the faults of his
neighbor, without feeling any love or compassion, it is an evident sign
that he is altogether void of God, and of his merciful spirit. On the
contrary, a true Christian, being anointed with the spirit of Christ,
treats all men as one that has a fellow-feeling with them, and bears with
them in a sympathizing Christian love and tenderness, according to the
example of Christ, which he has left us to follow. Therefore, if any man,
upon serious search into his inward condition, finds that he has not the
love of his neighbor abiding in him, let him know, assuredly, that the
love of God remains not in his soul, and that he himself is without God.
This should strike him with horror and indignation against himself; it
should influence him the more speedily (after repenting of his sin from
the bottom of his heart) to reconcile himself to his neighbor, that, in
this order, the love of God may also return to him again. Then all his
actions, while he continues in this love and faith, are good, holy, and
divine; and this love, dwelling in his heart, will actuate him freely and
willingly to embrace all men, and with great affection and joy to do them
all manner of kindnesses; so that he will “rejoice over them to do them
good,” even as God himself. Jer. 32:41.

22. Without this love, whatever is in man, is diabolical and altogether
evil. Nor is there, indeed, any other cause why the devil can do no good,
but because he is utterly destitute of love both towards God and man.
Hence, all which he does is radically evil, and deprived of all intrinsic
goodness. In all that he sets about, he designs nothing but God’s
dishonor, and man’s destruction. He cunningly contrives ways to vent his
enmity both upon God and man; and, therefore, he seeks for such hearts as
he can fill with spite and envy, and then discharges through them his
malice and wrath. “And hereby it is manifest who are the children of God,
and the children of the devil.” 1 John 3:10.

23. _Lastly_, Love must be “out of faith unfeigned,” that is, we must love
God equally in prosperity and adversity. Whoever loves God sincerely,
accepts with joy all the dispensations of his Providence, after the
example of Christ; who, with a cheerful and ready mind, took up the cross,
which he knew that the will of his Father imposed on him. “I have,” says
he, “a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened (and in pain)
till it be accomplished!” Luke 12:50. In the same manner have all the holy
martyrs carried with joy their cross after him.

24. To those that unfeignedly love God, the cross, which Christ enjoins us
to bear, does not prove grievous or burdensome; and this for no other
reason, than because it is the _yoke of Christ_. Matt. 11:29. If the
magnet attracts the heavy iron, why should not that heavenly loadstone,
the love of God, attract the burden of our cross, and render it light and
agreeable; especially after the heart is affected with a touch of the
divine love? If the sugar sweeten such herbs as are bitter by nature, why
should not the sweetness of the love of God make that pleasant and easy,
which to the flesh is nothing but a cross and affliction? And truly it was
from the fulness of this love, that the blessed martyrs bore the most
exquisite pain with patience and joy; being transported with it to such a
degree, as to be almost insensible of their very torments.




