Chapter XXX.


   Showing How God Manifests Himself To The Loving Soul, As The Supreme
                                 Beauty.


    _O Lord my God, thou art very great: thou art clothed with honor
    and majesty; who coverest thyself with light as with a
    garment._—PS. 104:1, 2.


As nothing is more lovely to a loving soul than Christ, and no good higher
or more precious than God himself; so there is also nothing more
_beautiful_ in the sight of such a one than God. That soul looks upon God
as the highest beauty, with which nothing in heaven and earth is to be
compared; so that all the holy angels cannot sufficiently praise to all
eternity this beauty of God. If all the holy angels in their lustre, and
all the elect in their glory, were put together, it would nevertheless
appear, that all their beauty and splendor proceed from God, who is the
eternal glory and beauty; and that they are derived from the everlasting,
infinite light and brightness. For as God is all good, and the highest
good, so He is also all beauty, ornament, and glory.

2. And when a man beholds in spirit the glory of God, he forgets all the
creatures, nay, the beauty of all the angels also; and mourns over nothing
so much, as that he has offended this great Good with his wickedness, and
this infinite eternal beauty and brightness with his impurity.

3. But because the Son of God, the brightness of his glory (Heb. 1:3), is
become man, He hath made men partakers of his divine nature, and of his
comeliness (2 Pet. 1:4), so that all who are in Christ by faith, are
comely and glorious before God. Ps. 16:3. He remembers our defects and
filthiness no more; for although his eyes see, yet the brightness of his
glory, and the love of Christ cover them. Eph. 5:27.

4. The wise heathen Plato, considering the beauty of the creatures, of the
luminaries, of the firmament, of the flowers in the fields, of the metals
and animals, has by his reason drawn the conclusion, that God must of
necessity be an eternal Being, beautiful above all things, because the
beauty of all the creatures must be comprehended or concentrated in Him.
But we say from the word of God, and the holy Evangelist St. John: “It
doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that when He shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is” (1 John 3:2);
that we then, being perfectly renewed after the likeness of God, shall
really be an image, like unto God, through which his beauty, brightness,
and glory will shine; but out of Jesus Christ our Lord, in the highest
brightness and beauty of all. For in him is all fulness; and so it has
pleased the Father that “in him should all fulness dwell” (Col. 1:19); and
that “in him should be gathered together in one all things, both which are
in heaven, and which are on earth” (Eph. 1:10); which no finite creature
can comprehend.

5. Therefore angels and men shall admire the brightness and beauty of
Christ, especially the chosen children of God, “whose vile bodies shall be
fashioned like unto his glorious body.” Phil. 3:21. And this is what
Daniel says, “They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever
and ever.” Dan. 12:3. And as the 104th Psalm, ver. 2, says of God, “Thou
coverest thyself with light,” so our covering or garment will also be
nothing else but light and brightness.




Chapter XXXI.


   Showing How God Manifests Himself To The Loving Soul As The Infinite
                               Omnipotence.


    _O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to
    thy faithfulness round about thee?_—PS. 89:8.


The love of God wills, that a loving soul should do good to all men, and
be profitable both to foes and friends; not for the sake of its own profit
and honor, but only for the sake of the love of God, which, as it were,
moves his omnipotence to draw nigh unto us; which also, from its infinite
treasure, gives us all we have, to the end that we should give again from
love what the love of God has given us out of the treasury of his
omnipotence.

2. Therefore, O man, be careful that thou appropriate nothing to thyself,
but restore all to the omnipotence of God, who himself is all that thou
hast and art. No creature can either give to, or take away from, thee; it
is only the omnipotence of God which can do it. Nor can any creature
comfort thee; the love of God alone can do it.

3. In this love, the loving soul sees the fulness of God’s
incomprehensible omnipotence, which comprehends in itself heaven and
earth, the sea and the dry land, but cannot be comprehended by any thing.
For the whole world is to the omnipotence of God “as a drop of a bucket,
and as the small dust of the balance.” Isa. 40:15.

4. And out of this fulness of God’s omnipotence, all the powers of angels,
men, and all other creatures, proceed. It sustains the firmament of
Heaven. The motions of the sea and the powers of the earth proceed from
it; so that heaven and earth are full of God, full of the divine power and
operation, full of the Spirit of the Lord. The power of God, which is the
might of his love, comprehends, incloses, and replenishes all things, but
is comprehended by none. Ps. 139:2, etc.

5. As high as God is over all things, so deeply also is he in all things,
and all things are in him, according to St. Paul, who says, “Of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things” (Rom. 11:36); and again, “Who is
above all, and through all, and in you all.” Eph. 4:6.

6. Since God is so great and over all things, nothing surely can be equal
to him; and he that will be so, makes himself a god, commits the greatest
sin, and falls into the pit of perdition. And since God is all, all that
is without him must be as nothing. Therefore from God’s omnipotence, man
learns to know his own nothingness, and to fear God, who delights in them
only that “humble themselves under his mighty hand.” 1 Peter 5:6.

7. Now as great and high as God is in his omnipotence, even so low is he
made by his love. Behold our Lord Jesus Christ, the living Son, the
powerful arm of God, by whom were all things created, and by whom all
things consist (1 Col. 1:16, 17); how deeply has he descended by his love,
and how lowly and humble has he made himself among all creatures!

8. Therefore, even as we cannot fathom, much less express in words, the
omnipotence of God; so neither can we fathom with our thoughts the
humility and lowliness of Christ. Nevertheless, as deep as is his descent,
so high is also his ascent far above all heavens. Eph. 4:10. Unto him be
honor and praise to all eternity. Amen.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

O God! O Jesus! O blessed Spirit! Thou unchangeable mind! Thou
inextinguishable light! Thou Peace which cannot be disturbed! Thou
indivisible unity! Thou infallible truth! Thou ineffable bounty! Thou
immeasurable might! Thou infinite wisdom! Thou incomprehensible Goodness!
Thou omnipresent eternity! Thou Life of all the living! Do Thou enlighten
me, do Thou sanctify me, do Thou quicken me!




