Chapter XVII.


The Inheritance And Possessions Of Christians Are Not Of This World; They
 Should, Therefore, Regard Themselves As Strangers In It, While They Make
                          Use Of Earthly Things.


    _We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
    carry nothing out. And having food and raiment, let us be
    therewith content._—1 TIM. 6:7, 8.


The design of the blessed God in creating temporal things, was that they
might supply man’s bodily wants; and it is right that they should be used
for such a purpose, and be received at the hands of God with gratitude,
attended with fear and trembling. In regard to those things which are not
absolutely necessary, whether gold and silver, food and raiment, etc.,
they are left to man in order to _prove_ him; so that from the manner in
which he employs these objects, it may be discovered how he stands
affected towards God, while possessed of the goods of this world: whether,
on the one hand, he will still cleave to God, and in the midst of earthly
possessions, keep his eye constantly fixed on those which are to come; or
whether, withdrawing his love from God, he will attach himself to this
fleeting world, and prefer a fading earthly paradise, to that which is
permanent and heavenly.

2. Man is therefore left to his own liberty and choice, in order that he
may be judged hereafter according to that which he has chosen here, and
thus be without excuse in that day. Agreeably to this principle, it was
the solemn declaration of Moses to the people of Israel: “I call heaven
and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life
and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and
thy seed may live.” Deut. 30:19.

3. The things of this world are then designed, not to fill us with earthly
delight and pleasures, but to be tests and trials of our fidelity. In
these trials the fall is very easy, when once we begin to withdraw from
God. The pleasures of this world are the fruits of a forbidden tree; of
which we are warned by God not to eat, lest our minds going out after them
should eventually take delight in them, after the manner of those who know
no other pleasures, but such as are derived from earthly objects. These
persons, by indulging the flesh, convert meat, drink, and apparel into
snares by which they are turned away from God.

4. It certainly is the duty of every true Christian, to esteem himself a
stranger and pilgrim in this world; and as bound to use earthly blessings,
not as means of satiating lust or gratifying wantonness, but of supplying
his absolute wants and necessities. We ought not to set our affections on
these inferior objects, but on Him alone who is able to satisfy them. To
do otherwise, is to expose ourselves to dangerous temptations, and with
Eve, to eat daily of the forbidden tree. The real Christian is not intent
upon worldly concerns, or delicious fare; for his interior eye is directed
to that bread which endureth unto eternal life. Nor is he solicitous about
fine and fashionable apparel; aspiring rather after robes of divine light,
and the raiment of glorified bodies. In short, all things that please the
natural man in this world, are, to a true Christian, only so many crosses
and temptations, allurements of sin and snares of death, that continually
exercise his virtue. Whatever man uses without the fear of God, whatever
he applies to the mere gratifying of his flesh, cannot fail to operate as
a poison to the soul, however pleasant and salutary it may appear to be to
the body. Yet, so far from laboring to know the forbidden tree of worldly
pleasures and its various fruits, man gives himself up to a careless and
thoughtless state of life, and yields to the lust of the flesh, not
considering that this lust is really _the forbidden tree_.

5. The Christian, on the other hand, uses all things in the fear of God,
and as a stranger and pilgrim on the earth; avoiding every kind of excess
in meat, drink, apparel, houses, and the other things of this life, lest,
by an improper use of them, he should offend both his Father in heaven,
and his fellow-Christians upon earth. He will not so much as gaze on the
_forbidden tree_, in order that he may not be ensnared; but with the eye
of faith, he steadfastly beholds the future felicity of the soul, and for
the sake of this felicity, refuses to yield to the cravings of corrupt
nature. What does it profit the body that in this world it swims in lusts
and pleasures, when, after a short period, it must be devoured by worms,
and stripped of all its enjoyments! “Naked,” says Job, “came I out of my
mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither.” Job 1:21. We bring into
the world a naked and infirm, a poor and indigent body; and even this is
the spoil of death; for when we pass out of this world we leave it behind
us forever.

6. Whatever we enjoy from the time of our birth to the period of our
dissolution, is all the bread of mercy and affliction, and designed to
supply the bare wants of this mortal life. At the approach of death all is
taken from us again, and we depart out of the world poorer than when we
entered it. When man enters the world, he brings with him life and a body,
and finds the necessary shelter, meat, and drink provided for him; but,
after existing a short time, he is, in a moment, bereft of all, and leaves
behind him even his body and his life. Consider then, O man! whether there
can be anything more wretched and poor, more naked and miserable, than man
when he dies, if he be not clothed with Christ’s righteousness, and
enriched in his God.

7. As, therefore, we are confessedly strangers and pilgrims here, and at
the hour of dissolution must leave behind us every earthly enjoyment, let
us, at least, cease to encumber our souls with things which we cannot
carry out of this world, and the use of which is restricted to this life
only. Is it not a species of madness to heap up riches for a frail body,
for a body which we must leave behind us, and which cannot possibly enjoy
wealth hereafter? Luke 12:20, 21. Are we ignorant that there is another
and a better world, another body and another life, and that, whatever we
may appear in the sight of men, we are in the eye of God only strangers
and sojourners on the earth? Ps. 39:12; Lev. 25:23. “Ye are,” saith the
Lord, “strangers and sojourners _with me_,” that is, “_before my eyes_,
although ye may not remember it.”

8. If, then, we are strangers and sojourners, it follows that our country
and our home must be elsewhere. This will be most evident to us, if we
compare time with eternity, the visible with the invisible world, the
earthly tabernacle with the heavenly, and things that are frail and
perishing, with those that are lasting and eternal. Such a comparison will
afford us a due insight into time and eternity, and lead us to behold with
the eye of faith, such things as remain altogether unknown to the
unthinking multitude. It is from the want of this consideration, that so
many become lax and disorderly in their manners, wallow in the mire of
earthly pleasures, and drown themselves in avarice and worldly cares. It
is from the want of this reflection, that the major part of mankind,
however keen and shrewd in the pursuits of this world, are blind and
insensible to the concerns of the immortal soul. They addict themselves so
much to this life, as to esteem it to be the most delightful, the best and
noblest of all; while the true Christian, on the contrary, accounts it an
exile, a vale of tears, a place of misery, a deep and dark prison.

9. Hence it is that those who love this world, and seek their happiness in
it, do not excel even the brute creation in wisdom or understanding; and
as they live, so they die like beasts. Ps. 49:12, 20. They are totally
blind as it respects the inward man; they do not even think of heavenly
and eternal things; they never rejoice in God, but only in the low and
sordid pleasures afforded by this world. It is in earthly things that they
seek their rest and their enjoyment; and having obtained their object
after much labor and toil, they sit quietly down and congratulate
themselves on their possessions. Wretched, miserable men! blind and
insensible to the tremendous concerns of their eternal salvation! here,
they lie contentedly in the darkness of ignorance, soon to remove hence to
that of death and damnation. Luke 1:79.

10. In order to our better acquaintance with the nature of our pilgrimage
here, we should unceasingly consider the example left us by the Redeemer,
and earnestly follow him both in his life and doctrine. He hath set us an
unerring pattern of universal holiness. He is our captain and our guide;
and to his life and manners, our lives and our manners should be
conformed. Go thou, therefore, and look unto him; unto him who, when the
greatest of all men, voluntarily chose that life in which nothing of
greatness appeared; a life of meanness, poverty, and contempt of honor,
wealth, and pleasure, the threefold deity of this world. All these things,
to which the world offers sacrifice, the Lord contemned; for he himself
said, “He had not where to lay his head.” Matt. 8:20.

11. Such, likewise, was the character of David; who, before his exaltation
to the throne, was poor and despised; and who, when created king,
accounted all his regal splendor as nothing compared with eternal life,
and the kingdom of God, to which he was called. “How amiable,” says he,
“are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth
for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh crieth out for the
living God.”—“A day in thy courts is better than a thousand.” Ps. 84. As
if he had said, I possess indeed a kingdom, and have people subject to my
sway; I possess kingly palaces, and the strong hold of Zion; but what are
all these in comparison of thy tabernacle, O Lord of hosts? So, too, Job
found comfort in his _Redeemer_. Job. 19:25.

12. Neither Peter, nor Paul, nor any of the apostles, sought the riches of
this life, but directed their attention to those which were laid up in
another and better world. Hence they freely espoused the despised life of
Christ, walking in his charity, lowliness, and patience; contemning the
earth, and triumphing over the world, its snares, and its allurements.
They prayed for those who cursed them; they thanked those who reproached
them; they blessed those who reviled them. 1 Cor. 4:12; Acts 5:41. When
they were persecuted, they glorified God; when scourged, they were
immovably patient, professing that “through much tribulation they must
enter into the kingdom of God” (Acts 14:22); and when slaughtered, they
prayed (with Christ their Head), “Father, forgive them” (Luke 23:34); “lay
not this sin to their charge.” Acts 7:60. Thus were they, on the one hand,
dead to all wrath and revenge; to bitterness, ambition, and pride; to the
love of the world, and of their own life also; while, on the other, they
lived in Christ and in his love, in his meekness and humility, his
patience and his resignation. They are, indeed, made alive in Christ by
faith, who thus live.

13. To a lover of the world, this excellent way of life is unknown; for
with regard to those who do not live in Christ, nor know that the _truth_
is in him, these are still dead in their sins; dead in wrath and hatred,
in envy and avarice, in pride and revenge; and as long as they so
continue, they are in a state of impenitence, and have not been quickened
by faith in Jesus, be their boasting what it may. But the genuine
disciples of Christ know it to be a duty to follow the steps of their
divine Master (1 Pet. 2:21), and to be conformed to his life, as the
supreme and original pattern of all virtue and goodness. In a word, the
life of Christ is their exemplar; he himself is their _book_, whence they
derive all solid and substantial learning, as it respects both life and
doctrine. Such persons declare with the apostle, “We look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal.” 2 Cor. 4:8. And with holy men of old they unite in saying, “Here
have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.” Heb. 13:14.

14. If, then, from a review of all these considerations, it evidently
appear, as it surely does, that in this world we are strangers and have no
abiding place, it follows that we were not created for the sake of earthly
things as the ultimate end of our being; but that there remain for us
another country and other dwellings, to gain which we ought not to
hesitate to sacrifice a hundred worlds, or even life itself. These are
subjects upon which the true Christian continually meditates with
pleasure; and it is his joy that here he has no continuing city, but is
created for life eternal. But how sad is the state of those who, occupied
wholly in pursuing the things of this life, lade their souls with a
crushing weight of worldly vanities, and thereby expose them to endless
perdition.




