Chapter XXIX.


 Of That Reconciliation To Our Neighbor, Without Which God Withdraws His
                                  Grace.


    _First be reconciled to thy brother._—MATT. 5:24.


Every one who desires to be reconciled to God, must of necessity endeavor
to reconcile himself to his neighbor; because God takes the injury which
is offered to man, as offered to himself, and the evil done to man, as
done to himself.

2. When, therefore, any one offends both God and man, he cannot be
restored to the favor of God before he is reconciled to man his neighbor;
for having offended them both, he must also be reconciled to both, which
is expressly attested by Christ himself: “If thou bring thy gift to the
altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee,
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.” Matt. 5:23, 24.

3. It will be needful, therefore, to say something further of the love of
God and of our neighbor, and to show how impossible it is to separate the
one from the other: and again, that this reconciliation, so joined
together, proves the true source of brotherly love and affection.

4. This the beloved disciple has expressed as follows: “If a man say, I
love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his
brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And
this commandment have we from him, that he that loveth God love his
brother also.” 1 John 4:20, 21. So utterly impossible is it, that the love
of God should subsist without the love of our neighbor. Hence, also, it
follows, that he who truly and unfeignedly loves God, will also embrace
his neighbor with the same sincere affection. And again, if the love which
we profess to bear to God be hypocritical and false, then the love with
which we seem to love our neighbor, will rise no higher than its
principle, but prove false likewise. Therefore, the love of our neighbor
is the test of our love of God, by the right application of which, the
truth or falsehood of that love will easily be discovered.

5. This consideration gives us a true insight into the love of our
neighbor, and that brotherly reconciliation which ought to attend it.
There is a twofold object given by God to man, to which all the actions of
his life are constantly to tend; namely, the love of God, and of our
neighbor. Into this, all our endeavors ought finally to be resolved, and
we ought to make a daily progress in this holy exercise; since we are to
this very end, created, redeemed, and sanctified. In a word, Christ
himself is the one and only scope in which all our actions ought to
centre. Now, the more we approach to love, the more we approach to Christ,
and the better we imitate his unblamable life.

6. For this end God was made man, or, the Word was made flesh, that he
might set before our eyes a most lovely and living image of his infinite
love and kindness, and that from hence it might appear, that God was LOVE
itself; love in His own immense, incomprehensible, and unsearchable
essence; and that man, by viewing so amiable an object of love as is
displayed in Christ Jesus, might be transformed into the same image day by
day.

7. Furthermore, as, in Christ, God and man are united together by an
indissoluble tie, so the love of God is so closely connected with the love
of our neighbor, that the former cannot exist without the latter. Nay, the
love of God and of our neighbor can be no more disjoined or put asunder,
than the divine and human natures in Christ. And as he who injures the
humanity of Christ cannot but affront his divinity also; so he who offends
man, is in like manner guilty of offending the infinite God himself. We
cannot be angry with our neighbor, without being, at the same time, angry
with God!

8. We will illustrate what has been said, by the following comparison.
When a circle is made, and from its centre a number of lines are drawn to
the circumference, all these lines, though ever so distant in the
circumference, meet together in the point, which is in the middle. Here
they are all united in one, and all flow into one, be they ever so wide
asunder, yea, even directly opposite one to the other. Not one of all the
lines, let their number be ever so great, can be broken from the rest,
without losing its communication with the centre itself, wherein they all
meet. So God is a point, or a centre, whose circumference is everywhere,
extending in a manner, to all men upon earth. Whoever presumes to break
off the lines of his love from his neighbor, must, in like manner, disjoin
and break them off from God at the same time. And as all these lines
cohere and concur in the centre, and therein mutually affect one another,
so is there a sort of central sympathy, and a fellow-feeling, as it were,
of the sufferings of our neighbor, provided we be but all united in God,
the great centre of all good Christians.

9. The truth of what has been said, is forcibly illustrated in the history
of Job. When the tidings were brought him, that his temporal goods were
destroyed, it appears that he quietly bore the loss of them, without
giving any great sign of discontent at the appointments of Providence. He
still continued to bless the Lord, and freely to own, that he who had
given him his property, had also a right to take it away whenever he
pleased. But when he was told, that he had also lost his children, then
indeed it went to his heart: then he “arose, and rent his mantle, and
shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground.” Job. 1:20. So let every
true Christian act when he hears of the calamity of his neighbor (here
represented by the children of Job); knowing that he ought more to be
affected with the misery of his neighbor, than with the loss of all his
worldly substance. For it is the property of true love, to be moved with
the miseries of other men more than with our own losses. O, happy men! if
they would live together in mutual love and affection! Then frauds would
cease; then injuries would be known no more, nor would there be any
complaint of unjust ways, or of underhand dealings.

10. In order that this might be the more deeply impressed on the heart,
God was pleased to create but _one_ man in the beginning, together with
Eve, who was soon afterwards made. Gen. 2:21, 22. This was done, that all
mankind, springing up from one original stock, and, as it were, from one
root, might all unite in mutual kindness and brotherly affection with one
another. This is the reason why God did not create a multitude of men in
the beginning, but one only; whereas he created many beasts, trees and
herbs at once.

11. The love which God commands us to pursue, is of that agreeable nature,
and of that incomparable sweetness, that it does not in the least burden
either a man’s soul or body. Nay, it renders the mind easy under every
event, is most agreeable to our very nature, and in every respect attended
with a quiet and blessed life. But if the same God who has enjoined thee
to love thy neighbor, had commanded thee to hate him, thou wouldest then
have had cause to complain of hard usage, and of a far heavier burden than
that which love can possibly impose upon thee. For the spirit of hatred
and revenge is a tormentor of the soul, and a daily grief and vexation to
those that are enslaved by it. On the contrary, love refreshes the whole
man; and is so far from weakening or destroying body or soul (which is the
common effect of hatred and envy), that it is a great preserver of both,
and exhilarates them by the healing influence which it carries with it. In
a word, to those that love God, it is a pleasure to love their neighbor
also; but those who do not love God think it a hard and difficult task to
embrace their neighbor with brotherly love.

12. But if thy depraved nature should still find it a hard task to love
thy neighbor, then consider how much harder it will be to be banished
forever from the presence of God, and to endure the pangs of hell to all
eternity. Wretched is the man, who makes so sad a choice as to prefer
hell-torments to a friendly reconciliation. Our own experience would soon
convince us, if we made the trial, that as by faith we enjoy solid peace
with God (as the apostle assures us, Rom. 5:1); so by Christian love and
reconciliation we enjoy peace with men, together with much ease and
tranquillity of heart: whereas, on the contrary, a mind full of rancor and
malice frets itself, and has no other reward to expect than the lashes of
an unruly conscience.

13. The sum of all this is: Every virtue rewards its followers with peace
of conscience; and every vice punishes those that commit it with the
recompense which they deserve. Every virtue exalts those that practise it;
and every vice covers its slaves with shame.

14. With regard to the order and method by which we are to proceed in
working out a sound reconciliation with our offended neighbor, the
Scripture is explicit. The terms of reconciliation are these: 1. The
offender is to confess his sin to his neighbor whom he has offended. 2. He
is faithfully to restore that of which he has defrauded his neighbor; that
is, he ought to return not only the _principal_, but also the _fifth_ part
over and above it. 3. If there be none to receive it, he is then to offer
it unto the Lord himself. Numb. 5:7, 8.

15. This restitution of things unlawfully taken away, is commanded in such
strong and expressive words, as to show that it is absolutely a necessary
part of unfeigned repentance. St. Augustine has thus expressed his mind on
this subject: “The sin is not remitted, unless the thing unlawfully taken
away be restored.”—“When the thing that is taken away may be restored, and
is not restored, there is no true, but a feigned repentance.”

16. And truly it is the property of unfeigned repentance to contemn all
earthly things, and count them as loss (Phil. 3:8), in respect of that
abounding grace which is bestowed upon a penitent sinner. Of this we have
a glorious instance in Zaccheus, and in his conversion to God (Luke 19:8);
who has had, however, comparatively few followers in this age. Sound
conversion to God cleanses the heart, and purifies the conscience, by
faith in Christ; it breaks the power of sin, and by influencing a man to
restore such things as are wrongfully detained, not only clears the heart
before God, but also the outward conduct in the eye of the world. For in
the heart and conscience a man is a thief before God, as long as he keeps
any thing back that is taken away, however he may cease to steal
hereafter. Therefore, in order that repentance may prove true, and the
conscience be freed from guilt, all possible restitution is to be made: or
if a man be not able to make full restitution, he ought fervently to
implore the Lord, that he himself, in his stead, would restore the things
taken from his neighbor, and thus do justice.

17. Since a sinner is thus bound in a twofold respect to God and to his
neighbor, in order that his repentance may be full and efficacious, it is
required that both be satisfied. God does not accept any man’s repentance,
unless he be first reconciled to his neighbor. Therefore, it is to no
purpose if thou shouldest say unto God: “Merciful God, I confess that I
have offended and injured my neighbor; I have damaged him by wicked usury
and fraud; and have dealt so with him, as I would not that another should
deal with me: which iniquity I humbly entreat thee, O Lord, to pardon for
thy dear Son’s sake.” Be not deceived; God will not be mocked! He repels
thy prayer, and saith: “Restore first that which with fraud and usury thou
hast taken from thy neighbor, and then thy pardon shall be ready.” Not as
if a man merited the pardon of God by this restitution; this is a debt due
to his neighbor, and how can he pretend to merit any thing by that
restitution which he is so engaged to make, and which the law of God
expressly enjoins? For thus hath the Lord commanded: “All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.”
Matt. 7:12. “For with the same measure that ye mete withal, it shall be
measured to you again.” Luke 6:38.

18. The same truth is confirmed by the following Scriptures: “Leave thy
gift (oblation or sacrifice) before the altar and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.” Matt. 5:24.
“Cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason
together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.”
Isa. 1:16-18. And again, by the same prophet the Lord thus reasons: “Is
not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked
that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?
Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall
spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the
glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward.” Isa. 58:6-8.

19. All these Scriptures, with one consent, proclaim this great
truth,—that God will not accept the repentance of any man, or hear his
prayer, or regard his alms and oblations, unless he be first reconciled to
his neighbor, and make him all the restitution that is in his power.




