Chapter XVI.


    A General Rule, Teaching Us How To Answer Our Obligations To God.


    _Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant
    fruits._—CANT. 4:16.


As the creatures are appointed by God to obey man; so man is obliged to
love God, and in this the creatures are our monitors. Thus the trees
furnish us with ripe, sweet, perfect, and pleasant fruits; which, if they
were unripe, sour, or rotten, nobody would taste or care for. So it is not
sufficient for man to offer his service, his love, fear, and honor unto
God, unless they be genuine and perfect in their kind, being made
acceptable unto God through Christ and in Christ, by the Holy Ghost, who
produces in us all true and perfect fruits. This then is the great end for
which we must labor, by faith and prayer, that we may bring forth fruits
acceptable to God: like the trees which spend the whole twelve months of
the year in laboring to produce fruits wholesome and pleasant to the
eater; for God will no more accept our unripe, sour, or bitter works, than
we ourselves would relish sour and unripe fruits.

2. Moreover, as the trees serve us, and naturally provide for our pleasure
and benefit; so is it our duty to serve God “out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned” (1 Tim. 1:5), without hypocrisy
and sinister designs, that both we and our works may be acceptable in his
sight. In a word, that universal rule which holds in nature, must
necessarily be transferred to our love and duty to God, namely, that a man
ought never to cease from laboring, till he has brought forth fruits
acceptable to God: on the other hand, that all superstition, will-worship,
and hypocrisy, are as hateful and abominable in the sight of God, as
unripe or rotten fruits are to us.



Chapter XVII.


     Showing That The Christian Who Loves Not God Is Without Excuse.


    _This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and his
    commandments are not grievous._—1 JOHN 5:3.


As God has implanted in every man a faculty of willing or desiring, which
we call the will, which is also the seat of love, both which mutually
depend on each other; and as man knows that the chief Good is to be loved
by him, and that God is that chief Good; hence it follows, that he alone
has a natural knowledge both that he ought to love God, and also of the
reasons that oblige him to it.

2. For as brute creatures are fond of their benefactors; so man is under
the highest obligations to love God, from whom he has received all that he
has; and if he do not, he is more stupid and ungrateful than the beasts
that perish. Rom. 12:9; Isa. 1:3. Moreover, as it is the nature of love to
exclude all weariness and sadness (which are the effects of hatred and
displeasure), and to sweeten and soften all the labors and difficulties
that may attend the service of the person beloved (1 Cor. 13:4, etc.); so
we are obliged to express our love to God, by all possible tokens of
satisfaction and joy; since love is the happiness and comfort of our
souls. And in this appear the kindness and love of God towards man, that
he does not exact of us a hard, severe, and painful service; but only the
sweet, the joyful, the comfortable exercise of love. Love casts out fear,
anguish, and torment; otherwise it ceases to be love. Love conquers all
difficulties, and drives away all sorrow, filling the soul with joy and
gladness; so that if we love not God, we are without excuse.

3. By this I do not mean, that man, since the fall, can by his own
strength and power, perfectly love God as he ought; but to show that every
man is convinced in his own conscience, that he ought to love him as well
as he can; that he who does not, is worse than the beasts; and that both
nature and religion oblige us thereto.



Chapter XVIII.


     Showing That Our Duty To God Tends To Promote Our Own Happiness.


    _By thy commandments is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them
    there is great reward._—PS. 19:11.


Having sufficiently proved, in the first and second Chapters, that God is
an absolute, infinite, and superabundant Good, having all perfection in
and of himself, and receiving no benefit from the service and worship of
the creature; it follows, that all our religious services, as they cannot
be enjoined without a purpose, so they must tend directly to _our_ benefit
and advantage. All the time and pains, therefore, which we spend in the
service of God, are really and truly laid out in the service of ourselves.

2. For so great are the kindness and love of God towards men, that He has
pointed out to them the path of love, that they might walk in it, and
drink plentifully of the waters of life. O the boundless love of God, who
has made even our duty to be our happiness!

3. But here we must not think that we can merit anything by the services
which we pay to Him; for, in truth, all the blessings that we receive
either in this life or the next, are solely owing to the free grace and
favor of God. The sense and meaning of this Chapter then is this: that the
virtues or vices of men are neither profitable nor hurtful unto God, but
only unto themselves.



