Chapter XX.


Showing That Humility Must First Be Laid As A Foundation In The Heart, And
          All Our Works Must Rest On It; Its Blessed Influences.


    _Be clothed with humility._—1 PETER 5:5.


If thou wouldst build for eternity, let thy foundation be humility; for no
man can of himself do anything. Wherefore, in all thine undertakings,
humble thyself before God, the overflowing fountain of grace and mercy,
and pray devoutly for his direction and assistance, that all thy labors
may be entirely directed to the praise, and honor, and glory of God; and
remember this, that whatsoever thou doest without the grace of God, can
tend to nothing but sin and destruction. He that carefully attends to
this, submitting himself entirely to the divine will, silently and humbly
deploring his own weakness and vileness, and by ardent love devoting
himself to God, shall experience in all the powers of his soul the
wonderful works of God; while, on the contrary, pride is that vice which
makes all our works vile and abominable in the sight of God.

2. And alas! why are dust and ashes proud? If we look into our original,
we were created out of nothing; of ourselves we are nothing, more fleeting
than a vain shadow; so corrupt that nothing but the grace of God restrains
us from falling into the grossest sins, and sinking into the lowest pit of
destruction. We are perpetually exposed to the assaults of the devil,
against whom we have no security but in humility. For this evil spirit,
puffed up with pride, has all imaginable advantages over the proud man;
but flies from the meek and humble. Pride has its root in Satan; but so
long as thou canst preserve thy humility, turning thyself to God from all
thine iniquities, so long he can have no power over thee. How lamentable a
thing is it then, to see a Christian, furnished with the Word and Spirit
of God, so tamely give himself up to the devil. Such a one is like a
cowardly soldier, who, though armed from head to foot, should suffer
himself to be stung to death by a wasp. So powerful is the grace of God in
humble souls, that if they will be true to themselves the devil can have
no power over them. And if thou suffer thyself to be thus shamefully
foiled, notwithstanding all the assistance offered to thee, what canst
thou expect at the last day but the insults of those very evil spirits to
whom thou hast given so cheap a victory. Consider well, therefore, what a
grace and blessing humility is.

3. There is, moreover, in humble souls, a perpetual hungering and
thirsting after the grace of God, which God never fails to reward by the
fulness of his blessings, that is, of Himself: for he alone can satisfy
the cravings of a thirsty soul. And on this humility is founded true
repentance; for when a man sees the vast impurity, the secret malice, the
deep corruption of his sinful heart, and bewails all this with sincere
sorrow, he gladly lays hold of the free grace of Christ by faith, and
entirely resigns and devotes himself to the will of God. Such a man’s sins
God freely pardons, and, as it were, blots them out at once. For when a
man turns himself from his sins unto God, God immediately turns unto him
and remembers his transgressions no more.

4. Another property of humility is, that it cheerfully receives every
cross sent from God as a preparation for greater gifts; it regards not the
immediate agents by which the man is afflicted, but looks up to God from
whom afflictions come. The humble man rejoices in the cross, saying:
“Hail, blessed cross, unexpected indeed, but not unwelcome. I know that it
is the will of God by thee to sanctify and consecrate me to Himself.” And,
lastly, humility keeps a man in peace of mind, as well in adversity as in
prosperity, as well under the want, as in the abundance of the gifts and
blessings of God. So that the truly humble man is always easy, whether it
please God to give or take away, and nothing can happen to him, to exalt
or deject him above measure. In him the wonders of divine grace manifest
themselves. And whereas he before lived and acted by his own strength, he
is now supported by God, and in and through Him produces fruit abundantly.




Chapter XXI.


 Showing That A Man Ought To Rest In God Alone, And Not In His Gifts; And
                        That He Must Deny Himself.


    _Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous._—PS. 32:11.


The genuine love of God proposes God alone for its end. It delights not in
the creatures, but in that supreme, eternal, and uncreated Good, whence
they proceeded; and this not only outwardly, but even in the very bottom
of the soul. For the soul, besides its natural powers, by which it gives
life and motion to the body, has a deep and central essence, having no
relation to the creature. This is the seat and city of God, abstracted
from all external and earthly things; here the Holy Spirit pours out his
gifts through all the faculties of the soul, in the different
manifestations of wisdom, understanding, and knowledge. But when corrupt
nature begins to delight itself inordinately with these visitations,
loving the gifts more than the Giver, it immediately pollutes them by
corrupt mixtures of self-love. All the love and joy which result thence,
are blind, vicious, and deceitful. For as the gifts of God are not God
himself, so we must not place the same love upon both. Most men rest in
the gifts of God, and upon the least perception of divine light in the
understanding, or warmth in the affections, imagine themselves at the
summit of perfection; not considering that they are yet far short of it.
Man was made for greater things, even to receive God into the soul; and
God is displeased if we stop short of this. There is nothing he so much
desires as to bestow himself upon us, and that after the most exalted and
glorious way; and certainly the least we can do in return is thankfully to
accept this divine love, and to delight in God alone.

2. But so corrupt is human nature, and so addicted to self-love, that it
catches greedily at everything that may gratify its passions, placing its
happiness in those delights, which, like Jonah’s gourd, perish in the
enjoyment. This satisfaction, though in the gifts of God, defiles them,
and hinders His operations in us. So great, and so deep, is the corruption
of our nature, introduced by Original Sin, that scarce one in a thousand
can know his secret faults. Ps. 19:12. Hence proceeds that inordinate love
which men have for themselves more than for God. This abyss of corruption,
the most learned men could never fully fathom nor explain: and yet much
more difficult is it to root it out of human nature. This rooting it out
is the denying of ourselves, required by our blessed Lord, if we will be
his disciples. Matt. 16:24. And yet it is much easier to forsake all
earthly things, gold, silver, houses, and estates, than to forsake one’s
self: so deeply is this poison rooted in our nature! But as this
self-denial is absolutely necessary, so God disposes and prepares us for
it by various tribulations. This is the only end of all the crosses and
afflictions, inward or outward, spiritual or bodily, with which he is
pleased to visit us; namely, to bring us to the practice of self-denial.




