Chapter XVIII.


        Showing How Worldly Pleasures Drive Away The Holy Spirit.


    _Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul._—1 PETER
    2:11.


The children of this world earnestly follow the joys and pleasures of it,
which the children of God avoid with all diligence, as so many snares and
temptations of the devil, designed to draw them from God, their sovereign
Good. If thou, O Christian, resolve to preserve this most valuable
treasure, be careful to avoid all occasions of losing it. Of this sort are
all so-called sports, pastimes, and recreations, or those actions which do
not in some way tend to the glory of God, and the good of our neighbor.
And though thou art sometimes forced to be present at them, yet be then
careful to turn thy thoughts inward, by an elevation of thy heart to God;
and so thou shalt never lose the comfort and peace of the divine presence
wheresoever thou art. And whilst thou art faithful in this exercise, the
world and all its vanities shall not hurt thee. This was queen Esther’s
case, who, though outwardly clothed with royal ornaments, yet was inwardly
clothed with profound humility. Thus David, in the midst of his glory and
riches, had nevertheless, humble thoughts of himself. 2 Sam. 6:22. And
Joseph, in his master’s house, which was full of luxury, yet preserved a
chaste heart. Gen. 39:9. And this is that true fear of God which keeps his
faithful servants from the world and all its vanities, that they lose not
their inward joy and peace of conscience. This “fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom.” Ps. 111:10. He that is endued with it will not turn
himself to the world, but from the world to God, seeking contentment, joy,
and peace in Him. This, in short, is the fruit of true contrition; to turn
us away from all things which are not God, or do not tend to him; and to
turn us to that chief and true Good, which is God. If we are inwardly
conscious that we have hitherto neglected this useful exercise, and have
been immersed in the vanities of the world, let the remainder of our lives
be spent in bewailing and lamenting our past transgressions, and in
forsaking and guarding against every approach towards them. If we do this,
God will not remember how great sinners we have been, but will rejoice at
our repentance, not regarding our former iniquities, but our present faith
and earnest desires of serving God more faithfully than hitherto we have
done. But though God so earnestly desires our salvation, yet too many, by
turning from him to the world, resist his grace and force him out of their
hearts, notwithstanding all his gracious endeavors to continue there.

2. Therefore it is necessary that every man should die to the world, that
would live to God; whence it appears that the major part of mankind are at
enmity with God. Alas! how many mortifications of the flesh must we
undergo before our corrupt nature, both externally and internally, is
perfectly slain in us, and the life of God succeed in its place. Now
crosses and trials are as so many remedies applied to our corruption, in
order to drive out of us the poison of sin, and restore us to the life of
God. Whence it appears, that the benefit of afflictions is very great, and
that we ought to meet them with contentment and joy, as the means of
purifying our corrupt nature, and bringing us to a participation of the
divine nature. This it is which brings us to the noblest exercise of
Christian duty, namely, dying to the world, in prosperity and adversity,
in silence and hope, secretly and inwardly, without the least murmur or
complaint. They who fret, repine, or complain, discover plainly that they
are unwilling to die to the world, and that they have but little of the
divine light in their souls. God cannot live in the soul which is not dead
to the world; for the more we live after the lusts of corrupt nature, the
less we live unto God and his holy will. On the other hand, the less we
live to the flesh, so much the more we live unto God. Let this, then, be
our certain rule, that he that would live to the Spirit, must die to the
flesh. Rom. 8:13.




Chapter XIX.


       Of Inward Prayer, And Of The True Use Of The Lord’s Prayer.


    _Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
    Father._—ROM. 8:15.


As God operates eminently in humble souls; so the Holy Spirit particularly
works in them the gift of filial prayer. Without the Spirit of God there
is no true prayer; for he it is that cries and groans in the soul, being,
as it were, its life. Rom. 8:26; Gal. 4:6. For as the soul is the life of
our body, so is the Spirit of God the life of the soul, being the source
of all its spiritual life and strength. This Holy Spirit is also the
witness of our adoption and regeneration; and he who knows how to use
these as he ought, relying, by faith in Christ and love of the Holy
Spirit, upon the eternal love of his heavenly Father, will ask for, and
receive great and heavenly gifts. For so great is the love, so abundant
the goodness of God, that he can deny nothing to his children, who ask in
faith. But as even faith and prayer are the work and gift of God, so we
must daily apply ourselves to Him for the same. Hence arises the true
internal prayer of the heart, from a true conversion and inclination of
our souls and affections to God. This inward prayer pierces the heavens,
whilst a man walking in the steps of his Saviour, freely and cheerfully
takes up his cross and follows him; not like Simon the Cyrenian, who bore,
indeed, the cross, but it was because he was compelled to do it. Matt.
27:32. So great is the love of God, that he does not stay for our prayers;
but comes forth freely to meet us, and courts our friendship, entreating
us to ask pardon for our sins, and to practise the same love towards our
neighbors which he shows towards us. Happy is he, who truly knows,
understands, and meditates on this boundless love of God in Jesus Christ.
Such a man prays more effectually in his heart, than if he used the most
perfect form of words. One single meditation or devout sigh offered up to
God by Jesus Christ, in faith, love, and devotion, is more acceptable to
God, than all the parade of external worship.

2. The whole life of a Christian ought to be spent in the exercise of
love, and in the imitation of his crucified Lord. He properly is a
Christian, who does all things from a principle of divine charity, and is
transformed by it into the nature of Christ. And can God deny anything to
so dutiful, loving, and obedient a child when he prays? No, surely. But
that we might know how and for what we ought to ask, Christ has taught us
the _Lord’s Prayer_, a prayer full of petitions for the most exalted
blessings. Can there be a greater good than the kingdom of God? For he
himself is his own kingdom, extending to all rational creatures. So that
when we pray, “Thy kingdom come,” we pray that God would please to bestow
Himself upon us, with all the riches and blessings of his presence. In
this kingdom, therefore, God is our Father, manifesting his paternal love
and faithfulness to his children, by erecting his kingdom in us, that
therein he may perfect his most noble work in us, expressed in this
petition, “Hallowed be thy name;” which is done when the dignity and
excellency of the divine name and nature are more deeply discovered in the
soul.

3. In this kingdom, which is within us, he works his own will, without any
impediment. And so his “will is done in earth,” namely, in us, “as it is
in heaven,” that is, in God himself. Hence we understand, that what God
desires to bestow, and has commanded us to pray for, is nothing less than
Himself. This was the promise that he made to Abraham, “I am thy shield,
and thy exceeding great reward.” Gen. 15:1. Moreover, our Heavenly Father
gives us “our daily bread;” that is, he appropriates all his creatures to
our use, testifying thereby the greatness of his love towards us. For the
heart that is truly devoted to God, and in which he freely executes his
own will, is capable of receiving the fulness of his grace and blessings.
So great are the goodness, love, and mercy of God, that he can deny us
nothing that is necessary either for the body or the soul; and he best
knows our necessities. For this end he is daily setting our sins and
miseries before our eyes, teaching us to abase ourselves before him, and
to pray: “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us.” For so compassionate is God, that he freely offers us
forgiveness of sins, and teaches us how to ask it from the heart; that
thereby we may be assured, that he is more ready to forgive, than we are
to ask it; and that we may thence learn to exercise the same kindness
towards our neighbor, that He exercises towards us. For they that are
truly the children of God, exclude no man from their charity, or from the
love of God. They have nothing more at heart, than the glory of God, the
increase of his kingdom, and the salvation of all men. By this
acknowledgment of sin, and petition for pardon, the Christian is taught,
that in his natural state he is without God and his kingdom; void of
comfort, poor and miserable. And, therefore, he is taught to pray, “Lead
us not into temptation,” by which the devil endeavors to draw us from the
will and kingdom of God; but that he would “deliver us from evil,” that
is, from our own evil will and corrupt nature, which hinder the
accomplishment of God’s will, and the erecting of his kingdom in us, and
deprive him of the honor due unto his name. “For thine is the kingdom, the
power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.” Whilst we receive these as
coming from him alone, they still continue to be his. But if we do not
ascribe them to Him alone, we exclude ourselves from his kingdom, his
power, and his glory, not worthily sanctifying his name, nor obeying his
will. And hence it follows, that we also are out of his kingdom, and so
have no title to remission of sins and deliverance from evil.




