Chapter XIV.


Showing How Christ, By The Shame And Contempt Which He Endured, And By His
   Self-Denial, Teaches Us To Despise The Honor And Glory Of The World.


    _He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
    acquainted with grief._—ISA. 53:3.


The second head of the life of poverty of Christ, is the contempt which he
endured from the world. After thou hast read over and seriously considered
the lesson of _poverty_ exhibited by the Lord, take also a view of the
deep and unaffected _humility_, which was so eminently seen in his whole
life and conduct. Never did he catch at the applause of men; never was he
actuated by ambition, or any thirst after temporal honor and greatness: on
the contrary, whenever men offered to bestow honors and praises upon him,
he refused them, both by word and by deed: never did he accept of any
honor from men; nay, not even when “they would take him by force to make
him a king.” John 6:15. On the other hand, with what inexpressible
humility did he bear all the insults, the reproaches, and calumnies with
which his enemies loaded him? He was execrated as a Samaritan, and his
miracles were maliciously ascribed to the power of Beelzebub. John 8:48;
Matt. 12:24. The sound doctrine which he brought down from heaven, was
denounced as blasphemy; and he who taught it, was everywhere insulted by
foul and uncharitable censures, and such base lies and slanders as the
malice of men could contrive. He was betrayed and sold; he was denied and
buffeted; he was spit upon and crowned with thorns; he was derided and
scourged; he was smitten, and sentenced to death; he was rejected, and
condemned to undergo the ignominious “death of the cross.” Phil. 2:8. He
was forsaken by God and men; and, in fine, being stripped of all, was
executed in the midst of scandalous malefactors, hanging on the tree like
one accursed. Gal. 3:13. He was made the common gazing-stock of all his
enemies, and derided by all. His prayers were turned into ridicule; his
garments were parted by lot; and at the approach of the very pangs of
death, he had nothing wherewith to refresh himself but vinegar mingled
with gall. Matt. 27:34. At last, when all was finished, he expired on the
cross, amid the reproaches, hatred, and indignation of the world; his body
was pierced with a spear, and he made his grave with the wicked. John
19:34; Isa. 53:9. Nay, his enemies continued to fume with rage and malice,
even now when he had given up the ghost; and called him a deceiver. Matt.
27:63. Being risen at last from the dead, and triumphing over his enemies;
they boldly denied the truth of his resurrection. Thus was the Lord, in
the beginning, progress, and end of his ever-blessed life, “despised and
rejected, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.”

2. In the course of our Lord’s life, there is not only displayed to us the
abounding treasure of redemption gained by Christ; but it is also most
clearly demonstrated, that in this scene of suffering, he is our great
teacher and master, our prophet and shepherd, our instructor, light, and
constant monitor; that also we, by looking unto him, may learn to despise
earthly pomp and greatness; and by closely adhering to him, like true
members to their head, “grow up into him in all things” (Ephes. 4:15),
being rendered conformable unto his life, “and rooted and grounded in his
love.” Ephes. 3:17.

3. But when our lives are contrary to the life of him who is designed to
be our Head; when in our actions, words, and endeavors, we do not entirely
aim at God’s glory, but our own; it is more than evident, that Christ does
not live in us, but rather the prince of this world. It is then plain,
that we have not yet learned to love Christ, and that we are not yet loose
from the various ties of this world; for “whatsoever is born of God,
overcometh the world” (1 John 5:4); and so of course is not overcome by
it. Nor does such a one any longer love the world; for “if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him” (1 John 2:15); and
consequently, that of Christ must be absent likewise. For the whole life
of Christ teaches us how to die unto the world. Consider then the
beginning, together with the progress and conclusion of his life, and
remember the profound HUMILITY with which he bore the contempt and
reproaches of all those that love the world.




Chapter XV.


 Showing How We Should, Through Christ, Bear And Overcome The Trials And
                          Contempt Of The World.


    _Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
    himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds._—HEB. 12:3.


It is a most moving complaint uttered by the Messiah: “I became a reproach
unto them; when they looked upon me, they shaked their heads. Help me, O
Lord my God; O save me according to thy mercy; that they may know that
this is thy hand; that thou Lord hast done it. Let them curse, but bless
thou; when they arise, let them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame; and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a mantle. I will greatly praise the Lord
with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude. For he shall
stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that condemn
his soul.” Ps. 109:25-31.

2. This pathetic complaint of the Lord our Redeemer, every Christian ought
to represent to himself as a mirror, in which to behold the life of Christ
under the cross, together with that of all the saints in general. This way
of the cross has been copiously set forth in the Book of Psalms, in order
to render it the more familiar to us, and to teach us betimes, that “we
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.” Acts 14:22.
Such a consideration gives present ease and comfort under the contempt and
reproaches incident to the true followers of Christ, and accustoms them to
a conformity to the image of Christ (Rom. 8:29): which as it is one of the
greatest honors our Master bestows on his disciples; so it is by the world
abhorred and loathed, just as a healing medicine is by a distempered and
delicate palate. This conformity is, however, the grand duty of a
Christian, inuring him to bear his Master’s reproach (Heb. 13:13) and
abject image in time, that he may also hereafter bear his glorious image
in eternity. Phil. 3:21.

3. Now, as the 109th Psalm above-mentioned, contains a prayer of Christ
poured out in the midst of his sufferings; so it mentions, in the latter
part, three kinds of trouble more particularly, with which the Lord found
himself oppressed.

4. In the first place, the Lord complaineth of a vehement anxiety of
heart, declared in this manner: “I am poor and needy, and my heart is
wounded within me.” Ver. 22. Behold, what complaints this holy, this
eminent Person is reduced to! And what is the reason of them? Surely, to
acquaint us in the most affectionate terms, with all that he hath suffered
for our sake. He says, “I am poor;” and lo! thou toilest to get estates,
to hoard up riches; and yet when thou hast them, thou art still poor and
discontented in the possession of them. He says, “I am needy;” and thou, O
man, art entirely bent upon thy ease, prosperity, and fulness of bread! He
complains, “my heart is wounded within me;” how unreasonable is it then, O
man! that thou shouldest desire to be humored and gratified in all thy
vain and carnal propensities! Now, if nothing will awaken in thee a love
of the cross of Christ, let at least the consideration of the sacredness
of the afflicted Person, infinitely exalted above thee, work thee into a
ready compliance with his life. Such a consideration will give thee ease
and patience under any grief that may attend thee, and make thee relish
better those pure and untainted pleasures which will succeed the cross.
Therefore, think with thyself in this manner: “I am now put to trouble and
anxiety of heart; but the same befell also my Lord and Master, whose very
soul was surrounded with sorrows so heavy and acute, with pains so great,
that nothing of what I shall ever undergo can equal them.” However, the
Lord, after his sufferings, entered into everlasting joy; after contempt,
into never-fading glory; through death into life; and through hell into
heaven. And thus will it be with the sincere followers of the Lord, to
whom their crosses will prove but as so many advances to a more excellent
glory, and their affliction will be the avenue to everlasting bliss and
happiness.

5. The Lord continues his complaint thus: “I am gone like the shadow when
it declineth: I am tossed up and down as the locust. My knees are weak
through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness.” Ps. 109:23, 24. A most
expressive description of the common frailty of human nature! What is a
shadow, but a mere nothing, an empty lifeless appearance? To such an
abject lowliness, to such an inconceivable degree of humiliation, the Lord
suffered himself to be reduced whilst he dwelt among us! He who is life
and light itself, and the bottomless fountain of life and happiness, is
exposed to labor and infirmities; and should not men hereby learn so much
humility at least, as to think themselves far more emphatically as
shadows, or as nothing, than the Lord of life himself? At the same time,
it is to be remembered that the Lord here refers to his state of
humiliation alone, for, in his own glory he is our Lord and our life. He
says, “I am tossed up and down as the locust.” The Lord had no settled
habitation upon earth, as men of the world have. He was in a constant
pilgrimage towards that kingdom which cannot be moved. For this reason he
is said to have only _dwelt or tabernacled_ among us (John 1:14), and is
here compared to a locust, which having no abiding place, is fearful, and
tossed to and fro with every wind. Nahum 3:17; Exod. 10:19. And even in
this our blessed Saviour has left us a pattern, to walk as he walked; and
since we have no continuing city here, to seek one to come, which “hath
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.” Heb. 11:10. What is farther
added of the weakness of his knees, and the failing of his flesh,
abundantly appeared about the time of his passion, when his “strength was
dried up like a potsherd” (Ps. 22:15); and this may be a monitor to us
under bodily diseases and infirmities. Should we complain of a fit of
sickness, when the Lord of life pined away into weakness, and languished
in misery? What matters it, how languid, weak, and neglected our body be,
if our soul and spiritual life be but vigorous and sound? The soul ought
to “eat that which is good, and delight itself in spiritual fatness” (Isa.
55:2), that so it may grow “strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might.” Ephes. 6:10.

6. Thirdly, the Lord complains of the great contempt he underwent in this
world, in order to stop us in our pursuit after vain honor, pride, and
self-esteem. “I became,” says he, “a reproach unto them: when they looked
upon me they shaked their heads.” What indignity is there like unto this!
But the Anointed of the Lord endured it all for no other end, than to
rescue mankind from eternal scorn and infamy; for man having become a
scorner and hater of God, Christ was designed to make atonement for so
heinous a sin, by the extreme contempt which he willingly endured.
However, as the Lord by his humble submission to the contempt of the
world, has laid a mighty obligation on all Christians to be his followers
therein; so the considerations here annexed, may be of use for supporting
a man under sufferings of that nature.

7. First consider, that in bearing the contempt of the world, thou bearest
no less than the very image of Christ, and followest him who is thy Head
and Master. Rom. 8:17.

8. (2) To be contemned and disrespectfully used by the world, is of great
efficacy for improving thyself in true humility; a virtue which finds
favor with God. “For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the
humble.” 1 Peter 5:5.

9. (3) Thy suffering of reproaches for the sake of truth, is an evidence
that thou art ranked with that cloud of witnesses, who in all ages have
been made “as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things,”
and so continue to be esteemed “unto this day.” 1 Cor. 4:13.

10. (4) Remember that those that are come out “of great tribulation, shall
be before the throne of God” at last (Rev. 7:14), and be there “confessed
before the angels of God.” Luke 12:8; 1 Cor. 4:5.

11. (5) Of what consequence is it how contemptuously the world uses thee,
since thou art not to rise in the last day (as many shall), “to shame and
everlasting contempt” (Dan. 12:2), (the Lord having redeemed thee from
that), but to honor and glory!

12. (6) Remember that God does not withhold his grace from thee in this
world. When the world frowns, God favors. When men withdraw their
kindness, then God confers his mercy. For this purpose the Psalmist prays:
“Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy; that they may
know that this is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, hast done it.” Ps.
109:26, 27. That is to say: As the Lord removed at last his Son from the
cross, from all the labors of his soul, from all the insults of his
enemies, and crowned him with glory in heaven; so will he deal with thee
also, if thou continuest faithful in bearing the cross, and all the
injuries of a profane world. All shall see and shall know, that it is the
Lord’s hand that hath done it.

13. (7) It was God himself who suffered his beloved Son to be thus
contemned, reproached, and reviled, according to the words of the Psalm:
“Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my face.”
Ps. 69:7. Remember, therefore, that the same God, who gave a bitter cup to
his dear Son, hath also allotted thee thy trials, to humble thee, and to
know what is in thy heart.

14. (8) Be sure that the Lord will change all the undeserved reproaches
thrown upon thee, into so many blessings, and in his own time pour shame
and confusion upon the scoffers. This is expressed in the following verse:
“Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed; but
let thy servant rejoice.” Ps. 109:28. Nay, if the wicked curse ever so
much, yet “shall the curse causeless never come” (Prov. 26:2), as plainly
appears from Balaam’s attempt, who could not “curse, whom God had not
cursed.” Numb. 23:8. Whereas, whosoever feareth the Lord, it shall go well
with him at the last, and he shall find favor in the day of his death. The
same blessing is bestowed on Abraham, and on all those that walk in the
steps of his faith: “I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
curseth thee.” Gen. 12:3. And in another place we have this encouragement:
“Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings.” Isa. 51:7. And our Redeemer himself hath declared: “Blessed
are ye, when men shall revile you.” Matt. 5:11. And his apostle says: “If
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of
glory and of God resteth upon you.” 1 Pet. 4:14.

15. (9) The Lord goes on in the aforesaid Psalm: “I will greatly praise
the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude.” Ps.
109:30. Christ now returns thanks to his heavenly Father for the very
crosses and reproaches that were allotted him. This is the temper of every
sincere Christian. He is thankful in the midst of afflictions and
reproaches, particularly when he looks on the hand of that kind Father who
entails all this upon him, but who also delivers him. And truly, the Lord
never inflicts a judgment on any soul, but he affords at the same time
sufficient reason for thanking and blessing him for that affliction. Thus
is gratitude the happy product of crosses and trials. And this
consideration is fit to sweeten the duty of resignation to the will of
God. He that for the love of Christ readily submits to the contempt of a
vain world, shall be honored by God again, both in this world and in the
world to come. There is a time, wherein the Lord “raiseth up the poor out
of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; that he may set
him with princes, even with the princes of his people.” Ps. 113:7. Surely,
it argues an excellent spirit, when a man for Christ’s sake bears the
insults of the wicked, and maintains an unshaken calmness of mind, in the
midst of all the calumnies of the world. This is “the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price.” 1 Pet.
3:4.

16. (10) The Psalm concludes, “For he shall stand at the right hand of the
poor, to save him from those that condemn his soul.” Ps. 109:31. Here is
comfort sufficient to make a Christian bear up against the hardships and
reproaches he is exposed to in his warfare. It is never said that the Lord
will stand at the right hand of the violent and great ones, of the
oppressors and persecutors; but he will stand at the right hand of the
poor, who being destitute of the arm or support of men, flee to the Lord
alone for help and refuge, as to the sole object of their faith and trust.
Those are “remembered, when he maketh inquisition for blood” (Ps. 9:12);
and those are the afflicted, or the humble, “whose cry the Lord doth not
forget.” Tertullian tells us, “We are then absolved by God, when the world
condemns us.” For though “the wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh
to slay him; yet will the Lord not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him
when he is judged.” Ps. 37:32, 33. Thus will the Lord attend thee, O man!
with a wonderful deliverance, and afford thee reason enough to extol his
name among many, for his marvellous kindness. David himself “had fainted,
unless he had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. Wait, therefore, on the Lord; be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.” Ps. 27:13, 14.
“Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the heart: and then shall every man have praise of God.” 1
Cor. 4:5.




