Chapter XXXVIII.


  Showing That An Unchristian Life Leads To False Doctrine, Hardness Of
  Heart, And Blindness; Also, Treating Of The Eternal Election Of Grace.


    _Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the
    light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in
    darkness knoweth not whither he goeth_.—JOHN 12:35.


Since Christ, and faith in him are denied, and almost wholly extirpated by
an ungodly life, what shall his doctrine profit us? For his doctrine, with
the Word and Sacraments, is delivered to us for no other end, than that it
be inwardly digested, and converted, as it were, into our very life and
spirit. As from a good seed springs up good fruit, so from the Word and
Sacraments should spring up within us the noble life of regeneration, or
the new birth; the new, holy, and spiritual man; or, to speak all in one
word, a true and real Christian. For he that is a Christian, must needs be
born again of the Spirit, the Word, and the Sacraments, and believe and
live in Christ, as in the primary principle of the life of grace. As
certainly as a child is begotten by his father, so truly must the
Christian be begotten of God and of Christ, through faith. James 1:18; 1
Peter 1:23; John 3:3, 5; Titus 3:5.

2. When, therefore, we do not resolve to strive against the depraved bent
of our flesh, and to digest the doctrine of Christ into our life and
nature; nay, when we contradict the _Christian_ doctrine by an
_anti-Christian_ life, by irreligion and profaneness; is it not plain that
we are not begotten of God, nor born of Christ? What will Christ’s
_doctrine_ profit us, when we are sure that our _life_ does not correspond
with it at all? Will our vain boasts of the light of the Gospel do any
good, when we evidently walk in darkness? It is on this account that the
light deservedly retires from us, and the world begins to be overspread
with darkness and false doctrines, with errors and with seducing spirits.
And that we might beware of these, our blessed Saviour hath left us this
warning: “While ye have the light, walk in the light, lest darkness come
upon you” (John 12:35); that is, lest ye be led away into all kinds of
errors and delusions, into blindness and hardness of heart, into darkness
and prejudices, which indispose the mind for the very reception of the
light of the Gospel. This was the case with Pharaoh, the Jews, and also of
Julian the Apostate; who, being in the end convicted by the reproaches of
his own conscience, exclaimed openly, and to his own confusion, that
Christ both lived and reigned, and was both Lord and God; saying, “Thou
hast overcome, O Galilean; thou hast overcome.” It would have been better
for him to have said, “Lord, have mercy upon me!” But, alas! this was
entirely out of his reach, in consequence of the hardness of his heart,
contracted by an uninterrupted course of sinning, and by having rejected
and despised the mercy of Christ.

3. This hardness of heart, is that terrible darkness which, in the end,
overtakes all such as refuse to walk in the light whilst they have it. It
is the just punishment inflicted on those that blaspheme the truth, as
Pharaoh did, when he asked: “Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord.” Exodus 5:2. Therefore it
was but just that he should the more grievously feel the overruling power
of God, by being made an example to the whole world, and a lasting
monument of the indignation of the Lord, and of the weakness of men who
vainly presume to oppose him.

4. In like manner were the Jews of old struck with blindness and hardness
of heart, when they refused to hearken to the voice of the Lord, having
been warned by Moses long before, that this would certainly come to pass.
“The Lord,” says he, “shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonishment of heart.” Deut. 28:28. This actually did befall them, as may
be seen, Isaiah, chap. 6:9-12. Whereby it is manifest, that such hardness
of heart is the most righteous punishment of unbelief, of contempt of God,
and the heavenly truth declared by him; according to the words of St.
Paul: “With all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish;
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie.” 2 Thess. 2:10, 11. Whence it plainly appears, why God is
used to strike men with such terrible blindness and hardness of heart;
namely, because they “receive not the love of the truth.”

5. And, indeed, the man from whom God takes away his offered grace, is
surely most wretched and miserable; neither can he of himself at any time
return into the right way. As a proof of this, we have the examples of
Pharaoh and Julian. He from whom the Lord removes his light, must of
necessity live in darkness. God removes it, however, from those only who
refuse to walk in it; _neither does he take his grace from any, but from
those that boldly reject it_.

6. It is in this sense that the words of St. Paul are to be taken: “ ‘I
will have mercy (saith he) on whom I will have mercy.’ Therefore hath he
mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he hardeneth.” Rom.
9:15, 18. But truly the Lord hath pity on all them who freely receive his
mercy; as, on the contrary, he hardeneth those that reject and blaspheme
the offer of his grace. And it is this wilful resistance for which St.
Paul reproves the Jews: “It was necessary,” says he, “that the word of God
should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and
judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles.” “And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and
glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed” (Acts 13:46, 48): that is, as many as did not resist and
obstinately cast away the word of grace, as the means of faith. It was
because the Jews were guilty of this, that they could not believe: for the
Lord hath not ordained any one to eternal salvation, who disdainfully
rejects his word, and proves disobedient to the offer of his grace.

7. The ordination to life eternal, or the election of grace (Rom. 11:5),
is fully brought to pass in Jesus Christ, with this promise annexed, that
God offers his grace to all by the Gospel; those who receive it are
ordained to eternal life; and whosoever reject it thereby “judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life,” as St. Paul expresses it. That is,
by their own fault they make themselves unworthy of that blessing, and
debar themselves from that universal grace which is displayed in the
Gospel; and so putting their own names out of the book of life, which is
Christ, they resist the good work of God by their own contumacy, and,
consequently, cannot obtain that true saving faith, which the Word begets.

8. And here let us not deceive ourselves, by vainly supposing that they
only reject the word of God, who do not outwardly embrace the faith and
doctrine of Christ (such as Mahometans and Jews); and that those who
profess the Christian faith, and adhere to the doctrine of the Gospel,
cannot possibly be deemed wilful despisers of the offer of mercy. Certain
it is, that all who will not follow the footsteps of Christ, nor take his
life upon them, nor walk in the light, fall under this heavy charge. And
for this cause God is moved to take from them the light of his word, and
of pure doctrine. “I,” saith Christ, “am the light of the world: he that
followeth me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life.” John 8:12.

9. Hence we learn that whoever follows the example of Christ, and lives
his life, shall be in no danger of being misled by any delusion and error.
He shall also escape that blindness and hardness of heart, which an empty
confessor of the Christian faith draws upon himself. Consider here, on the
one hand, the many proud, noble, learned, ingenious, and mighty men of
this world; and, on the other, the errors, blindness, and delusions, into
which they are plunged. Truly, those delusions arise from no other source,
than because men do not live in Christ, but are averse to the imitation of
his holy life; and therefore cannot have the light of life.

10. From the same source also proceed those “workings of Satan,” and those
“strong delusions,” together with all the “lying wonders” mentioned by St.
Paul (2 Thess. 2:9-11), and which more and more increase upon us, because
the world is not willing to follow Christ, and by this means, to be
preserved from delusion and error. “For what communion hath light with
darkness? and what concord (therefore) hath Christ with Belial?” 2 Cor.
6:14, 15. That is to say, Purity of doctrine, and divine knowledge, cannot
remain with those that live in the devil, in darkness, in pride, in
covetousness, and filthy pleasure. How should the pure doctrine dwell with
those who exhibit impurity of life and manners? Nothing, certainly, can be
more irreconcilable, than purity of doctrine and an impure life.

11. If, therefore, we would preserve pure doctrine, we must be wholly
changed in our minds, and have no part with the world, and with
unchristian actions. We must “awake” (Eph. 5:14) from the lethargy of sin,
and shake off the works of darkness, that so Christ may enlighten us again
with the light of true faith. Whence it is plain, that whosoever does not
follow the footsteps of Christ, nor imitate him in his love, humility,
meekness, patience, and obedience, he must necessarily be deceived, and
stray from the knowledge of God; since he does not walk in the way which
leads to truth.

12. On the contrary, if we but lived in Christ, if we walked in his love
and humility, and directed all our endeavors and studies purely to this
_one object_, that the flesh be mortified, and the life of Christ raised
within us; that through him we might overcome ourselves, and triumph over
the flesh, the world, and the devil; if this were but once effected, there
would then remain very little contention and strife about the doctrine,
and heresies would of themselves fall to the ground.

13. We have an example of most strange delusion in Ahab, who, on account
of his wicked and tyrannical life, was seduced by four hundred false
prophets. 1 Kings 22. It was by their encouragement that he undertook that
fatal expedition against the Syrians, in contempt of the true prophet
Micaiah, who positively foretold his death in that battle. But being led
by a false light, he rejected the truth, and gave credit to lying
prophets, who prophesied nothing but peace and prosperity to him. Hence
the justice of God met him, according to the word of the true prophet, and
by due desert the dogs licked his blood.

14. In this is verified the word of St. Paul: “The god of this world hath
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ should shine unto them.” 2 Cor. 4:4. And is not
the same judgment threatened against all hypocrites, who boast of Christ
and his doctrine, but deny him in their life and actions? For thus saith
the Lord through the prophet: “Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart
far from me; therefore the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.” Isa. 29:13, 14.
Concerning the prophets in particular, the Lord has plainly declared, that
he has “covered the prophets, the rulers, and seers.” Hence the vision
shall become as a “sealed book,” etc. Verse 10, 11. And as for the Jews
themselves, the apostle has told us, that there is a “vail upon their
heart,” preventing their eyes from beholding the true Messiah; which,
however, shall be “taken away when they turn to the Lord.” 2 Cor. 3:15,
16.




