Chapter III.


The Whole Treasure Of The Inner Man Depends On Faith, Namely, God, Christ,
                 The Holy Spirit, And The Kingdom Of God.


    _God grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be
    strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man; that
    Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted
    and grounded in love, etc._—EPH. 3:16, 17.


A Christian ought to employ his greatest care and diligence, in learning
the true nature and practice of faith. It is faith that unites us to
Christ, and admits us into all the blessedness of the kingdom of God. Upon
this account it is called, “a substance;—the substance of things hoped
for.” Heb. 11. For our whole Christian life consists in a living and
operative faith, not in mere knowledge, not in a shadow or pretext, but in
a living, active power. In a word, it is faith alone that can deliver us
from our bondage of corruption and misery, and bring us into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. Whence, at our first admission into the
Christian Church by holy Baptism, through which, as through a gate, we
enter into the fold of Christ’s sheep, faith stands at the head. “He that
believeth and is baptized, shall be saved.” Mark 16:16. And St. Paul says,
“This is the word of faith which we preach, that if thou believe in thine
heart, etc., thou shalt be saved, etc.” Rom. 10:8-10. But as the nature of
faith may be better known by its properties, I shall briefly speak of
eight of them in this chapter.

2. The first of these is, spiritual freedom or a release from sin and
death, from the devil, from hell, the curse of the law, the Mosaic typical
ceremonies, and from all the commands and traditions of men. For as
nothing can cause greater agony to the soul, than to be compelled to bear
the fiery darts of Satan, and the tyranny of Antichrist, by which the
conscience is fettered and entangled with traditional precepts of men, as
with cords and chains: so nothing can give it greater quiet, peace, and
comfort, than to be delivered from this servitude of sin, Satan, and human
traditions, into a true freedom and liberty of conscience; which liberty
is nothing but a true and saving faith. For by this faith we apprehend
Jesus Christ, and all the treasures of his grace, particularly
reconciliation with God, remission of sins, the Holy Spirit, and eternal
life. He that has this faith cannot be hurt by sin, death, the devil, or
the world; for he has Christ dwelling in him, who is his righteousness
against sin; his life against death; his strength against the devil; his
heaven against hell; his victory over the world; his blessing against the
curse of all the world; his blessedness against all the miseries of this
world; his liberty, from all the vain traditions of men. This our blessed
Lord has briefly summed up in one sentence, “If the Son shall make you
free, ye shall be free indeed.” John 8:36. Whence Christ is all in all
unto faith, and the sum and completion of all our hopes and all our
blessedness. So that faith gives quietness to the soul; peace and plenty
to the conscience; freeing it from all fears and terrors, and causing the
heart to rest joyfully and quietly in God.

3. Secondly, by faith the soul is united to Christ, as a bride with her
bridegroom—“I will betroth thee unto me forever; yea, I will betroth thee
unto me in righteousness.” Hosea 2:19. The consequence of this espousal,
is a communication of all good things, yea, and of the cross itself, so
that all that Christ has, belongs to the soul, and all that the soul has,
belongs to Christ. Now as Christ has all heavenly and eternal gifts, such
as wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, blessedness, and
eternal life (1 Cor. 1:30): yea, is himself all these; the soul therefore
receives them all. And, on the other hand, as our soul has nothing but
sin, uncleanness, calamity, misery, sin and death, Christ has taken to him
all these; bestowing his good things upon us, and taking our sins and
miseries upon himself. But as the good things of Christ are eternal and
omnipotent, so they root out, swallow up, and destroy all sin, death, and
misery that are in us. For the eternal and invincible righteousness of
Christ, is so superior to the power of sin in us, that it utterly destroys
it; and by this means, the soul is delivered from its own sins, and
clothed with the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Isa. 61:10. And surely
this is a blessed exchange, when a man changes sin for righteousness,
death for life, a curse for a blessing, and eternal misery for eternal
blessedness. “There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus” (Rom. 8:1); for their sins are swallowed up in his
righteousness. For if, as St. Paul says, “death is swallowed up in
victory” (1 Cor. 15:54), it follows that sin also must be swallowed up.

4. Hence, thirdly, it follows, that by faith our souls are assured of
everlasting happiness. “I am persuaded,” saith St. Paul, “that no creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God.” Rom. 8:38. “Behold, I
lay in Zion for a foundation a tried stone; he that believeth shall not
make haste.” Isa. 28:16. And “I will make with you an everlasting
covenant.” Isa. 55:3. “My kindness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord, that hath mercy
on thee.” Isa. 54:10.

5. Hence, fourthly, arises the victory of faith over sin, death, hell, and
the world. “Whatsoever is born of God, overcometh the world:—who is he
that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of
God?” 1 John 5, 4. In these words, the _original_ of faith is discovered;
that it proceeds not from the powers of man, but that it is the work and
gift of God (John 6:29); and that regeneration is a divine, and
supernatural work. And as this new birth is in all respects superior to
nature, therefore it cannot be hurt by any assaults from the world; for
though a Christian be ever so much despised and abused by the world, yet
is he in Christ a glorious and triumphant conqueror. “In all these things
we are more than conquerors, through him that loved us.” Rom. 8:37.

6. Hence also arises, fifthly, the glory of faith, which is twofold: the
one spiritual and hidden; the other, future, visible, and glorious in the
world to come. Now faith makes us partakers of both kinds of Christ’s
glory. So then, as the majesty of Christ consists in his kingdom and
high-priesthood; so also he makes us kings and priests unto God; an honor
which, when St. Peter speaks of, he can hardly find words to express. “But
ye,” says he, “are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,
a peculiar people.” 1 Peter 2:9. Moreover, the glory of Christ’s kingdom
consists in this, that it is _eternal_, and all the blessings and benefits
of it are eternal: eternal grace, everlasting righteousness, unfading
consolation, endless life, joy, peace, and blessedness. What good could we
expect from a temporal prince? All the world itself, and all its glories
decay and perish; and there is no trust to be put in princes, nor in any
child of man. But Christ is our _Eternal King_; and all his favors and
blessings endure to eternity. The spiritual kingdom, then, of a Christian
consists in this, that by faith he is spiritually exalted above all
things; that nothing can hurt or hinder him, in the great affair of his
salvation. Yea, all things are subject to him, and work together for his
good, as we are told (Rom. 8:28): even life and death, the world, hell,
and the devil himself. Hence it appears how glorious, how extensive this
spiritual dominion of a Christian is, since all things, whether good or
evil, are forced to contribute to his spiritual good, so soon as he is
possessed of Christ, and Christ of him. For the whole treasure and hope of
a Christian is—Christ apprehended by faith; Christ is all-sufficient. O
the precious liberty of a Christian! O the mighty power of the inward man!
As the liberty, righteousness, and blessedness of a Christian, as also his
slavery, sin and misery, are not external things; so it follows, that no
external thing, nothing but the mere grace and command of God, can
justify, sanctify, or glorify a man. What though the body enjoy liberty,
health, and strength, and eat and drink well, will the soul be the better
for this? If the body be imprisoned, sick, weak, hungry, and thirsty, will
the soul be the worse? Not at all. These things cannot make the soul
either happy or miserable, whilst she preserves her inward treasure, and
is true to her spiritual liberty. So also in respect of her spiritual
priesthood, the soul is out of danger from anything that may happen
without. Its sacrifices, prayers, and devotions, are spiritually performed
by faith, without any necessary dependence upon external things; as time,
place, food, garments, or temples. Again, the soul is not at all the
better for any external circumstance; such as images, saints’ robes,
churches, external fasts, oral prayers, and other outward works. These are
not efficacious enough to lead the soul into the paths of righteousness
and liberty. All these things a hypocrite may do, without any benefit to
his soul. For there is nothing either in heaven or earth in which the soul
can live, nothing that can bestow upon her righteousness and liberty,
nothing in which she can rest with comfort, and joy, but CHRIST alone, on
whom by faith she comfortably and joyfully depends. This is what our Lord
himself tells us, “I am the way, the truth, and the life.” John 14:6. And,
“Come unto me, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.” Matt. 11:28. The
soul that is by faith united unto Christ, stands in need of nothing (John
10:11); for in Christ she possesses all things: food, joy, peace, light,
knowledge, righteousness, truth, wisdom, liberty, comfort, blessedness,
life, answers to prayer, and all things. So that “Christ is all, and in
all” (Col. 3:11), as the Apostle tells us. And whatsoever external
ceremonies we may conform to for the sake of peace, order, and uniformity,
we may be satisfied that “unto the pure, all things are pure.” Tit. 1:15.
“Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.” John
15:3. So that nothing can defile the soul, but unbelief, and its fruits.

7. The sixth property of faith is, that it renews the whole man. It
kindles in him the fire of divine love, and furnishes him with all
Christian graces and works of mercy; not as if he merited thereby anything
from God, but only as it renders the soul grateful to Him. “Offer unto God
thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the Most High.” Ps. 50:14. So that
faith immediately begins a new life in man, and quickens him through the
Word of God: for all the Holy Scripture is contained in faith. As
therefore the Word of God is holy, true, just, living, spiritual, free,
and full of all good; so also it makes all those who receive it in faith,
holy, just, true, the children of God, “thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.” 2 Tim. 3:17.

8. Seventhly, though true and saving faith triumphs over the world and the
devil; yet is it of such a nature, that, in pure love, it makes itself
servant unto all. He who has it, considers seriously with himself, that
Jesus Christ and all the heavenly graces are freely given him by God, so
that he stands in need of no worldly thing in the concern of salvation:
and withal, that “nothing can separate him from the love of God” (Rom.
8:38), and that nothing in this world can hurt him. When a man, endued
with a lively faith, considers all this, he cannot but acknowledge, that
in mere gratitude to God, he is obliged to do for his neighbor, as Christ
hath done for him. He will say, “All my gifts and graces, my wisdom, my
understanding, my riches, my comfort, are all my neighbor’s, as freely as
Jesus Christ, by his infinite mercy, has bestowed them on me.”

9. The eighth property of faith is, that it conquers and triumphs over
every cross, yea, glories in the cross. For we find more comforts in
Christ by faith, than we leave in forsaking the world for his sake; more
honor, than the united malice of the world can take from us. In him we
meet with so much love, that we shall not regard the hatred and enmities
of men; such blessings, that all the curses in the world cannot impair
them; so much joy, that all the world cannot make us sad. If it were
possible for us to be slain and murdered ten thousand times over, yet
Christ remains, and will forever continue to be our Lord, and our
everlasting Life, infinitely to be preferred before this short and
fleeting life.




