Chapter LII.


     Comforting Instructions For Those That Are Laboring Under Great
                          Temptations In Spirit.


    _I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction._—ISA. 48:10.


It is an undoubted truth that all spiritual sorrow proceeds from God. For
“the Lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and
bringeth up.” 1 Sam. 2:6, 7. By the “grave” in this place, is meant such a
state of spiritual afflictions as, like the grave, is void of all light
and comfort. The soul that is thrust down into this prison, looks upon
itself as dying and pining away; as hated, despised, and persecuted by
every creature of God. In this disconsolate state, the poor man cries out
with holy David, “My soul refused to be comforted.” Ps. 77:2. And well it
might, when both the Scripture and God himself were withholden from him.
This is that “grave” into which God brings the soul. Here it finds no
comfort but in silence and resignation, in those unutterable sighs and
groans which proceed from the ground of the heart; for so great is its
distress, that it cannot so much as think upon God, or the promises
contained in his holy Word. Faith grows weak, hope languishes, and the
whole man is feeble, withered like grass (Ps. 38:8, 9; 102:3), and ready
to perish, were he not inwardly supported by the secret Word and power of
God.

2. In this grave or shadow of death, we find our Lord Jesus Christ, when
“his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death; and in his agony his
sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood.” Matt. 26:38; Luke 22:44. In
this state a man undergoes greater afflictions than in death itself. Yea,
here a man wishes for death, and longs to find a grave where he may rest
from his unspeakable labors and sufferings. Job. 7:15. Thus we find Job
repeatedly wishing for death. And our blessed Lord himself, under the
agonies of death, cried out, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me!”
Matt. 27:46. He complains that he was forsaken of God, though He was
continually present with him, and preserved him under all his trouble. But
now, what can be more wonderful than that Christ himself should complain
for want of comfort, considering his intimate union with God? For he was
both God and man. Yet God had so withdrawn his consolations from him, that
his _human nature_ was left desolate and comfortless. Now if the blessed
Jesus, who was united to the eternal Godhead and anointed with the
heavenly oil of gladness, endured a conflict so bitter, surely sinful man
has no reason to wonder, when he is brought under the same fiery trial, as
if some strange thing had happened unto him. 1 Pet. 4:12.

3. We suffer nothing but what our blessed Master suffered before us; and
certainly nothing is more reasonable than that the members should suffer
with the Head.

4. This, therefore, is a kind of trial whether thou art truly a member of
Christ, and a partaker of his sufferings. Rev. 1:9. Such seems to have
been Hezekiah’s case when he complained—“Like a crane or a swallow, so did
I chatter: I did mourn as a dove.” Isa. 38:14. And Job’s—“I cry unto thee,
and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not.” Job
7:3; 30:20. And so again, “If I had called, and he had answered me; yet
would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.” Job 9:16. Such
were the complaints of holy David (Ps. 6; 13; 38; 88). In these scriptures
we may see how wonderfully all the saints and servants of God have been
purified in this furnace of affliction. This was the ground of that warmth
of feeling which we meet with in the words of Job and the holy Psalmist.
Sometimes they are so much bereft of hope, that they could not think it
possible that God should ever show mercy to them; at other times, they are
full of hope and confidence, and believe that “their Redeemer liveth” (Job
19:25), as Job expresses it. Yet the carnal man has no understanding of
such sufferings, or of the complaints arising from them. This we find by
the example of Job’s friends, who, not understanding what was the true
state of his distressed and afflicted soul, reproved him as one that had
lost patience, and that charged God foolishly. When a man is come into
this state, he falls into such a degree of unbelief that he is not
conscious of the least trace of faith remaining in his soul. All the
powers of faith being, as it were, collected in the centre of the soul,
seem to the man to be _lost_; though they still operate in secret, and
breathe in sighs and groanings unutterable. This absence of faith is a
kind of torture to the soul. Therefore the man cannot believe that God
will be merciful to him, but cries out, “O how willingly would I believe,
if it would but please God to give me the power!” And in the height of
this conflict, the Scriptures themselves afford him no comfort. This is
that crisis of the soul when God, by humbling us, shows us how unworthy
and vile we are in ourselves; yea, that of ourselves we are _nothing_, but
that all our sufficiency is of God; so that thence we may learn not to
trust in ourselves. Nevertheless, the poor soul occasionally perceives
some distant gleams of light breaking through the thick darkness, which
administer comfort and support, and preserve it from desperation.

5. Now, though it may happen that a man in the bitterness of his soul
grows impatient, and is tempted to fret against God, yet let him remember
that God is merciful. He knows whereof we are made; he sees the struggle
of our souls under the fiery trial, when he sets his hand to cleanse us
from our impurities. In a word, the most holy and best beloved children of
God, are they that have passed through this furnace of affliction; as we
may see by the examples of Job (Job 42:2, etc.), of David, and Jeremiah.
Jer. 20:12, etc. These learned faith in the school, and under the
discipline of the cross; whilst the delicate Christian who flees from the
cross, and expects to learn it amidst the enjoyments of the world, will
find himself miserably deceived in the end. But further,

6. (2) Let us call to mind that noble saying of Jeremiah, “The Lord will
not cast off forever; but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. For he doth not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men.” Lam. 3:30, 31, 33.
Whence them mayest learn, that though the Lord suffer thee to be afflicted
for a season, yet he will not cast thee off forever. Perhaps, however,
thou wilt say, that the evil thoughts with which thou art troubled, are
not from God, but from Satan. Now, though it cannot be denied that they
are suggested to us by Satan; yet it is also true, that Satan can do
nothing but by God’s permission. In this case, look unto Jesus, whom our
heavenly Father suffered to be tempted by the same adversary. The fiery
darts (Eph. 6:16) which the Evil One cast at our blessed Saviour, came
indeed from him, and not from God; but it was God that gave him permission
to assault as he did. And though our blessed Lord bore all this, yet he
still continued to be the dearly beloved Son of God, nor could the tempter
with all his art and power do him the least harm. Matt. 4:1, etc. Hear
this, O afflicted soul, and believe that thou also shalt be safe and
unhurt amid all the fiery darts of the wicked one. Remember the case of
Job, when, by God’s permission, the devil so afflicted him internally and
externally, that he cursed the day of his birth; yet was God still with
him, and we find him thus expressing himself to God: “These things hast
thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with thee.” Job 10:13.

7. Having thus discovered the _origin_ of this spiritual affliction, let
us next inquire into the _reasons_ why God sends it upon us.

8. First, then, it is certain that the true inward taste of the Word of
God, is accompanied with unspeakable joy, peace, and comfort, vastly
surpassing any enjoyments of this life. This is the true joy of our souls,
a foretaste of eternal life, arising from the true and living knowledge of
Christ Jesus; by which we discover the heart of God full of the most
tender compassions, and an ardent and eternal love towards lost mankind.
Now, so corrupt and perverse is human nature, that it is too apt to be
exalted above measure, by the abundance of these divine manifestations,
and to make them occasions of spiritual pride; and the man who is thus
visited and comforted from above, will be apt to think highly of himself,
to overvalue his sanctity, and to think meanly of the rest of the world,
who are strangers to these consolations; and thus, forsaking the fountain
of living waters, whence all the streams of blessing flow, and to which,
with all humility, they ought to be ascribed; the man grows vain and
arrogant, and sets himself up in the place of God. This perverseness of
soul, as it is directly contrary to true penitence, and to the appointed
way of salvation, so it is very hateful to God. This causes him to
withdraw his consolations from us, and to hide himself in thick darkness;
so that though we call and cry, and search ever so diligently, we shall
not be able to find Him. This is a deplorable state, when we are hanging,
as it were, between heaven and hell, oppressed and afflicted on every
side, not knowing whither to fly for relief or comfort; having no certain
evidence whether we believe or not, whether we hope or not, whether God be
angry with us or not, whether we are in a state of life or of death. This
is that darkness and desolation which we find described in Psalm 88; of
which the Psalmist speaks also in Ps. 31:22. “I said in my haste, I am cut
off from before thine eyes. Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplications when I cried unto thee.”

9. Now, although nothing is more bitter to us than to be so long deprived
of the comforts of the divine presence; yet even this deprivation itself
is more profitable to the soul, than all the enjoyments and glories of the
world. By this, as by a fiery trial, we are taught humility, repentance,
contempt of the world, and the true value of all its favors and
enjoyments; that these are dangerous, transitory, and perishing, and can
give no solid comfort to the distressed soul. And though the soul in this
state is encompassed with perplexities and fears, so that it can hardly
lift up itself to God, yet there is left a kind of deep and secret sorrow,
venting itself in holy sighs, and devout aspirations towards God, and a
longing for his favor. Hence we may learn how great a good God is to the
soul, and that no true, solid, or constant peace can be found except in
Him. This cannot be learned any where but in this school of temptation; in
which alone the truest knowledge is to be acquired. And whosoever is
unacquainted with this, knows not God and Christ as they ought to be
known.

10. And would to God, that for his glory, and our own unspeakable
advantage, we would readily submit to this visitation, which is designed
for the trial of our faith, even as gold in the furnace is tried! Then we
should quickly reap the amazing benefits of such a cleansing. For the
faithful soul that can hold out, and not faint under it, comes forth
glorious as gold out of the fire, cleansed from all its dross; so that
neither fire, nor water, nor the cross, nor death, nor Satan, can hurt it.
Such a one will learn how to behave himself ever afterwards with patience
and humility, both in prosperity and adversity; not to sink under the
cross; not to be presumptuous in prosperity; not to depend upon himself,
or be puffed up with his own fancied perfections; but to look up
steadfastly to God, the everlasting fountain and giver of all goodness;
and to embrace every dispensation of Providence, whether sweet or bitter,
as his only happiness; and, in every state or condition of soul or body,
to rejoice in God alone.

11. Secondly, whensoever it shall please God to cast any of us, his
creatures, into this trying furnace, it will be much more consistent and
profitable for us to pray for patience under it, than for deliverance from
it. For when once the fire of temptation has purged away the dross of our
iniquities, our pride, luxury, covetousness, and envy, it will be much
easier for us to endure afterwards other fiery trials, by having our own
will swallowed up in the will and good pleasure of God. But when from an
excessive indulgence of the infirmities of our corrupt nature, we endeavor
to avoid this fiery trial, it often happens that before we can receive any
benefit from it, we are contriving to make our escape. So that if God did
not often keep us under the trial against our will, we should fly from it,
without considering whether we were sufficiently purified, according to
the will of God and the necessities of our corrupt nature: like children,
who, if their parents or physicians did not prevent, would throw away that
bitter cup which alone can cure their disorders. But God knows our case,
and what is proper for us, better than we ourselves; and therefore he has
appointed certain measures of affliction, to which he confines the soul,
till he sees it proper to release her. So that we ought not so much to
pray for deliverance from temptations, as for patience under them.

12. Thirdly, our deliverance is so certain, that we have not the least
reason to doubt of it; for “though the Lord cause grief, yet will he have
compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies.” Lam. 3:32. This is
the promise of God, who is truth itself, and it therefore ought diligently
to be weighed and considered by us. It is much better to know and digest
some few comfortable passages of Scripture, or even only one of this kind,
than to burden our memory with a great many without true spiritual relish.
For when a man has by a lively faith digested one, he will easily
understand and digest all the rest; and he that can derive comfort from
_one_ text, will thereby learn to do the same by all the rest. It will be
very useful to repeat frequently, with lively affection, the 88th Psalm,
where thou wilt see the state of thy soul described. There thou wilt find
that there have been others in the world before thee, who have been tried
and afflicted as thou art, and yet have afterwards been delivered and
comforted of God, as we find in Psalm 89, where the holy man, rejoicing in
the divine comfort, begins, as in a rapture, “I will sing of the mercies
of the Lord for ever.” Be thou confident, therefore, and believe that God
will also in due time comfort thee with the same consolation. For the Evil
spirit, who always delights to afflict the souls of men, has, from the
beginning of the world, made it his business to gall and wound them with
his fiery darts. As in a tempestuous sea one wave is continually rolling
upon another, so do the various temptations of Satan pursue the afflicted
soul; sometimes oppressing it with fearful and melancholy thoughts; at
others, with impatience, unbelief, blasphemous and wicked thoughts. The
terrors and miseries of such a soul are sometimes so great, that no
creature can give it comfort; yea, those very things which give joy and
delight to others, are to such a man, not only joyless, but burdensome.
The whole world is to him but one bitter cross; yea, even God himself
appears dreadful to him. Thus Job bitterly complains (chap. 7:13, etc.);
and the agony is increased by the sting of his own conscience, which
terrifies him with this dreadful sentence, “There is no help for thee in
thy God.” Ps. 3:2.

13. Against these wiles of the devil there is no better remedy than to
endeavor to strengthen thyself after the examples of Job, David, and other
holy men. (1) By bearing thy affliction as long as it shall please God;
and waiting patiently till the clouds of darkness be driven away. Isa. 54:
11. “I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, until he bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.” Micah 7:9. Where God afflicteth, it is in no man’s power
to comfort. “The Lord killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to the
grave, and bringeth up.” 1 Sam. 2:6.

14. (2) We must, in this case, stop our ears against the opinions of the
world, and, with Job, disregard the accusations of our friends, the
terrors of the devil, who is the enemy of all peace and comfort, the
reflections of our own hearts, the stings of our own consciences, and all
the objections of flesh and blood. For, “if our heart condemn us, God is
greater than our heart” (1 John 3:20), yea, than all the world, or the
devil himself. Rather call to mind what God himself has promised to such
afflicted souls. “To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of
a contrite spirit.” Isa. 66:2. “I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction.” Isa. 48:10.

15. (3) Consider also the examples of holy men. Did not they suffer as
thou dost, and were they not at last delivered? Does not David complain,
“How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever?” Ps. 13:1. And did God
forsake him in his troubles? No; for he adds, “I have trusted in thy
mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation!” Ver. 5. He complains,
“Hath God forgotten to be gracious?” Ps. 77:9. But did God leave him in
this extremity? No, certainly, for after his deliverance he adds, “I will
remember the years of the right hand of the Most High.” Ver. 10. Thus when
God discovered himself in terrors to Jeremiah, he prays, “Be not a terror
unto me!” (Jer. 17:17), but immediately adds, “Thou art my hope in the day
of evil.” Did not Jesus Christ himself cry out, “My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?” Ps. 22:1. But was he forsaken of God? No; for he adds,
“I will declare thy name unto my brethren” (Ps. 22:22): and “I shall not
die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord.” Ps. 118:17.

16. Thou also, after this example of thy Saviour, must be content to drink
the wine mingled with gall and myrrh (Matt. 27:34), that thou mayest
hereafter sit down with him at his royal supper in the kingdom of heaven.
Isa. 65:13. Learn, therefore, to bear his reproach (Heb. 13:13); and thou
shalt be a partaker of his glory. Learn to be conformed to Christ
crucified, that thou mayest be conformed to Christ glorified. Rom. 8:29;
Phil. 3:21.




