Chapter VI.


                       The Seat Of God In The Soul.


    _Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women_?—CANT.
    6:1.


Though our “beloved” is always with us, yet he never discovers himself but
when the heart is quiet and composed, and all the senses are collected in
God. When nothing earthly appears in the understanding, but all its animal
and worldly wisdom is swallowed up in faith; then the divine light arises,
darting light and glory through the benighted soul. This is that darkness
which is the habitation of God; that night, in which the will rests in
union with the will of God; and in which the memory forgets all the
impressions of the creatures. Then, in a moment, the divine light strikes
the understanding, heavenly desires inflame the will, and eternal joys
possess and fill the memory; yet neither the understanding, the will, nor
the memory, can comprehend or retain the transcendent joys with which they
are visited of God. For this perception is not lodged in the faculties of
the soul, but lies hid in the very centre of it. Yea, it may sometimes be
awakened through the Word, and break forth in words, so that we may cry
out with St. Augustine’s mother Monica, “Let us fly away, let us fly away
to the eternal joy.”

2. From this fountain spring all the unutterable groanings of holy souls.
This was the sweetness that St. Paul tasted, when he uttered these words,
“I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God” (Rom. 8:38): meaning
_that_ love of God to us, which he had tasted in his own soul. Thus St.
Augustine witnesses of himself, “that he sometimes felt such exalted joy
in his inward soul, that if it were but lasting, it could be nothing else
but eternal life.” This is that divine pleasure which would fill our
souls, and draw them to itself: and by these foretastes we know what
eternal life is; that it is a state in which our souls shall be fully
satisfied with heavenly joy and sweetness. Hence the devout soul says, “I
am sick of love.” Cant. 5:8. That is: “This is the height of my wishes,
this is what I long and sigh after: that I may find my beloved, and be
satisfied with his love, and recover my heavenly nobility, which consists
in union with Christ; that I may nevermore delight in any worldly or
transitory things, much less in sins, or sinful pleasures.”

3. This nobility of the soul is but little known to the men of this world,
even those that are accounted wise and learned: and they that have written
volumes about the soul and its faculties, have never come to the
fundamental point. For Christ is the true strength of the soul, its
understanding, will, and memory; that is, light in its understanding;
pleasure in its will; and joy in its memory. So Christ is the true
sanctification, glory, and ornament of the soul; so that a man, for the
love of Christ, which he experiences in himself, does not desire to sin.
Thus we are told, “Whoso abideth in him, sinneth not. Whosoever is born of
God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot
sin.” 1 John 3:6, 9. Yea, from this love of Christ arises often joy so
great as to make crosses and afflictions not only tolerable, but even
desirable for Christ’s sake (Acts 5:41); so that the cross is turned into
joy, which is continually springing up from its eternal fountain in the
centre of the soul. There God has sanctified a place for himself, and made
it so peculiarly his own, that neither angel, nor man, nor any other
creature, can enter there. Here it is that God delights to dwell, and he
suffers no other being to dwell with him. God’s delight is to dwell in a
pure soul. So he tells us, “My delights are with the sons of men.” Prov.
8:31. But what this happiness is, or how great this delight is, no man
knows but he who has experienced it; nor can even he explain it fully in
words.




Chapter VII.


  Of The Dignity Of The Soul; Of True Repentance; And, Of Divine Mercy.


    _My house is the house of prayer._—LUKE 19:46; MATT. 21:13; ISA.
    56:7.


The dignity of the soul consists in this, that it is the habitation and
temple of God, in which he takes more delight than in the whole compass of
heaven and earth. So the believing soul has more of the divine presence
than heaven, than all the temples made with hands, yea, than all the
creatures in the world. For God communicates his whole treasures of love
to such a soul; he rejoices and delights in it; yea, through all creatures
he seeks to make the soul of man happy and glorious. Wherefore, as God
shows so much love, and takes so much pleasure in the soul of man, he may
more properly be said to dwell in it than in any material buildings, yea,
than in heaven itself. Here he displays all the wonders of his providence
and love; yea, for this very end has he created it with nobler faculties
than he has given to the rest of his creatures, that it might be capable
of these exalted communications of the divine grace. And if God should
bestow upon the soul anything less than himself, she would reject it as
being too little. Now St. Paul tells us, “God hath chosen us in Christ
before the foundation of the world.” Eph. 1:4. Let this then be our labor,
this our highest endeavor, to be really what we have been from the
beginning of the world. And as the soul ought to be the spouse of the Son
of God, it follows that it is beloved by God above other creatures. It was
this love that brought the blessed Jesus down from heaven to be united to
the beloved soul which the Father had betrothed to him from all eternity,
and to bring it back to the great original from which it at first
proceeded.

2. Now as God has discovered this transcendent love to the soul, it
follows that the soul ought to rest in God alone, and not to waste its
love on any creature, at which it knows that God will be offended. So
great is the loveliness, so great the beauty that is in God, that if the
soul could take ever so remote, ever so obscure a view of it, she would
not be separated from him to gain the whole world. The soul, then, which
is so beloved of God, should be ashamed to fix its love upon any creature
which is offensive to God. She ought to be heartily ashamed and afflicted
if she has not preferred God before all creatures, proposed his glory in
all things, and loved him above all things; this is the true contrition
which is acceptable to God. The whole creation naturally loves God more
than itself, and spends itself in the execution of his commands; but the
miserable sinner loves himself better than his God. If thy sorrow,
therefore, proceed merely from a sense of thy own loss, and not of thy
sins and offences against God, thy contrition is not true, thy sorrow is
not acceptable before God. Though there were no heaven to reward thee, nor
hell to punish thee, yet thou oughtest to be grieved that thou hast
offended and provoked thy God. For the love of God is very heaven, and his
anger is hell. But if thou hast in thy heart that contrition which is here
described, and true faith in Christ, thy sins shall freely be forgiven
thee. For it is more agreeable to him to forgive sins, than to punish
them: not to mention, that as he is our Father, and we are his children,
he is obliged in justice to show mercy to us. For if he be our Father, it
follows that he has a fatherly affection towards us, which will upon all
occasions rejoice and triumph against the severity of his justice. To this
fatherly affection of God, let us perfectly resign ourselves. Whosoever
rests in this, will be well pleased both with the justice and the mercy of
God. For he that truly loves God, will bear patiently all the
determinations of His will, either towards himself or towards any other
creature. Let his will be thine; remember the saying of one of old: “I
would rather be in hell with God, than in heaven without him.”




