Chapter XLIV.


   Of Patience, Which Triumphantly Endures The Cross, And Waits For The
                             Promised Glory.


    _Ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of
    God, ye might receive the promise._—HEB. 10:36.


True Christian _patience_ is that virtue by which, in all afflictions that
cannot, by ordinary means, be avoided, we resign ourselves to the divine
will, and submit entirely to it; choosing rather to suffer the greatest
evils, than murmur against God, or let go our dependence on him.

2. The first reason or ground of this virtue is, _the counsel and gracious
will of God_, by which we are appointed to sufferings and afflictions;
according to Rom. 8:29: “Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his Son.” As, therefore, God appointed his
own beloved Son to the sufferings of the cross, that thereby he might
bring him to glory; so also has he appointed all the true members of
Christ to bear the cross, without which they cannot be his body. Eph.
5:30. To each of these he has marked, measured, and, as it were, weighed
out, his exact portion of affliction, which cannot be escaped, much less
shaken off by impatience; but may be alleviated by obedience and humble
submission, and overcome by the power of Jesus Christ.

3. The second reason why we ought to be patient is _the approaching
consummation of all things_; at which time, as our blessed Lord has told
us, “iniquity shall abound, and love shall wax cold.” Matt. 24:12. The
consequence of this must be that sincere Christians will be exposed to
various afflictions, crosses, injuries, and sundry kinds of death; for
“all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” 2
Tim. 3:12. Christ assures us that the righteous must expect tribulations
and persecutions for the testimony of a good conscience. John 15:20; 16:1.
And the whole Revelation of St. John testifies that Antichrist shall
persecute the Church of God till the last coming of the Lord; then the
conflict will at last end, and the dragon and false prophets be cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone. Do not, therefore, deceive thyself with
golden dreams of felicity, but possess thy soul in patience, and
strengthen thyself against the approaching calamities.

4. Thirdly, the hope of the restitution of all things, and _the
expectation of everlasting happiness_, is another argument to support our
patience. For as “the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the
earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and
latter rain” (James 5:7), comforting himself under all his toils with the
hopes of a plentiful harvest, so should Christians also learn to “possess
their souls in patience” (Luke 21:19), and to persuade themselves that the
great and universal harvest of the long-expected day of the Lord shall
repair all our losses, and give to every one of us the fruit of our
labors. For as the husbandman by no means reckons his seed lost, though it
is for a while buried in the earth, but only sows it there in hopes of a
harvest, so when Providence is pleased to take from us our lives, our
friends, our estates, or honor, we must not look upon them as lost, but be
assured that they are sown in hope of the great day of harvest, when we
shall reap abundantly, “if we faint not.” Gal. 6:9. So also afflictions
are compared to seed-time: “They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He
that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.” Ps. 126:5, 6.

5. Fourthly, another support of patience is the _coming of Jesus Christ_;
when all our sorrows shall be done away, yea, be turned into joy (John
16:20), and the just judgment of God shall fall upon our enemies; and then
“shall every man have praise of God.” 1 Cor. 4:5. And this day is at hand:
“the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.” James 5:8. “Vengeance is mine,
saith the Lord.” Rom. 12:19. The time of the cross is short, but the glory
that follows it will be eternal. And that day of deliverance cannot be far
off.

6. The fifth support of patience is _the truth and faithfulness of God_;
by the consideration of which “we ought to stablish our hearts,” as St.
James says, so that they may not waver. James 5:8. For as we tie a tender
tree to a post, that it may not be broken by the winds; and as we cast
anchor in a storm, to hold the ship, that it may not be driven by the
tempest; so ought we to apply our faint and weak hearts to the firm pillar
of God’s word, and hold the ship of our souls by the anchor of hope, that
it sink not. Heb. 6:19. For how many and great promises of divine
assistance have we in the Holy Scriptures! How many instances of strange
deliverances have we daily before our eyes! And what variety of methods
has God to deliver us! How many has he preserved in pestilence and famine
(2 Kings 6:25; 7:16), and delivered from the peril of the sword! 2 Chron.
20:22; 14:12. For God can turn the hearts of enemies to unity and peace,
or disappoint the designs of the adversary, as appears in the history of
the blessed Jesus: “for,” says the angel, “they are dead which sought the
young child’s life.” Matt. 2:20. God can also convert an adversary, as he
did St. Paul. Acts 9: 3, etc. How often does he disappoint the bloody
intentions of wicked men! Saul had a design upon the life of David, and
thought he was so penned in that he could not escape; but God recalls him
by the message of a new incursion of the Philistines into his country. 1
Sam. 23:27. And the chief priests having sent their officers to lay hold
on the blessed Jesus, the latter were so affected by our Lord’s
discourses, that they could not find in their hearts to touch him. John
7:44. Sometimes God smites the enemies of his servants with blindness, as
in the cases of Elisha (2 Kings 6:18) and of Lot. Gen. 19:11. Consider,
too, the innumerable legions of angels that guarded the Christians of old
time, and miraculously preserved them from imminent dangers, as in the
case of St. Peter. Acts 5:19; 12:7-11. And how often was St. Paul
wonderfully preserved, and the designs laid against his life discovered!
Acts 23:16. At length, by a temporal death, God puts an end to the
miseries of his servants.

7. Sixthly, how _glorious_ shall the _recompense_ of past afflictions be
to the faithful in the other world, which they would not exchange for all
the pleasures and glories of this! Rom. 8:18. “Blessed are they that
mourn; for they shall be comforted.” Matt. 5:4. And in Rev. 21:4 and Isa.
25:8, it is said, that “God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of”
his saints. But how shall he wipe away the tears of those that never
sincerely wept?

8. Seventhly, we must set before our eyes _the examples of holy men_, as
Abel, Noah, Lot, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Job, and especially
the man of God, Moses; who, as the Holy Scripture witnesses, was “very
meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth.” Num. 12:3.
The people were sometimes murmuring against him, sometimes chiding him,
and sometimes threatening to stone him; but he broke their stubborn hearts
by his meekness and patience, pacifying them with gentle words, praying to
God for them, and entreating rather to be blotted out of the book of life,
than that they should be cut off in His displeasure. Exod. 32:32. So also
Elijah, having been most cruelly persecuted, yet obtained rain from God
for his ungrateful country. 1 Kings 18:45. Micaiah, before the kings Ahab
and Jehoshaphat, was struck by the false prophets, and cast into prison,
only for dealing sincerely with the king, and giving him a salutary
warning. 1 Kings 22:24; 2 Chron. 18:23. Why should I mention Isaiah, sawn
asunder as a reward for his faithful services, or Jeremiah, bitterly
persecuted by his countrymen (Jer. 15:10), or Daniel, cast into the den of
lions (Dan. 6:6), or John the Baptist beheaded (Matt. 14:10), or St. Paul,
and all the afflictions which he endured (2 Cor. 11:23, etc.), or the
sufferings and trials of the rest of the Apostles, and all the holy
martyrs? See Heb. 11:35, etc. Should you inquire of all these, by what way
they entered into heaven, they will all with one voice answer: By the way
of the cross and tribulation. Acts 14:22. Neither did Christ himself enter
by any other way. So says St. Peter, “Christ suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that ye should follow his steps: who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed
himself to him that judgeth righteously.” 1 Pet. 2:21, 23. So great was
the patience of our blessed Redeemer, that though the sun hid its head at
the time of his passion, being unwilling to witness indignities so great;
though the earth trembled, and the rocks rent (Luke 23:44; Matt. 27:51);
yet he, still hanging upon the cross, murmured not against his enemies,
nor by either word or gesture discovered the least impatience; but on the
other hand, prayed for his enemies, that they might be saved by that blood
which they so unjustly shed. Now if this be the lot of the children of
God, that he chasteneth every one whom he loveth and receiveth, it follows
that we must either suffer, or quit our title to be the sons of God. Heb.
12:6-8. If our heavenly Father spared not his own Son, though he was
without sin, but chastened him with the rod of affliction; canst thou, who
art an adopted son, and polluted with innumerable sins, expect to escape
it? Moreover, if God bear so patiently with our provocations, how much
more patient ought we to be, when we are punished for our good, with a
view to our amendment! “Let us rather rejoice,” as St. Peter exhorts us (1
Epistle 4:13), “inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that
when his glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy.”

9. Eighthly, we shall bear our afflictions patiently, when we consider
that Christ Jesus has _sanctified and blessed our crosses by his own_, and
has taken away the sting of affliction, and made it to us the instrument
of blessing, life, and glory. For as the sufferings of Christ ended in
glory, so will the sufferings of every Christian be turned into
everlasting joy.

10. Ninthly, behold _the glorious reward_ of those that bore their cross
_with patience_. Though many of the holy martyrs were most barbarously
treated, most inhumanly punished, and cruelly put to death, some thrown to
wild beasts, some boiled in oil, others in melted lead; yet there is no
man so impious or foolish, as to say, that he had not rather be in their
condition now, than that of their murderers. Who would not now prefer the
condition of the poor Lazarus, to that of the rich man? Luke 16:25. But if
thou wouldest obtain the glory of the saints, thou must also bear the same
crosses, and bear them with the same patience. To this we must refer those
words of our blessed Saviour: “Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil of you falsely, for my
sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven.”
Matt. 5:11, 12. As also those in Rom. 8:17, 18, “If we suffer with Christ,
we shall also be glorified with him.” And again, “I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us.”

11. Tenthly, let the deep _compassion_ of God be a support to our
patience, who can no more forget us, than a mother can forget her sucking
child. Isa. 49:15. He says, that “his bowels are troubled for Ephraim, and
that he will have mercy upon him.” Jer. 31:20. Hence also he is said to be
“faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able” (1
Cor. 10:13); not chastening us for our hurt, but that we may obtain
everlasting life, “and not be condemned with the world.” 1 Cor. 11:32.
For, if the cross be nothing but a token of God’s favor, wouldest thou
rather choose the pleasures and dainties of the rich man here, and have
his punishment hereafter, than enter into eternal life by the way of the
cross, and wear a crown of glory?

12. All that has been said on this head, is admirably explained in the
Epistle to the Hebrews (Heb. 12:1-11) as follows: “Let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author
and finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand
of the throne of God. For consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Ye
have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. And ye have
forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My
son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth
every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you
as with sons: for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye
be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards,
and not sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of spirits and live? For they verily for a few
days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness. Now no chastening for the present
seemeth to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth
the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which are exercised
thereby.”




