Chapter XXI.


                       Of The True Worship Of God.


    _The sons of Aaron offered strange fire before the Lord, and there
    went out fire from the Lord and devoured them._—LEV. 10:1, 2.


This fire is called _strange_, because it was different from that which
continually burned upon the altar, and with which, according to the
command of God, the burnt-offerings were consumed. It is, therefore, a
type of false worship; and the sons of Aaron were destroyed with avenging
flames, because they violated the divine precept.

2. This marked displeasure of the jealous and righteous God, is in like
manner provoked by those who, from the motion of their own unregenerate
mind, and from a singular presumption of devotion or religious sanctity,
introduce a new and peculiar worship of God; which, not being enjoined by
himself, provokes his indignation, anger, and vengeance; because “God is a
consuming fire.” Deut. 4:24; Heb. 12:29.

3. In order that _we_ may not incur the wrath of the divine majesty, let
us consider wherein the true worship of God consists; for the punishment
of temporal fire, inflicted on false worship under the _Old_ Testament, is
to us a proof, that the Lord will also, under the _New_ dispensation, take
the severest vengeance on all strange worship, not only with everlasting,
but also with temporal fire, wars, desolations, and effusion of blood.

4. Now, we can learn wherein the true worship of God consists, when we
compare the Old Testament with the New. The ceremonies which the former
prescribed, referred typically to the Messiah. Devout Jews saw, as it
were, the Messiah from afar, believed on him, and, according to the
promise, obtained deliverance from sin and death through him. But our
worship, according to the _New_ Testament, does not consist in external
ceremonies; we are taught to worship God in spirit and in truth, that is,
to believe in Christ, who fulfilled the Law. Thus he redeemed us from the
curse of the law (Gal. 3:13), and made us free from all Jewish ceremonies
(Gal. 5:1); so that now, by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, we serve
God with a willing heart and mind (Jerem. 31:33; Rom. 8:14), and our
conscience and faith are not bound by human ordinances.

5. To true, spiritual, internal Christian worship, three things belong. 1.
The _true knowledge of God_. 2. The _knowledge of sin_, accompanied with
unfeigned repentance. And 3. The _knowledge of grace_, attended with
remission of sin.

6. The _knowledge of God_ consists in faith, which apprehends Christ, and
in him, and through him, knows God, his omnipotence, love, mercy,
righteousness, truth, wisdom; all which are God himself. For what is God?
Surely no other than pure omnipotence, pure love and mercy, pure justice,
truth, and wisdom. And the same is to be said of Christ, and of the Holy
Spirit.

7. But whatever God is, he is not to himself only, but also to _me_, by
his gracious will, made manifest in Christ Jesus. Thus _to me_ is God
omnipotent; _to me_ he is merciful; _to me_ eternal righteousness, through
faith and remission of sins. _To me_, also, he is everlasting truth and
wisdom. Thus it is, also, with Christ. He is made _to me_ eternal
omnipotence, the almighty Head, and Prince of my life, my most merciful
Saviour, everlasting love, unchangeable righteousness, truth, and wisdom;
according to the words of the apostle: “Christ is of God made unto us,
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.” 1 Cor.
1:30. All of which is also true of the Holy Spirit, who is _my_ eternal
love, righteousness, truth, and wisdom.

8. This is the true knowledge of God, which consists in faith. It is not
some empty and speculative science, as people imagine; but a cheerful,
lively, and effectual reliance on God, in which I feel the rays and
influences of the divine Omnipotence really descending upon me, so that I
perceive how I am upheld and preserved by him; how “in him I live, and
move, and have my being.” Acts 17:28. I must also taste the riches of his
goodness and mercy. Is not that which the Father, Christ, and the Holy
Spirit, have done for thee, for me, and for us all, the effect of pure
love? What more perfect and complete righteousness can there be than that,
by which he rescues us from sin, hell, death, and the devil? And do not
his truth and wisdom most conspicuously appear in all that he has
accomplished for us?

9. This, therefore, is the true and substantial faith, which consists in a
living and effectual reliance on God, and not in empty words. In this
knowledge of God, or faith, we must, as becomes the children of God, make
daily advances, and abound more and more. 1 Thess. 4:1. Hence the apostle
pours out most fervent prayers, “that we may know the love of Christ,
which passeth knowledge.” Eph. 3:19. As if he had said, “Though it were
the sole care of our lives to learn the depth of the love of Christ, yet
would there still remain continual and never-failing matter for further
inquiry.” Neither is it to be supposed, that this knowledge consists in a
barren acquaintance with the universal love of Christ, extending itself
over the whole world; but we must also taste it in our own hearts; we must
experience the sweetness and delight, the power and vital influx of this
immense kindness displayed in the Word, and embraced by faith. Can he say
that he knows the love of Christ, who never tasted its sweetness? Hence it
is said of some that were endued with this experimental sense, that they
had “tasted of the heavenly gift, and the good word of God, and the powers
of the world to come.” Heb. 6:4. All this is effected by faith through the
Word. The same experience of the divine love is also intimated by the
“shedding abroad of the love of God in our hearts by the Holy Ghost.” Rom.
5:5. In this consist the fruit and efficacy of the Word of God. And this
only is the true knowledge of God, proceeding from experience, and founded
on a living faith. For this reason the Epistle to the Hebrews calls our
faith a _substance_, and a certain and well-grounded _evidence_. Heb.
11:1. And this knowledge of God, that arises from a living faith, is one
part of the inward and spiritual worship of God. In a word, _faith_ is a
spiritual, living, and heavenly gift; yea, the very light and power of
God.

10. When, therefore, this true knowledge of God is attained, by which God
offers himself, as it were, to be touched and tasted by the soul,
according to that Psalm, “O taste and see that the Lord is good” (Ps.
34:8); it is impossible that a sincere repentance should not immediately
ensue; that is, a real renovation of the mind, and reformation of the
life. For, from a sense and knowledge of the divine Omnipotence, proceeds
_humility_; since he must necessarily submit himself unto the mighty hand
of God, who has perceived its irresistible power and energy. From the
experience of the divine mercy arises _charity_ to our neighbor; for no
man can be uncharitable who has ever been affected by a sense of the
divine compassion. Who can refuse to lend to his neighbor, that considers
that God, from pure mercy, has bestowed himself upon us? From the
long-suffering of God, proceeds great _patience_ towards our neighbor; so
that were it possible that a true Christian could be killed seven times a
day, and as many times be restored to life again, yet would he always
freely forgive his murderer, and this on account of the boundless mercy of
God conferred upon himself. From the divine justice flows the _knowledge
of sin_, as the prophet teaches us: “Righteousness belongeth unto thee, O
Lord, but unto us confusion of faces.” Dan. 9:7. “Enter not into judgment
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.” Ps.
143:2. “If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand?” Ps. 130:3. From the knowledge of the truth of God, flow _fidelity_
and candor towards our neighbor; and all fraud, deceit, lying, and other
such sinister practices, are, in consequence, freely abandoned. The
sincere Christian reasons thus with himself: “God forbid that I should
deal deceitfully with my neighbor; for then I should offend the truth of
God, which is God himself; since he has dealt so faithfully with me, it
would be the blackest impiety were I to act otherwise by my neighbor.” The
consideration of the eternal divine wisdom produces the _fear of God_. For
whoever knows God to be the Searcher of hearts, viewing the most secret
recesses, must necessarily dread the eyes of the divine majesty. “He that
planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not
see?” Ps. 94:9. Therefore, “Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who
seeth us? and who knoweth us? Surely your turning of things upside down
shall be esteemed as the potter’s clay: for shall the work say of him that
made it, He made me not? Or shall the thing framed, say of him that framed
it, He had no understanding?” Isa. 29:15, 16; see also Jer. 23:24, and
32:19.

11. From the true _knowledge of God_, arise the _knowledge of sin_, and
consequent repentance. This repentance brings renovation of mind, and
renovation of mind is accompanied with amendment of life. And this
knowledge, together with those things that attend it, makes up the other
part of the inward worship of God; and it is that sacred fire which, by
the appointment of God, is to be used with the sacrifices, lest his wrath
should be kindled against us, and we be consumed by the fire of his
vengeance.

12. The injunction of God to the priests, not to drink wine or strong
drink when they were about to enter the tabernacle (Lev. 10:9), is an
illustration of this repentance; and in a _spiritual_ sense, it extends
itself to all Christians. For if we would enter into the tabernacle of
God, even into life everlasting, it is necessary that we should abstain
from the lusts of the world and of the flesh, and from all that tends to
bring the spirit in bondage to the body. For the love of the world, the
love of pleasure, pride, and other vices, are like palatable wine, by
which the power of the soul and spirit is clouded, and at last brought
under subjection to the flesh. Man, so subjected, is restrained from
entering into the tabernacle of God; that is, he cannot arrive at the
knowledge and the sanctuary of God; consequently he is deprived of that
discerning faculty, which distinguishes between things sacred and profane,
clean and unclean; so that he understands nothing of divine and heavenly
operations, and therefore is unfit to instruct those in sound doctrine who
are committed to his care. His understanding and thoughts are not
enlightened from above; but being overcome with the wine of worldly lust,
are eventually involved in gross darkness. This repentance, contrition,
and grief for sin, and this true faith in Christ, are followed by the
_knowledge_ of _grace_ and _remission of sin_; which, as it proceeds from
the merit of Christ only, so the benefit of this merit can be claimed by
no man without repentance. Repentance was therefore necessary, even to the
thief upon the cross, that his sin being first remitted, he might
accompany Christ into paradise. And that his repentance proceeded from a
heart affected with a holy contrition, appears from the reproof which he
gave his companion: “Dost not thou fear God? We receive the due reward of
our deeds; but this man hath done nothing amiss” (Luke 23:40), and from
the request he addressed to Christ: “Lord, remember me when thou comest
into thy kingdom.” Verse 24. These are most undeniable proofs of a
contrite heart, embracing Christ and his merits by faith.

13. This gracious absolution from sin, which is apprehended in faith by a
penitent heart, supplies all those defects under which we labor: but it is
entirely the effect of the death and blood of Christ. All our offences are
as completely annulled by his abundant satisfaction, as if they had never
been committed. The merit of Christ is of that extent and power, that
David exclaims: “Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and
I shall be (not only as white, but even) whiter than snow.” Psal. 51:7.

14. Hence also it is, that God is said to _mention_ the sin no more when
the sinner returns to his duty. Ezek. 18:22; 33:16. For whatever is fully
and completely paid for, yea, blotted out too, must of necessity be buried
in eternal oblivion. Isa. 43:25. But conversion must go before remission,
according to the order proposed by the prophet himself: “Wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil. Come now and let us reason together: Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow.” Isa. 1:16. As if he had said: “Ye who
require your sins to be forgiven, according to my covenant and promise,
come forward and call me to an account. I do not indeed deny, that I
promised you remission of sins; but it was on no other terms than that you
should first repent. Where is your repentance? where is your true and
living faith? If you have these, all is well! It shall not be my fault, if
your sins (though as crimson in grain, though so deeply dyed, that neither
heaven nor earth can blot them out), be not wholly pardoned and made
whiter than snow.” Repentance, therefore, is the true confession of sin;
and if you have this in yourself, namely, sorrow for sin mixed with faith,
be assured, that Christ, by virtue of his death and blood, will entirely
forgive you your sins. This blood, as it is shed for us, so it cries to
God in heaven, and procures a full remission of sin.

15. When a man is thoroughly affected with this sense of sin, he hastens
in spirit to those cities of refuge, of which three, Bezer, Ramoth, and
Golan, were set apart on this side Jordan, by Moses, being appointed by
him, in order that he who had inadvertently killed his neighbor, might
flee unto them and be preserved. Deut. 4:41-43.

16. And, alas! O Lord, how often have we inadvertently slain our neighbor
with thoughts, words, hatred, envy, anger, revenge, and unmercifulness!
Let us, therefore, fly upon the wings of faith and repentance, to the
sanctuary of the grace of God, and to the merit and cross of Christ. No
sooner do we arrive there, but we are safe; nor will the avenger measure
to us again with that measure with which we served our neighbor. For by
those cities of refuge, Christ Jesus is signified and represented. He is
the true _Bezer_, that is, a _fenced tower_, according to that saying of
Solomon: “The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runneth
into it, and is safe.” Prov. 18:10. He also is the true _Ramoth_, which
signifies _exalted_: for Christ is the Most High (Isa. 52:13; 57:15), “And
at the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth.” Phil. 2:10. Nor have we any
other _Golan_ besides him; which, as the word imports, is a _heap_ or
_multitude_, a storehouse of all manner of celestial gifts. Hence, we read
in the Psalms: “With the Lord there is mercy; and with him is plenteous
redemption.” Psal. 130:7. And in the epistle to the Romans: “The Lord is
rich unto all that call upon him.” Rom. 10:12.

17. And this is the _third_ part of inward, spiritual, and true worship,
arising from the knowledge of God. This knowledge is also the source of
repentance, as repentance is of remission of sins, and each rests on an
experimental knowledge of God, as on a proper foundation to sustain it.

18. Thus is the letter of the law of Moses changed into spirit, or into an
inward, holy, and new life; and its sacrifices are converted into
unfeigned repentance. Hereby we offer up unto God our body and soul,
together with the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving. Hereby we ascribe
unto him alone, our knowledge, conversion, justification and remission of
sin, that God alone may be all in all, and his grace be worthily
acknowledged, and celebrated with thankful hearts and tongues unto all
eternity. This, then, as hath been already mentioned, is the true worship
of God, of which the prophet says: “He hath shewed thee, O man, what is
good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?” Mic. 6:8. O when, therefore,
shall we wretched mortals become truly penitent, that we may obtain this
gracious pardon of sin? For without penitence it is impossible we should
secure unto ourselves so incomparable a mercy. For how can sin be
remitted, when there is no sense of sin, no sorrow affecting the mind, no
hunger after divine grace? And how can he grieve for sins, who utterly
refuses to abandon them, and to change his life for a better? May God, for
Christ’s sake, turn us, that so we may be truly turned! Lam. 5:21.

19. From these considerations it abundantly appears, that the true worship
of God is seated in the heart, and consists in the knowledge of God, and
in true repentance, which mortifies the flesh; and, through grace, renews
man after the divine image. In this order, man is made the holy temple of
the Lord, where, through the good Spirit of God, internal worship is
performed, in the exercise of faith, charity, hope, humility, patience,
prayer, thanksgiving, and the praise of God.

20. But though this worship has regard to God himself, and is offered to
him alone; yet far be it from us to believe, that God has any need of our
adoration or service, or that he receives any advantage from it, or any
addition to his perfection. Let us rather think, that such is the mercy of
God to miserable men, that he is willing to impart himself wholly to us
with all his benefits, to live, to operate, and to dwell in us, provided
we be but ready, by true knowledge, by faith and repentance, to entertain
him in the heart, that as in the school of the Spirit, he may teach us
true wisdom, and carry on the work which he has so happily begun.

21. For there is no work approved and accepted of God, but that of which
he himself is the author. Therefore has he commanded us to repent and to
believe, to pray and to fast; not that the benefit in any way might return
to him, but belong to us alone. For to God no man can give, and from him
no man can take away; him none can profit, and none can injure. If we be
found devout and sincere in his sight, we shall reap the advantage of it
ourselves; but if we be found false and corrupt, the evil will return upon
our own heads. But what harm, O man, canst thou do to God, if even thou
shouldst wilfully persist in impiety and a dissolute course of life?

22. God, therefore, commands that he should be served on thy account, not
on his own. He being Love itself, it pleases him that many be found in his
service, to whom he may freely impart the streams of his love, yea, even
himself too. For as a mother cannot but love the infant that reposes on
her breast, so God takes a singular pleasure in a free and unconfined
communication of his love and kindness.




