Chapter XXVIII.


 Love Unites Him Who Loves With The Person Loved, And Transforms Into The
                               Same Nature.


    _God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and
    God in him._—1 JOHN 4:16.


Love unites itself to the beloved object, because it is the nature of love
to communicate itself willingly and freely to every person or being that
is disposed to receive it. For love is a free gift, and cannot be obtained
by force. And as it is the nature of a gift, to be entirely in the power
of him to whom the last owner gave it; so our love is entirely
appropriated to him on whom we have bestowed it, so that we truly give up
ourselves to that thing on which we fix our love. Thus the beloved is
united with the lover, and they two become one, not by constraint or
force, but freely, willingly, and joyfully: and so he who loves is made
one with the thing beloved, and love takes its denomination from its
object. Hence we read of _carnal_ love, _earthly_ love, and _divine_ love,
each taking its name and character from the objects on which it is fixed.
Thus then every man has it in his power to be changed with freedom and
ease into a being more noble than himself.

2. Moreover, as the will, without controversy, undergoes a change in love,
and every change ought to be from an ignoble to a more noble state of
being (as we see the elements are changed into plants and herbs, and these
into the flesh of living creatures, and they again into the substance of
human bodies), it would, therefore, be unnatural to fix our love upon,
and, consequently, to be united and changed into, anything that is meaner
than ourselves, but rather upon God, the best and supreme Being; to whom,
according to the order of nature, our love and will ought to be united.
Thus we hear, as it were, the whole creation calling to us, and putting us
in mind of the supreme excellency of God; upon which account He, and He
alone, is worthy of our love.



Chapter XXIX.


 Nothing Is Worthy Of Our Love, But That Which Can Make Us More Noble And
                                  Pure.


    _Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world._—1
    JOHN 2:15.


As our love is the most noble present we can make, and has a power of
changing our will into the nature of the thing beloved, so that we are
under the control of that which we heartily love; it follows, that we act
meanly and unworthily, when we give to anything that is vile and earthly,
the power of enslaving our will, which is a spiritual faculty, and,
consequently, more noble than anything corporeal: and that he is very
unhappy and foolish, who places his love on his body, and the
gratifications of sense, for instance, on his furniture, equipage, houses,
and estates; all which debase the soul, and can yield it no satisfaction
in trouble, no comfort in the hour of death, or in the day of judgment.
Nothing can do this but God, who is the highest and chief Good, and alone
is worthy of our love.

2. We must not, therefore, waste our love on anything that is not sensible
of the honor we pay it, nor able to make us a worthy return for it, much
less on things that corrupt and debase it, making it earthly, sensual, and
unprofitable. On the other hand, as God loves us above all creatures, he
deserves a suitable love from us; and that not only as he raises and
ennobles our love, but as he requites us with his own, which is infinite,
uncreated and eternal.



Chapter XXX.


Our Chief Love Is Due To God, As The First And Last, The Beginning And The
                            End Of All Things.


    _He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
    judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is
    he._—DEUT. 32:4.


Not only the universal voice of nature, but our own consciences also bear
witness that our chief and highest love is due to God. 1. Because he is
our chief and eternal Good. 2. Because not only man, but all other
creatures derive their being from him. 3. Because the love and goodness of
God are conveyed unto man by all the creatures. Whence it follows, that
God, who is the fountain of goodness and love, deserves to be loved by us
more than any creature, yea, than all the creatures put together; they
being no more than means or instruments of conveying to us the
transcendent and eternal love of God. So that our love is never true,
right, regular, or reasonable, but when it is fixed upon God; which may be
properly called the rectitude of our will.

2. On the other hand, when self-love predominates, and a man makes all his
love centre upon himself, that love is unnatural, preposterous, unjust,
and irregular, a direct opposition to God, and the root and seed of all
sin and iniquity. For what can be more unjust and ungrateful than to
withdraw our love from God, who alone has a right to it, and to fix it
upon ourselves or upon any creature? This, in short, is the highest
injustice, and the highest violation of the laws of nature, as well as of
God.



