Chapter XXIII.


        Of The Mystery Of The Cross, By Which We Are Drawn To God.


    _He that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not
    worthy of me._—MATT. 10:38.


Let all that desire to be the true disciples and followers of Jesus
Christ, bear their cross in this world, be it what it may; for if thou
flee from one, another will meet thee; and do what thou wilt, thou must
bear it. But under every cross the hand of God is with us, to lighten it
and make it easy, and by his assistance we may bear it with pleasure. But
when God withdraws his hand, then, indeed, it is a heavy burden. Now the
Son of God bore a very heavy burden, and in the most afflicting
circumstances; of which, in their proportion, all his true friends and
followers have been partakers. Words cannot express the many and great
advantages that are in the cross; forasmuch as God lays it upon us in mere
love, that he may thereby draw us to himself, and make us “conformable to
the image of his Son” (Rom. 8:29), and partakers of eternal happiness. The
wounds in Christ’s sacred feet, should teach us abstinence and patience:
abstinence from carnal lusts and fleshly pleasures; and patience under all
afflictions and oppositions, whether from within or without. The wounds in
his sacred hands, should teach us silence and contempt of worldly things.
The wound in his side, should teach us to deny ourselves, and seek for
rest and joy in Christ alone. His naked body stretched on the cross,
should continually put us in mind, that we must be stripped and bare of
all created comforts. For as Christ was fixed naked to the cross, and his
garments were parted by lot before his blessed eyes (Ps. 22:18; Matt.
27:35), so, be assured, that if thou art desirous of perfection, thou must
be stripped of everything which is not of God. And as every cross, however
small, is laid upon thee by the particular order and direction of
Providence, so thou oughtest to receive it with thankfulness. For the
beloved friends of God have always the greatest share of afflictions. The
devil always makes use of our prosperity, as the best season and occasion
of our ruin; to prevent which, it pleases God, in mere compassion, to
visit his children with a variety of crosses and afflictions, thereby
withdrawing us from the love of the world, and disappointing the malicious
designs of the tempter. Did we but know how efficacious the cross is in
bringing us to God, driving away the devil from us, and entitling us to
future glories, we should not only expect it with patience, but run out
vigorously to meet it. For so great is the dignity, so transcendent are
the benefits of the cross, that God has allotted it as the inseparable
companion of all his chosen servants.

2. Did we thoroughly consider the benefits and honor of the cross, we
should think ourselves unworthy of so great a blessing; for great is the
honor of being made like unto the Son of God! He was never acceptable to
the world, but was its scorn and derision. But now, scarcely one Christian
in a thousand is come to that perfection, as not to desire to please the
world. He that pleaseth the world, cannot, however, please God: and he
that is full of the world, is empty of God. But so far as a man dies to
himself and the world, so far is Christ, the true life, advanced in him.
No man can please God better than by fully submitting to his will. If my
prince should like to see me in one suit of clothes rather than in any
other, I should certainly esteem it better than the most gaudy dress. And
since my God is better pleased to see me under the cross, I ought
certainly to prefer it to all the affluence and glories of the world. But
perhaps thou art in doubt with thyself, whether the cross which thou
bearest, has come from God; if so, let this be the test: Whatsoever thou
sufferest for thine own sake, will be grievous and tedious, but if thou
suffer for God’s sake, thy cross will be easy, for God himself will
lighten it. What matters it then, whether thy load be of the weight of a
hundred or of a thousand pounds, if He but lend a helping hand, and make
thy yoke easy and thy burden light. Matt. 11:30. Wherefore, O Lord, lay
upon me what burden thou pleasest; only assist me in my weakness with the
everlasting arms of thy omnipotence!—Observe, in the next place, that the
choicest blessings of God are bestowed upon us whilst we are under the
cross; and though they are sometimes bestowed beforehand, yet it is the
cross that confirms them in the soul; and as it is so very useful and
necessary to the soul, God has given a large share of it to his faithful
friends and servants, and particularly to his only begotten Son Jesus
Christ; the advantage it brings with it, making it tolerable and easy to
be borne. Devout men submit themselves entirely to God, keeping their
minds easy and cheerful under all the vicissitudes of life. Particularly,
they take care to preserve humility, as the best guard against the
assaults of their spiritual adversaries. Though God sent his only Son into
the world, in order to suffer in his human nature, yet we expect an
exemption from sufferings. But, be assured that if you would walk in the
same way, and rest upon a firm foundation, you must expect to suffer with
Christ, and in some degree at least, to have your lives conformable to
his. Every affliction, how small soever, is a token of divine love,
commissioned to visit us for our good. And the united malice of earth and
hell cannot do the least hurt to a devout man trained up in sufferings,
and in obedience to the discipline of the cross. The more his enemies
assault, the higher is he exalted by God. And though he should be thrust
down into hell, yet even there would he meet his God, and hell itself
should be a heaven and blessedness to him.

3. When God sees a man too weak for a temptation, he refreshes him a
little with his consolations, that he may not entirely sink under it: but
he should know, that these intermissions are only allowed him in order to
recover his strength, that he may the better bear up against a fresh
assault. So it pleases the divine love to exercise men, that by various
trials and temptations, they may be brought to despise all worldly
enjoyments, and, like the panting hart (Ps. 42:1), may long for the
fountains of divine peace and joy, the refreshing streams of life and
glory. There the weary soul may drink and be satisfied, and quench its
thirst in those rivers of pleasure which are ever flowing from the tender
and paternal love of God. This is what the wise men of this world neither
know nor understand. For the natural man cannot discern the things of the
Spirit of God. If the children of a family should plunder the wine-cellar,
and be intoxicated, whilst the father is asleep in his bed, how would he
bear it when informed of the matter? Would he not correct their
extravagance by wholesome severities? Thus God deals with his children. He
allows them plentiful draughts of spiritual comfort, and refreshes them
with his mercies, as with new wine; but when he sees that they are
immoderately fond of it, he withdraws it from them, and corrects their
extravagant joy, by mixtures of gall and wormwood, bringing them thereby
to a sense of their fault, and of their necessary dependence upon him.
They then begin to think meanly of themselves, and to bewail their vain
presumption, which made them fancy that they could do and suffer anything
for God’s sake, whereas now they are ready to sink under a very small
burden. We know that Christ led the way for us in misery, poverty, and
contempt, even unto death; and we must follow him in the same way if we
desire to enter into heaven with him. So great is our pride, that God
sometimes cannot break it, but by some exemplary shame, which quickly
brings us to our senses, and shows us our own unworthiness. This is the
only means of bringing us to a true knowledge of ourselves. Many a man has
gone astray for want of these wholesome trials. He that considers this as
he ought, will certainly rejoice in shame and reproaches for God’s sake.
For whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth in this manner, in order to cure
him of his arrogance and pride, and bring him to humble thoughts of
himself.

4. Whosoever will follow the blessed Jesus, must “deny himself, and take
up his cross.” Many would freely follow him, if they could do it without
difficulties and sufferings; but these, aiming chiefly at their own ease,
whilst they pretend to follow Christ, will find themselves deceived at the
last. For it behooved Christ to die, and to suffer, and to enter into his
kingdom (Luke 24:26, 46): and if we intend to share with him in the
glories of his kingdom, we must also be content to share in his
sufferings; for unless we suffer with him here, we shall never reign with
him hereafter. So, then, if we intend to follow him, we must cheerfully
and contentedly submit to every cross, whether inward or outward, and by
this means we shall at length arrive at the glories which he himself
attained by the cross. How many do we see every day drudging in the
service of the world; they venture body and soul; go into foreign
countries; rush through fire and sword; and all for the sake of a little
uncertain honor; and shall not we do as much to purchase the everlasting
glories of heaven, as they do for the trifling riches and glories of this
world? God manifests himself to us under the cross, as much as in the most
cheerful spiritual visitations; yea, we then receive greater
communications of heavenly joy, when we are most empty of worldly
comforts. For as salt preserves flesh from putrefaction; so afflictions
and temptations keep the soul from falling into sin and misery. And the
deeper a man sinks into the centre of humility by the cross, the deeper
does he penetrate into the heart of God, which is always open to receive
and embrace the mortified and humble soul. This is the great end proposed
by God, in all his various methods of humbling us; that, being sensible of
our own great corruption, we may die to ourselves, and live entirely unto
him. The saints of old, when under heavy tribulations, could no otherwise
possess their souls in patience and liberty, than by a total abandonment
and denial of themselves, being ready to submit to every cross which God
should lay upon them, even though it should last during their whole life.
By this humility, obedience, and self-denial, they were at last delivered.
For the end designed by God in sending crosses upon them, being answered,
he was pleased immediately to release them.

5. The last comfort under the cross is, that thou canst not be hurt by it,
unless it be by thine own fault, by being fretful and impatient under it.
Thou art very much in the wrong, if thou thinkest thyself injured by this
or that man; they cannot hurt thee if thou keep thy mind steady and even
under its burden. Be assured, that so long as thou art master of thyself
and thy passions, the whole world can do thee no harm. If thou wouldst be
safe, then, against the assaults of thine enemy, answer not again; be
silent, even as a dead man, in his grave. Every calumny and reproach which
the world shall cast upon thee, shall be as rays of light, encircling thy
head with a crown of glory. How glorious are the three degrees of
patience, in which true victory consists! The first is, to suffer without
murmuring. The second is, not only to suffer patiently, but even to wish
for suffering for Christ’s sake, from a pure love of him. The third is, to
rejoice in suffering; and this is the most powerful and the greatest
victory of all.





