Chapter VII.


 The Law Of God, Written In The Hearts Of All Men, Convinces Them That On
             The Day Of Judgment They Will Be Without Excuse.


    _When the Gentiles ... do the things contained in the law ... they
    shew the work of the law written in their hearts._—ROM. 2:14, 15.


When God created man in his own image, in righteousness and holiness, and
endowed him with exalted virtues and gifts, he impressed three qualities
on the human conscience so deeply, that they can never be effaced: First,
the natural testimony that there is a God. Secondly, a testimony that a
day of Judgment will come. Rom. 2:15. Thirdly, the law of nature, or
natural righteousness, by which man is enabled to distinguish between
honor and shame, and to experience joy and sorrow.

2. For no nation has ever been discovered so wild and barbarous, as to
deny that a God exists, inasmuch as nature furnishes internal and external
evidence of this fact. Indeed, men have not only acknowledged the _being_
of a God, of which they were assured by their consciences; but they have
also been affected with a sense of his _justice_, as an avenger of evil,
and a rewarder of good; and this persuasion arose from the consciousness,
that, on some occasions, they were harassed with fearful apprehensions;
while, on others, they felt a certain measure of peace and joy. By this
knowledge, they even proceeded farther, and discovered the doctrine of the
immortality of the soul, as appears from Plato, who most amply discussed
this subject. And, lastly, they gathered from this inward law, that God
was the author and source of all that was _good_ in nature, and therefore
ought to be worshipped by an assiduous attention to virtue, and with a
pure heart. Hence, they defined virtue to be man’s chief good; and schools
of moral virtue were accordingly instituted by Socrates, and by other
heathen philosophers. This may be sufficient to convince us, that God,
even since the fall, has allowed a spark of natural light to remain in
men, in order that they might be admonished of their heavenly origin, and
be assured, that it was only by following these footsteps of divinity,
that they could be restored to their former perfection. Some of the
heathens themselves, have not been unacquainted with this truth; among
whom is Aratus, the poet, quoted by St. Paul, who declares that “we are
God’s offspring.” Acts 17:28.

3. The Gentiles, however, stifling the testimony of conscience, contemned
the light of nature, and “the work of the law written in their hearts”
(Rom. 2:15); so that it cannot but be their own fault, that they are
condemned and lost; and they are, as St. Paul argues, left altogether
without excuse. Rom. 1:19, 20. And as the Gentiles knew, by nature, the
justice of God, and that such as did evil were worthy of death; and yet
not only committed evil but had pleasure in it; it follows, that they
thereby condemned themselves, whilst “their thoughts accusing or excusing
one another,” convinced them of the certainty of the day of judgment. Rom.
1:32; 2:15. But if the _Gentiles_ shall be “inexcusable,” because, though
endued with the natural knowledge of God, they sought him not, as was
their duty; what shall _they_ plead in their own behalf, to whom God hath
given his Holy Word, and whom he hath so earnestly invited to repentance,
by Jesus Christ his beloved Son; in order that, forsaking the corruptions
of the world, they might, by faith, apprehend the merits of the Saviour,
and obtain eternal life and salvation?

4. Therefore, every false Christian shall, in the day of judgment, be
condemned by two mighty witnesses: by his own conscience or the law of
nature, and likewise by the revealed Word of God, which will then judge
him. In that day, “it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom,” than
for such false pretenders to religion. Matt. 11:24.

5. Their anguish and torment shall be without end; since God has made the
soul immortal and planted the conscience in it, to be both a witness and a
judge. The conscience can never throw off the recollection of God, and yet
cannot of itself approach him; which must be attended with unutterable
pain to the soul, and expose it to the worm that dieth not, and to the
fire that cannot be quenched. And the more the wicked have, through
impenitence of heart, treasured up to themselves “wrath against the day of
wrath” (Rom. 2:5), the more severe will this inward and eternal suffering
be. For as God, in the exercise of his righteous judgment, gave up the
Gentiles to a reprobate mind, because they sinned against their own
consciences, and “the work of the law written in their hearts;” so that
they became blind in their understandings, and rushed into every kind of
filthy and abominable pollution; thus drawing down upon themselves the
wrath of God, denounced against all crimes that are committed against the
light of knowledge: so the same doom (yea, and a far heavier one) will be
inflicted upon those who rest in the mere profession of the Christian
faith, and deny the life and the power of godliness. The reason of this is
obvious: such persons have contemned the inward as well as the outward
word and testimony of God, and have not only persevered in a state of
impenitence, but have resisted the Divine Spirit, and blasphemed Him who
favored them with the light of his Gospel. On this account, God gives them
up to a reprobate mind, so that they become worse than heathens and
infidels. He sends them “strong delusion, that they should believe a lie;
that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness.” 2 Thess. 2:11, 12.

6. This is the true reason why vices of so detestable a nature universally
abound among Christians; many of which were not so much as known among the
Pagan nations. What satanical pride, what insatiable covetousness, what
unheard-of intemperance, what bestial lust; in a word, what inhuman
wickedness, is not practised by those who call themselves Christians! And
whence does all this arise, but from that blindness and hardness of heart,
which they have contracted by confirmed habits of iniquity. When those who
are called Christians disdain to imitate the meek and lowly Jesus in their
manners and their conversation; when they are scandalized at him, and
consider it disgraceful to look to him whom God has appointed to be the
light of the world, and our great example (John 8:12); then the righteous
God gives them up to follow Satan; to take upon them the life of the
devil, his abominable impiety, wickedness, and lies; that they may execute
with him all the works of darkness, inasmuch as they refuse to walk in the
light. For thus saith the Lord, “Walk while ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you.” John 12:35.

7. Finally, if God gave up the heathen to so terrible a blindness and so
reprobate a mind; and this because they proved disobedient to the
glimmering light of nature; or, as St. Paul expresses it, “because they
did not like to retain God in their knowledge,” in order to be preserved
by him (Rom. 1:28); how much more shall those be banished from life and
salvation, to whom the truth of God has come not only by natural light,
but by means of his revealed word, and the new covenant, and who yet
haughtily despise these special tenders of divine mercy! Of which new
covenant, God thus speaks: “I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my
people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the
least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.” Jer.
31:33, 34; John 6:45.

8. And here, let us also attend to that which the Apostle says, concerning
those who offend wilfully. “If,” says he, “we sin wilfully, after that we
have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more
sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised
Moses’ law,” continues the Apostle, “died without mercy under two or three
witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the
blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and
hath done despite unto the spirit of grace? For we know him that hath
said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” Heb.
10:26-31. These words, however, are not pronounced in reference to those
who fall through natural infirmity, but against them who sin wilfully and
against knowledge, and who persevere to the end in a state of impenitence.




