Chapter XL.


      He Can Never Praise And Glorify God, Who Seeks His Own Glory.


    _Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
    glory._—PS. 115:1.


He that in all things seeks not the glory of God, and endeavors to promote
it, does not act like a creature of God, but directly opposes his Maker,
and all his designs, seeing he made all things for his own glory. And he
does even worse, who measures all things no otherwise than as they
contribute to the raising of his own glory and honor. Such a one usurps
the honor due to God alone, and, like the rebel Lucifer, sets himself in
God’s throne.

2. And this he does not only in his own soul, but endeavors to lead others
into the same guilt, by filling their hearts, which ought to be thrones
and temples of God, with the same notions of love and honor to himself, as
he has entertained in his own mind; endeavoring as much as in him lies, to
dispossess his Maker and settle himself in his room. But what greater sin
can there be than this? Now as the consequence of this irregular loving
and honoring a man’s self is, that it makes him the enemy of God, and
casts him out of his presence into the pit of destruction, it follows,
that he who would be the friend of God, must hate and deny himself.

3. Return, therefore, and repent, O man! believe in Christ and live in him
as a new creature, and he will receive thee and comfort thee. But to
others, who persist in their rebellion and continue in their corruptions,
he shall say at the last day: “I never knew you: depart from me, ye that
work iniquity!” Matt. 7:23. Moreover, as the love of Christ is our chief
good, our highest wisdom, and the perfection of our knowledge, and
self-love is perfectly opposite to it: let us be persuaded to cast out the
love of ourselves and of the world, that the love of Christ may enter into
our hearts. This is that love which perfects and accomplishes our
Christianity, and with this do thou, O God, refresh and satisfy our souls
for ever and ever. Amen.



Conclusion.


1. The title “True Christianity” is prefixed to these Four Books for the
reason that true faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and the righteousness
which proceeds from faith, constitute the fountain from which the whole
Christian life must flow. I have, accordingly, written, not for heathens,
but for Christians; who have, it is true, adopted the Christian faith, but
whose life does not accord with it, and who deny, or will not understand,
the power of faith. 2 Tim. 3:5. I have written, not for unbelievers, but
for believers; not for those who are yet to be justified, but for those
who are already justified. Hence, this whole work on daily repentance and
Christian love, ought to be understood in no other sense, than that faith
must go before as a light in our path, and that it is the foundation of
all. Let no one, by any means, suppose that anything is here ascribed to
our carnal free will or to good works; our sole object is to persuade you,
as you are a Christian, and are anointed with the Spirit of God, to let
Christ live in you, and rule in you, and to let the Holy Spirit govern
you, in order that your Christianity may not be hypocrisy.

2. Hence, too, Part II. of this Fourth Book is not to be so understood, as
if we could love God from our own carnal will; for love is a fruit of the
Holy Spirit. This Part II. is, on the contrary, only intended to show
that, besides the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, even our own heart and
conscience may teach us, from the book of nature, and the light of nature,
that we are bound to love God on account of his great love bestowed upon
us, and manifested through the means of all his creatures. Such an
argument, derived from nature, ought to convince every man, whether he be
a heathen or a Christian, a believer or an unbeliever; and no one can
refute it. For, granting that God has bestowed so many mercies on us, who
can deny that we are in gratitude obliged to so gracious a benefactor? And
as he calls and invites us to love him, by all the creatures which are
bestowed in common upon all mankind, who can deny that the love of God is
discovered to us in the book of nature, and that the heathens themselves
may be convinced by arguments drawn thence? “The works of the Lord are
great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.” Ps. 111:2. And,
“Thou Lord, hast made me glad through thy work; I will triumph in the
works of thy hands.” Ps. 92:4. How can these works be more effectually
praised, than in this manner? The Lord God give us understanding and
wisdom, that we may know him and praise him for all his works, both here
and forevermore. Amen.





INDEX.


The Roman Numerals indicate, respectively, the Four Books; the first
Arabic numeral which follows, designates, in every case, the _Chapter_;
the second, with any that may follow, refers to one or more _Sections_ of
a chapter. The references to the INTRODUCTION, the PREFACES, the two PARTS
of BOOK IV., etc., will be readily understood.

A.

ABRAHAM—an example of patience, II. 47. 16.
—— the time when the promise was given to him, I. 12. 7.

ABSOLUTION FROM SIN, I. 21. 13.

AGRICOLA, INTROD. § 15.

ADAM—his fall, I. Chap. 2; II. 17. 9; II. 34. Sect. 4. 1.

ADAM AND CHRIST, contrasted, II. 7. 1-6.

AFFLICTION—its uses, II. 5. 3; II. 35. 5.
—— none for which God has not provided consolation, II. Chap. 48.

AHAB—his delusion, I. 38. 13.

ANGER of GOD—what is meant by the expression, II. 42. 11.

ANTINOMISTIC CONTROVERSY, INTROD. § 15.

APOLOGY of Augsburg Confession, INTROD. § 25.

APOSTASY—when man is guilty of it, II. 23. 4.

ARNDT—account of his life, INTROD. § 1, etc.
—— his motives in writing the “True Christianity,” PREF. to Book I. 1;
            INTROD. §§ 20, 21, 24, 31.
—— his orthodoxy, INTROD. §§ 22, 24, 25, 40.
—— his religious character, INTROD. § 26.
—— popularity of his “True Christianity,” INTROD. § 31.
—— translations of it, INTROD. § 33, and Note.
—— his death, INTROD. § 22.

ASCENSION of Christ (see CHRIST, etc.), II. XXV. 11.

ASPIRATIONS of the believer, I. 11. 11.

AUGSBURG, CONFESSION OF—Conclusion of Book II., p. 374.
——, INTROD. §§ 24, 25.
——, PREF. to Book I. 8.

AUGSBURG INTERIM, INTROD. §§ 12, 15.

AUGSBURG, PEACE OF, INTROD. § 12.

AUGUSTINE—quoted, III. 6. 2.

B.

BABYLAS, II. 45. 8.

BAPTISM—a means to attain the new birth, I. 3. 12.
—— a renewal of the covenant with God, II. 2. 6.
—— what is received therein, III. 1. 4.

BELIEVING SOUL, a—its beauty, III. 4. 2.

BIRTH (see NEW BIRTH; REGENERATION)—twofold, I. 3. 2, etc.

BLESSEDNESS of the true believer, I. 8. 7; I. 11. 10; I. 12. 5; I. 13. 6;
            I. 22. 10; I. 34. 17; I. 36. 7.

BOEHM, INTROD. §§ 32, 34, 35.

BONAVENTURA—a saying of his, II. 6. 6.

BOOK OF LIFE, I. 11. 1.

BREAD, IV. Part I., Chap. 3. 14. 35-39.

