Chapter XLI.


The Whole Of Christianity Consists In The Restoration Of The Image Of God
            In Man, And The Destruction Of The Image Of Satan.


    _But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
    the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
    even as by the Spirit of the Lord._—2 COR. 3:18.


In the _true knowledge_ of Christ, wherein is comprehended that of his
Person, offices, benefits, and heavenly and eternal gifts, consists _life
everlasting_. John 17:3. This knowledge is kindled in our hearts by the
Divine Spirit, and is a new light shining forth with increasing
brightness, and passing on from glory to glory. It is like a metallic
body, which, by constant polishing, becomes every day more brilliant; or
like a tender infant, which, by a daily supply of food, grows up in vigor
and strength. No sooner is the righteousness of Christ, through faith,
conferred upon a returning sinner, than he is also really born again, and
the image of God is daily renewed within him. His spiritual growth, or the
renovation of his mind, goes on, however, in a successive manner, from one
degree to another, for he has not yet become a “perfect man in Christ.”
Eph. 4:13. He is a child for some time; but is continually nourished by
the Divine Spirit, and daily brought to a greater conformity with the Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. For the whole life of a Christian upon earth, is properly nothing else
than a continual _renewing_ of the image of God in his soul: so that he
may constantly live in the new birth, and daily mortify that which is old
and corrupt, till the body of sin be eventually destroyed. Rom. 6:4. This
life must be begun in this world, that so it may be perfected in that
which is to come. Whereas, in whomsoever the renewal of this divine life
shall not be begun before his departure from this world, in him it never
shall be accomplished. Wherefore I have thought it might be well briefly
to repeat what is here meant by the _image of God_, which is to be
revived; and what by the _image of the devil_, which is to be obliterated
and destroyed in man’s soul: for in the right knowledge of these two, the
substance of our whole religion consists. It is the main point upon which
all turns, and from which many other articles (as that of Original Sin,
free-will, repentance, conversion, faith, justification, prayer, the new
birth, sanctification, and lastly, obedience, and the whole practice of a
religious life), borrow no small light. Of this, the following remarks
will give an account.

3. The soul of man is an immortal spirit, endowed of God with excellent
faculties; as the understanding, will, memory, and other powers and
affections.

4. See that thou turn all these towards thy God, in order to behold him
therein as in a mirror; and, by beholding him, to have his image gradually
formed in thy soul. In this sense the apostle speaks of “the glory of the
Lord,” which we behold “with an open face,” without vail and shadows. 2.
Cor. 3:18.

5. As God is a truly good and holy Being; so also were the substance of
the soul, and its true nature and essence, originally good and holy. And
as in God there is nothing of evil; even so was the soul of man, in the
beginning, free from all manner of evil. As in God there is nothing but
what is right; so in the soul there was nothing at first but what was
right also. For He is the rock, whose “work is perfect;” even “a God of
truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.” Deut. 32:4; Ps. 92:15.
As God is wise, so was also the human soul full of divine and spiritual
knowledge, of heavenly and eternal wisdom. And as the divine wisdom
ordered all things in number, weight, and measure, and knew the powers of
all creatures, as well in heaven as in earth: so also was the mind of man
possessed of the same light and knowledge.

6. And as it was with the understanding, so it was with the will: for as
the one was the image and reflection of the divine understanding, so was
the other of the divine will, in everything. It was holy as the pattern
was holy, and conformed to the will of God. Hence, as God himself is, so
was the human soul; righteous, loving, merciful, long-suffering, patient,
meek, gentle, true, and pure. Exod. 34:6; Ps. 103:8; Joel 2:13. Yea, all
the passions or affections, all the appetites, and motions of the heart,
being made most perfectly conformable to the motions and affections of the
divine mind, partook of this conformity of the will of man to that of God.
As, therefore, God is LOVE, so all the affections and motions of man, in
his first state, breathed nothing but pure love. As God, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, are ONE in an unspeakable and eternal bond of
love; so all the affections and desires of man, burned with a most perfect
and ardent love, and he cleaved unto God fully with all the powers and
faculties which he had; “with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his might” (Deut. 6:5); so that man verily loved God more than
himself, and preferred God and His honor, to himself and his own.

7. But as the image of God shone forth in the _soul_, so the image of the
soul again shone forth in and from the _body_. This, therefore, was holy,
chaste, and pure throughout, not subject to any unclean motion or lust. It
was undefiled and without blemish. It was in every respect, beautiful,
well proportioned, and graceful; of vigorous health, and possessed of a
constitution even out of the very danger of sickness. It was such as death
itself had no power over, and it was perfectly free from pain,
listlessness, passion, grief, and old age, now the common attendants and
warnings of man’s mortality. In a word, the whole man, both in soul and
body, was pure, holy, righteous, and every way acceptable to God. For, in
order that man might be the image of God, it was necessary that his body
should be holy, and conformable to God, as well as his soul. Accordingly,
St. Paul both exhorts and prays, that the _body_, together with the
_spirit_ and _soul_, be _sanctified wholly_; and be preserved holy and
blameless unto the coming of our Lord. 1 Thess. 5:23. For since man is
made up of soul and body, and exercises both bodily and spiritual
functions, there was a necessity that the instrument through which the
soul was to act, should be pliable and obedient, adapted to the nature of
the soul, and holy as the soul was holy; to the end that the holy and
righteous soul, might finish her work through the body without any
obstacle or resistance. As, therefore, the soul burned with the pure love
of God: so did all the powers of the body manifest and exert themselves in
the love of God and man. As the soul was altogether merciful; so also the
body was, with its whole might, and all its faculties, impelled to
tenderness and compassion. As chastity shone forth from the soul, which
was altogether pure; so the whole body, in like manner, with all the
inward and outward senses and powers thereof, visibly set forth the most
perfect purity and chastity. To conclude, the virtues no less gloriously
shone in the body, than in the soul itself; so that the body was the holy
instrument of the soul, in everything suited to it, and worked together
with it. And hence man in the state of innocency, was able to love God
_with all his heart_, _with all his soul_, _with all his strength_, _and
with all his mind, and to love his neighbor as himself_: which is the very
substance both of the old and new law given to man. Deut. 6:5; Matt.
22:37, 39; Luke 10:27. Hence, as often as God calls for the heart of man,
we are to understand the _whole man_, both as to body and soul, and the
powers, faculties, and operations of both. In this sense, the word
“_heart_” is frequently taken in Scripture; so that under it are
comprehended all the powers of the soul, as the understanding, will, and
memory, together with all the desires and affections attendant on them. So
when God demands a man’s _soul_, he, under that name, requires not a part,
but the whole of a man. He must, in all his powers, be conformed to God,
and renewed in Christ Jesus: and thus man, having put off the old nature,
and being renewed in the spirit of his mind, must also _walk_ in newness
of life, and in the spirit by which he was begotten again. Gal. 5:16; Eph.
4:23.

8. Moreover, there was a _perfect joy in God_, which accompanied this
perfection of holiness, righteousness, and divine love, in man. By this,
all the faculties and springs, both of soul and body, were most powerfully
affected: for wherever divine holiness resides, there also divine joy must
be present. These two are knit together with an everlasting bond, and make
up the very image of God. Yet, as in this life, the divine righteousness
and holiness are but imperfect in us, so we but taste, while here, only
the first fruits of that joy which shall be fully revealed hereafter.
However, as the righteousness of Christ is verily _begun_ in sincere
believers, so it follows that they also enjoy a _real_ beginning and
foretaste of divine joy and comfort; as those Christians can abundantly
attest, that have learned religion by experience. John 16:22; 2 Cor. 1:5;
Phil. 4:4. Whatever progress, therefore, any one makes in the love of God,
be it more or less, so much of divine joy does he also perceive in his
soul. And this holy and divine love, as it shall in the next life attain
its full perfection, so in that day the Christian’s _joy_ (arising from
love) shall also be _full_, as the Lord himself declares. John 15:11;
16:22. For divine love is the only true life, and the only true joy: but
where this love of God is wanting, there is neither joy nor life; but
death itself, and the everlasting portion of wicked men and devils. Whence
has a father joy? Is it not from the love of his children? Whence has a
bridegroom joy? Is it not from the love of the bride? Isaiah 61:10; 62:5.
But infinitely sweeter must that joy be, which is derived from the love of
our Creator! He not only embraces us as a father does his children, but he
rejoices over us as over his bride; nay, most tenderly kisses us “with the
kisses of his mouth” (Cant. 1:2.), (that is, in Christ, who is his mouth
and word), and coming to us, through Christ with the Holy Ghost, makes his
_abode_ with us. John 14:23. Take heed, however, concerning this image of
God, which consists in a conformity with God, that you do not therefore
think, as if man were made _equal_ with God in holiness. Not by any means.
For God is infinite as to his essence, virtues, and properties; he is
incomprehensible, and without bounds; so that nothing in the world can be
compared with him. Man therefore, even in his first state, could not
properly be said to bear God in him; being designed only to bear his
_image_, as it has been already explained in Chapter I. of this Book.

9. That which has now been stated concerning the image of God, is plain,
true, and beyond all doubt. It cannot be denied, that God created man, to
be a bright mirror of himself: so that if man had been desirous to know
the nature of God, he might, by looking into himself, have beheld God
there, as in a glass, and clearly perceived the image of the Deity within
his own breast.

10. This image was the life and blessedness of man; but the devil, looking
with envious eyes upon this image of God in man, exerted all his art and
cunning to efface it, by raising in man a spirit of disobedience and
enmity against God. Gen. 3:1, etc. This he accordingly effected with a
subtility and haste, that never were since seen. He was not ignorant, that
if man had continued in that state, _he_ would have been the master: but
that if he could be induced to fall from it, that the devil would thereby
become the lord (or rather the tyrant) of fallen man. When, therefore,
with all the powers of his cunning and malice, he could devise nothing
more likely to accomplish his design than that by which he himself lost
his first state or principality, he began, in a seductive manner, to
insinuate into the imagination of the woman, no less than an affectation
of the Divine Majesty. What can appear more divine, or what is there more
noble to be wished for, than to “be as God”? Gen. 3:5. By this cunningly
contrived method, man being therefore circumvented, he lost the divine
image at once; and the image of Satan, consisting in an affectation of the
Divine Majesty, was impressed upon him.

11. This aspiring thought, by which man threw off all his dependence on
God, being thus begotten in the mind; and this haughty arrogance having
once seized the imagination, there followed immediately apostasy from God,
disobedience, and transgression of the commandment concerning the
forbidden tree. Hereupon the image of God was extinguished, the Holy
Spirit departed from man, and the image of Satan was imprinted instead of
that which was effaced. Hence now there are so many men, so many slaves of
the devil. The devil having thus gained his object in subjecting man to
his dominion, most cruelly tyrannized over him; just as a giant may be
supposed to do over a little infant. Hence the understanding in man is
darkened and blinded; the will is, by a complete disobedience, turned from
God; and all the springs and powers of the heart are stirred up against
God in utter malice. In a word, the whole image of God lieth now slain in
man, and the whole race of mankind, being swayed by the satanical nature,
have a seed sown in them full of the deepest malignity. Hence men became
the offspring of Satan, and his living likeness, being poisoned with all
manner of sin and enmity against God. Thus died man! Thus died he the
death everlasting! For as the image of God is the life and salvation of
man, so the departure of this image is the death of man, even death
eternal, and his damnation, which is also called a death “in trespasses
and sins.” Eph. 2:1; Col. 2:13.

12. They best understand this death, who, having been cast into deep
spiritual temptations, sensibly feel the devil’s rage and tyranny over
them. By this he torments the soul beyond what it is in the ordinary power
of sin to effect. Now, unless the Holy Ghost shine in upon the soul under
this terrible affliction, and by darting in some ray of his light comfort
it; the devil slays the man with this death, and racks the soul with the
very anguish of hell itself. Hence all the natural force of the body
sinks, the strength fails, the heart withers and pants, and the very
marrow in the bones consumes away, so that there is no soundness left in
the body. This state is described at large, in Psalms 6 and 38. The word
of God itself, to such a one, seems dead and lifeless: he finds in it no
manner of devotion, no savor of spiritual life. This is the _spiritual_
death, into which the soul is fallen: and while the soul remains thus
spiritually dead, all human holiness, righteousness, excellency, might,
power, glory, honor, arts, and wisdom, can avail nothing. And, truly, man
would undoubtedly perish in this grievous condition, if he were not
supported by divine grace: for nothing but this is able to succor him.

13. Learn, therefore, O man, duly to look into, and rightly to consider
the abominable filthiness of _Original Sin_, as the sink of all
abomination. For by this the hereditary righteousness of God was lost, and
the hereditary unrighteousness of the devil transplanted into men. Hence
the sinner was cast away from God, and doomed to an eternal death: and
this he must certainly undergo, except he obtain forgiveness of sin for
Christ’s sake through faith.

14. But to set the state of fallen man, both as to soul and body, in as
clear a light as possibly I can, I think it well to give a fuller
description thereof in this place; most earnestly entreating every one,
for the sake of God and of his own eternal salvation, to ponder again and
again, and seriously to revolve in his mind that original depravity which
has corrupted our nature. The consequence of this will be, that as a man
beholds his bodily face in a glass, and knows it, so he may also behold in
himself his own wretchedness, and original sin. This will daily influence
him to lament his own distressed condition, and to sigh after Him, who
alone is able to heal us.

15. For the whole Christian life is indeed nothing else, than a constant
wrestling with original sin, and a continual purging away of the same by
the aid of the Holy Ghost, and by true repentance. For, in proportion as
any one mortifies his natural propensity to evil, in that degree is he
renewed after the image of God, even day by day; and they who are not
inwardly mortified by the Holy Ghost, are at best no more than hypocrites,
let them make ever so great a show with an external profession of the
Christian faith. Neither can they expect to enter into the kingdom of God,
since they are not renewed into his image: for whatsoever is not dead to
itself, nor renewed into the image of God by his Spirit, is altogether
unfit for that glorious state.

16. From all this, there may evidently be inferred the absolute necessity
of the new birth, and of the daily renovation of our mind into the image
of God. This necessity will yet more fully appear, when we consider the
image of the devil according as the law describes it. For as the devil not
only does not _love_ God, but rather _hates_ him with his whole heart; so
he has infected man’s soul with the same contagion, and transfused into it
malice against God; so that now man by nature neither loves, honors,
believes, calls upon, nor trusts in God; but as he is filled with enmity
against him, so he flees from him, and shuns him. As the devil is hurried
on with a blind fury, and lives without God and his will; so in like
manner, the soul of man being corrupted by him, leads a _godless_ life,
unmindful of God and of his will. This inward darkness of the mind, is
attended with a frightful destruction of the divine light and image; and
brings forth that abominable sin, in which man, left to himself, saith:
“There is no God.” Ps. 14:1. And by reason of this blindness of heart, all
mankind are become an abomination before God, in all their ways.

17. But notwithstanding so dreadful a night of apostasy, there still
remains a spark of natural light in man’s understanding, by which he might
come to know that there is a God (Rom. 1:20); as also, that this God must
be just, according as all the heathen philosophers teach: but as for the
spiritual life, which is after God and his righteousness, it was wholly
extinguished in man. For conscience, which is the law of God written in
every man’s heart when it was first formed by him, teaches every one what
is good and right. Thus if you look, for instance, upon a person that is
unchaste, there is not one that so much wallows in the filth of the flesh,
but he now and then thinks with himself, “Surely there is a God, and this
God is most pure and undefiled; and so not like to me by any means.” He
cannot but reflect further: “This holy and pure God, must abhor every sort
of pollution and uncleanness; and, therefore, if I would be acceptable to
him, I ought to live chastely, and to abstain from all impurity.” But this
spark of light is soon put out by the filthy lusts of the flesh which
crowd in upon the mind; these overwhelm all good impressions, just as a
spark of fire is swallowed up by a flood of water. The lust of the flesh
is kept within the heart, and the conviction, which began to reprove it,
is soon stifled.

18. From this it plainly appears, that the spiritual life, consisting in
holy love and truth, is in the carnal or natural man utterly abolished.
And thus the wiser sort of heathens, however they might sometimes by the
light of nature maintain both the being of a God, and his providence over
human affairs, were soon carried away with the darkness of their own
hearts, and again called in question that providence which they had before
asserted: so that very little is to be made of what they say on this head.
This their books sufficiently declare. From this hereditary blindness of
heart, and this natural inbred darkness, spring unbelief and doubts. And
because all men are by nature in this degenerate state, they are an
abomination in the sight of God; since there is no faith in them, nor any
filial reliance upon the paternal goodness of God. To this spiritual life,
and to the various operations that proceed from it, the natural man is an
utter stranger; consequently he does not call upon God, but trusts to his
own wisdom, power, and strength. This is the greatest blindness and
darkness of mind possible.

19. From this blindness of heart, further arise both a contempt of God,
and a state of carnal security. As the devil does not humble himself
before God, but is hardened in pride; so has he infected the soul of man
with the same vice, and poisoned it with contempt of God, security, and
presumption. Hence he, like his father the devil (John 8:44), will not
humble himself before God; but is stout and insolent, haughty and
self-willed, and would do everything after his own will, without the least
fear of the Lord to keep him awe. As the devil relies on his own strength
and wisdom, and thereby entirely governs himself; so fallen man, being
infected with the contagion of Satan, acts in conformity with him; and
will always be his own counsellor and master. Moreover, as the devil seeks
his own honor, so does the natural man, who bears his image. He is in
pursuit of self-honor, without any regard to his Maker, whose honor he was
designed to promote. As the devil blasphemes the name of God, and is
ungrateful to his Creator; so it is with man, transformed into his image.
As the devil is unmerciful, wrathful, and revengeful, so is the soul of
man, which he has soured with the same leaven of malice. As the devil
delights to _lord_ it over men, and to please himself with vainglory, so
man, tainted with the same tyrannical ambition, haughtily lifts himself up
above others. He laughs at his neighbor, and shuns his company, as if he
were a worthless, pitiful person, and too great a sinner to be conversed
with. But, O man! thou art to consider over and over again, that in these,
and all other cases, the method of God is not to charge or accuse the
outward members of a man, but the _heart_ only. The heart is the murderer
and the liar, not the hand nor the mouth. It is the soul that is guilty;
and this is therefore everywhere arraigned in Scripture. So when God
commands men to call upon him in the time of trouble (Ps. 50:15), he gives
this command to the soul, not to the lips. And it is the very same in
every other case. Whosoever does not observe this necessary rule in
reading the Scriptures, is blind indeed. He can never have a right
apprehension of original sin, repentance, or regeneration: nay, he cannot
attain to a sound knowledge of any one article of the Christian religion.

20. We have daily before our eyes the extreme wickedness of men, their
horrid pride, savage hatred, barbarous enviousness, and other impious
qualities, with which they tear one another, after the manner of wild
beasts. Many are transported to such a degree of malice, as to be
unconcerned about their own lives, provided they can but hurt or destroy
another. Their neighbor must submit to their pleasure, or expect to have a
snare laid for his ruin. Thus, as the devil himself is a “murderer from
the beginning” (John 8:44); so he stirs up the soul of man to thirst after
the blood of others. For all these inhuman qualities of the heart, this
envy and wrath, this bitterness of mind, this rancor and malice, what are
they but the seed of the devil sown in man, and his express image engraven
upon the soul? Alas! how the devil has portrayed himself in man!

21. God had implanted in man a conjugal affection, that was pure and
honorable; that thence children might be begotten after the divine image.
Nor could there have been a love more holy and heavenly, than that by
which man, in his blessed estate, would have thus propagated the image of
God and mankind at the same time. All would have been for the glory of his
Creator, and the salvation of man. Nay, if man in the state of innocency
could have begotten a vast multitude of children, and have thus propagated
the honor and image of God; nothing, certainly, could have been more
grateful to him than this; nothing more delightful, more full of holy joy
and satisfaction. For these acts would then have proceeded from pure love
to God and to men, as so many images of the Supreme Good. As God found in
the creation of man, a holy pleasure, and delighted in him, as in his
image; so also man would, in like manner, have been sensible of a most
pure and exquisite joy in the procreation of his like, for it would have
been the propagation of God’s image. But, alas! Satan has polluted this
chaste flame of conjugal love with all uncleanness. Men and women,
actuated with a blind transport of lust, begot children _in their own_,
not in God’s likeness. Gen. 5:3. How is the holy bond of matrimony
trampled upon and profaned! How wholly defiled is it with spots of the
flesh, and what a multitude of vices and impurities now shelter themselves
under the sacred name of matrimony!

22. As God is just, the devil is unjust. The devil is therefore a thief, a
plunderer; and being so in himself, has instilled into man’s soul the same
unjust disposition, the same ravenous nature. The devil is a false accuser
(Rev. 12:10), a fallacious reasoner (2 Cor. 11:3), and a treacherous
informer (Job 1:9, 10), as well as a scornful mocker of God and man. Job
2:3, 4, 5. He misrepresents both words and actions, and wrests them to a
wrong sense. Of this artful contrivance he gave a striking instance when
he beguiled our first parents by his craft and subtlety. Gen. 3:5-7. Thus
the soul of man, corrupted by Satan, has received from him, as by
inheritance, a perverse and lying nature. John 8:44. This poison, conveyed
into the soul, is so horrible and so manifold, as to render it altogether
impossible to declare at large the subtile contrivances, and the different
kinds of diabolical art and cunning that proceed from it. Eph. 6:11. Read
Psalm 5:9, Romans 3:13, and James 3:5, 6; and thou shalt find described
therein in the most lively terms, that world of wickedness, which by a
deceitful tongue is drawn forth from the diabolical venom that lurks
within, and that thence spreads itself through the whole man. For God does
not blame the tongue, or the hands alone, but in his law, charges the
fault upon the whole man, yea, upon the heart, as the chief cause of all
the evils committed. See the Commandments, in Exodus 20:16, 17. This ought
to be particularly observed in the whole course of a religious life.

23. And this is that image of the devil, which now, instead of the image
of God, is so deeply engraven on the soul. Hereby man is made to delight
in sinning, and in slandering another, even as the devil’s name imports.
Rev. 12:10. How many, alas! are there, that reckon themselves very good
Christians, and yet will not hesitate to slander their neighbor upon any
occasion that offers; and after they have discharged their venom against
him, will applaud themselves for what they have done. Such a man will say:
“This is just what I have sought for a long while; I am now eased of a
great burden; I seem to be alive again, as I have so finely treated such a
one.” Ah! poor man, thou art to be pitied! How great is thy blindness,
that thou dost not discern who it is that has transformed thee into such a
devil and slanderer; and whose image it is thou carriest about thee! Seest
thou not that this is the very nature of the devil, the unhappy seed of
Satan? Discernest thou not this to be his true temper, which he has
implanted in the soul of man, that it might there display itself, in all
sorts of vices, but more particularly in pride, covetousness, lust, and
slander; even as daily experience abundantly witnesses? Alas, is this thy
wit, and cunning, and wisdom?

24. Behold, O man! the foul, the horrible, the profound corruption of
Original Sin! O how filthy, how unsearchable it is! Consider this again
and again; and descending into thyself, learn there to know the image and
nature of Satan, which, like a gangrene, is spread through thy whole soul,
together with all the dangerous symptoms that attend it. And learn how thy
soul is hence become an abomination before God, and is laid waste in so
dreadful a manner, that no creature is able thoroughly to search out the
malignity of the heart of man. Neither art thou thyself able sufficiently
to explore it, or to explain in words, that detestable venom which is as
rottenness in thy innermost parts. Wherefore, I earnestly beseech and
entreat every one, that he ponder with himself, and seriously reflect on
those things that have been said concerning the _depravity and corruption
of man’s heart_; even as if they had been inculcated a thousand and
thousand times, over and over again. For so great is this virulence, so
malignant and pestilential, as to put it beyond the power of any creature,
either angel or man, ever to root it out, or to cleanse or free our nature
from it. All the powers of men come short of so great a performance. For
how should any one be able to work out his salvation with his own natural
powers, since they all without exception are utterly depraved, and dead to
spiritual things? Man, therefore, must be forever miserable, and eternally
lost in this corruption, unless there come to his help one that is able to
succor, and to apply a healing medicine to so dreadful a disease. This
must be a lord over sin and death, able to subdue so obstinate an evil,
and by his divine virtue, to renew, transform, and purify again the
defiled nature of man. All this is a convincing proof, that
_justification_ cannot be the work of man, but is the work of God only;
and likewise that _regeneration_, or the being born again by the Spirit,
is indispensably needful to the restoring of fallen nature. For in
conformity to the inward principle of corruption, there is now a sort of
necessity that the soul should live a perverse and impious life. Man does
not now hesitate openly to transgress all the commandments of God; and
this is enmity against God. The understanding and will are now so dead,
and so much enslaved by sin, that according to their natural bent, they
are incapable of any love, fear, or reverence for God. They cannot call
upon him, honor him, praise, or worship him; they cannot put the least
trust in him, or turn themselves towards him. Many of the heathens have,
indeed, been illustrious for their good and virtuous deeds, and gained no
small credit by their morality. But it is utterly impossible for nature to
_change the heart_, to turn it to God, and to cleanse it from those sinful
affections that lurk within. This work is to be accomplished only by a
_divine_ power. For notwithstanding all this glittering show of morality
which some make, there still remains the inward root of the tree of evil,
whose fibres stick so fast in the soul, that no human power can ever
destroy them. The utmost that a man can do in so sad a case, is to prevent
the fire from breaking out into flames, so as to consume all that comes
near it; but notwithstanding this damp which is cast upon it, the evil
fire still keeps in, and secretly burns as much as ever.

25. Were not human life, and the management of civil and social affairs
under some check, the whole race of mankind would be destroyed at once,
and rooted up from off the face of the earth. But though the devil has
exercised an exceedingly great cruelty over man, yet God has not suffered
him to pluck up all the natural powers and affections from man’s soul, or
to extinguish the spark of free will which remains in the soul. There
still remain the law of nature and the natural love subsisting betwixt
husband and wife, parents and children. Without this it would have been
impossible for mankind to have long subsisted upon earth. For he who obeys
the unbridled lusts and desires of his corrupt nature, must be looked upon
as the very bane of all society. He entirely ruins, as much as in him
lies, all commerce and dealings betwixt men. It is, therefore, an effect
both of God’s mercy and wisdom, that he has preserved in fallen man this
little flame of natural love: the design of which is, that by the sense of
this love, we might know in some degree the excellency of that spiritual
and divine love which we have lost by the fall of man; and that from
feeling the one, we might be brought to consider the worth of the other,
and to breathe after the recovery of the same. But as to _spiritual_
matters, and such things as more immediately concern the happiness of the
soul, and the kingdom of God, nothing can be more true than that saying of
the apostle, “The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.” 1 Cor. 2:14. That is, man in his natural
state, has not so much as one spark of spiritual and divine light; but is
wholly blind in the things that appertain to the heavenly life, and that
constitute the image of God in the new creature. Man, nevertheless, was
created for this only end, that by means of this spiritual light, he
might, with the inward eye of the soul, contemplate the gracious presence
of God, and his sincere love towards him; and, continually walking with
and before the Lord, absolutely depend upon Him, and submit himself to be
governed by His will and pleasure.

26. The natural man not having so much as one spark left of this spiritual
light, it cannot but be that all men must abide in their natural
blindness, unless they be enlightened by God himself. This is that
hereditary spiritual blindness, which utterly incapacitates us for the
knowledge of such concerns as relate to the kingdom of God. But if it
happen, as too often it does, that a man besides this, indulge in evil
practices, then that spiritual blindness is followed still by another,
even natural blindness, which produces mournful effects in the fallen
soul. For by so prevailing a wickedness, that weak glimmering light which
yet sparkles in man, and would reason him into _outward_ honesty of life,
is at last totally extinguished; and the soul is struck with utter
blindness and darkness of heart, and must forever continue so, unless
Christ enlightens it.

27. What art thou, then, O man, unless Christ by his Spirit regenerate
thee, make thee a new creature, and transform thee into the image of God?
This new creation, necessary as it is, is, however, only _begun_ in this
life, and must struggle under the weight of many infirmities. If thou dost
but look into thyself, even after thou art become a new creature through
the Holy Ghost, it will plainly appear that the image of God is but
slightly delineated, and, as it were, shadowed out in thee. Dost thou not
see, that faith, hope, charity, and the fear of the Lord, are as yet but
weak, and hardly able to advance beyond the first principles of the
Christian life? Dost thou not see how slender thy humility is, and how
deeply the sin of distrust, pride, and impatience, is rooted in thy
breast? Dost thou not find thy devotion weak and languid; and thy charity
towards thy neighbor comparatively cold? How tender a spark of pure
chastity remains in the heart; and how vast a fire of carnal desire burns
within! How faint the one, how violent the other! How great still are thy
self-love, self-honor, and interest, sins that lurk within, and do not
always outwardly appear! And how fierce is the tide of evil concupiscence
which flows in upon thee, and disturbs thy inward repose! Whence it
follows, that to the very last moment of our lives, we must, by the Spirit
of God, continually wrestle with the old Adam, and with the image of
Satan. All this urges us incessantly to pray, sigh, and seek, till the
Divine Spirit be bestowed upon us, in order to destroy the image of Satan
daily, and to restore the image of God to us.

28. From all this, thou canst easily understand, O man! that thou art
never to rely on thine own strength; but entirely to cleave to the grace
of God, which alone is able to work all this in thy soul. All things are
to be sought and obtained from and by Christ through faith. From Him thou
art to receive divine knowledge and wisdom, against thy own blindness; his
righteousness, against all thy unrighteousness; his holiness against all
thy impurity; a full redemption, power, and victory, against death, hell,
and the devil. From Christ thou must obtain remission of all thy sins,
against the kingdom of sin and Satan, and against all the combined powers
thereof; and, lastly, everlasting happiness, against all spiritual and
bodily adversities and troubles. In this order, life eternal is to be
derived from Christ. But of this, more shall be said in the Second Book of
this volume.




