Chapter VI.


Showing How The Vital Power Of The Word Of God Should Be Manifested In Man
                              Through Faith.


    _Behold, the kingdom of God is within you._—JOHN 17:21.


Inasmuch as man’s whole welfare depends on his regeneration and renewal,
it was the will of God that all those changes which ought to take place in
man _spiritually_ and by faith, should be also _outwardly_ set forth in
the words of Holy Scripture. Since the Word is the seed of God (Luke 8:11)
within us, it is necessary that it should also spring up and spiritually
bear fruit. That must be accomplished _in us_ by faith, which is declared
_without us_ in the letter of Scripture; and if this effect be not
produced, then the Word is evidently to us but a dead seed, destitute of
life and energy. Hence, we ought in faith and in spirit to learn by our
own happy experience the truth of that which the Scriptures have outwardly
declared.

2. When God revealed his will in his Word, he never designed that the
latter should be a dead letter, but that it should grow up in us to a new
and inward man; otherwise the Word is of no benefit to us. These truths
may be explained more clearly by a reference to some example, as that of
Cain and Abel. The nature, manners, and actions of these two persons, as
they are recorded in Scripture, clearly explain the motions and workings
of the old and the new man in the breast of the believer. Cain perpetually
endeavors to oppress and destroy Abel. What else is this but the daily
strife of the flesh and spirit, and the enmity subsisting between the
serpent and the seed of the woman? With Abraham, the Christian is required
to quit his own country, leaving all that he possesses, even life itself,
in order that he may walk before God with a perfect heart, obtain the
victory, and enter into the land of promise and kingdom of heaven. Such is
the meaning of the Lord’s words: “If any man come to me, and hate not his
father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters,
yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple;” that is, he must
renounce all these rather than renounce Christ. Luke 14:26. With Lot, he
must depart from Sodom and Gomorrah, forsaking the wicked course of the
world; not looking back with Lot’s wife, but obeying Christ’s injunction
(Luke 17:32), in order that his deliverance may be completed. Hither are
all the wars and battles of Israel against the heathen and infidel nations
to be referred; for what is represented under this history but the
continual strife between the flesh and the spirit? Whatsoever is recorded
of the Mosaical priesthood, the tabernacle, the ark of the covenant, or
the mercy-seat, with the sacrifices, etc.,—all has relation to the
Christian believer. For unto him it appertains to pray in spirit and in
truth; to burn spiritual incense; and to slay the sin-offering by
presenting his body, through mortification, as a reasonable service and
sacrifice, so that Christ may truly dwell in him by faith.

3. And if we advert to the New Testament itself, what is this but an
outward expression of those truths, which are to be inwardly fulfilled by
faith, in the experience of the believer? If I become a new creature in
Christ, it is incumbent on me to live and walk in him; in him and with
him, to flee into exile, and to be a stranger upon the earth. The virtues
that resided in him I ought to practise; humility, contempt of the world,
meekness, and patience; and I am bound to be fervent in acts of benignity,
charity, and loving kindness. In and with Christ I should exercise mercy,
and pardon and love my enemies, and, with him, do the Father’s will. I
must be tempted by Satan with him; and, with him, I must obtain the
victory. I am to be derided, despised and vilified for the sake of the
truth that is in me; and, if called to it, I ought to die for and with
him, after the example of the saints, and in testimony that he, by faith,
hath lived in me, and I in him.

4. This is to be conformed to the image of Christ; this is to be born with
and in Christ; to put on Christ; to grow up and be strong in Christ; to
live with Christ in banishment; to be baptized with his baptism; to be
scoffed and crucified with him; to die with him; to be buried with him; to
rise with him from the dead; and to reign with him to all eternity.

5. If ever thou desirest to live in a constant union and conformity with
thy Head and Saviour, thou art in this manner to die daily with him, and
to crucify the flesh. Rom. 6:5, 6. Should this divine harmony not exist,
and another way be devised more consonant to thy fancy, then Christ will
not be _within_ but _without_ thee; far from thy faith, thy heart, and thy
spirit; and, in that case, he will profit thee nothing. But if thou permit
him to dwell in thy heart by faith, he will be thy strength, thy comfort,
and thy salvation.

6. All this, O man! doth faith in Christ effect within the heart; and thus
the Word of God becomes a living Word, and, as it were, a living witness
in us of all those things which are externally declared in the Scriptures.
Hence, faith is termed by the apostle a substance and an evidence, Heb.
11:1.

7. It is therefore evident, that all the sermons, discourses, and
epistles, contained in the Word of God, whether proceeding from Christ, or
the prophets, or the apostles; and, in a word, that all the Scriptures, in
general, as it regards their complete fulfilment, belong to man, and to
every man individually. Not only do the plain doctrines appertain to us;
but all the parables and miracles with which the history of Christ
abounds, have their final reference to man.

8. The purpose for which they were written was, that they might be
spiritually fulfilled in our own experience. When, therefore, I read that
Christ healed others, I promise myself the same relief; for we live in
unity one with another, Christ with me, and I with Christ. When I read
further, how he cured the blind, I am encouraged to believe that he will
restore me to the enjoyment of spiritual sight, who am blind by nature:
and so, with regard to all his other miracles. Only own thyself to be
blind, lame, deaf, or leprous; to be dead in trespasses and sins; and
then, he will surely heal thy maladies, and quicken that which is dead,
that so thou mayest have part in the first resurrection.

9. The substance of all that has been advanced is this: the Holy Scripture
bears _outward_ testimony to those things, which are to be _inwardly_
fulfilled in man, by faith. It points out that image externally, which, by
faith, is to be formed within him. It describes the kingdom of God in the
_letter_, which is to be established in the heart, by faith, after the
_spirit_. It exhibits Christ outwardly, who is, by faith, to live within
me; and it testifies of the new birth and of the new creature, which I
must experience in myself. All this I am to be made by faith, or the
Scripture will profit me nothing.




