Chapter XIII.


 The Christian Ought Willingly To Die Unto Himself And The World, For The
 Sake Of The Love Of Christ, And For The Sake Of That Future And Eternal
              Glory, For Which We Were Created And Redeemed.


    _Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was
    rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
    poverty might be rich._—2 COR. 8:9.


Thou art required, O man! to die to thyself, thy sin, and the world; and
to lead a holy, harmless life, according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
This thou art to do, not with a view to merit anything at the hands of
God, but from a principle of love to him, who performed and merited all
for thee, and died to save thee.

2. Be not deceived: Jesus must be loved by thee, not in word and in
tongue; but in deed and in truth. “If,” says he (John 14:23), “a man love
me, he will keep my words;” and so St. John speaks: “This is the love of
God, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments are not
grievous.” 1 John 5:3. And, again, the Saviour says: “My yoke is easy, and
my burden is light.” Matt. 11:30. To him, indeed, who loves Christ with
all his heart, it cannot but be easy to sacrifice the pleasure which
earthly vanities afford, and to do that which is good, without constraint.
Love renders every burden light that is laid upon us by Jesus; whereas to
him that is devoid of this heavenly principle, every act which duty
requires is grievous and oppressive. To such a one, every religious
exercise is painful and laborious; whereas the man who sincerely loves the
Lord Jesus Christ, esteems death itself to be in nowise terrible, when
submitted to for his sake. And, therefore, the Apostle says: “Unto you it
is given, in the the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
also to suffer for his sake” (Phil. 1:29); nay, to lay down life itself,
whenever that sacrifice is required of us.

3. In order to confirm thy faith, consider the example of Moses, who, “by
faith, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh’s daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.” Heb.
11:24-26.

4. Consider Daniel, who refused the luxuries of a court, and desired to be
fed with pulse and water, resolving “that he would not defile himself with
the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine which he drank.” Dan.
1:8, 12. He contemned the pleasures of Babylon, that he might attain “the
wisdom that is from above” (James 3:17), which dwells only in a heart
preserved pure from the pollutions of an unholy world. So, if thou
desirest that Christ, the eternal Wisdom, should enter into thy soul, thou
must abhor the pleasures of sin. For as Daniel and his companions were
made fairer by their sobriety and abstemious life, so be thou firmly
assured, that thy soul will appear more beautiful and fair in the sight of
God, even as “partaking of the divine nature,” if thou escape “the
corruption that is in the world through lust.” 2 Pet. 1:4.

5. Consider, further, the example of St. Paul, who says, “The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world” (Gal. 6:14); that is, I am dead
to the world, and the world is dead to me. Thus are all true Christians
_in_ the world, yet not _of_ it. Though they live in it, they do not love
it; for they view it as a transient shadow; and its pomps, dignities, and
lusts, as vanity and deceit, vexation and disappointment. Hence, they are
crucified to the world, though they remain in it; and the world is
crucified to them; that is, they desire no mere worldly honor, wealth or
joy.

6. How happy is the man who is dead to earthly vanities, and alive to God;
separated from the world, and drawn into Christ! How blessed is he into
whose heart divine grace is so infused, as wholly to wean it from inferior
objects, and exalt it to the fruition of the light and glory of heaven.
Such a state is the effect of daily prayer and supplication, without which
a true Christian cannot possibly exist.

7. Agur prayed to the Lord thus: “Two things, have I required of thee;
deny me them not before I die. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me
with food convenient for me.” Prov. 30:7, 8. So let the Christian pray:
“Two things I desire of thee, O Lord, even these two: that I may die to
myself, and to the world.” For without this death, it is utterly
impossible to be a true Christian. If thou, O Man! thinkest otherwise,
thou certainly deceivest thyself, and shalt at last hear from the mouth of
Christ that awful sentence, “I know you not.” Matt. 7:23; 25:12.

8. Though to die thus to self and to the world, is, to flesh and blood, a
grievous cross, yet will the spirit and the love of Christ eventually
triumph over every difficulty. So powerful indeed are these aids, that
they enable the true Christian to bear all things for the sake of the
Beloved, as a pleasant yoke and easy burden. And although he who lives a
life thus mortified, will be hated by the world, yet shall he be loved of
God; for the enmity of the world is friendship with him (James 4:4). And
the Lord hath himself declared, “If ye were of the world, the world would
love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.” John 15:19.

9. Those who are dead to the world for the testimony of Jesus, it casts
out; but it honors and applauds them who, living in the enjoyment of its
pomp and splendor, are its genuine offspring; because they live in the
world, and the world liveth in them.

10. In short, that man is not received and commended by the world, but is,
on the contrary, cast out of it, in whose heart, pride, covetousness,
lust, wrath, revenge, and the other corrupt passions of nature, are
mortified and restrained. Unto him the world is dead; and he again is dead
to the world: he begins to live in Christ, and Christ lives in him: and he
will be confessed by the Saviour, as one of his peculiar people, in whom
the great design of redemption has been effected. To others, on the
contrary, it will be said, “I know you not, as ye, in like manner, knew me
not.” You have not confessed me before men, but have been ashamed of my
life, my meekness, humility, and patience; and I will not confess you: you
have despised the shame of my cross; and you shall be with shame disowned
by me. Mark 8:38. For whoever refuses to live with Christ in time, cannot
expect to live with him in eternity: whoever has not the life of Christ
here, shall never have it set forth in him hereafter: and whoever disdains
to follow Jesus in the present world, shall never be glorified with him in
the world to come.

11. Therefore, O Man! strictly scrutinize thy life, and see whether thou
bearest a greater conformity to the life of Christ, or to the life of the
devil: for thou must inevitably be united to one or other of these
throughout all eternity.

12. If thou art dead to thyself and to thy depraved desires within thee,
thou wilt find it no hard task to die to the world and its vain
allurements which are without thee: and whoever is thus dead to the world,
will not love it or the things which it contains; for, “if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him.” 1 John 2:15. Again, how
shall his desires any more go out after the world without him, when he is
dead to it? Great indeed would be the loss sustained by a lover of the
blessed God, were he, in any degree, to yield to the allurements of the
world, and allow it to obtain a share in that affection which should be
fixed solely on the Supreme Good. A soul so undecided would soon be
entirely vanquished by the blandishments of sin, as was Samson by the
charms of Delilah (Judg. 16:6); and would become subject to all that
misery and vexation of heart, which invariably attend the love of this
world.

13. The love of the world appertains not to the _new_ creature, but to the
_old_: for the world has nothing to bestow but honor and vainglory,
riches, pleasures, and carnal desires; in these the “old man” delights.
The new man, on the other hand, has no peace except in Christ, who is his
honor and glory, his riches and his heaven.

14. And as nothing can be conceived of that is greater or more exalted
than the image of God renewed in Christ Jesus, so it should be our only
concern and care, to render ourselves partakers of this exalted honor;
remembering the words of Tauler, “What man, who is possessed of reason,
can doubt for a moment, that God can infinitely more rejoice and delight
the heart, than the corrupt and indigent creature is capable of doing?”

15. In addition to this, the Scriptures assure us that man was not created
for the world’s sake, but the world for man’s. It was not to pamper his
appetite, to heap up riches, or to extend his empire without limits, that
man was formed; it was not that he might acquire large estates and
possessions, erect palaces, or be gorgeously attired, that he was endued
with a soul intelligent and immortal: man was made to be _lord_ of the
earth, and not its _slave_; to subdue, and not to be subdued. He was not
to seek his pleasure and enjoyment on earth, however fair and fascinating
it might be to a depraved taste: he was not destined to be an heir of this
inferior world, nor the possessor of terrestrial, treasures, nor to be
actuated by any worldly motive whatsoever. Man is to depart hence, as one
that dwells on earth as a _tenant at will_. He was not made for it, and
cannot remain in it; he entered it naked, and naked he must quit it again.
Many, indeed, are born into the world at the same time; but an equal
number, on the other hand, are daily taken out by death; nor can any carry
with them even an atom of the treasures which they had accumulated upon
earth.

16. Man, then, is but a guest and a pilgrim below; and most obvious it is,
that he was not created for this temporal life, and that this world was
never designed to be the _end_ of his being. That _end_ is God, and the
image of God in Christ Jesus, unto which we are renewed by the Spirit; and
we are created for the kingdom of God and for eternal life. These our
blessed Redeemer purchased for us, when they had been forfeited by us; and
it is his Spirit that regenerates men who had been without God in the
world.

17. How unreasonable, therefore, is it in man to fix his affections on
temporal objects, when we are assured that the soul is infinitely more
noble and more precious than the whole world! How preposterous is it, that
he should lavish his time in the pursuit of earthly things, when he is
conscious that he was created to bear the image of God in Christ, through
the Holy Spirit! Therefore, let us now solemnly repeat what has been
before affirmed, namely, that man was not made for the world, but the
world for man. The excellency of the image of God in Christ Jesus, is
inconceivably great and glorious: so that were all mankind to unite their
labor and might, their wealth, their honors, and their all, they could not
succeed in restoring even _one_ soul to the possession of this image. It
became requisite that Christ himself should die, in order that this divine
image which had been utterly defaced by sin, might, through His Spirit, be
revived; and that man might again become the temple and house of God
through all eternity.

18. This being duly considered, as certainly it ought to be, how is it
that man so thoroughly debases his soul as to seek after the things of
this world, its honors, its pleasures, lusts, and wealth? He should surely
reason with himself, and say: “Shall I, for the sake of a little gold, or
for this fading world, or for all the honors and pleasures it can afford
me,—shall I, for the sake of _these_, sacrifice my _immortal soul_, which
Christ has redeemed at so infinite a price? God forbid.” “What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?” Matt. 16:26. Alas! the “whole
world,” with all its power and glory, could not avail to rescue one soul
from eternal destruction; for the soul is immortal, while the world
passeth away with all that it contains. 1 Cor. 7:31; 1 John 2:17.




