Chapter XI.


   God, The Light Of The Soul, Directing Us Not To Judge Our Neighbors.


    _God is light, and in him is no darkness at all_.—1 JOHN 1:5.


God is the supreme, most pure, and beauteous light; flaming with an ardent
desire of enlightening the souls of men, and uniting himself to them, if
not hindered by the darkness which men “love rather than light.” John 1:5;
3:19. But the darkness of the soul is the love of itself, and the love of
the world, which obstruct the operations of God in us. Wherefore, if the
soul would be a partaker of this divine light, let her take care not to be
overcome by the love of the creatures, by covetousness, anger, self-love,
ambition, and the lust of the flesh; for all these are the darkness of the
world, in which the god of this world ruleth. 2 Cor. 4:4. A man must then
forsake himself and all creatures, yea, everything that is not God; this
is called the forsaking “all that he hath.” Luke 14:33. Such a soul is
fixed entirely upon God, and is enlightened by his truth; and if by the
will of Providence he be required to engage in worldly affairs, he does it
with humility and fear, still keeping the centre of his soul free from the
creature and the world; so that the emanations of divine light are not
obstructed, but flow in perpetual streams from their fountain, which is
God.

2. This inward light breaks forth into external actions, so that
whatsoever a man says, or does, or suffers, is no longer an act of his
own, but of God, to whom he has surrendered and dedicated himself. For how
can he act, who is merely passive? So then, whatsoever impression or
impulse thou findest in thyself, whether it be a devout desire, a good
intention, an inclination to prayer or thanksgiving, all is from God, and
not from thyself. Submit thyself, therefore, to the mighty hand of God,
and suffer him to accomplish his will in thee; for so whatsoever thou
doest, is in him, and through him, and he worketh in thee. For it is a
necessary condition of all good works that they ultimately regard God, and
be wrought in him. John 3:21. Hence we should live in him, pray in him,
and do everything in him. One such work wrought in God, however
insignificant it may be in the eye of the world, is of more value in the
sight of God, than all the actions wrought in human strength. This is the
spring of true virtue, the essence of which is, that it should begin and
end in God. But in proportion as the love of the world and the creature
prevails in thee, thou art farther removed from God: whilst the nearer God
is to the ground of thy heart, the more deeply and plentifully will he
shine forth, and manifest himself by works of charity and compassion
towards thy neighbor. For our blessed Saviour tells us, “I am the light of
the world.” John 8:12. In him, therefore, let us act. Let us cleave to the
love of this our Head, that we may be enlightened in Christ.

3. For of all our actions those only may be called “light,” which proceed
from God and diffuse themselves through the darkness and miseries of our
neighbors, in patience, in meekness, in humility, in consolation, in
compassion, in gentle reproofs, and charitable censures. Whereas from an
arrogant love of censuring others arise self-esteem, a high mind,
contempt, and insolence toward our neighbors. This is the root of
innumerable sins. But as the light of the Holy Spirit cannot enter into
such souls, so where he inhabits, these vices have no place. The man of
God judges not his neighbor, unless compelled by necessity; and even then
he does it with great gentleness, and in the proper time and place; lest
while he attempt to cure one wound, he should make ten, by an unseasonable
and improper application. One thing ought carefully to be observed in
reproving our neighbor, namely, that we should not publish such
uncharitable reflections upon him, as may in any way injure his
reputation, either in his spiritual or temporal concerns; but on the
contrary, every one should keep himself within the bounds of meekness and
charity, lest he endanger his own humility and poverty of spirit. They
that delight in uncharitable censures and railing accusations, are like
the old serpent; their very breath is infected with his poison, whilst,
like him, they delight in being accusers of the brethren. Whilst they know
not themselves, they will dare to censure and judge their neighbors.
Consider, O man, thy perverse heart, and judge thyself, but no one else.
Luke 6:37. The false light of nature misleads thee, and draws thee blindly
into pride, self-love, and rash censures of others. But know that this is
not the light of God, but the very darkness of Satan.

4. But the true and divine light always discovers itself in modesty and
humility. It hunts not after the empty applause of men, but seeks after
God, from whom it proceeded, and into whom it longs and labors to return.
Such a man thinks himself the weakest, vilest, and most ignorant of all
men; being fully persuaded that whatever good there is in him, it is not
his but God’s. Above all things, therefore, endeavor to know thyself, and
trouble not thyself about thy neighbor, particularly his faults; lest in
the bitterness of thine heart thou be tempted to condemn him; for thereby
thou canst do great harm to thine own soul. Turn away, then, thy eyes, for
God’s sake, from any vices of thy neighbor, and turn into thyself, and see
whether thou art not, or hast not been as deep in the mire as he. And if
this appear to be the case, consider it in the order of Providence as an
opportunity of reading thy own defects in the life of thy neighbor, and as
a means of bringing thee to the knowledge of thyself, to true repentance
and amendment of life. Then turn thine eyes upon thy neighbor, and pray to
God for him, that He would be pleased, of his fatherly compassion, to
grant unto him also the same knowledge and amendment of life. The man that
is thus disposed, profits by his neighbor’s faults, and is preserved from
the sin of rashly judging or condemning him.




Chapter XII.


The Christian Ought Daily, Once At Least, Wholly To Abstract Himself From
All External Objects, And Retire Into His Own Soul; The Advantages Of This
                                 Course.


    _Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt
    bountifully with thee._—PS. 116:7.


The soul of man, flowing out into worldly things, and cleaving entirely to
the creatures, is like a wandering sheep. Now, the great Shepherd of souls
tries, by all the methods of his mercy and wisdom, to bring him back to
the fold, by emptying him of the creatures, and filling him with all the
fulness of God. Thus the royal Psalmist concludes the 119th Psalm: “I have
gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant.” This expression, how
oddly soever it may sound to carnal ears, discovers, nevertheless, to the
spiritual man, the whole work of illumination and divine wisdom. For as
the soul of man is placed between time and eternity, so soon as ever it
turns to time, it forgets eternity, and withdraws every day further and
further from divine things. But if it returns to eternity, then it forgets
the creatures, recovers its liberty, draws nearer to God, and is
thoroughly drawn unto him. For there is nothing dearer to God, than a soul
abstracted from the creatures, and resigned to him. Then, and not till
then, the soul enjoys true peace, tastes the food of life, and feels in
herself the true fruits of that divine _anointing_, which denominates us
truly Christians (the name “Christ” signifying: “The Anointed One.”)

2. And if these things are so, who can doubt that it is the duty of every
true Christian, if not oftener, yet once a day at least, to taste this
divine food of the soul, which is God himself, that thereby he may be
refreshed with true peace, and be replenished with the fulness of divine
life and grace? Wouldest thou, O man, but thoroughly consider this, thou
wouldest be much more in love with heaven, than with earth! Wert thou but
thus disposed, though the burden of a whole kingdom lay upon thy
shoulders, as it did upon David’s, yet it should be no hindrance to thy
holy exercises. For the creatures are not in themselves hurtful, but are
only so to him whose soul is in captivity to them; or, as it is said, “who
sets his heart upon them” (Ps. 62:10), which ought to be entirely
consecrated and devoted to God. Upon this foundation stood the Psalmist,
when he cried out, “Lord, whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee.” Ps. 73:25. For so great is
the sweetness of divine love, that the soul that has once tasted it,
despises sufferings, and looks upon the love or hatred of this world with
indifference. They that are admitted to these joys, have perpetual peace
in God with all creatures, whether friends or enemies. To these “the yoke
of Christ is easy” (Matt. 11:30); for they are in Christ, and Christ is in
them; and his presence makes their burden light, whilst he bears it in
them, and they bear it in him. Therefore, such a believer says with St.
Paul, “I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.” Phil.
4:13.

3. From what has been said, it appears plainly, how necessary and
profitable an exercise it is for every Christian, once a day at least, to
retire into his own heart, into God, and into Christ, to draw thence true
peace of soul, and to learn there the true use of temporal blessings. For
God does not forbid us the use of these, provided we walk in humility, and
in his fear, and continue faithful in our attendance upon him. Our misery
requires this of us, which in such a soul God will not suffer to last
long; and so does, lastly, our daily cross, which Christ by this means
makes light and easy to us. Not to say, that thou, O Christian, art
continually admonished by the Spirit of God within thee, to sigh and pray
for the love of God, and of God alone, and to grieve within thyself, when
any worldly impediments draw and separate thee from it. This is the true
and inward calling of the Holy Ghost, this is the well-beloved’s knocking
at the door of thy heart (Cant. 1:13; Rev. 3:20), as a living testimony
that our hearts ought to be the chamber of our heavenly bridegroom.




