Chapter IV.


    The Believing Soul Seeks God Internally, In Itself; Its Beauty And
                 Blessedness When It Is United With God.


    _I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it; that the
    love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
    them._—JOHN 17:26.


There are two ways of seeking after God, the one external, and the other
internal. The first is the active way, when man seeks after God; the
second is the passive, when God seeks after man. In the outward way, we
seek God by various exercises of a Christian life; as fasting, prayer,
retirement, meekness, accordingly as we are moved by God, or led by devout
people. In the inward, we enter into the ground of our hearts, attending
upon the revelation of the kingdom of God which is within us. Luke 17:21.
For if the kingdom of God be in us, then God himself is in us, and more
intimately united to the soul than she is to herself: and such a treasure
as this within us, ought carefully to be attended to. The soul that
desires to enter into this inward way, must entirely resign and submit
itself to all the dispensations of Providence, both inward and outward;
must perfectly rest in God, and be content to be, as God shall appoint,
poor or rich, cheerful or sad, peaceful or joyless. For thus the soul is
cleansed from all created images that may crowd into it from without; and
when thus stripped of all rational, sensible, and created things, and
everything which is not God, she comes at last into her own ground and
centre, and there with a pure eye discovers the essential light and
presence of God. But before this treasure can be obtained, everything else
must be forsaken. Blessed and truly happy are they that find it: for being
entirely divested of all worldly affections, they live in a constant union
with God.

2. And now, if a man could with his bodily eyes take a view of such a soul
as this, he would see the most beautiful creature in the world, shining
forth in all the transcendent beauties of holiness; for such a soul is
united to God, and by consequence is a partaker of His glory, not by
_nature_, but by _grace_. It desires nothing either in time or eternity
but God alone, seeking nothing for its own sake, either spiritually or
naturally. On the other hand, could we but see with our bodily eyes a soul
sunk in the love of itself and the creatures, wholly polluted with the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; and all
its corrupt thoughts and imaginations externally figured by visible
characters and impressions; neither earth nor hell could furnish a more
dreadful monster than this. But in the last great day, when the hearts and
consciences of all men shall be laid open (1 Cor. 4:5), and the inward eye
shall be unclosed, so that every one shall have a full view of himself,
then shall such an impure soul see its secret abominations, and find in
itself an eternal source of sorrow, misery, and torment. On the other
hand, the pure and divine soul shall forever contemplate in itself the
presence and kingdom of God, whom it shall forever see as He is, and by
virtue of its union with him, possess and enjoy him as its own forever. He
that rightly considers this union of the soul with God, shall
experimentally understand that expression of St. Paul, that “neither
height nor depth can separate us from the love of God.” Rom. 8:39. For if
it were possible that such a soul should be in hell, yet could it not be
separated from the presence and kingdom of God, to which it is most
intimately united. On the other hand, should a damned spirit, or the devil
himself, be admitted into Paradise and heaven, yet could they not be
exempt from the torments of hell, which they continually carry about in
themselves.




Chapter V.


  Showing How A Man May Be Drawn To God; Also, Wherein Spiritual Poverty
             Consists; And, What The Degrees Of Humility Are.


    _He that humbleth himself shall be exalted._—LUKE 18:14.


Many are the means which men make use of to come to a union with God; such
as reading, and other external exercises of religion. But in truth, next
to that true, living faith which purifies the soul from the love of the
creatures (as has already been shown, and will be further explained below,
chap. ix), there is no better or easier method than that of _true
humility_. This, however, does not consist in words, or in any external
behavior; but is seated in the bottom of the soul, so that the man upon
all accounts, both natural and spiritual, reckons and esteems himself as
nothing; and being thus truly poor in spirit (Matt. 5:3), he values
neither wealth nor honor, body nor soul, peace nor joy, nor anything in
the world, in comparison with his duty and the glory of God. Yea, should
it please God to inflict even the agony of hell upon him, he would
acknowledge that he deserved it; and he would most cheerfully and
contentedly submit, esteeming the will of God as the only measure and
standard of his duty and happiness, and continuing to offer praise. This
is that true poverty of spirit which disposes a man cheerfully to part
with, or submit to, anything, according to the will of God; after the
example of our blessed Saviour, who not only _did_, but also _suffered_
the will of his Father (Matt. 26:39), and voluntarily chose the accursed
death of the cross, and therefore was highly exalted by God. Phil. 2:9.
Whosoever has this humility, is truly poor in spirit; and though he
possessed the greatest temporal riches, yet would they be no hindrance to
his union with God. This is that “poor man” of whom the Psalmist speaks:
“This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him.” Ps. 34:6. And if we could
suppose such a one to be at ever so great a distance from God, yet would
the most merciful Father, out of his abundant mercy and goodness,
infallibly draw him to himself. For the fulness of divine grace chooses to
discover itself in the depth of human misery, and can no more forsake it,
than a tender father could leave his beloved son under the agonies of a
dangerous sickness. Of this we have an instance in the woman of Canaan,
who, looking upon herself as no more worthy than a dog, immediately
obtained help of Jesus. Matt. 15:27, 28. For no man ever yet came to the
fountain of living truth, but by the way of humility and poverty of
spirit, arising from a knowledge of his utter unworthiness. He that
understands this, will never think contempt, reproaches, poverty, or the
cross, either bitter or irksome to him. Yea, rather with the holy
apostles, he rejoices that God has thought him worthy to suffer shame for
His name (Acts 5:41), so that God in his glory may enter into his soul in
his misery. Hence the truest and safest way of coming to a union with God,
is that of deep humility and true poverty of spirit.

2. There are six steps or degrees of humility, by which we may arrive at
the perfection of spiritual joy and peace. The first step is, that a man
reckon himself as inferior to all men, and have no desire for the honor
and esteem of men. The second is, to despise and judge no man, but have a
constant eye upon himself. The third is, to refuse and avoid honors that
are offered; and if they cannot be avoided, to receive them with regret.
The fourth, to bear reproaches with joy. The fifth, to converse willingly
with men of inferior condition, and be so far from thinking ourselves
better than they, as rather to think ourselves the most miserable of all
men, and the chief of sinners. The sixth is, to submit readily and
cheerfully, not only to our superiors, but even to the least and meanest.
By these steps we ascend to the last and highest of all, where is the
throne of peace. “The way is humble,” says Augustine, “but the country to
which it leadeth is on high.” King Solomon’s throne had six steps
conducting to it (1 Kings 10: 19); on the top Solomon (that is,
_Peaceable_, 1 Chron. 22:9) sat enthroned. So when we have ascended the
six steps, we shall find the heavenly Prince of Peace—true _peace_ of
heart. There is no coming to the exalted felicity of the kingdom of God,
but by the low valley of humility and self-denial.




