Chapter IV.


  God Made Man In His Own Image, In Order That He Might Delight In Him.


    _My delights were with the sons of men._—PROV. 8:31.—_The Lord
    shall rejoice in his works._—PS. 104:31.


Every artist has a love for the works of his own hands, and that induces
him to take so much pains about them. “God saw every thing that he had
made, and, behold, it was very good.” Gen. 1:31. But if he took so much
delight in the general survey of his works, how much greater pleasure must
he take in man, whom he created after his own image.

2. For the more anything resembles ourselves, the more tenderly do we love
it. A father has a stronger affection for his son, who partakes of his own
nature, than for a house which he himself has builded, though ever so
exact and regular in itself.

3. Moreover, as God takes pleasure in a creature made to resemble himself,
therefore, it was necessary, that after the other creatures were formed,
he should create man in his own image, in whom he might rest and delight
himself. And as similitude is the foundation of friendship and society,
and everything naturally associates with its like, it follows that God, in
making man after his own image, intended to delight and rejoice Himself in
him; so that man ought likewise to cleave unto his God, and to delight and
take pleasure in conversing with Him.

4. Further, as God is the most perfect love, he could not but desire to
communicate himself, and all his blessings, to some other being. That
could not be done, however, without making some being like himself; and as
there was no such being then in nature, capable or worthy of such divine
communications, therefore he created man in his own image, which consists
chiefly in perfect love.

5. And, lastly, as there is naturally a reciprocal love betwixt the giver
and the receiver of any benefit; hence it follows, that it is the duty of
man to worship with the highest affection and most ardent love, his
heavenly Benefactor, who so affectionately desires to communicate himself,
and all the riches of his goodness, to his unworthy creatures.



Chapter V.


              That God By His Love Bestows Himself Upon Us.


    _God is love._—1 JOHN 4:16.


As man devotes himself entirely unto God by love, so God bestows himself
entirely upon man also by love. And as that love of his is in the highest
degree of perfection, he cannot but give us Himself: for the highest
instance of love is to bestow one’s self upon the person we love. And as a
consequence of this perfect love, He bestowed himself upon us in his only
begotten Son.

2. This is the true spring of the incarnation, passion, and death of the
Son of God. Thus our blessed Saviour pronounces these words of comfort,
“God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son” (John 3:16);
that is, God loved the world with an entire and perfect love, and
therefore gave us his Son. But as the eternal love of God is the fountain
of eternal life to the world; and that eternal love is manifested by
Christ Jesus, in and by whom we have everlasting life, therefore, our Lord
further adds: “that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.”



Chapter VI.


    Showing How Much Man Is Indebted To God For His Everlasting Love.


    _We love him, because he first loved us._—1 JOHN 4:19.


In every benefit or gift there are three things to be considered: the
giver, the receiver, and the gift itself. As, then, there is a natural
obligation upon the receiver to the giver, it is manifest, that since man
has received all that he has from God, so he owes all to him, and is under
the strictest obligations of love and obedience to his great benefactor.

2. And as man consists of body and soul, so God has abundantly provided
for the comfort and happiness of both.

3. As for his body, it is sustained and refreshed by the various
productions of nature, so that the whole creation seems to call upon him,
and put him in mind of his Creator: “Consider,” it saith, “O man, the
benefits which thy Maker has bestowed upon thee, and what returns of
gratitude and service thou owest him for the same. I (saith the heaven),
give thee daylight to work in, and send darkness in which thou mayest
sleep and take thy rest. I give thee the pleasant spring, the warm summer,
the fruitful autumn, and the cold winter, in their proper seasons. I
(saith the air), supply thee with breath, and every kind of birds. By me
(saith the water), art thou washed, and thy thirst is quenched; by me thou
art supplied with all kinds of fish. I bear thee and sustain thee (saith
the earth), and satisfy thee with bread, wine, and flesh; by all which
thou mayest know how much thou art beloved by Him who made thee, and me
for thy use; all of whose favors are as so many bonds and obligations upon
thee.”



