Chapter II.


  True Faith, And Converse With The Soul, The Only Means Of Attaining To
                          This Inward Treasure.


    _Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors._—ISA. 46:8


The true way of attaining this divine inward treasure is, by a true and
living faith. Though we have already in Books I and II treated largely of
faith, with all its powers and properties, how it cleaves unto Christ,
rests and depends upon him; yet we must here return to it, and show of
what use and advantage it is, in the matter before us. The property of a
true and living faith is, to cleave unto God with our whole heart; to put
our whole trust in him; to depend upon him; to dedicate and resign
ourselves entirely to his mercy and goodness; to be united to God; and to
enjoy him in the internal rest of the soul. True faith prefers nothing to
God; it makes him the true object of all its desires, by unfeigned
abstraction from all earthly comforts. In a word, it places its chief,
eternal, infinite, and perfect good in Him alone, who is the true fountain
of all good, whether in heaven or earth, in time or eternity, and all
through Jesus Christ, who is “the author and finisher of our faith.” Heb.
12:2. This is that faith which leads us to our inward treasure, which is
our chief good. Of this the Psalmist was an instance: he was full of this
faith: “Whom,” says he, “have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee.” Ps. 73:25. Such was the faith of Mary,
the sister of Lazarus, when she sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word
with eagerness. Luke 10:39. For faith, as has been observed, brings the
soul into the true sabbath of the heart, into a state of divine quiet and
heavenly rest, in which God delights to manifest himself. Therefore the
Lord said to Martha: “Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about
many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good
part, which shall not be taken away from her.” Luke 10:41, 42. What is
“that good part” but God in Jesus Christ? For by this faith which opens
the heart, in order to receive God alone is that better part chosen. By
this faith it is, that the ever-blessed Trinity enters into the heart, and
takes possession of it. Eph. 3:17; John 14:23. This is “that good part”
which we ought all to choose; namely, eternal life and blessedness.

2. In this one article is contained the whole sum of the Christian
religion; it is the fountain of charity and of all virtues. For faith
produceth love; love produceth hope; hope, patience; patience worketh
meekness; meekness, humility; humility produceth the fear of God; and the
fear of God teacheth us to pray to him, to “crucify the flesh” (Gal.
5:24), to deny ourselves, to hate our own life, and to despise the world.
Matt. 16:24. Upon this account St. John calls faith, “the victory that
overcometh the world.” 1 John 5:4. This was that one thing to which our
Lord directed the attention of the rich young man in the Gospel (Luke
18:18), when he asked him, saying, “Good Master, what shall I do to
inherit eternal life?” When he had commanded him to keep the commandments
of God, he answered, “All these have I kept from my youth up.” Jesus,
hearing him, said, “Yet lackest thou one thing; sell all that thou hast,
and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and
come follow me.” In these words the Lord directs him to choose that one
thing, that better part, by faith; and, by forsaking himself and his
worldly possessions, to turn to God, the true fountain and centre of his
being and happiness. From this one thing proceeds the whole Christian
life, and all the commandments, as a stream from its fountain, not by
compulsion or law, but from love and freedom of the spirit. “For it is God
which worketh in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure” (Phil.
2:13); neither will he own anything in us as his, which he himself has not
wrought. Here, then, is no need of laws, no need of commands or
prohibitions. For faith, by its free motion and spirit, does everything in
us which is necessary to be done: that is, it surrenders itself freely and
entirely to God, and to the operations of his grace. And this is what the
prophet Isaiah means, when he invites us to come unto God, to “buy wine
and milk without money and without price.” Isa. 55:1.

3. Faith, then, is the means of attaining to this inward treasure, whilst
it keeps a sabbath of rest unto God in every soul that is collected into
itself. For as the motion of the heavens is therefore the most perfect,
because it terminates in itself, and returns to its beginning; so the life
of man may then be accounted most excellent and perfect when it returns to
its original, which is God. And this a man does, when he enters deeply
into himself, having collected all the powers of his understanding, will,
and memory, and emptied them of the world, and all the lusts of the flesh;
offering up his soul, with all its affections, to God, by the Holy Ghost,
and celebrating an eternal sabbath in his presence. Then God begins to
operate in him. He waits for such a frame of spirit, and rejoices to
finish his work within us. For so great is the love of God towards us, so
ardent is his affection, that it is as if his divinity itself could not
consist without us; as if he should himself cease to be, unless he could
discover the abyss of his divinity in us, and transfuse the overflowing
fulness of his essence into us. So that the most acceptable service a man
can do unto God, is to keep his heart so quiet and still that God may rest
and manifest himself in it. All that God requires, in order to accomplish
this work in us, is an humble and quiet spirit. Whenever he finds such a
habitation, he dwells there with a high manifestation of his wisdom and
power. The eternal wisdom of God cannot unite with the wisdom of man; but
when the human soul is entirely submitted to God, then God entirely rests
in her. But if thou wilt engage thy will, thy understanding, memory, and
affections in the service of thy own mind, then they are no longer proper
instruments for the work of God. For in every union of two beings as one,
the one must of necessity be active and the other passive. But God is an
infinite and eternally active power, an essential pure motion; perpetually
operating in thee, unless hindered by thee. This may be illustrated by the
following similitude: as the eye cannot fix upon any object, nor receive
any impressions from it, unless it be free from all other images (for
otherwise one will hinder the other); so the soul, with all her powers,
understanding, will, and memory, can receive no impressions or influences
from God, if it be not empty of, and disengaged from, the world. The ear
cannot receive or enjoy the sweetest music, whilst employed and filled
with other sounds: so neither can the soul receive the divine sweetness
whilst it listens to the voice of the world. The more, therefore, a soul
withdraws itself from the world, the nearer it approaches to God. The more
it renounces the pleasures of the flesh, the nearer it comes to the
participation of “the divine nature.” 2 Pet. 1:4.

4. Nature cannot admit a vacuum. So if a man will empty himself of the
love of the world and himself, with all his passions and affections for
worldly things, God will infallibly fill his soul with divine grace, love,
wisdom, and knowledge. But if thou art full of worldly things, thou canst
not at the same time be full of heavenly things. When Abraham, at the
command of God, went from his own country and kindred, then was he
enlightened from above. Gen. 12:1; 13:1. Our carnal affections, self-love,
self-will, and self-conceit, with all our inclinations to the profits and
pleasures of the world, are to us as so many near friends and relations;
and it is hard to flesh and blood to part with them. But how hard soever
it be, this is the first step that conducts to this hidden treasure, this
pearl of great price; of which our Lord says, that the merchant having
“found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought
it.” Matt. 13:46. This is what the Lord says: “Verily, I say unto you,
There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, but shall receive
a hundredfold, and eternal life.” Mark 10:29, 30. What are our brethren
and sisters but our carnal lusts and corrupt inclinations, of which we
must be emptied, if we expect to be filled with the fulness of God. As the
Virgin Mary was a pure, immaculate virgin (so remaining eternally), when
she conceived our Lord Jesus Christ (Luke 1:27); so must every soul be
like a pure, immaculate virgin; that is, be unspotted, free from all the
pollutions of the world, in order to this _spiritual_ conception of him. A
soul thus pure and unspotted is, “as the king’s daughter, all glorious
within” (Psalm 45:13); enriched with hidden treasure. But how can the soul
be betrothed to God, that is betrothed to the world? “I come,” saith our
blessed Lord, “to send fire on the earth.” Luke 12:49. Oh, that such a
fire of divine love would so burn in us as to consume all our dross of
worldly affections, that nothing might live and move in us but the pure
and holy love of God! He adds, “I came not to send peace, but a sword.”
Luke 12:51; Matt. 10:34. And would to God that the Holy Spirit might so
mortify and destroy all our carnal concupiscence, that God alone might
move and operate in us! But if you will say, that you are so much taken up
with the business of the world, that you cannot be so collected as you
ought, then set apart some corner of your house, and some little portion
of your time, either by day or night, to retire into yourself, and to pour
out your soul to God, in the words of St. Augustine: “Lord, my God, be
pleased to enter into covenant with me, that I may die entirely to myself,
and that thou mayest live in me; let me keep silence in myself, and do
thou speak within me; let me rest from all things, that thou mayest
operate in me.”




