Chapter XIII.


 Showing That Jesus Christ Is The True Book Of Life, And That His Poverty
              Teaches Us To Despise The Glory Of The World.


    _Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was
    rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
    poverty might be rich._—2 COR. 8:9.


All who believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, are written “in the book
of life” (Phil. 4:3), or as the Lord expresses it, “in heaven.” Luke
10:20. This shall be made manifest in that great day, when the Lord will
“confess their names before his Father, and before his angels.” Rev. 3:5.
But besides this, the Lord Jesus himself is a most complete Book of a
truly Christian life: he being, as the word and wisdom of the Father, made
man, and come into the world to teach us by his life and death; and by his
conduct and conversation, to set a pattern before us for our imitation.

2. The whole of his life, from his tender infancy to his death, was made
up of nothing but a continual series of crosses and afflictions; insomuch
that he took hardly any step without the inseparable attendance either of
a pressing poverty, or of great contempt, or of most exquisite pains and
sufferings: and into these three heads the entire extent of the life of
Christ may be fitly resolved.

3. The poverty which the Lord endured, may be considered again under a
threefold aspect. In the first place, he was poor in relation to outward
things. This he himself declared: “The foxes,” says he, “have holes, and
the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay
his head.” Matt. 8:20.

4. This indigence in worldly goods was attended by another, which was a
poverty of friends. Nothing was more visible in his birth than meanness
and poverty. He was born at Bethlehem, the least among the cities of
Judah, and of a mother that was destitute of all wealth and worldly
greatness. Luke 2:4, 7. Nor did he ever court the favor and friendship of
the great and wealthy of this world. It is true, that Lazarus of Bethany
was his friend, the Evangelist taking particular notice, that the Lord
_loved him_, and thought him worthy of the title of his _friend_ (John
11:3, 5, 11, 36); but this friendship was not founded on any worldly
advantage which the Lord expected from him, but on that faith, whereby he
was induced to believe, that Jesus was really the true Messiah.

5. The third degree of the Lord’s poverty, was the state of his
humiliation, whereby, laying aside the _form of God, he humbled himself,
and made himself of no reputation_. Phil. 2:6, 7. He thereby entered into
the depth of our misery. He was wearied in the journeys he undertook, when
he “went about doing good” (Acts 10: 38); but particularly, when he healed
multitudes of sick and diseased, that continually crowded to him from all
parts, and surrounded him often to that degree, that he could not so much
as eat bread, and even his very friends thought him beside himself. Mark
3:20, 21. He fulfilled also what was said by the prophet, and is repeated
in the Gospel: “Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses”
(Isa. 53:4; Matt. 8:17); never withdrawing from any hardship or
approaching calamity, never shrinking under the burden of poverty, or
cruel mockings, or unjust reproaches, or other evils, though they were
sharp and numerous. And whereas he might have been served by all the
creatures of God, and waited on by legions of angels, yet he dispensed
with all this glory, and did not exert that sovereign power which he
possessed. He suffered his head to be torn by thorns, his hands to be
bound, his sacred body to be scourged, his hands and feet to be nailed to
the cross, his side to be pierced with a spear. All this he freely
allowed, though it was in his power to prevent it, and with one word to
restrain all creatures from inflicting an injury on him.

6. In a word, for our sakes, he made himself subject to all creatures. He
took upon him the form of a servant, that by his lowliness, he might
repair our losses, and reinstate us in that sovereign dominion over all
the creatures, which we had lost. He rose from the dead again, and gained
a perfect conquest at last, thereby to purchase for us an everlasting
victory. He suffered himself to be tempted by the devil (Matt. 4:1, 8),
hurried about by his malice, tormented by his instruments, the Jews,
fastened to the cross by their cruelty; and all this he underwent, in
order to rescue mankind from the power of the devil and all his
subordinate tools and agents.

7. Thus the Strongest became weak; the Almighty infirm; the most Glorious,
became most despicable; the most Beautiful, most abhorred and hated; the
most Exalted, most exposed himself to temptations of all kinds, to
sufferings and difficulties, to pains and hardships. Hereby he designed to
check and put to shame our sinful tenderness and effeminacy. We are, alas!
so tender and delicate that the smallest cross is now complained of as an
insufferable burden, and a little trouble and toil undergone for the sake
of God and our neighbor, seems a sufficient plea why men should start back
into the smooth way, and forsake the Lord; whereas he sends such trials
upon men for the purpose of promoting thereby the recovery of their own
souls, and the glory of his name.

8. Thus the Lord laid aside for a while the form of God. But this was not
all. He did no less lay aside the use of the divine wisdom which resided
in him. His conversation with others was plain and easy; and he behaved
himself like a man _who had not learned letters_, as the Jews expressed
it. John 7:15. He did not assume to himself the wonted formalities of a
great doctor, or of an acute reasoner and disputer. Neither did he act
like men that value themselves on account of their parts, skill, polite
learning, and high descent. Nothing was more visible in his life and
conduct than that quiet serenity of mind which he enjoyed in the midst of
all the storms of the world. This was attended, however, by a divine
power, an unaffected holiness of manners, an unfeigned charity, meekness,
and humility. He made use of plain and easy terms when he “taught the way
of God in truth” (Matt. 22:16); therefore he was despised by the proud
Jews as an unlearned man. Thus the eternal WISDOM of God, speaking through
the prophets of old, was cast aside as folly, and the true light of souls
rejected as deception: all which may serve to instruct us not to overvalue
ourselves upon our parts and abilities; but to consider that they are not
given us for the gratification of pride; and to employ them solely for
advancing the glory of God, and the good of our fellow-creatures.

9. This simplicity of our Lord was manifested herein also, that he made no
display of his glory and majesty. So great was his condescension, that he
freely conversed with sinners. He did eat and drink with them; and this
for no other reason, but to complete thereby the great work for which he
was sent, which was, to “seek and to save that which was lost.” Luke
19:10. It was on this account that he was so grievously defamed with a
multitude of odious names by his enemies, who called him “a gluttonous
man, a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners” (Luke 7:34): and at
another time, they exclaimed against him as a Samaritan, that had a devil.
John 8:48. And, at last, he suffered them to crucify him between two
malefactors, as if he were the greatest criminal, whereas he then bore our
transgressions.

10. Now he might have gained a greater repute than John himself, who,
according to the Lord’s own testimony, was a “burning and a shining
light.” John 5:35. But he readily renounced any such honor, thereby to
give a check to all superficial pretenders to piety, who are too apt to
value themselves on account of an outward show of religion: though those
that busy themselves so much about form and appearance, may have but
little of the life and power of God within them.

11. In short, the Lord forsook all that is lofty and grand in the world.
He was a king, and yet would be subject to kings and magistrates, nay, to
Joseph and his mother, though they were so mean and indigent. “He went
down with them to Nazareth, and was subject unto them.” Luke 2:51. He was
Lord over all, and yet when he came into the world, “He came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister” (Matt. 20:28), clothing himself in the
attire of poverty and meanness. He was the great and wise Prophet, and
chose disciples of the lowest rank, plain and simple people. And when it
was in his power to behave himself as a Lord and Master in the small
company of his followers, yet did he even there divest himself of that
right, being “among them as one that serveth.” Luke 22:27. He assumed no
lordlike air over them, but chose rather to be a master in life and
doctrine, than to have any other distinguishing character of grandeur and
pre-eminence. Thus when he taught the duty of obedience, he showed at the
same time a pattern of obedience in his own conduct. When he endeavored to
instil into his disciples a sense of humility, of patience, of subjection
to their superiors, and of other Christian virtues; he practised them
first himself, that so his own example might have the greater influence
upon the lives of others. Being Head and Master, he thought it becoming
his character to be chief also in bearing affronts, reproaches, injuries,
poverty, misery, and in performing the most humble services, even such as
that of washing his disciples’ feet. John 13:5. Thus he proved a Master,
Head, and Teacher, not in doctrine only; but in life, in example, and
practice.

12. Alas! how great is our folly! Our Head despised worldly honor, and lo!
we are in pursuit of it. He submitted to crosses and trials, and we shrink
back at the sight of them. He became obedient unto death; and we seek
liberty, so that we may follow our own will. But this does not agree with
the example which the Lord has set before us, nor with the spiritual
maxims contained in the Book of Life, which he has left us for imitation.

13. Consider, therefore, O man, whether the way wherein thou walkest
agrees with that excellent way wherein thy Lord and Master walked himself.
If thou despisest the narrow way of Jesus, and followest the way of the
world, then know certainly that thy way, though smooth and pleasing for a
while, will end in utter destruction at last! And thus the first part of
Christ’s life of sorrow and poverty has been described.




