Chapter XXVI.


 Five Kinds Of Works Of Love, In Which The Grace And Goodness Of God Are
                           Especially Revealed.


    _The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
    Jacob._—PS. 87:2.


There are chiefly five arguments of the love of God. 1. Christ’s
incarnation. 2. His suffering. 3. God’s indwelling in us. 4. God’s love
shining forth out of the creatures. 5. His amiableness in his own Being,
therein surpassing all created things.

2. I. Where love is, there is union; for it is the nature of love that it
unites itself with the beloved. Now, as God loved man so mightily, it
could not be otherwise but that he must unite himself again unto man after
his fall, and out of pure love and mercy become a man. Ah! “What is man
that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him!”
Psalm 8:4. The soul of man is so beloved of God, that as Christ is God and
man, having united himself with human nature, with our body and soul: so
also God loves our soul so much that he desires to pour himself wholly
into the same, if it were perfectly purified, and man did not resist him.
For there is infinite love in God, which is unutterable. This is, then,
one of the greatest demonstrations of the love of God, that God is made
man, and has showed himself a true lover of men, having taken upon him
what is human that he might give us what is divine. He is become a Son of
man, that he may make us children of God. He came down to us upon earth,
that he might lift us up into heaven. O what a noble exchange! and all for
this end, that we in him might be loved of God. It is as if God did call
from heaven, saying: “O ye men, behold my beloved Son! Him I have suffered
to become man, that he might be a living example and witness of my deep
love to you; that he might bring you all with himself to me, and ye all
might be made my children and heirs!” Therefore the Lord always calls
himself in the Gospel the _Son of Man_, out of an intimate love to us. We
seldom read that he calls himself the Son of God, but always the Son of
Man, from an affectionate humility and love.

3. II. Although his holy incarnation is a very great argument of his love
to us, yet his holy _suffering_ and _dying_ for our sins are a still
greater one. For “greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down
his life for his friends.” John 15:13. “In this was manifested the love of
God towards us (saith St. John), that God sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins.” 1 John 4:9, 10. This is the highest love. Our
God, according to his incomprehensible omnipotence, could have found out
other means by which to redeem us; as the Lord Jesus Christ himself prayed
for it in his agony, saying: “Abba, Father, all things are possible unto
thee; take away this cup from me.” Mark 14:36. But then it would not have
been the highest love shown to us. In order that God might bestow the
highest love upon us, and that we might not be able to say, “God has
something which he loves too dearly to give it to us;” he has given us his
dear Son, and not only given him, but given him also to be the
propitiation for our sins. Therefore he could not have showed us greater
love. Therein God commandeth his love towards us. Rom. 5:8. “He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things?” Rom. 8:32. Hath he given us that
which is the greatest, he will surely give us that also which is less. In
the eternal life all that is God’s shall be ours. “He that overcometh
shall inherit all things.” Rev. 21:7.

4. III. Further, God shows his love to us, by his dwelling among us, and
in us. O what a great comfort is this, that God has sanctified our heart,
and dedicated it to be his dwelling-place. Formerly, in the Old Testament,
when the tabernacle and sanctuary were finished, Moses was commanded to
consecrate, to sanctify, and to sprinkle it with the blood of the
sacrifice; for “almost all things were by the law purged with blood.” Heb.
9:22. And thereupon the glory of God came from heaven, and filled the
tabernacle (Exod. 40:34); so also, after Christ died for our sins, and
after we are sanctified through his blood, God comes to us and makes his
abode with us.

5. Whom we love, with him we delight to be. God loves mankind tenderly;
therefore he delights to be with them, and to have his habitation among
them. “I the Lord dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and
to revive the heart of the contrite ones.” Isa. 57:15. And again, with
whom we delight to be, him we tenderly love. God delights to be with men;
therefore he loves men tenderly, according to the Psalm: “In the saints on
earth, and in the excellent, is all my delight.” Ps. 16:3. This assurance
that God loves us and is with us, ought to comfort us in all our
calamities, in poverty, in sickness, in persecution, and in contempt. What
(sayest thou), doth he love them whom he suffers to come under so many
crosses? I answer, Yes, that he may through the cross make them glorious.
As their sufferings here abound, so also shall their consolations abound
there. 2 Cor. 1:5. The greater afflictions are on earth, the greater joy
and glory are in heaven. 2 Cor. 4:17.

6. And this is the reason why God makes many people sorrowful; namely,
that he may dwell in their hearts; for he delights to dwell nowhere more
than in a poor and contrite spirit. Ps. 34:19; Isa. 66:2. God fills us
here with his grace, that he may fill us hereafter with his glory, even as
he fills and illuminates the heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 21:23.

7. IV. The love of God shines forth also out of the creatures. When St.
Paul would desire for his Ephesians the best, the highest, and the most
glorious thing, he wishes that they might know the love of God, and be
able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height of the same. Eph. 3:18. He means to say so much, that
the love of God is higher than heaven, deeper than the sea, broader than
the earth, longer than it is from east to west, according to Psalm 103:11.

12. In a word, heaven and earth are full of the love of God: for all that
God hath created, be it visible or invisible, he hath created for this
end, that his inexpressible goodness and love might therein be manifested.
And, therefore, he hath given to man both inward and outward senses, that
thereby he might perceive the goodness and love of God. For all that man
can apprehend by his understanding, thoughts, mind, and reason, as well as
what he apprehends with his outward senses, altogether bears witness to
the love of God. All that man hath, is a testimony of the love of God;
yea, all creatures, visible and invisible, are, as it were, so many
messengers of God, declaring unto us his love; and he speaks to us through
them, saying, “Behold the heaven and earth, and all creatures! I have
created all out of love to man.” And whenever we perceive the pleasantness
of the creatures, we perceive the goodness of God; so that both with our
inward and outward senses we can taste and see that the Lord is good,
according to the words of the 34th Psalm, ver. 8.

8. The sun speaks to us by its light and warmth, as if it said: “Look upon
me, the greatest and the brightest creature among all visible things: He
must be great that made me.” Ps. 19:1, etc. But not only through beautiful
creatures doth God speak to us, but also through the most despicable worm,
as if God did say: “Lo, thou art beholden to me thy Creator, that I, who
could have made thee a worm, have, out of mercy, made thee a man.” Here
remember him who said: “I am a worm, and no man.” Ps. 22:6. Thus God
speaks unto man through all the creatures, declares his love to him, and
invites, leads, and draws us unto himself. This is that wisdom of God
which in all places uttereth “her voice in the streets,” which “rejoiceth
in the habitable part of the earth, and whose delights are with the sons
of men.” Prov. 1:20; 8:31.

9. Indeed, if we consider the matter aright, we are encompassed by the
love of God, even as we are all inclosed under heaven, seeing that “in God
we live, and move, and have our being.” Acts 17:28. Man can go nowhere,
but the love and goodness of God follow after him, and call him through
all the creatures, nay, through his own heart and conscience, saying:
“Whither wilt thou go, beloved child? Whither shalt thou flee from my
presence? If thou ascendest up into heaven, I am there. If thou makest thy
bed in hell, behold I am there. If thou takest the wings of the morning,
and dwellest in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall my hand
lead thee, and my right hand shall hold thee.” Ps. 139:7, etc. Therefore,
come unto me, and acknowledge my love and grace, with which I meet thee in
every creature. Hast thou sinned, grace abounds with me; hast thou left
me, my love and mercy have not yet rejected thee, but are continually
hastening after thee, have been calling to thee, and, as a wandering
sheep, have sought after thee. And if thou believest not these many
testimonies of all the creatures, believe the testimony of my dear Son,
how I have loved the world in him. John 3:16. “Thou canst nowhere find
rest for thy soul except here; turn which way thou wilt, thou must and
canst only rest in my love and grace.” O how blessed is the heart which
understands that heaven and earth are full of the love of God, and that he
has as many witnesses of his love as there are creatures! But the greatest
and highest witness of all is the Son of God.

10. V. We know also the love of God, from the amiableness of his own
being. From the visions of the prophets, and the Revelation of St. John,
we can observe that God Almighty is so lovely and beautiful, as infinitely
to transcend all the beauty and loveliness of the world. He is the beauty
of all things beautiful, and the loveliness of all things lovely, the life
of all the living. He is ALL. An ancient father has said: “God is so
lovely and beautiful, that if a man were in a fiery furnace, and saw the
beauty and glory of Him but for a moment, the greatest torment would be
changed into the greatest joy;” as it happened to St. Stephen, when he saw
the glory of God, and said: “Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son
of man standing on the right hand of God.” Acts 7:56. God is so lovely and
beautiful, that if a man saw him for a thousand years together, it would
seem to him but one hour. For in beholding the loveliness and glory of
God, all time is swallowed up; so that the more any one sees God, the more
he desires to see him; the more he loves God, the more he will love; and
the more he praises God, the more will he praise him; according to the
words of Xystus, an ancient teacher: “Devout souls can never be satiated
with the love and praise of God.” Hence, although the holy angels have
seen God from the beginning of their creation, they have not yet seen him
enough; and although they have praised him from the beginning, they have
not yet praised him enough: for “God is more to be praised, than all
praise can express; and more lovely, than the love of all the creatures
can reach.” God is infinite in his beauty, loveliness, and glory;
therefore no creature can love him enough. God is so amiable, that the
more one loves him, the more one desires to love him. He is so to be
praised that the end of his praises cannot be attained; so lovely to be
looked upon, that looking upon him never makes us weary; so comfortable to
be heard, that he never can be heard enough. Tauler says, “If one might
taste but a drop of the perfect love of God, all the joys and pleasures of
this world would be changed to us into the greatest bitterness.” The
saints have endured the greatest torments for the sake of the love of God,
and have given up their lives; and if they had a thousand bodies, they
would hazard them all, that they might keep the love of God; as the
Psalmist says, “Thy loving kindness is better than life; therefore my lips
shall praise thee.” Ps. 63:3. God is so high, so noble, and so pure a
Good, that the more any one knows him, the more he loves him. He is so
tender and perfect a sweetness, that the more one tastes of him, the
sweeter he becomes; and the more one loves him, the more his loveliness
increases. Blessed is the soul which is filled with the love of God. He
will be conscious in his soul of such amiableness as cannot be found in
time among creatures.

11. Behold now, ye children of men, how deceived ye are by the love of the
world. What is it which any man can obtain by the love of temporal things,
but sorrow, trouble, loss of time, unprofitable words (of which an account
must be given), wranglings, fightings, and a burdened conscience? Surely
all the children of men shall one day sorely repent that they have so much
loved the world, and the things therein: according to the warning given us
by St. John, saying, “Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world: if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the
world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth
the will of God abideth for ever.” 1 John 2:15, etc. Therefore every man
ought to mourn all the days of his life that he ever loved anything more
than God only. If God pours into thy heart his love, so that thou lovest
him above all things, then he has given thee the best thing he hath, even
_Himself_.




