Chapter III.


Our Righteousness Before God, Consists Solely In The Perfect Obedience And
 Merit Of Christ Jesus, And In The Remission Of Sin Apprehended By Faith.


    _As by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
    obedience of one shall many be made righteous._—ROM. 5:19.


As a skilful builder, when he is about to raise a lofty structure, takes
care to lay first a deep and solid foundation, so the merciful and
compassionate God, when he was to erect the high and everlasting palace of
our salvation and righteousness, thought fit to lay the foundation
thereof, in the depth of his mercy, upon the Person and office of his dear
Son Christ Jesus, as on the true rock of salvation. This is the promise
recorded by the prophet: “Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone,
a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation: he that
believeth shall not make haste.” Isa. 28:16. This stone was indicated by
Christ, when he declared to Peter, that “thereon he would build his
church;” a church so firmly and surely sustained, that “the very gates of
hell should not prevail against it.” Matt. 16:18.

2. This was the rock and corner-stone, which was preached by the apostles
Peter and Paul. 1 Pet. 2:4; 2 Tim. 2:19. This is that marvellous
corner-stone celebrated by the Psalmist, and upon which the 118th Psalm is
grounded. Upon this foundation, God has been pleased to raise the whole
structure of our righteousness, faith, and eternal salvation. But as God,
our merciful Heavenly Father, has, on his side, placed the groundwork of
our salvation and righteousness in the unsearchable depth of his mercy and
everlasting love; nay, even in his beloved Son, and the paternal affection
of his own heart; so he wills that on our side also the same be laid in
the depth of our heart, and in the centre of our soul; in order that,
through the divine light and power of faith alone (and even faith is
solely the work of the Divine Spirit), the righteousness of Christ may be
apprehended, and without any respect of our own works, whether antecedent
or consequent, be freely imputed and appropriated to us. The reasons of
this way of proceeding are as follows.

3. In the _first_ place, that God by this means might cleanse and justify
a man from within, and in the inmost centre of his soul: for as man is
inwardly corrupted by Satan, and infected in all the interior powers of
his soul, so it is but fit that his cure should be wrought from within,
and that all the faculties of his soul should be restored to their former
integrity and soundness.

4. _Secondly_, that our righteousness proceeds from _faith_ only. This
faith is wrought by God himself, and it stands entirely in his _power_ (1
Cor. 2:5), being supported by it, and not by any human performance, or
hypocritical action of men. Of this latter sort was the righteousness of
the Pharisees (Matt. 5:20), who made indeed a show of outward
performances, but were little concerned about the reformation of the
heart, and the inward recesses of the mind.

5. _Thirdly_, that our heart, soul, and spirit, renouncing human power and
strength (upon which, through the temptation of the Devil, and the snares
of self-love, ambition, and pride, they too much rely), might wholly
depend upon _Christ alone_, and upon his precious merit and satisfaction.
For from him alone flow the gracious remission of all our sins, and the
whole train of graces consequent on it; Jesus Christ having abundantly
satisfied for the sins of the whole world, and reconciled the Father to
mankind.

6. _Fourthly_, that the righteousness of Christ, by faith, might be made
_our_ own. In order to the same end he also by his Word and Spirit begets
this faith in our hearts, that thereby we may become actually possessed of
this inestimable treasure. For this is the highest, the unspeakable, and
inconceivably great consolation, that our righteousness is not the
righteousness of a man, nor even of a saint or angel, but of Christ, and
of God himself; “It is God that justifieth.” Rom. 8:33. Therefore if the
whole world were overflowed with the sins of one man, yet would the
righteousness of Christ be still more extensive and overflowing. For
verily, he is “the Lord our Righteousness” (Jer. 33:16), and how can sin
be more powerful than the Lord Jehovah? Would it be an insufficient
satisfaction, thinkest thou, if instead of a penny which thou owest thy
creditor, thou shouldest return ten thousand pounds? But such a price,
nay, one infinitely greater, is paid with the blood of Christ, which
therefore is called by St. Paul, “God’s own blood.” Acts 20:28. So great
and immense is the righteousness of Christ, conferred on us by faith, that
thereby we are not only made _righteous_, but also _righteousness_ itself.
2 Cor. 5:21. For, as it is not enough that a defiled infant be washed from
its uncleanness, but it must also be wrapped up in clean apparel (Ezek.
6:10), so Christ not only cleanses us with his blood, but clothes us also
with the garment of salvation, and covers us with the robe of
righteousness (Isa. 61:10): which we have received from the hand of the
Lord. This garment is called by the prophet, priestly or holy apparel; by
David, “the beauty of holiness” (Ps. 29:2); by St. John, “fine linen clean
and white, which is the righteousness of saints” (Rev. 19:8); by the
prophet Amos, “rivers of righteousness” (Amos 5:24); by St. Paul,
“superabounding grace” (Rom. 5:20); and “exceeding riches of grace.” Eph.
2:7. All these expressions set forth that the righteousness bestowed on a
penitent soul, is as great as God himself, and therefore beyond all human
comprehension. Though in the state of innocency, our first parents had a
complete righteousness in its kind, yet was it not so full and exuberant
as that which we have obtained in Christ: for this righteousness and
holiness, which we apply to ourselves by faith, is far more excellent than
that which Adam would have left us, had he continued in his original
innocency. So, too, the humility and obedience of Christ, as it was more
perfect, so it was more acceptable to God, than the obedience and
innocency of Adam; nay, a thousand such persons as Adam, could not have
come up to the perfection of Christ alone. Adam would have transmitted to
us indeed an hereditary righteousness, and thereby united us with God; yet
it cannot be denied, that our union, established with God in Christ, is
much more noble and excellent than that which we should have derived from
Adam: for Christ being made man, has in himself so cleansed and exalted
human nature, that the primitive state of Adam is not at all to be
compared with it. And as Christ retains his human nature to all eternity;
so all believers continue in the same united to God; because Christ is
wholly ours, and we are wholly his. Whatever purity the human nature hath
obtained in general in His Person, is also transferred to the nature of
each believer in particular. This will appear in the glorification of our
bodies at the last day, when “they shall be fashioned like unto the
glorious body of Christ.” Phil. 3:21. Nay, even in this life, it is said
in faith: “Behold, thou art fair, my love” (Cant. 1:15); “glorious, not
having spot or wrinkle” (Eph. 5:27): “the king’s daughter is all glorious
within, her clothing is of wrought gold.” Ps. 45:13. In a word, our
righteousness in Christ is no less immense than God himself; and if his
depth may be found out, so will our righteousness. Whence all creatures,
finding nothing that can be reproved in man, must stand as it were
astonished, and cry out with admiration: “Who is he that shall accuse or
condemn man, whose righteousness is the Son of God himself?” And this is
that righteousness of faith on which we rest, as on an eternal rock, and
which is a foundation that cannot be shaken. Of this we glory, in this we
rejoice in time and in eternity. By this we are conquerors, and triumph
over sin, death, the devil, and hell. By this we tread upon the lion and
adder, and trample under foot the young lion and the dragon. Ps. 91:13.

7. _Fifthly_, an angel (who never died for us) cannot be the foundation of
our righteousness, much less any _man_. The righteousness of man is but
weak and inconstant; and if he should fall, “all his righteousness that he
hath done shall not be mentioned” (Ezek. 18:24; 33:13), and therefore
whatever is built thereon falls soon to the ground and comes to nothing.
For this reason, our righteousness must have another foundation; a
foundation, namely, which is firm and constant, and not liable to be
shattered to pieces, though the “mountains should depart, and the hills be
removed.” Isa. 54:10. “An everlasting righteousness must be brought in”
(Dan. 9:24), so that “the salvation of the Lord may be forever, and his
righteousness be not abolished.” Isa. 51:6. A most excellent, eternal, and
sovereign Person, must procure an eternal and infinite good, by an immense
and infinite satisfaction offered for us.

8. The _sixth_ cause why God will have our righteousness to be apprehended
by faith, is found in his truth and promise, on which our faith entirely
rests, and by which God declared and promised righteousness to Abraham,
and to all his faithful seed. Whence St. Paul argues, that “our
righteousness must be of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end that
the promise might be sure.” Rom. 4: 16. Upon this promise of grace,
fulfilled in Christ, has God established our righteousness and salvation,
as the same apostle in another place more fully asserts: “Even as
Abraham,” says he, “believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same
are the children of Abraham.” And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto
Abraham: saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed (Gen. 12:3). “So
then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.” Gal.
3:6-9. And thus “grace and truth are come by Jesus Christ.” John 1:17.

9. _Seventhly_, God has made his grace, and the merit of Christ, the
foundation of our righteousness, that Christ alone may have the honor of
it. Isa. 45:22-24; 53:11. “In him alone is our help.” Hos. 13:9. He is the
beginning, middle, and end of our righteousness and salvation, so that
“every mouth may be stopped.” Rom. 3:19. For we are “saved by grace
through faith; not of works, lest any man should boast.” Eph. 2:8, 9. But
if our righteousness were founded on our own works and merits, there would
then be no room for grace, nor should we have occasion for mercy or pardon
of sin, “for which every one that is godly doth pray.” Ps. 32:6. Moreover,
there would be no place for humility, nor for the fear of God; neither
would faith and prayer turn to any great account; yea, we should have no
need of a Mediator, Redeemer, and Saviour. Christ would have then died in
vain; and we should be obliged, both by an external and an internal
obedience, perfectly to fulfil the whole law. We should remain under the
curse, have fallen from grace, and have lost Christ; as St. Paul expressly
testifies in Gal. 5:3, 4. So that the doctrine of justification by
_works_, in the sight of God, is altogether inconsistent with the whole
Scripture, both of the Old Testament and the New, and with our holy
Christian faith.

10. In short, our salvation and righteousness are founded entirely upon
the eternal grace of God, and the eternal Person and office of Christ; and
in Christ alone we are made righteous, holy, alive, blessed, sons and
heirs of God. The righteousness of Christ is ours, his goodness ours, his
holiness ours; his life ours, his happiness ours, and lastly, the sonship
and inheritance of Christ are ours; and so the WHOLE Christ, both
according to his divine and his human nature, is ours; (for God gives us
the WHOLE CHRIST for a Saviour, that he with his Person, office, grace,
glory, and blessedness, may be wholly appropriated to us). That all this
is our own, is our highest consolation, glory, praise, honor, love, joy,
and peace before God and all the angels and elect; it is our sublimest
wisdom, strength, might, victory, and triumph over sin and death, the
devil and hell, the world and all our enemies. For which God be praised to
all eternity! Amen.




