Chapter XXXIV.


             Love To God, The Only Source Of Peace And Unity.


    _Above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of
    perfectness._—COL. 3:14.


If all men had an equal love for God, the supreme Good, they would then
all be of one heart and of one mind, and the sincerity and unanimity which
they would manifest in the love of God, would cordially unite them to each
other.

2. But instead of this, every man loves himself, and pursues the
inclinations of his own heart, so that hardly two can agree together. For
as he whose heart is set upon honor, cannot but hate and envy every one
that is preferred before him; so from these different interests and
inclinations, nothing can proceed but emulation, strife, and discord.
Moreover, as he that pursues his own will, and courts the esteem of men,
makes himself his own god, there must by consequence be as many of these
idols and false gods as there are proud, ambitious men in the world. Hence
arise envy, hatred, wars, and fightings, whilst every one is bent upon
increasing and defending his own grandeur, in opposition to that of his
neighbors. Hence it plainly appears that as the love of God is the bond of
peace and union; so self-love is the root and cause of all the discord and
contention that is in the world.



Chapter XXXV.


                    Showing How We Ought To Love God.


    _Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart,
    and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned._—1 TIM. 1:5.


There is no better way of convincing a man than by appealing to his own
conscience. There, as in a glass, we may read our duty much more plainly
than ten thousand teachers can instruct us. We have already shown that it
is a point of natural equity to love God above all things, and that he who
does otherwise, sets himself up as his own idol. And now, if any man
desire to know to what his duty to God obliges him, let him look into
himself, and examine his own heart, and conclude that whatsoever he would
have done for himself, _that_ he is obliged to do for God. Therefore, as
self-love is natural to us all, we must reverse that, and offer to God
that which we unjustly arrogate to ourselves, by loving him as we have
hitherto loved ourselves.

2. Wherefore, as thou now lovest thine own will, and endeavorest to
gratify it in all things, so thou must, for the future, prefer the will of
God to thine own will, and think it better to submit to God’s good
pleasure than to humor and gratify thyself. Thou art in love with honor
and esteem, and wouldest have everybody bow to thy superior merit and
character; turn now this inclination of thine, and apply it to promote the
glory of God, and pray that all men may unite to do the same. As thou hast
hitherto been angry with every one that has opposed thee in thy pursuits
of glory, so oughtest thou now to oppose those that oppose the glory of
God.

3. Whilst thy heart is full of self-love, thou art greedy of praise, and
wouldest have everybody think and speak well of thee; do thou the same for
God; labor and pray that God may be glorified by all men, and that every
creature may praise and magnify His name. As thou art very industrious to
be thought a man of truth and honesty, and wouldest be very uneasy to be
counted a liar; so oughtest thou also cheerfully and industriously to
propagate and vindicate the truth and veracity of God. From all which it
appears that every man may read in the book of his own conscience the
obligation he is under to love and honor God rather than himself.



Chapter XXXVI.


                  Divine Joy, The Fruit Of Divine Love.


    _Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice._—PS. 5:11.


The end and perfection of everything is the fruit it bears, or the effects
it produces, which are as various as the seeds from whence they spring.
Therefore, as there are two different seeds or roots in man, namely, the
love of God and the love of ourselves, which are diametrically opposite to
each other; so likewise are the fruits which they produce. Now the end and
fruit of all human actions is either joy or sorrow. Joy, as it is a good
fruit, must necessarily proceed from a good root; and sorrow, being evil,
must proceed from an evil root; that is, in short, all true joy must
proceed from the love of God, and all sorrow and anguish of mind from the
love of ourselves.

2. For as all joy arises from love, and depends upon it, such as is the
_love_, such also must be the _joy_. If the love be divine, the joy will
be divine; if earthly, the joy also will be earthly. Now so long as our
hearts are united to God by true love, they cannot but rejoice and be
happy in him. This is a foretaste of eternal life, in which both our love
and our joy shall be completed and perfected together. Therefore, as we
shall there live eternally unto God, so our love also shall be eternal;
and as our love shall be perfected, so it shall be united with a perfect,
absolute, infinite, and eternal good, being itself also perfect,
unchangeable, constant, and eternal. And from a love so pure, immaculate,
and heavenly, shall flow a river of joy, divine, pure, precious, full of
rapture, full of grace, glory, and immortality.

3. For eternal life itself is nothing but this eternal joy, with some
drops of which, faithful souls, even in this life, have been often
refreshed and comforted. This is the meaning of that passage in Canticles
2:4, “He brought me to the banqueting-house: stay me with flagons, comfort
me with apples.” And whosoever has tasted of this joy, can have no relish
for worldly pleasures. But as that proceeds from the true love of God,
arising from faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, it follows, that if we desire
to obtain so great a good, and, by tasting some drops of this sweetness,
to enjoy this earnest and foretaste of everlasting life, it must be
obtained by a lively faith, operating by divine love. Whence St. Paul
tells us that “the love of Christ passeth knowledge.” Eph. 3:19.

4. And as this divine love is not a thing _without_ us, but _within_ us,
it follows that this does not depend upon our external goods or
possessions, such as riches, honors, learning, meat, or drink, or any
other outward blessing; but that all these things are contained _in it_.
And as this love shall attain its full perfection in the other life, so
the peace and joy that flow from it, shall be perfect and everlasting.
This treasure a man shall have in himself, and no one shall take it from
him; he shall have a river of living pleasure rising up in himself,
independent of all external blessings and comforts. And as no man knoweth
this treasure, but he that has it; so he that has it, is in perfect ease;
he envies nobody, covets nothing, thirsts after nothing but the fulness
and perfection of divine love.

5. The first fruits of this treasure may be possessed by faithful souls
even in this life, without lessening the reversion in the next life; yea,
it rather increases and spreads itself to infinite degrees, so that though
all mankind should unite together in this divine love, they would be no
hinderance to each other, but would rather increase and improve their
united stock of love and joy. For the more earnestly any man loves God,
the greater is his joy. And if it be so in this world, how great shall our
joy be in the next, when God shall pour out the fulness of his joy and
love upon his elect, and He himself shall be “all in all.” 1 Cor. 15:28.



