Chapter VII.


            Of The Things That Instruct And Comfort The Soul.


    _Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of
    the air, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and it
    shall teach thee._—JOB 12:7, 8.


Let us now see what provision God has made for the comfort and instruction
of the _soul_ of man. Here we shall find every creature in one way or
another, subservient to this end. And, first, I shall speak of the
pleasure which man receives from the creatures.

2. Man alone has the privilege of really enjoying what he possesses. Other
creatures, being void of understanding, have no relish of those blessings
from which man receives very great comfort; gold, silver, and precious
stones, have no intelligence. But man, being endowed with an understanding
mind, reflects with gratitude and pleasure upon the goodness of God, who
has provided so many beautiful creatures for his use and benefit. O the
wonderful goodness of God, who has made all the excellencies of the
creatures subservient to the happiness of man; so that they are the
channels of conveying that happiness to us, which they themselves are not
capable of enjoying! Thus the sweetness and goodness of the water, the
fragrance and beauty of flowers, the light and glory of the sun, moon, and
all the host of heaven, yield no pleasure to themselves, but all unite to
promote the happiness of man. Nay, without them, man would have no
enjoyment at all in this world; nor could he have any notion of the
dignity and pre-eminence of his nature above that of other creatures, but
by comparing his condition with theirs. This shows him the transcendent
goodness of God, manifested to him above all the rest of the creation;
this teaches him to be thankful for his beautiful form and stature, his
erect countenance, but above all, for his rational soul, created after the
image of God. From all which it appears, that the knowledge of a man’s
self is his highest wisdom, and the want of it, the most deplorable folly.

3. Moreover, the creatures were made, not only for the delight of man, but
also to be his monitors and instructors. For from them we may learn, that
our chief good consists not in worldly and outward enjoyments; such as
eating, drinking, and the gratifying the other bodily appetites, all which
are common to the beasts as well as to us; and this is a convincing
argument, that man, being of a more noble frame and nature than they,
ought to look for other meat and drink, and other pleasures suitable to
the higher nobility of his nature, which the inferior creatures cannot
share with him. I need not here mention, that the greatest part of human
wisdom arises from the contemplation of the creatures. Thus our music came
from the sound of metals; our skill in medicine, from other creatures; and
our astronomy, from the stars; which still farther illustrates my first
observation, that the whole world was created for the sake of man, for
which he owes never-ending thanks to his munificent Creator.



Chapter VIII.


              Of The Obligations Under Which Men Lie To God.


    _O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.
    A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand
    this._—PS. 92:5, 6.


The obligations which man lies under to God, are as many and as great, as
are the favors which he has received from him, or the excellencies which
he has bestowed upon all the creatures. For as every creature was made for
his use and benefit, so ought his gratitude to rise in proportion for them
all. If a king should bestow great estates and honors upon a company of
children in the same family, and but one of the number had age and sense
enough to know the greatness of the favor and honor done to them, he alone
is certainly obliged to thank him in the name of all the rest, and would
be guilty of ingratitude if he did not. So in this world, the rest of the
creatures are like children, that know not the worth and value of God’s
blessings, as man does; he is, therefore, alone obliged to adore and
praise him in the name and stead of all the rest, and is highly ungrateful
if he does not.



Chapter IX.


  Man Even More Indebted To God For Inward, Than For Outward Blessings.


    _And the fear of you shall be upon every beast of the earth._—GEN.
    9:2.


As man knows himself to be the most excellent of all creatures, so ought
he to be more thankful to God for the perfections of his own being and
nature, than for those of all the rest of the world. For as all things
else were made for his sake, he must of necessity be more perfect and
excellent than they. The sun, the moon, and all the host of heaven, those
glorious bodies, all wait upon man, and do him service. This they do, not
on account of his body, which, considered in this corrupt state, is less
excellent than theirs; but on account of his soul, as to which he is in
every respect superior to them. For the very notion of servitude implies a
superiority in the person to whom the service is paid: so that it would be
unnatural for those glorious bodies to do that service to man, if he had
not an immortal soul, and by consequence, a more excellent nature than
they.

2. And on account of the immortality of the soul, it is an unworthy thing
for a man to fix it upon anything that is mortal and perishing; because it
is incapable of uniting with anything but what is immortal, and
particularly with God himself. The body, indeed, is connected with
corporeal objects, and is capable of terrestrial enjoyments; but the soul
should be united solely with God; so that, as a king, he might be
enthroned and bear rule in her; and in this consists the excellency of man
above all other creatures, that his soul is the throne, the image, and
habitation of God. Greater honor than this no creature is capable of
receiving; therefore man is the most excellent of all, and is infinitely
indebted to the Author and Giver of such inestimable benefits.



