Chapter XXII.


All The Works Of A True Christian Must Be Done In Humility, Or They Will,
              Otherwise, Become An Abomination And Idolatry.


    _That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the
    sight of God._—LUKE 16:15.


All works that are a well-pleasing and acceptable sacrifice to God, can
proceed from true faith alone; this will not fail to beget Christian
humility in the heart. The effect of this will be meekly to acknowledge
that with regard to any good that may be found in us, it is wholly and
solely to be ascribed to the grace of God: “Not I, but the grace of God
which was with me.” 1 Cor. 15:10. He who does not do this, commits two
sins: the first is, apostasy from God, by turning himself from God towards
himself, that is, from the Supreme Being, towards that which is in itself
nothing. The second is sacrilege, by taking to himself that honor which is
due to none but God; to whom, and not to man, everything that may be
called good belongs. He, therefore, that doeth not all things in humility,
steals from God the glory due to him. For when God says: “I will not give
my glory to another, neither my praise to graven images” (Isaiah 42:8); he
shows that all glory and praise are due to him alone.

2. If, therefore, any man applaud himself, either for knowing or doing
anything, verily that man takes to himself the glory which is due to God
only, and is thereby an idolater of himself. For this reason, ambition is
abominable idolatry: and self-love, and self-esteem, are no less than
having another God before him whose name is Jehovah. For this very reason
also, the devil seeks to be honored and worshipped in the world.

3. Such a vainglorious devil, covetous of honor and worship from the
world, every proud and arrogant person, by thinking highly of himself,
cherishes in his heart. If thou be wise, see that thou break down and
destroy this idol, which is set up in thy heart. Many persons are so holy
that they will not even look upon any outward images, lest they should
happen to be defiled by them; not observing, at the same time, that great
idol which they carry about with them in their hearts, and by which they
are to such a degree defiled as to become an abomination before God. For
all that is most highly esteemed by men (through self-love and ambition)
is an abomination before God. Whence all who seek only their own honor, or
power, or ascribe aught to themselves as their own, are idolaters. Thus
the whole world lieth in idolatry; and every house has its living idols.

4. That idolatry which defiles thee, proceeds from within, even from the
heart. To whatsoever thy heart inclines, in whatsoever it acquiesces and
rests, and unto whatsoever it cleaves by love and inclination, whether it
be good fortune, wealth, honor, power, or long life; that very thing
immediately becomes an idol, and has seduced thee into the sin of
idolatry. Idolatry is not any outward pollution; but that which is
internal, spiritual, and springing up within. It is so that God considers
it; He judges all things according to the heart; and it is so only that he
looks, trying the hearts and reins (Ps. 7:9), and judging of all things
according to the faith or unbelief there found by him. Whence Christ has
also plainly told thee, “Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be
also” (Matt. 6:21); that is, thy God, thy rest, thy peace, thy trust will
be there; and there will be thy paradise, yea, there will heaven and all
things be to thee. Observe closely what that object is on which thy heart
loves to dwell, for it is surely thy God, whatever its nature may be. If
thy heart cleave fast to God only, then is _He_ thy God, and blessed art
thou: according as it is written: “Happy are the people whose God is the
Lord.” Ps. 144:15. And again, “Delight thyself also in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desire of thy heart.” Ps. 37: 4. But if thy mind
cleave to the world, then the world is thy God. And so of the rest.

5. It hence appears that there are really in the world no other idols but
such as the heart of man makes for him. The devil himself is called “the
god of this world” (2 Cor. 4:4), because the ungodly follow him, do his
deeds, love darkness, and take pleasure in the works of the devil. And
thus men make a god even of Satan.

6. Idols of wood are easily avoided, but take heed of the idols of gold.
See that thou be not ensnared by these. It is no hard matter to keep from
dead idols; but take heed that thou worship not living ones, and
especially thyself. As soon as thou ascribest honor, skill, or power to
thyself, thou settest up thyself in the place of God. This idolatry is
properly struck at by God, when he says that he “will not give his glory
to another.” Isa. 42:8. For whatsoever is, or is called by the name of
honor and glory, is due to none but him, who is the Most High, and the
most Holy One, and the sovereign and everlasting Good. Whosoever,
therefore, thou art, that wouldest not make an idol of thyself, nor
pollute thy works with the foulest of abominations before God, learn
hence, not to ascribe to thyself honor, or glory, or praise; knowing that
it is true humility to shun honor, and to account one’s self unworthy of
all glory. When thou shalt do this, and shalt have mortified all ambition
and self-esteem, then thou shalt be known to be dead to the world indeed.
From this springs up the new man, in whom is found the most noble life of
Christ; which life, he himself has described as being meekness and
lowliness of heart. Matt. 11:29. He, on the contrary, is still carnal, and
lives after the flesh, according to the old birth, who would be honored
and greatly esteemed: because it is the nature of the carnal man to
endeavor to be, or to be accounted above all others. But if any man seek
to be accounted nothing of, he has a heart truly spiritual and Christian.
But alas! where shall we now find the true Christians, that is, such as
are willing to be slighted, and to be reputed as nothing? For, as hath
been said before, it is the property of the true followers of Christ, to
deny themselves, to hate themselves, to despise themselves, and to
renounce all that is theirs, for his sake. Matt. 10:38; Luke 9:23. Such
are indeed genuine Christians.

7. If any one should here ask of me, What then is a Christian to do, if it
please God so to honor him as to give him grace and glory before the world
(Ps. 84:11), as in the case of Daniel: and, since God has appointed
certain distinctions among men, several orders, states, and offices; and
has for that end variously distributed his gifts among them, What is the
duty of a Christian, if he be advanced to some post of dignity? I answer,
If this be thy lot, then render all the honor which is conferred upon thee
to God again; and ascribe nothing to thyself which is the right of
another, or take that to be thine which is God’s only.

8. As soon, therefore, as any honor is given thee, see that, being mindful
of thy low estate, thou transfer it all to God, and keep nothing thereof
to thyself. If thou neglectest to do this, and shouldest be induced to
attribute anything to thyself, it is certain that thou must thereby lose
divine grace, while, with a sacrilegious impiety, thou invadest that which
of right belongs to God. So if thou excel others in spiritual or natural
gifts, in wisdom or skill, wealth or dignity, be watchful not to take this
honor to thyself; yea, let it be thy joy and delight to offer all up to
God again, from a most deep and intimate devotion of thy heart. This thou
wilt not fail to do, and to give that glory to Him which is due, when thou
shalt glory in nothing but in Him only, according to the words of the
Prophet: “Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; neither let the mighty
man glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: but let
him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me,
that I am the Lord which exercise loving-kindness, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth; for in these things I delight, saith the
Lord.” Jer. 9:23, 24.




