Chapter V.


  Showing That The Evidence Of True Christianity Does Not Consist In The
 Knowledge And The Hearing Of God’s Word, But That He Is A Christian, In
 Whose Life God’s Word Is Manifested, And Who Beseeches God In Sincerity
That This Word, As A Divine Seed, May Be Quickened In Him, And Bear Fruit.


    _The gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation to every
    one that believeth._—ROM. 1:16.


The way by which we are to arrive at true and substantial wisdom, and
become friends of God, is to submit ourselves to the discipline of
repentance, and to lead a life conformable to the Word of God. Such a life
as this cannot fail to be attended with true illumination of the mind, and
an increase of all divine graces; nay, with so close an alliance with God
himself, as to make us “partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.” 2 Peter 1:4. An example of
this we have in Enoch, who having “walked with God, was not, for God took
him” to himself. Gen. 5:24. To such a holy life as this David aspired with
the utmost fervor of spirit, proposing two means by which to obtain it:
the first, _fervent prayer_; and the second, _a diligent practice of the
word of God_. “I cried,” says he, “with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord: I
will keep thy statutes. I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy
testimonies.” Ps. 119:145, 146.

2. These words set forth the difficulties which he encounters who seeks to
be a true Christian, and to keep the word of God in holiness of life. For
flesh and blood naturally strive against the word of God, and that
holiness of life which it requires: and are, besides, inconstant and weak,
and prone to yield to the enticements of the world. The devil on all
occasions hinders our progress, and opposes our endeavors on every side.
This is followed by a multitude of evil examples, and the persecutions
which wicked men raise in opposition to those souls that enter upon
another course of life. Against obstinate evils, such as these, all the
strength of the soul is to be opposed. This we learn from the example of
David, who cried unto the Lord _with his whole heart_, in order that he
might better digest the Word, and by leading such a life as that Word
requires, continue in the favor of God. This ought also to be our main
concern; the favor of God being infinitely preferable to all that the
world affords. Whoever pleases God, and is His friend, most effectually
secures himself thereby from the malice of all his enemies. Hence _serious
and fervent prayer_ is, as I said before, the first step to a holy life.
The second means to obtain a holy life, is expressed in the following
words of the same Psalm: “I prevented the dawning of the morning, and
cried: I hoped in thy word. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I
might meditate in thy word.” Ps. 119:147, 148. Here the Psalmist declares
the earnest study, love, and affection, which are due to the word of God;
as also the time best suited for meditating in it, namely, the morning.
The faculties of the mind are then more strong and vigorous than at other
times; and are best disposed for searching into divine subjects. The truth
of this is at that season most feelingly perceived, when the soul,
afflicted by sadness and deep spiritual temptations, “watches for the
morning” (Ps. 130:6), and with “waking eyes” (Ps. 77:4), expects help from
the Lord. She is then “as a sparrow alone upon the house top,” as a lonely
owl in the desert (Ps. 102:6, 7); and “so weary with groaning” (Ps. 6:6),
as to be almost ready to expire.

3. This is that exercise of the cross, or school of affliction, in which
all saints are most effectually trained for a happy eternity. Whoever is
not inured to this sort of trials, can know but little of God and of his
word. In this exercise, all the natural powers of soul and life consume
away, that God alone may become our strength and support. By such inward
trials as these, the carnal life is likewise more and more weakened, and
the quickening power of God and of his word, perceived with the greater
effect and experience. And truly, all our efforts ought to centre in this,
that the external hearing and reading of the divine word be practically
applied to the mind, and improved into Christian experience.

4. This doctrine, therefore, I would have firmly rooted in thy mind,
namely, that not the reading or hearing, but the doing and practising of
the word, demonstrates the true Christian. James 1:22. Without this
practical improvement, hearing and reading will be of no great advantage.
For the word was not committed to us, that it might be read and known
only, but that it might be reduced to practice. As a medicine gives no
relief to the patient who hears of, or looks upon it, but at the same time
refuses to take it; so the word, though a remedy for our diseased nature,
can yet cure no man, or restore him from death to life, whilst he refuses
to take what the word prescribes. Therefore, in order to this, fervent and
constant prayer (according to the example set us by David), will be
requisite in order to enable us to conform our life and actions to the
divine word. What advantage is it to an artist that he knows an art, if he
never practises it? Will not his supine and careless neglect reduce him at
length to poverty? And what will it avail us to _know_ the word of God,
and not _do_ it? “That servant,” says our Saviour, “which knew his lord’s
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes.” Luke 12:47. And St. Peter affirms, that “it
had been better for such not to have known the way of righteousness, than,
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them.” 2 Peter 2:21. As a father does not own him for a son, who in
everything acts in a manner contrary to his will, so not words, but the
life and actions, are marks and indications of a child of God, according
to that saying of our Saviour: “If ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do
the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me,—this did not Abraham.—Ye
are of your father the devil.” John 8:39, 40, 44. Why should a barren and
fruitless tree take up any room in the garden, when it only incumbers the
ground on which it grows? It is surely fit for nothing, but to be cast
into the fire, as is represented in the parable of the barren fig-tree.
Luke 13:6, 7. As it would be foolish to give to a raven the name of a
swan, to which it has no resemblance; so if the men of this world should
be called by the name of true Christians, whilst so little of a Christian
temper appears in their life and manners, I think it would be justly
counted egregious folly. It is not by words, but by deeds and actions,
that we are to judge of a Christian’s state, according to that saying of
St. Paul: “The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.” 1 Cor. 4:20.
Such is the condition of most men at this day, that those who make the
strongest pretences to the Christian name, do nothing but that which is
contrary to the Christian spirit. They are like the people at Rome,
concerning whom Laurentius Valla exclaimed when reading these words of our
Lord, “Blessed are the merciful, blessed are the peacemakers,” etc. (Matt.
5:7-9), “_Surely either these words are not true, or we are no
Christians._” Man is corrupted to such a degree, that even not a few brute
creatures visibly surpass him in some good quality. The dove excels him in
harmlessness (Matt. 10:16); the ant in industry (Prov. 6:6); the stork in
a careful provision for her young; the dog in love and fidelity; the ox
and the ass in knowledge of their master (Isa. 1:3); the sheep in meekness
(Isa. 53:7); the lion in generosity and clemency towards weak animals; the
cock in watchfulness; and the serpent in wisdom. On the contrary, man in
his natural state exceeds all the beasts in mischief. He is more fierce
than a wolf; more crafty than a fox; more vain than a peacock; more
voracious than a swine; more pestilent than a viper; fiercer than a bear.
Indeed, the Lord Jesus himself terms Herod a _fox_ (Luke 13:32); John the
Baptist applies the name of _vipers_ to the Pharisees (Matt. 3:7); and St.
Paul that of _lion_ to Nero. 2 Tim. 4:17. Truly, those vices and
mischiefs, which go single and unaccompanied in brutes, are oftentimes
crowded together in one natural man. So that the human body is very
significantly called by the apostle, “the body of sin” (Rom. 6:6), as
being full of sins, and infected with all manner of defilements. Not to
mention, that there is no creature so bad and pernicious, but that it may
be still of some use to men. The foxes and wolves, for instance, with
their skins, secure men from the injuries of a rigorous season. But, alas!
what good is there to be found in a man abandoned to the conduct of an
unregenerate nature? “Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart is
only evil continually” (Gen. 6:5; 8:21); as is more than once expressed in
Scripture. He exercises his reason to practise fraud; he wastes his body
with pride and lewdness; and is both inwardly and outwardly corrupted, so
that all his members are justly called the “instruments” or weapons “of
unrighteousness.” Rom. 6:13. Hence it is, that the Sacred Scriptures
represent our nature in colors so dark and odious, as may strike terror
into every man that reads them. “There is none righteous, no, not one:
there is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God.
They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable;
there is none that doeth good, no, not one. Their throat is an open
sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is
under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; their
feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways;
and the way of peace have they not known; there is no fear of God before
their eyes.” Rom. 3:10-18; Ps. 14.

5. Behold here the deplorable image of the natural man! Behold the
abomination that is common to us all! And now tell me how a man can see
the kingdom of God, unless he be born again from above, or, as St. Paul
expresses it, “unless he be renewed in the spirit of his mind: putting on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness?” Eph. 4:23; Col. 3:10. And the same apostle says, “But ye have
not so learned Christ; if so be that ye have heard him, and have been
taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus.” Eph. 4:20, 21. Yea, he says,
“They that are Christ’s, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts.” Gal. 5:24. Alas! if those belong not to Christ, who do not mortify
the members of unrighteousness, but live in the pollutions of sin, then
they surely must belong to the devil, and cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven, since they do not crucify the flesh. For whosoever desires to
please God, must become “a new creature” in Christ (2 Cor. 5:17); “in whom
neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature.” Gal. 6:15. Now, since these are the terms on which our eternal
welfare depends, let it be our main concern, that we more and more
vanquish sin in our mortal bodies, and that we be members, not of Satan,
but of Jesus Christ. Let us earnestly endeavor, that the divine Word may
gain ground, and bear fruit in our souls. Let us strive to render our
lives acceptable to God, so that, being preserved by his grace to the end,
we may continue “vessels of mercy, and not of wrath.” Rom. 9:22, 23.

6. It is for this reason that David so heartily wishes to lead a holy
life, conformably to the word of God: “I cried,” says he, “with my whole
heart; hear me, O Lord; I will keep thy statutes” (Ps. 119:145): for since
our conversion is entirely from above, it follows, that a holy life must
be obtained by continual prayer and supplication. “Heal me, O Lord,” says
the prophet, “and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for
thou art my praise.” Jer. 17:14; 31:18. And David says again, “I cried
unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.” Ps. 119:146. Sin
and the kingdom of Satan are, indeed, so strong and powerful in man, that
it is in vain to attempt their conquest without the divine aid and
assistance.

7. Let us therefore shake off all sloth and negligence, and let us acquit
ourselves diligently, in a matter of so great importance. David himself
further adds, “I prevented (_that is_, I came before) the dawning of the
morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word. Mine eyes prevent (_or_,
anticipate) the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word.” Ps.
119:147, 148. And very appropriate are the words of the prophet on this
account: “He wakeneth me morning by morning: he wakeneth mine ear to hear
as the learned.” Isa. 50:4. With which those of Solomon agree: “I sleep,
but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocketh.” Song
5:2.

8. In these and the like sentences of Scripture, we may view the fatherly
care, and condescending love of our merciful God; since his delight is to
be conversant with the sons of men, to speak with them and to instruct
them. Hence he appointed his Son to be our heavenly Teacher and Master; of
which the Lord Jesus himself gave a visible image when he was found in the
temple in the midst of the doctors, and astonished the hearers with “his
understanding and answers.” Luke 2:47. This was done by our Saviour, not
merely on account of the Jewish temple, which is now destroyed; but rather
on account of the Christian Church itself, which is the true and heavenly
Jerusalem, taught and instructed by his Word and Spirit. It was also done
with reference to the temple of our heart, in which he will teach,
comfort, enlighten, and sanctify us. Here he will pray, ask questions, and
answer them; and speak in holy thoughts, and devout meditations. And in
this the prophetical office of Christ consists. Hence also he replied to
his mother in these words: “How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that
I must be about my father’s business?” (Luke 2:49), meaning that office
which was conferred upon him by his Father. This office he now performs at
the right hand of God, as our true and only High priest; and upon earth he
discharges it by his _word_; by means of which he also inwardly preaches
in our hearts by his Holy Spirit and gracious illumination. Without this,
the outward preaching must prove barren and unfruitful, according to the
words of the apostle: “I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the
increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watereth; but God that giveth the increase.” 1 Cor. 3:6, 7.




