Chapter XLVIII.


    There Is No Affliction For Which God Has Not Provided Appropriate
 Consolation. The Consolation Which He Affords Is Always Greater Than Our
   Misery; This Consideration Should Sustain And Confirm Our Patience.


The holy Apostle St. Paul, when meditating upon the tender mercies and
compassions of our Heavenly Father to all afflicted and contrite sinners,
breaks out into these words, full of the praise of God: “_Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the
God of all comfort; who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may
be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
we ourselves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound
in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ—knowing that as ye are
partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation._” 2
Cor. 1:3-7.

2. In these words, so full of grace, the holy Apostle gives thanks to God
for heavenly consolation; which is indeed the only remedy against all the
troubles and adversities that oppress us in this life; teaching, at the
same time, that no adversity befalls us, how great soever, but God
supports us under it by his divine comfort, which is more abundant than
our sufferings. This he confirms by seven weighty arguments, which he
repeats in regular order.

3. The first is, because God is the _Father of mercies_, which is the most
cheering appellation that can be conceived: for he shows himself a Father,
not only in name, but in sincerity and truth to all afflicted souls.
Consider what are the properties of a father; for they all belong to God
our Heavenly Father. It is the part of a father, 1. To love his children.
2. To take care of them. 3. To feed them. 4. To defend them. 5. To correct
and instruct them. 6. To pity their infirmities. 7. To be tender of them.
8. To give them an inheritance. If a man will but thoroughly consider
these particulars, he must acknowledge that the very name of a _father_
carries in it such a treasure of comfort, as abundantly outweighs all the
miseries of human life. And to illustrate this yet more perfectly, St.
Paul, by a most significant epithet, calls him, _the Father of mercies_;
that is, the eternal fountain of all that tenderness and affection that is
diffused through the hearts of so many thousands of fathers. Hence it
follows, that no cross can befall the children of God so great, as is the
comfort that arises from the Father of mercies.

4. The second argument is contained in this expression, _the God of all
comfort_; that is, he overflows with eternal and infinite comforts. For as
God is the eternal, infinite, and chief Good; and on the other hand, our
crosses are finite and temporal; what can proceed from that eternal and
chief Good, but perpetual comfort, not only equal, but superior to our
greatest affliction? For as our miseries are finite, and the consolations
of God are infinite, it clearly follows that the latter must be superior
to the former.

5. The third argument is, the example of St. Paul, and all the saints.
“God,” saith he, “comforteth us in all our tribulation.” If we but read
the histories of holy men of former times, and compare their trials and
afflictions with the divine consolations wherewith they were supported
under them, we shall easily perceive that our afflictions are but light in
comparison with their torments; and that no cross can befall us so great,
as to exceed those divine comforts and supports which the holy martyrs
enjoyed. Who will presume to compare his crosses with those of Job? Who
can say he has been afflicted like Jeremiah (Jer. 20:7, etc.)? or tried
like David? Ps. 88. And what is our cross compared with that of Christ? or
are our sufferings, compared with the torments of the holy martyrs? Their
examples, as they were the children of God, our Heavenly Father has set
before our eyes, to teach us, 1. That the cross is the sanctuary of the
true Christian. 2. His heavenly and spiritual glory. 3. His victory over
the world and the devil. 4. His preparation for the kingdom of heaven. 5.
That without the cross no man can enter into the kingdom of God. 6. That
the cross is the image of Christ. 7. That it is an exalted and sublime
mystery, in which lies hid the highest wisdom of God. But flesh and blood
cannot comprehend this, neither taste the heavenly manna hidden in the
word of God, except by the cross. Hence, the divine comforts are greater
than any human sufferings.

6. The fourth is expressed in these words, “That we may be able to comfort
them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are
comforted of God.” Now, how did God comfort the apostles? And how do they
comfort us again? Certainly, by the gracious promises in his holy Word.
Hence it is said, “Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for our learning, that we, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope.” Rom. 15:4. Now, whosoever reads the Word of God as he
ought, must needs observe how kindly God vouchsafes to treat with us, what
abundance of grace, what spiritual and eternal blessings he promises to
bestow upon us; so that we must needs confess that such comfort outweighs
all the sufferings of human life. For though it is said of this
troublesome world, “that all the sons of Adam, from the day of their
birth, find it full of trouble and unquietness, fear, anger, and strife;”
yet, if to this state of trouble and misery we oppose the glories of the
eternal kingdom (2 Cor. 4:17), it will appear that the joys of the next
life, promised in the Word of God, are vastly superior to the miseries of
this. It is, indeed, true, that sin is a very great and dreadful evil,
daily encompassing us about, and involving us in innumerable miseries.
Yet, if we but call to mind, that Christ is our righteousness, it will
thence follow that the burden of sin which lies upon us is much less than
our spiritual consolation which is in Christ Jesus. For greater is the
righteousness which is in Christ than the sin which is in us. In short,
the Word of God so abounds and overflows with heavenly consolations, that
the heart of man is too narrow to receive them. It is like the poor
widow’s pot of oil (2 Kings 4:6), which, by the blessing of Elisha,
produced more oil than there were vessels to receive. Yea, it often
happens that a word of Holy Scripture can comfort a man more than the
whole world, yea, than the devil himself can distress him. “The river of
God is full of water,” saith David (Ps. 65:9), so full that no man can
empty it. Therefore, God calls himself “The fountain of living waters.”
Jer. 2:13. And so in Ps. 36:9, “With thee is the fountain of life; in thy
light shall we see light.” Who, then, can think that the fountain of sin
and death more abounds with affliction than the fountain of life with
comforts?

7. The fifth ground of comfort is that the apostle calls the cross of the
faithful, “the sufferings of Christ.” And that 1. Because all the faithful
are the spiritual members of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now, as the head feels
all the pains of every member of the body, by a certain sympathy arising
from its union with them; so Christ, who is our Head, feels all the
crosses and sufferings of every member. 2. Because Christ dwells in his
faithful servants, and is vitally united to them; therefore, also, he
suffers in his members, sharing in all their sufferings, banishments, and
persecutions, as he witnessed by a voice from heaven, “Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?” Acts 9:4. 3. Because we are born anew of Christ, and
he is our “everlasting Father.” Isa. 9:6. Now we know, that the heart of a
father has a very tender sense of the sufferings of his child. Therefore,
the sufferings of all believers are the sufferings of the Lord Jesus
Christ. And if it be so, canst thou think any affliction so great that it
cannot be made easy and tolerable by this consideration, that Christ is
thy Head, and thou art his member; that he is united to thee, dwells in
thee, and suffers in thee, regarding all thy sufferings as his own; that
he is thy Father, and feels in himself all the crosses, pains, and
afflictions that are laid upon thee?

8. The sixth ground of consolation, the Apostle deduces from Jesus Christ,
the spring and foundation of all comfort, in these words: “Our consolation
aboundeth by Christ.” As sin is the fountain of all misery; so is Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, the spring and fountain of all joy and comfort.
Now as the power of Christ is greater than the power of sin; so is the
comfort that proceedeth from him greater and more powerful than any misery
that can arise from sin; according to the words of St. Paul, “Where sin
abounded grace did much more abound.” Rom. 5:20. “For it pleased the
Father, that in Christ should all fulness dwell.” Col. 1:19. Him,
therefore, the prophet Isaiah (Isa. 61:1) describes as sent from God to
comfort all that mourn. Whence it follows, that the comforts flowing from
Christ, are greater than any crosses and sorrows which we endure.

9. The seventh comfort which the Apostle mentions, is the glory of Christ:
hence he says, “As ye are partakers of his sufferings, so shall ye be also
of the consolation.” This glory we know to be so great, that he is
glorious, not only with respect to his own Person, in a manner
incommunicable to his body, which is the Church; but also that he, as the
Head of the Church, was exalted to glory for that very end, that all the
members of his body might be partakers with him. Hence St. Paul calls him,
“The head of the church which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth
all in all.” Ephes. 1:22, 23. And now, what calamity, what cross, what
affliction can be so bitter, as not to be sweetened by the consolation
arising from such future glory? Wherefore St. Paul does not “reckon the
sufferings of this present time to be worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us.” Rom. 8:18.

10. It now remains that we speak of the five means, by which we may be
partakers of these comforts.

11. The first is, _true repentance and knowledge of sin_. Without this,
the soul is not capable of comfort; according to that saying of Christ,
“They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.” Matt.
9:12. On the other hand, a soul that has a true sense of sin, understands
that sin has cast it into so many miseries and calamities, and therefore
murmurs not against God, but abhors itself and its own iniquities (Lam.
3:39); and confesses that God is just in all that he has brought upon it.
For as sin, like a general contagion, has infected the whole mass of
mankind; so also the sentence of misery and affliction in this moral
state, has passed upon all, for that all have sinned. And whoever, like
the prophet Daniel (Dan. 9:7, 16), confesses his sin, shall find
consolation descending upon him from heaven like an angel, as in the case
of Daniel, ch. 9:21.

12. The second means, is _faith_, which hangs upon Jesus Christ, as the
infant upon the mother’s bosom. It rests entirely in the paternal
affection of the God of all consolation. It holds fast by Jesus Christ, as
Jacob did by the angel, saying, “I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me.” Gen. 32:26. It is faith which in Christ Jesus overcometh sin, death,
the world, the devil, and all misery. For “all things are possible to him
that believeth.” Mark 9:23. And he that believeth shall see the glory of
God. John 11:40.

13. The third means, is _prayer_, which is a conversation with God. As it
is a relief and a refreshment to an afflicted soul, to communicate its
sorrows and troubles to a faithful friend: so are our hearts refreshed and
comforted, by conversing with God in prayer. “When I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.” Psalm
138:3. Prayer offered up in the name of Jesus Christ, is like Jacob’s
ladder (Gen. 28:12), on which the soul ascends from earth to heaven; as
soon as the prayer ascends, an angel, that is, divine consolation,
descends upon it. Thus it was in the agony of our blessed Lord; for when
he prayed more earnestly, lo! an angel descended from heaven to strengthen
him. Luke 22:43. And we may assure ourselves, that whensoever we pray
according to His will, we shall be strengthened according to His promise.

14. The fourth means of obtaining divine consolation is, _praising God_,
which is always attended with comfort and spiritual joy. He that is daily
employed in the praises of God, lives the life of an angel; for they, we
know, continually “behold the face of the Father which is in heaven”
(Matt. 18:10), and sing his praises. This is their highest joy, this is
the bread of angels. Whence it appears, that praising and glorifying God
must afford the most exalted joy and comfort to a devout soul. Hence David
says, “I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be
in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord; the humble shall
hear thereof, and be glad.” Psalm 34:1, 2. In this place David joins the
praise of God and spiritual joy together; teaching us thereby, that the
one is the fruit of the other, because they are most intimately connected.

15. The last sure and certain means of receiving divine consolation, is a
diligent reading, hearing, and meditating on the Word of God. “For
whatsoever things were written, were written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.” Rom.
15:4.

16. From the Word of God as the true fountain of consolation, are to be
drawn all the above-mentioned arguments and grounds of comfort; namely,
joy and quiet of mind under all kinds of crosses and afflictions. Hence
also we must learn how these comforts are to be obtained, namely, by true
repentance, a living faith, ardent prayer, and continually praising God.




