Chapter XLIII.


    To Praise God Is The Highest And Most Honorable Employment Of Men.


    _It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord—upon an
    instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp
    with a solemn sound. For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy
    work; I will triumph in the works of thy hands. O Lord, how great
    are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep. A brutish man
    knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this._ PS. 92:1-6.


There are six Psalms which have been distinguished by the name of Golden
Songs, namely, 16, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, to show us that the praise of God
and prayer are the spiritual and heavenly treasure of a believing heart.
And that this is the greatest honor man is capable of, appears hence. (1.)
That a cheerful confidence in God is that which procures the soul the
greatest liberty of access to him. Hence it is said, “Honor and majesty
are before him; strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.” Ps. 96:6. And
that this freedom of access is the highest honor of man, the very angels
themselves confess, who glory in that exalted privilege. “I am Gabriel,
that stand in the presence of God.” Luke 1:19.

2. The giving praise to God is a great honor and treasure of man, because
(2) thereby we become like the angels in heaven. Therefore our blessed
Saviour, pointing out the future glory of men, says, “They shall be as the
angels of God.” Matt. 22:30; Luke 20:36. This, though it is ultimately to
be understood of the purity and other perfections of their glorified
bodies in another life; in which respect we shall not only be like the
angels, but also be conformed to the glorified body of our Lord Jesus
Christ (according to Phil. 3:21, and 1 John 3:2, “It doth not yet appear
what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him; for we shall see him as he is”)—yet even as no man can be like him in
the other world, that has not been conformed to him in this; that is to
say, that has not believed in him, imitated his holy life, followed him in
his meekness and humility, and, in a word, perfectly clothed himself with
the image of the patient, humble, afflicted and crucified Jesus, that he
may be like him in his glorious, exalted, and perfect state in the other
world; so also shall no man be like the angels in heaven, that has not
endeavored to conform himself to their examples on earth. There is then no
instance in which we can better imitate them here, than by offering up
devout and incessant prayers and praises to God; for this is the
employment of the holy angels. Isa. 6:3; Ps. 103:20. Whosoever then does
this, imitates those blessed spirits, and maintains fellowship with them.
Hence it follows, that to be continually celebrating the praises of God is
the noblest and most honorable employment that man is capable of. And this
may be done at any time, and in any place by a devout soul, praising from
the ground of the heart. It is thence that the true praises of God
proceed, according to that expression, “singing with grace in your hearts
unto the Lord.” Col. 3:16.

3. That singing praises to God is the greatest glory and highest honor
that a man can receive, appears (3) hence; that by this a man becomes, as
it were, the harp or instrument on which the Holy Spirit is perpetually
sounding forth the praises of God. Of this we have a very beautiful
representation, where the Evangelist saw a great multitude clothed in
white, and following the Lamb of God; and “he heard the voice of harpers
harping with their harps.” Rev. 14:2. This was also indicated under the
Old Testament by that admirable variety of musical instruments mentioned
by David in Ps. 150. All these instruments express nothing else but the
various gifts of the Holy Spirit, by which the name, the praise, the
honor, the wisdom, the mercies, and wonderful works of God were to be
published to the world; which instruments are now laid aside to make room
for the divine harmony of _spiritual_ music, even that of praise and
thanksgiving to God. For what the musical instrument is to man, that the
soul of man is to the Spirit of God, being attuned and rendered harmonious
by the hand that holds it. Thus it is said, “Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings thou hast ordained strength.” Ps. 8:2. But what greater glory
can the heart, mouth, or soul of man desire and enjoy, than to be as so
many organs or musical instruments of the Spirit of God? This is what
David means, “The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my
tongue” (2 Sam. 23:2); and the apostle, “Be ye filled with the Spirit:
speaking to yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody in your heart to the Lord.” Eph. 5:18, 19.

4. That the praising of God is a man’s greatest privilege, and most
valuable treasure, appears (4) hence: because in that exercise is
contained the greatest spiritual joy. Hence it is said, “Thou, Lord, hast
made me glad through thy work; I will triumph in the works of thy hands.”
Ps. 92:4. And as in this divine joy consists the greatest part of the
happiness of eternal life, and the kingdom of God within us, which we are
told, “is peace and joy in the Holy Ghost” (Rom. 14:17); so whoever
desires a foretaste of the happiness of that blessed state, may obtain it
by the daily exercise of praise and thanksgiving. This, when it proceeds
from a sincere heart, gives life and divine joy both to the soul and body;
as we are told in Ps. 63, and Ps. 84. What is Paradise itself, but pure
joy and unmixed pleasures; where “we taste and see that the Lord is good”?
Ps. 34:8. And what is eternal life, but the abundance of this joy, “and
pleasures at God’s right hand for evermore”? Ps. 16:11.

5. The greatness and excellency of this duty appears (5) hence: that by it
we are led to the contemplation of all the wonderful works of God, whence
such rays of divine light and wisdom dart upon the soul, as scatter and
dissipate the clouds of error and darkness in which men are naturally
involved. Thus saith the Psalmist, “O Lord, how great are thy works! and
thy thoughts are very deep. A brutish man knoweth not, neither doth a fool
understand this.” Ps. 92:5, 6. And St. Paul, “The Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the deep things of God.” 1 Cor. 2:10. Therefore, the more a
man knows of God, the more he praises him; and the more he praises him,
the more he increases in the knowledge of him. For the higher any one
rises in the praises of God, so much the more deeply he descends into the
contemplation of his nature and providence. I do not mean the presumptuous
inquiries of some curious searchers into forbidden mysteries, but those
riches of the divine wisdom which God often discovers to the soul that
loves and praises him, and which strike her dumb by the excess of glory
and sublime manifestations of Himself. If the queen of Sheba was so
astonished at the riches and magnificence of Solomon’s court, as to break
out in these words, “Thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I
heard. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom” (1 Kings 10:7, 8), how
much more should the devout soul be swallowed up in rapture and
astonishment, at those revelations of divine light and glory which God
frequently vouchsafes to them that love and praise him, causing them to
cry out with David, “O, Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts
are very deep”! Ps. 92:5. And again, “The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him; and he will show them his covenant.” Ps. 25:14. And again,
“Thou shalt make me to know wisdom in the hidden part.” Ps. 51:6.
Therefore, as the queen of Sheba says, “Happy are thy men, happy are these
thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom;”
so those that continually praise God, are the servants of God, standing
continually about his table, believing in spirit the divine wisdom, and
hearkening to the word of God. This is the never-failing fountain of true
wisdom, which one of the ancient fathers treats of, calling it “the deep
ocean of divine wisdom.” But sublime and glorious as it is, “a brutish man
knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.” In a word, the more
closely a man approaches God by praise and thanksgiving, the clearer
manifestations has he of the riches and treasures of the divine wisdom;
which at the same time are hidden, and as it were locked up from those
that are without understanding in the ways of God.

6. We may conclude that praising God is the highest honor, the most
exalted privilege, and greatest benefit to man; because (6) by this man
gains the victory over all his enemies, both Satan and men. See Psalm 8:2;
18:3, etc.; 118:5-15. We have a plain instance of this in the case of
Jehoshaphat, who, with one divine hymn, routed a vast army of his enemies
without loss of blood; as we find, 2 Chron. 20:21, 22. Such songs of
victory are frequently to be met with in the Psalms: as Psalms, 18; 46;
47; 76, etc.




