Chapter XXXIV.


   Showing That God Alone, Without Any Human Aid, Is The Author Of Our
Salvation, And That We Are To Submit Unreservedly To His Grace; Also, That
             Christ’s Merit Is Not Imputed To The Impenitent.


    _But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
    wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption._—1
    COR. 1:30.


In this impressive sentence, St. Paul teaches us that all things necessary
for our salvation are merited by Christ Jesus our Lord. When we were
ignorant of the way of life, he was made _wisdom_ unto us; when we were
sinners, he was made our _righteousness_; when we were an abomination
before God, he was made our _sanctification_; and when we were in a state
of damnation, he became our _redemption_.

2. It is therefore most certain, that man does not contribute so much as
one jot to his salvation. Sin, indeed, man could commit of himself, but he
was not able to justify himself again; he could lose, but not recover
himself; kill, but not restore to life; he could submit himself to the
devil, but could not shake off his spiritual fetters. As a dead body
cannot quicken itself again, so men “being dead in sins” (Eph. 2:1, 5), as
the Apostle declares, cannot raise themselves again to life.

3. We did not contribute anything towards our creation, neither do we
perform anything towards our redemption, regeneration, and sanctification,
which are far greater transactions than the creation itself.

4. Hence it was necessary, that the Son of God should take human nature
upon him, to recover all that was lost in Adam, and to revive those that
were dead in sins and trespasses.

5. That this may be the better understood, we ought to represent to
ourselves the traveller in the Gospel, who, falling among thieves, was
cruelly wounded and bruised by them, and at last utterly disabled from
helping himself again. Luke 10:30. Him, therefore, the good Samaritan
receives into his arms, binds up his wounds, sets him on his beast, takes
him to an inn, and omits nothing that a faithful physician could
administer to a sick and wounded person. And as the traveller showed
himself obedient to his physician, and strictly followed the directions
prescribed by him; so we ought to act if we desire to be healed of our
disease. We ought to _suffer_ the healing hand of the Lord, and not to
resist, when he attempts the cleansing of our wounds; and when, after
having poured in wine and oil, he binds them up. To obtain the blessed
effect of these spiritual operations, we must wholly resign ourselves to
him, who alone is able to save us; and then we may trust to the goodness
of God, that on his side he will not fail to restore us to health and
soundness.

6. No sooner does a sinner repent than he begins his happy return towards
the Lord, grieving for his former transgressions, and suffering that his
wounds be washed with the sharp wine of the law, and the oil of
consolation. Whoever complies with these terms, in him, Christ, by his
grace, works an unfeigned faith, attended with all the fruits it
produces,—righteousness, life, peace, joy, comfort, and salvation, and
thus “worketh in him both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.” Phil.
2:13.

7. But it is not in the power of man by nature to forsake sin. The
Scripture calls the natural man a “servant of sin” (John 8:34), and one
that is “sold under sin” (Rom. 7:14), who can do nothing but sin; and the
prophet says, “Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his
spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.” Jer.
13:23. But “the grace of God that bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all
men (by the Gospel), teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present
world.” Tit. 2:11, 12. This is offered us by the word of God; and it is
this grace which excites, teaches, and allures fallen man; which urges and
influences him to renounce sin, and to submit to the discipline of grace.
And these divine admonitions, furnished through the Word, fully agree with
the inward testimony of the conscience; so that a man is convinced both
from without and from within of his sinful life, and of the necessity of
quitting it, in order to preserve his soul from everlasting destruction,
for whoever lives in sin, lives in opposition to God and his own
conscience.

8. When a man yields to the suggestions and exhortations of divine grace,
and, proving obedient to the Word, begins to withdraw from his vicious
life, then the grace of God endows him with all those virtues which the
Gospel requires. It is then that faith springs up in the soul, the
original principle of all other virtues. This is followed by love, and all
Christian graces, which grow as so many fruits on the tree of faith. It is
then, also, that light begins to shine in the midst of darkness. But as it
is impossible that darkness should be able to enlighten itself; so it is
also impossible for fallen man to raise himself from darkness to light.
Hence the Psalmist says, “For thou wilt light my candle; the Lord my God
will enlighten my darkness.” Ps. 18:28. Let a man open his eyes ever so
much, he will never be enlightened whilst the light of the sun is
withdrawn from his sight. Thus the grace of God, that is, of Christ
himself, is that clear and serene light, risen on all men “that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death.” Luke 1:79. “He enlighteneth every
man that cometh into the world” (John 1:9): that is, he manifests himself
to all, and offers his grace to all. He is the light of the whole world;
he shows the way of life to all men; and leaving us his own example for
imitation, he goes before us like a good shepherd (John 10:4), and guides
his flock into the path in which they are to walk. He sought us out as his
lost sheep, and even now daily seeks and allures us. Luke 15:4. Nay, more;
he still follows us closely, calls after us, and wooes us to his love, in
as endearing a manner as a bridegroom does his bride. O that men did not
love sin and darkness rather than light and grace!

9. Now, as a physician, addressing his patient, says: “Beware of this,
lest you die; you hinder the workings of the medicine by an irregular
life, so that you cannot be made whole;” so Jesus Christ, the true
physician of souls, says: “My beloved, I beseech thee, incline thy mind to
true repentance; utterly forsake all thy sins; shake off thy pride, thy
covetousness, thy carnal propensities, thy wrath, and thirst of revenge,
with other sins. If this change be not wrought in thee, thou must surely
die; and the precious medicine of my blood and merit can profit thee
nothing, whilst thy disorderly life hinders their healing effect.”

10. It was for this cause that Christ gave it in charge to his apostles,
before all things, to preach repentance (Luke 24:47); and he himself
called sinners to it while he conversed with them upon earth; because an
impenitent heart never can partake of his merits.

11. Whoever hears that either sin must be forsaken, or eternal
condemnation be endured, must, of necessity, be brought to some serious
consideration about the state of his soul. He is struck with a double
conviction; the truth of the Word of God, and the power of his own
conscience, leaving so strong an impression upon him, as to set him beyond
all doubts about the truth of this matter. It is true, God hath freely
promised remission of sin to all men; but it is on this condition, that
they _repent_, and turn themselves unfeignedly to the Lord. Thus the
prophet says, “If the wicked shall turn from his wickedness, he shall live
thereby. None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto
him” (Ezek. 33:14, 16): where we see that repentance and remission of sin
are linked together.

12. Christ, the Son of God, in no other sense promises life eternal to
those that believe in his name. The nature of faith must, however, be more
fully inquired into. This faith is a very active principle in the soul. It
daily strives against the old man; it tames the flesh, and subjects it to
the Spirit; it converts the whole man; it subdues and vanquishes sin; it
purifies the heart. He is a true believer who turns from the world, from
sin and the devil, to God, and seeks rest and comfort wholly and entirely
in the blood, death, and merit of Christ, without the works of himself, or
of any other man whatsoever; the blood of Christ being a perfect ransom
for all the debts which the soul has contracted. Whoever, therefore,
imagines that his sins may be pardoned, although he desist not from them,
is most miserably deluded. He deceives himself with a false faith, which
he has assumed to himself, and the dreadful effects of which he must
hereafter feel. He can never be saved without true repentance.

13. Consider the case of Zaccheus the publican, who, having a sound
apprehension of the doctrine of faith and conversion, freely acknowledged
_that_ to be true faith by which a man is turned from sin to God, and in
this order hopes to obtain a gracious pardon from Christ, and an interest
in his merit, so as to rely upon it with a filial trust and an unshaken
firmness of mind. In this manner did he understand the word of our Lord,
“Repent ye, and believe the Gospel” (Mark 1:15): that is, Desist from sin,
trust in my merits, and expect forgiveness of sin from me alone. Hence
Zaccheus says to Christ, “Behold, the half of my goods I give to the poor;
and if I have taken anything by false accusation, I restore fourfold.”
Luke 19:8. In these words he does not commend his own works at all, but
extols the grace of God, which had taught him the way of true repentance.
As if he had said: “O Lord, I am so thoroughly grieved at the fraudulent
practices which I have committed against my neighbor, that I will not only
restore fourfold unto him, but will also bestow half of my goods on the
poor. Wherefore, Lord, since I confess my sin, and fully resolve to leave
it, I now embrace thy promises with faith, and beseech thee to receive me
into thy grace and favor.” And no sooner is this resolution taken, than
the Physician declares, “This day is salvation come to this house. For the
Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.”

14. This is true repentance and conversion, carried on by a faith which is
the work of God within us. God himself will begin, advance, and finish at
last, the great work of our salvation, if we only yield to his Spirit, and
do not resist him wilfully, as did the refractory Jews of old; to whom the
apostle says: “It was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.” Acts 13:46. It
is, therefore, our duty to take the advice of the physician, after the
manner of the sick, and to obey his precepts and prescriptions. As the
physician first explains the nature of the disease, so the Lord lays open
the spiritual disease of the heart, and then, as a faithful physician,
warns us against hurtful things, lest the healing virtue of the precious
blood of Christ be obstructed, and at last rendered ineffectual.

15. No sooner does man, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, withdraw from
sin, than the grace of God begins to operate in him, and to endue him with
new gifts. Without this, he is not sufficient to think any good thought of
himself, much less to do any good work. Whenever such a person discovers
any good motions arising in his mind, he attributes every good desire to
divine grace, even as St. Paul says, “By the grace of God I am what I am.”
1 Cor. 15:10. Whoever, therefore, complies with this order of salvation,
to him the merit of Christ and his perfect obedience, are fully imputed,
as if he himself had made a complete atonement for all his transgressions;
but no wicked person, and no contemner of this dispensation, has a share
in the imputation of the merit of Christ.

16. God, when he works in us and through us, crowns and commends those
things as our own, of which he himself is the chief author. “Without me,”
saith Christ, “ye can do nothing” (John 15:5); that is, no good; for by
nature we are ready enough to do evil without him. The doing of evil is
our own property; as the doing of good is entirely the property of God.
Therefore let no flesh glory in anything; all is of and through grace.
Rom. 3:24; Eph. 2:8, 9.

17. Happy is the man that refrains from sin, and gives up his will to the
Lord. Christ uses all his endeavors to gain our love and affections, and
to wean us more and more from the profane love of the world. He applies
the most endearing expressions, in his word, and in his addresses, to our
hearts. He seeks and allures us; and even before we remember him, he
bestows upon us tokens of his love and kindness; and this for no other
end, than that we might at last forsake our beloved sin, and partake of
the blessed effect of his blood and merits.




