Chapter IX.


    The Unchristian Walk Of Many Persons In Our Day, Is A Cause Of The
                Rejection Of Christ And Of The True Faith.


    _Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof._—2.
    TIM. 3:5.


Every one calls himself by the Christian name, even though he do not
perform the least part of what he thereby professes; and, by this means,
the Saviour is denied, contemned, blasphemed, scourged, crucified, and, as
it were, cast out of the sight of men, as dead. The Apostle expressly
declares, that some persons “crucify the Son of God afresh.” Heb. 6:6.

2. Would to God that Christ were not, even in _our_ days, crucified again
and again among those who call themselves after his name, and honor him
with their lips; and yet, by their anti-christian lives and actions,
utterly reject and deny him. His most holy, humble, and exemplary life is,
at this day, to be found among but few; and wherever there is not the
_life_ of Christ, _there_ Christ is not himself, however loudly the faith
and the doctrine may be commended. For the Christian faith without a
Christian life is a tree without fruit. True faith works by love (Gal.
5:6); and wherever it is found, there Christ dwells, with all his divine
graces and virtues. Eph. 3:17.

3. But when these are not expressed in the lives of those who profess his
doctrine, there Christ himself is rooted up and denied; for it is only
where true faith exists that Christ dwells.

4. Now Christ hath said, “Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father and the angels.” Matt. 10:33; Luke 12:9. This
denial of Christ is not only made in words (as by those who renounce
Christ and Christianity), but it is also done when, by our lives and
actions, we wilfully sin against the Saviour and resist the Holy Ghost.
St. Paul speaks of some who “profess that they know God, but _in works
deny him_” (Tit. 1:16); and it is certain that Christ is no less denied by
a wicked and satanic life, than he is by a verbal abjuration. It is with
hypocrisy and an empty profession of the faith as it is with open
wickedness; and this is strikingly illustrated by our Lord’s parable of
the two sons, who were commanded by their father to go and work in his
vineyard. The one (_openly_ denying) said, “I will not;” while the other
(_professing_ obedience) said, “I go, sir,” and went not. Matt. 21:28-30.

5. This is a forcible representation of those Christians who make religion
to consist in empty profession without obedience. They will cry “Yea,
yea,” and “Lord, Lord!” (Matt. 7:21), and yet are worse than others,
because they pretend to be children of the Father, and yet do not, in any
respect, obey his will. Their character is thus given by St. Paul: “Having
a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.” 2 Tim. 3:5. Now, what
is it to deny the power of godliness but to deny Christ himself, and to
shake off allegiance to him, and thus to act the part of a heathen under
the mask and name of a Christian? These are “the children of unbelief or
disobedience,” in whom the spirit, not of Christ, but _of this world_,
worketh. Eph. 2:2. They, therefore, who usurp a Christian’s name, and yet
do not a Christian’s work, shall be denied, in their turn, by the Saviour
when he shall pronounce the sentence: “I never knew you: depart from me,
ye that work iniquity.” Matt. 7:23.




Chapter X.


  The Children Of The World Are Against Christ, And, Consequently, Their
            Life And Their Christianity Are Both Alike False.


    _He that is not with me is against me._—MATT. 12:30.


If the conduct of the generality of men in the present age be examined by
the standard of life and doctrine left us by Christ, we must soon come to
the conclusion that it is wholly _unchristian_, and totally repugnant to
his example. The lives of men in our day are, in too many cases, made up
of insatiable avarice, sordid and self-seeking manners,
worldly-mindedness, worldly cares, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life; disobedience, wrath, strife, hatred, malice,
contentions, and a violent thirst after human applause, pomps, and
dignities. Add to these the jealousies, the revenge, the secret feuds and
envyings, the unforgiving spirit, the injustice and hypocrisy, the frauds
and calumnies, the lies and perjuries, together with all the impurity and
unrighteousness with which the world so exceedingly abounds. In short, the
whole life of the children of this generation consists of the love of the
world, self-love, self-honor, and self-seeking.

2. To all this the life of Christ is entirely opposed; it can have no sort
of communion with it. His life is nothing else but pure and sincere love
to God and men. It is composed of humanity and kindness, of meekness and
patience, of humility and obedience even unto death, of mercy and
righteousness, of truth and simplicity, of purity and holiness, of
contempt of the world, its honors, wealth, and pleasures; of self-denial;
of the cross, tribulations, and afflictions; of fervent desires after the
kingdom of God, and after the fulfilment of the divine will. This is the
life of Christ, to which the false Christianity of the present age is so
greatly opposed.

3. If, then, it be the truth that he who is not _with_ Christ is accounted
as one that is _against_ him; and he that _standeth_ not _in_ the will of
God, as he that _withstandeth_ it (and we know that this is the meaning of
the language of our Lord himself), it is most evident that the generality
of those who make a public profession of the Christian faith, not being
with Christ, must be against him. They have no communion with him, but are
contrary to him; they are not led by a Christian, but by an antichristian
spirit. Scarcely any, indeed, are to be found who are of one soul, one
will, one mind, and one spirit with him; and yet only these can be
Christ’s, or be accounted his disciples. It is in reference to the latter
that the apostle speaks when he says, they have “the mind of Christ” (1
Cor. 2:16); and, in another place, “Let this mind be in you which was also
in Christ Jesus.” Phil. 2:5. The children of the world have not this mind,
and it is hence certain that they are not _with_ but _against_ Christ. Now
whatever any man’s profession and doctrine be, he who is thus _against_
Christ in his life and actions, is most undoubtedly an antichrist. 1 John
2:18.

4. Where, alas! shall we now find true Christians, in the midst of so many
_unchristian_ disorders that universally abound? How justly may they be
termed “a little flock!” (Luke 12:32) as they were called by our Lord
himself. How justly has the prophet Isaiah compared the church to a
solitary cottage in a vineyard, and to a wasted city! Isa. 1:8. “Woe is
me!” exclaims Micah, “I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits,
as the grape-gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul
desires the first ripe fruit. The good man is perished out of the earth;
and there is none upright among men.” Micah 7:1, 2. See also Ps. 74:19;
102:7.

5. God alone knows where and who these are: but be they where and who they
may, assuredly Christ is with them, yea, in them, “alway, even unto the
end of the world.” Matt. 28:20. Nor will he ever leave them without
sufficient succor; “I will not leave you comfortless,” he says; “I will
come unto you.” John 14:18. For he knoweth them that are his, and those
whom he is said to _know_, he watches over with never-ceasing and
distinguishing care. “The foundation of God standeth sure, having this
seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his.” But who _are his_? The answer
is immediately annexed: “Let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.” 2 Tim. 2:19. But let those who are not disposed to
obey this injunction, assume some _other_ name that shall better accord
with their conduct; and let them not name _His_ name, until they conform
to His life by a living faith.




