Chapter LV.


  The Reasons For Which God Sometimes Delays His Comfort And Assistance.


    _For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it
    shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it; because it
    will surely come, it will not tarry. Behold, his soul which is
    lifted up, is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his
    faith._—HAB. 2:3, 4.


In these words the Holy Spirit comforts us, under the _delays_ of Divine
assistance: for so we are apt to call (1) those very methods by which God
hastens to help and save us. He has, in his unsearchable wisdom, appointed
to every man his cross in weight and measure. He delivers it out to him in
meet proportions, sending one affliction after another, till the measure
of his sufferings be accomplished; that so, by a gradual conquest, he may
at last obtain a complete victory. This dealing of God with us, we are apt
to call _his delaying_ to help us; not considering that this is the
quickest method of accomplishing the measure of our sufferings, and
completing our victory. That which to us seems to be delay, is in the
sight of God, _making haste to help us_.

2. Now he that is refractory and impatient under the cross, has no peace
in his soul. For as patience renders the soul easy and quiet, so
impatience makes it restless and uneasy. Thus our Lord tells us, “Learn of
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your
souls.” Matt. 11:29. And, whereas, the prophet adds, that “the just shall
live by his faith;” this relates to the promises of divine grace and
assistance, which we lay hold on by faith. And from this consolation the
soul derives life and joy; as Hezekiah says: “O Lord, by these things men
live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit.” Isa. 38:16. On
the other hand, unbelief produces impatience; impatience, disquiet;
disquiet, despair; and despair, everlasting death. So that we may most
truly say, that “the just lives by faith;” that is, by the grace of God,
which he patiently expects and waits for.

3. (2) Solomon tells us: “To every thing there is a season, and a time to
every purpose under heaven.” Eccles. 3:1. Whence we may learn, that
crosses and afflictions come not by chance; but that every season of
affliction is appointed to us by God. Wherefore, in our troubles let us
lift up our eyes unto Him, in whose hand are our happiness and misery, our
riches and poverty, our life and death; yea, and every moment of our
afflictions. This is illustrated in the case of Joseph, whom, for thirteen
years together, God visited with remarkable afflictions (Gen. 37:36;
41:1): “until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried
him,” as the Psalmist tells us. Ps. 105:19. By his example we may learn
how useful and necessary it is for us that God should sometimes delay his
help. For when he was sold, he was seventeen years old; and when, by the
hand of God he was brought out of prison, he was thirty; and the bearing
of his cross all that season, was the very thing that qualified him for
the glorious advancement that followed. In that honorable post he
continued eighty years; whence we may observe, that his thirteen years of
suffering, were recompensed with many years of glory and honor: for he
lived a hundred and ten years. Therefore let the devout Christian that
suffers imprisonment or any kind of persecution for the testimony of a
good conscience, or shame, or sickness, call to mind the wonderful
providence of God to Joseph, and satisfy himself that the all-wise God,
who has appointed his season of affliction, has likewise determined the
set time of his deliverance. For as a skilful builder knows well by what
time his laborers will have finished their task, so has God measured out
the weight and duration of every man’s cross, and appointed the season of
his deliverance. As soon as that comes, the light of divine grace will
immediately break forth, and will comfort the afflicted soul.

4. (3) As God has determined the number of our crosses; so He has been
pleased to conceal from us the time of our deliverance, satisfying us with
that declaration of our blessed Lord, “It is not for you to know the times
or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.” Acts 1:7.
Agreeably to this are the words of God, who when he had threatened the
children of Israel with the Babylonish captivity, adds, “Is not this laid
up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?” Deut. 32:34.
Thence we may learn, with what great and unsearchable wisdom God governs
and corrects the children of men. To this also may be referred that saying
of St. Paul: “God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell
on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation.” Acts 17:26. In these words
we are instructed, that not only the period of every man’s life, but even
the place and manner of it, are appointed by God. And this general
determination of time and place, includes in it the crosses and
afflictions appointed to every person.

5. (4) And as God has appointed the period, time, and place, of the
sufferings of his servants; so has He also of the persecutions and
oppressions of the wicked. When these have for a season been breathing out
oppressions and slaughter, then that God to whom vengeance belongeth,
awaketh and riseth to judgment; according to Deut. 32:35: “To me belongeth
vengeance and recompense; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day
of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them,
make haste.” This is abundantly confirmed by the examples of heretics and
tyrants that have most grievously persecuted the church of God; and when
the devil has raged long enough, and his time is expired, then has the
divine vengeance so confounded him and all his accomplices, that the whole
world has been amazed and astonished at the righteous judgments of God.
“Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord
draweth nigh. Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be
condemned: behold the Judge standeth before the door.” Jas. 5:8, 9.




