Chapter IV.


        Of True Repentance, And The True Yoke And Cross Of Christ.


    _They that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the
    affections and lusts._—GAL. 5:24.


Repentance, or true conversion, is the work of the Holy Spirit, under the
influence of which, man, through the _law_, acknowledges his sin, and the
wrath of God provoked against it; and earnestly mourns over his offences;
and then, understanding, through the _Gospel_, the grace of God, by faith
in Christ Jesus, he obtains the remission of his sins. By this repentance,
the mortification or crucifying of the flesh, and of all carnal lusts and
pleasures, is carried on; together with the quickening of the spirit, or
the resurrection of the new man in Christ. Under the exercise of
repentance, therefore, the old Adam, with his corruptions, dies within us;
and Christ lives in us, by faith (Gal. 2:20); for we must be aware that
these two are inseparably connected. The resurrection of the spirit
follows the mortification of the flesh; and the quickening of the new man,
destroys and annihilates the old man; the ruin of the one, is the life and
resurrection of the other. “Though our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day.” 2 Cor. 4:16. We are, therefore, enjoined to
“mortify our members which are upon the earth” (Col. 3:5); and to “reckon
ourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.” Rom. 6:11.

2. Let us, however, inquire why the flesh is thus to be mortified; and why
the whole body of sin is at last to be destroyed. It has been remarked
(Chap. II) that, by the fall of Adam, man became earthly, carnal, and
devilish; without God, and without love: for being without God, he was
also without love. Man was now turned from the love of God to the love of
the world, and especially of himself; so that in every situation, and
under all circumstances, he now studies, favors, flatters, counsels, and
applauds himself; and provides only for his own interest, honor, and
glory. All this is the consequence of Adam’s fall; who, while meditating
how he might erect himself, as it were, into _a God_, was involved,
together with all his posterity, in the same awful sin and perdition. This
depravation of human nature must of necessity be entirely removed; and
this can be effected only by serious repentance; by godly sorrow; by a
faith that apprehends the remission of sin; by the mortification of
sensual pleasure; and by the crucifixion of pride and self-love. For true
repentance consists not in putting away gross and open sins only; but it
requires that a man should enter his heart, and search into its inmost
recesses. The secret parts, the windings and the turnings of iniquity are
to be laid open; in order that the returning sinner may be thoroughly
renewed, and, at length, be converted from the love of himself, to the
love of God; from the love of the world, to a life of spirituality; and
from a participation of earthly pomps and pleasures, to a participation,
through faith, of the merits of Christ.

3. Hence it follows, that a man must deny himself (Luke 9:23); that is, he
must mortify his own will, and suffer himself to be entirely led by the
will of God. He must no longer love, seek, and esteem himself; but he must
account himself to be the unworthiest and most miserable of all creatures.
He must renounce all he has for the love of Christ; and trample on the
world, its pomps, and its vanities. He must pass by his own wisdom and
natural endowments, as though he beheld them not; he must confide in no
creature, but in God alone; yea, he must “hate his own life” (Luke 14:26),
that is, his carnal will and pleasures; his pride, covetousness, lust,
wrath, and envy. He must not please, but rather displease himself; nor
must he attribute anything to his own strength or ability. In a word, he
must be crucified to the world (Gal. 6:14), to the lust of the eyes and
the flesh, and to the pride of life. This, and this alone, is that true
repentance and mortification of the flesh, without which no man can ever
be a disciple of Jesus Christ. This only is conversion from self, the
world, and the devil, unto God (Acts 26:18); without which no one can
receive remission of sins, nor be saved.

4. This is the true cross and yoke of Christ; that of which the Saviour
spoke when he said, “Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek
and lowly in heart.” Matt. 11:29. As if he had said, “Thy self-love and
ambition must be removed by earnest and inward humility, of which thou
hast an example in me; and by the example of my meekness, must thy wrath
and desire of revenge be subdued.” This, to the new man, is an easy yoke
and a light burden; though, to the flesh, it may seem to be a most bitter
and afflictive cross. This is to crucify our own flesh, with the
affections and lusts. Gal. 5:24.

5. They, therefore, who are acquainted with no other cross than the
tribulations and afflictions of this life, greatly err; being ignorant of
that true cross, which we ought to bear after our Lord daily; namely,
inward repentance, and the mortification of the flesh; submitting to our
enemies with great patience; and overcoming the malice of slanderers by
humility and mildness, after the pattern which the Lamb of God has left
us. For it becomes us to follow the example of Christ, who renounced all
worldly splendor and glory, and everything that is commonly esteemed great
and noble.

6. This yoke of Christ is the real cross, which when a man bears he truly
dies to the world. It is not to retire into monasteries and cloisters, nor
to adopt a set of rules and orders for the regulation of life; for while
the heart remains disordered, and the love corrupt; while the man is
puffed up with spiritual pride, and a pharisaical contempt of others;
while he is devoted to lust, envy, hypocrisy, secret hatred and malice; he
does not die to the world, but altogether lives to it. This is not the
Christian yoke nor is it the cross of Christ; for these consist in
mortifying the flesh, with its sinful propensities; in turning away from
the world to God; in an inward and constant secret sorrow for our sins; in
a daily dying to the world, and living to Christ by faith; in following
his steps with sincere lowliness and humility; and in confiding only in
the grace of God in Christ Jesus.

7. To this unfeigned repentance, this true and inward conversion from the
world unto God, hath our blessed Lord called us. The imputation of his
righteousness and obedience, together with the remission of all our sins,
apprehended by faith, is promised to it alone. If we are destitute of
repentance, Christ profiteth us nothing; that is, we cannot then become
partakers of his grace and favor, nor of the efficacy of his merits;
because these can be applied only by a contrite, penitent, lowly, and
believing heart. And truly this is the fruit of the passion of Christ in
us, that we die to sin by a sincere repentance; as the fruit of his
resurrection is, that Christ may live in us, and we in him.

8. All this is necessary to render man that _new creature_ in Christ
Jesus, without which nothing availeth in the sight of God. 2 Cor. 5:17;
Gal. 6:15.

9. Hence, therefore, let us be instructed in the nature of true
repentance; lest we be led away into that common error, that the mere
relinquishment of some gross enormity, as theft, fornication, profaneness,
blasphemy, is the genuine and only repentance. It is certain, that this is
a kind of _external_ repentance; but it is no less so, that all the
Scriptures alike inculcate the necessity of an _inward_ repentance, which
takes possession of the whole soul. A man under the influence of this
repentance, not only supports a fair conversation in the world, but he
also denies and hates himself. Renouncing the world and all he calls his
own, and crucifying the flesh, he commits himself by faith to God alone;
and offers up to him a broken and contrite heart, as the sacrifice most
acceptable in his sight. This character of inward repentance is eminently
set forth in the Psalms of David, and particularly in those termed
Penitential.(4)

10. This is, therefore, the only true repentance, when the heart of the
sinner is inwardly torn with grief, and weighed down by heaviness; and
when, on the other hand, it is healed by faith and the remission of sin,
quickened by the infusion of divine joy, provoked to good works, and
thoroughly transformed and changed. Such a frame of mind cannot fail to be
attended also with an _external_ reformation of life and manners.

11. But, on the other hand, though a man be very serious in the
performance of bodily penances, and, from a dread of punishment, abstain
from the commission of notorious sins; yet if he continue unreformed and
unregenerate in his heart, and enter not upon that new and inward life
which it has been our object to describe, he will prove but a _castaway_
(1 Cor. 9:27) at last, notwithstanding the whole train of his external
acts. It will avail him nothing to cry, “Lord, Lord!” He will hear the
tremendous declaration, “I never knew you!” For most certain it is, that
not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but those only who do the will of their Heavenly Father. Matt.
7:21-23. And under this awful sentence of divine majesty, all men are
comprised, of what rank or order so-ever, who do not truly and inwardly
repent, and who are not new creatures in Christ, for “if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.” Rom. 8:9.




