Chapter XXVII.


                  Wherefore Our Enemies Are To Be Loved.


    _Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
    that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and
    persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is
    in heaven._—MATT. 5:44, 45.


The first cause why enemies ought to be loved, is the express commandment
of God by his Son; for which he gives this reason, “that we may be the
children of our Father in heaven,” that is, “of him that loved us when we
were yet his enemies.” Rom. 5:10. As if he had said, “Unless you love your
enemies, you cannot be the children of the heavenly Father: and he that is
not God’s son, what father shall he have?” This commandment of the Lord is
little practised; alas! how backward we are in bringing forth such fruits
as become the children of God! If we be his children, truly we ought to
study the great lesson of loving our enemies, that so, in some degree, we
may express the character of our Father in heaven.

2. The Scripture says, “He that loveth not his brother, abideth in death.”
1 John 3:14. And why does he abide in death? Because he has not yet
received that vital principle which is to be derived from Christ. The
spiritual and heavenly life consists in faith towards God, and in love to
our neighbor. Thus, St. John says, “We know that we have passed from death
unto life, because we love the brethren.” 1 John 3:14. Whence it is
manifest, that love is an undoubted sign and effect of spiritual life or
restoration to life in Christ; as hatred to men is an infallible proof of
spiritual death and separation from God. And this spiritual death here,
will end in eternal death hereafter; of which our Lord faithfully warns
us.

3. Whoever, therefore, suffers his heart to be filled with wrath and
bitterness against his neighbor, ought to know assuredly, that even his
best performances, his prayer and attendance on divine worship, and other
works of that nature, are altogether vain, and of no account before God.
St. Paul says, “Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though
I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing.” 1 Cor. 13:3.

4. It is, on the other hand, the property of a noble and divine mind, to
pardon injuries. Behold how long-suffering God is, and how easily he is
reconciled. Ps. 103:8. Consider the example of Christ, the Son of God,
who, in the midst of his exquisite torments, like a patient lamb, did not
so much as “open his mouth.” Isa. 53:7. Contemplate the nature of the
divine Spirit, who appeared in the form of a dove (Matt. 3:16), with a
view that by such a representation he might teach us a dove-like meekness
of mind, and recommend to us that tender simplicity of manners, which
becomes a true Christian. With what patience did Moses bear the reproaches
of the people, thus deserving to be called “very meek, above all the men
which were upon the face of the earth.” Numb. 12:3. Remember also the
conduct of David, and with what lenity of mind he heard the curses of
Shimei. 2 Sam. 16:10.

5. True love teaches us to be angry with none but ourselves. True peace
consists not in having much wealth, but in bearing patiently whatever goes
against our nature. Should a madman rail at the sun, and curse it for
being nothing but darkness, the sun would never be darkened by his
reproachful language, but continue his course, and enlighten the world as
before. So do thou also, and remember that there is no sweeter or better
revenge than to forgive. Such wise and excellent rules were practised by
many of the heathens themselves. Pericles, the Grecian orator, having
patiently heard a man revile him for the space of a whole day, when night
came on, kindly invited him to his house, and entertained him in a
friendly manner, saying, “It is easier to speak evil of virtue than to
possess it.” Thus Phocion, general of the Athenians, when he had deserved
well of his country, but through envy was adjudged to death, and was now
about to undergo the sentence, being asked if he had any commands for his
son, generously made answer: “None, except that he never take measures to
revenge this injury, which I suffer of my country.” The Emperor Titus
being told that two brothers had conspired to cause his death, scrupled
not to invite them both to sup with him; and in the morning went with them
to the theatre, and placed himself betwixt them, to behold the play. Thus
with marvellous clemency he overcame, at last, their baseness. And when
Cato had committed suicide, Julius Cæsar said: “I have lost a glorious
victory; for I had intended to forgive Cato all the evil that he has done
to me.”

6. But after all, as to the man who cannot be influenced by the
unspeakable patience and meekness of the Son of God himself, to forgive
and to love his enemies, him neither the example of the saints, nor of
heathens, will ever be able to melt into love and forbearance. For what
greater injustice and barbarity can be conceived, than that the Son of God
should be so shamefully treated by the children of men, be scourged with
stripes, crowned with thorns, spit upon, and loaded with all the marks of
scorn and derision; and lastly, be nailed on the cross? Nevertheless, he
was able to bear, with an unshaken firmness, all the affronts and
indignities which the malice of men was able to contrive; nay, and freely
to pardon all this barbarous usage, and to pray, “Father, forgive them!”
Luke 23:34.

7. And, truly, it was to this very end that our blessed Redeemer set his
example before our eyes, that it might be an all-healing medicine for such
spiritual diseases as have seized upon us; particularly, that it might
abase all pride and loftiness, strengthen what is weak, supply what is
defective, and correct what is evil and out of order. Can the distemper of
pride be so violent, as not to be healed by the profound humility and
lowliness of Christ? Heb. 5:8. Can avarice and covetousness prove so
stubborn, as to baffle a remedy derived from that sacred poverty which
appeared in Jesus Christ? What wrath is so fierce and vehement, that his
meekness and lenity cannot mollify it? What desire of revenge so bitter
and barbarous, which his patience cannot assuage and compose? What
inhumanity so great and cruel, which the love of Christ cannot warm into a
sweet and compassionate temper? And what heart can be so hard and
obdurate, as not to be melted with the tears of Jesus Christ himself?

8. Who would not heartily wish to be made like God the Father, his Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and to carry within him the excellent image of the
sacred Trinity, which chiefly consists in love and forgiveness? For it is
the highest of all the divine properties, to show compassion and mercy, to
spare and to pardon, to be kind and gracious: and that must be undoubtedly
one of the sublimest virtues, which makes us bear the nearest resemblance
to the Most High God, and to all such persons as are the most conspicuous
for goodness and virtue.

9. Lastly, the highest degree of virtue is, when a man, overcoming
himself, is ready at any time to forget injuries, to pardon offences, and
to show acts of favor and clemency. “He that is slow to anger,” says
Solomon, “is better than the mighty: and he that ruleth his spirit, than
he that taketh a city.” Prov. 16:32. This is the highest step of the
soul’s ascension in her spiritual exercise; and when she has attained it,
she rests in God, and is perfect in him.




