Chapter XLII.


In This Concluding Chapter The Reasons For Adopting The Method Observed In
  Book I. Are Explained; The Duty Of Guarding Against Spiritual Pride Is
Described, And The Truth Is Set Forth That True Spiritual Gifts Cannot Be
                         Obtained Without Prayer.


    _What hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst
    receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received
    it?_—1 COR. 4:7.


I regard it as necessary, before I conclude this Book, to call the
reader’s attention to several points.

2. In this Book, _repentance and its fruits_, have, for various reasons,
been explained at large, and in different ways. Most of the Chapters in
this Book, accordingly, treat upon the fruits of true repentance; such as
our renovation in Christ, the daily mortification of the flesh, the
practice of self-denial, contempt of the world, the exercise of charity,
etc. For therein we find the beginning and foundation of true
Christianity, of a holy life, and of salvation itself, through true faith.
So, too, no solid comfort can ever be tasted in the heart of man, unless
he be thoroughly acquainted with the nature of Original Sin, that
dreadful, mortal, and diabolical evil, which is like an infernal poison
(ah, it is impossible sufficiently to describe and deplore it!) and has
proved the seed of a multitude of fatal and pernicious fruits. All the
books of comfort, and all the promises with which the Gospel abounds,
afford no substantial consolation to a man, except he be first thoroughly
humbled by a sense of his misery, and of that awful evil, Original Sin.
Man, in this fallen state, is too apt to flatter himself, and to look for
comfort, before a thorough search has been made into his own sinful
condition, degeneracy, and apostasy from God. Nature is concerned for
comfort more than for a cure.

3. But this is very preposterous, and altogether against the tenor of
Scripture, and the method of salvation therein explained. Our Lord says,
“The whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.” Matt. 9:12. No
cure can be expected, no medicine can be prescribed, no comfort can be
applied, nor can Christ himself, the great Physician of souls, be of any
benefit at all, so long as a man, thinking himself well, is not sensible
of those deep distempers that rage in his soul. Hence a true Christian’s
life consists in a _daily crucifixion_ of the flesh, and of all its sinful
propensities. O that every one might lay this earnestly to heart! No man
can belong to Christ, or have a share in his merits, but he that regulates
his life according to this rule. Now, such a soul shall not be left
comfortless in the end; but, shall be refreshed with divine consolation.
No sooner is a soul thoroughly humbled by a lively sense of inbred
corruption, and the infectious influence it hath on all the actions, than
it is raised again by those suitable grounds of comfort which the Gospel
affords. In all this, the operation of the Divine Spirit, and man’s
meditation on the word of promise, concur, and bring over the soul to
Christ, who is both willing and able to heal her, and to turn her mourning
into permanent gladness. He who will enter upon this course of true and
sincere repentance, must be careful, at the same time, not to be shaken by
the foolish judgment which this impious world will be apt to pass upon the
whole design of true Christianity. Let the profane worldling think ever so
much of his own natural parts and wisdom, it is certain that he is
altogether blind in the things of the Spirit of God, and most ignorant.
And though he may exercise his reasoning faculty on things that are far
above his reach and capacity, yet while he has no knowledge of the
wretchedness of his own nature, and of those spiritual diseases that
spring from it, he continues an utter stranger to spiritual concerns. He
does not understand what Adam and Christ are, or how Adam is to die, and
Christ to live in us again. And as he disdains to learn what he knows not,
he must forever remain in darkness and ignorance. Nor will he ever be able
in that state to obtain any insight into the grounds and properties of
true repentance, faith in Christ, and the new birth, wherein true
Christianity consists, and whereby he might be rescued from everlasting
ruin.

4. The next thing which I would mention at the close of this Book, and
which thou art carefully to avoid, is the sin of _spiritual pride_, after
God has begun to implant in thee, by his grace, spiritual gifts, new
virtues, new habits of mind, and new knowledge. See that thou ascribe
these attainments not to thy own power, wisdom, or industry, but to the
grace of God. Carefully avoid taking up thy rest in those virtues and good
dispositions that are formed within thee; and never confide in them as
_means_ of thy justification before God. For as they are yet marked by
various defects and imperfections, so they can never pass for the perfect
righteousness of God. Never seek thy own honor and glory by the gifts
which God has been pleased to bestow upon thee. On the contrary, use them
with humility and fear, divesting thyself of all selfish designs, and
returning all thou hast unto Him, who is the true Disposer and Author
thereof. Do not say in thy heart: “I have now a strong faith, fervent
charity, much knowledge, many gifts;” for these suggestions are the
_tares_, which the enemy of thy soul sows among the wheat while thou
sleepest.

For, (_a_) none of these gifts are thine, but God’s only, without whose
illumination and all-quickening power, thou art but a lifeless lump of
clay. These gifts are no more thine, than the light and heat of the sun
are the earth’s, which is warmed and penetrated by them. Thou art, at the
best, but the casket to hold the jewels; and the glory of these no more
belongs to thee, than the lustre of a precious stone belongs to the box in
which it is kept. Is it not, therefore, great folly to boast of the goods
of another, which are laid up in thee?

(_b_) Thou art to consider, that, as the lord of a treasure may lodge his
treasure wherever he pleases, and remove it as he thinks fit; so God, in
like manner, may deposit his heavenly treasure in thee, and take it away
again, as he sees proper. Him, therefore, thou oughtest to fear with holy
reverence, and at the same time carefully beware of spiritual pride and
presumption: for this would issue in the inevitable loss of the celestial
jewel committed to thy trust. “Be not high-minded, but fear.” Rom. 11:20.

(_c_) Thou art, further, to consider, that the righteous God will call
thee to an exact account of all he has intrusted to thy care. The more
thou hast received, the more will he require at thy hands.

(_d_) In the midst of all thy gifts, do not think that thou hast received
all that the Lord has in store for his children. Ah! beloved Christian! be
thy attainments ever so high and excellent, they are hardly the beginning;
there is yet much which thou lackest.

(_e_) Seriously consider, that no good and perfect gifts are obtained or
preserved except by _prayer_: for every good and perfect gift descendeth
from God. James 1:17. Whatever thou seemest to possess without this, is
but a lifeless shadow, a seed bearing no fruit, but withering away. For
without prayer, no heavenly gift can descend into the heart of man. The
reader is desired to peruse what is said on the subject of Prayer in the
_Second_ Book of this Work. There are two things which thou must chiefly
regard in thy prayers and application to the Lord: _first_, That the
_Image of Satan be destroyed in thee_; as unbelief, pride, covetousness,
lust, wrath, etc.; _secondly_, That the _Image of God be restored __ in
thee_; in which are contained faith, love, hope, humility, patience,
meekness, and the fear of the Lord. These two, that is, the destruction of
the satanic, and the restoration of the divine image, are illustrated in
the Lord’s Prayer. This prayer makes both _against_ thee, and _for_ thee.
If the name of God alone is to be hallowed, then thy name must be debased
and thy haughtiness be pulled down. If the kingdom of God shall come, then
certainly the devil’s kingdom must be overthrown in thee. If thou desirest
that the will of God should be done, then truly thine own must be
renounced.

These are the two parts into which any useful prayer-book or method of
prayer may be fitly digested; an order which is clearly exhibited in the
prayer of our Lord, so far as it respects those heavenly and eternal
benefits and gifts which we are directed to seek. Nay, in the Lord’s
Prayer, all the treasures both for soul and body, and all the things which
we need both for this life and that which is to come, are summed up. And
there is no question, but that the Father in heaven, according to his
paternal compassion, will readily grant, what the Son of his love has so
strongly commanded us to ask.





