Chapter XIX.


 The Service Which The Creatures Render To Man, Compared With That Which
                           Man Renders To God.


    _My son, keep sound wisdom and discretion: so shall they be life
    unto thy soul._—PROV. 3:21, 22.


As we have already shown that there are two sorts of services; one which
the creatures render to man, and the other which men render to God, both
tending to the sole happiness of man; it remains now that we show the
resemblance and relation that subsists between them. As for the service of
the creatures, it is not in the power of man to make any retribution for
the good they do us (for everything that we have is God’s): nor indeed is
it fit to do this, because all the goodness of the creatures is no more
than a little stream of divine goodness, flowing to us through them; and
to Him alone, the Author and Fountain of all good, all our love and
gratitude are due. So then, though a man cannot subsist one moment without
the assistance of the creatures, yet are they not the proper objects of
our love, but God alone; who, by their services, endeavors to oblige and
draw us to a reciprocal love and service to himself. For what advantage is
it to us, to live by the help of the creatures, unless we live unto God.

2. This then is the intention of God: to instruct us, by the cheerful
services which the creatures pay to us, how cheerfully we ought to love,
to serve, and obey him. For as man cannot live without the help of the
creatures, such as the air and universal nature; so he spiritually dies
unto God whenever he ceases to obey him and to live in Christ. Moreover,
as the life of man is nothing worth, if it be not godly and devout; so the
service of the creatures profits him nothing, if he also be not active and
cheerful in the service of God. And as the natural life is nothing, when
compared with a life of godliness and devotion; so the service we pay to
God, profits us much more than all the service the creatures pay to us.

3. Nay, he that serveth not God, is not worthy of the service of the
creatures; for as they were made for the service of man, so man was made
for the service of God; and all the duty they pay to us, is only to
encourage us in our duty to our Maker. When this end is not answered, we
may not only be said to use the creatures in vain, but to abuse them. The
end of all that has been said, is this: that as God has commanded the
creatures to contribute to the support of our natural life, he thereby
instructs us to devote and dedicate that life entirely to His honor and
service.



Chapter XX.


               All Things Are Preserved By The Hand Of God.


    _The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him; but
    his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake
    him._—EZRA 8:22.


As man, the noblest of the creatures, cannot subsist one moment without
the help of those that are much inferior to himself; it follows, that
their being, and the qualities by which they help and assist us, are
entirely owing to God. Whosoever denies this, must believe that they who
want not our help, must be more worthy than we, who cannot subsist without
theirs.

2. But the more natural conclusion would be, that if man cannot subsist
without their help, they who are so much more ignoble than he, must
likewise depend on some superior being for their support and preservation.
But as He that supports the creatures, also supports mankind by their
means, it is plain, that he can be nothing less than the Creator and Maker
of all things. For nothing can preserve our being, but he that gave it,
and that is God, who ordained the creatures for our sakes, and man for his
own.



Chapter XXI.


  Showing That From The Service Of Man And The Creatures, A Union Takes
              Place Between The Visible World, Man, And God.


    _Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord; thou art
    great, and thy name is great in might. Who would not fear thee, O
    king of nations?_—JEREM. 10:6, 7.—_If then I be a father, where is
    mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear?_—MAL. 1:6.


Let us now consider and admire the wonderful union of all the creatures
with God, by that double service of which we have spoken. For as all the
creatures were made for the use of man, thence arises a certain relation
or union between man and them; as there is by our duty and service to God,
between us and him. For as God intended to draw man to himself by the
cords of love, so he commanded all the creatures to do service unto man,
as being created for his use alone; and this is a strong obligation upon
us to love, serve, and honor _him_.

2. Hence we may learn, that all the duty they pay to us, or we to God,
tends solely to the good and benefit of man. As for the other creatures,
they reap no benefit or advantage from their several labors and services,
but only that every one is looked upon to be more or less excellent, in
proportion to the service they respectively do to man. So likewise God
receives no advantage from our services to him; but the greater love any
man has for God, the more noble he is, and the greater benefit he
receives. Whence it appears, how wonderfully this twofold service unites
the creatures to man, and man to God,

3. And would to God that the bond of union which is between God and man,
were as strong as that which is between man and the creatures! They are
incessantly employed in the service of man, and never act in a manner
contrary to this design of their creation; but man, on the other hand,
bursts the yoke, and breaks the bonds of duty which God has laid upon him,
debasing himself below the beasts, though so much more noble than they.
Now if the laws of nature and reason require the creatures to be obedient
to man, as their lord, how much more just and reasonable is it, that man
should be obedient unto God? For as the soul is much more noble than the
body, so is the inward and spiritual service of God much more excellent
than that external and bodily service of the creatures. And thus by the
duty and service of man to his Maker, are all the creatures united unto
God, and perfected in charity, that they may not be created in vain.



