Chapter LVI.


Showing That In Seasons Of Trial The Consideration Of The Exalted Patience
Of Christ, And Of The Future And Eternal Glory, Will Alleviate The Burden
                              Of The Cross.


    _Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into
    his glory?_—LUKE 24:26.


The eternal Son of God, by his most holy incarnation, took upon him all
the miseries and calamities of mankind: and this not of compulsion and
necessity, but of pure love, that by his example he might teach us
patience, and enable us to bear the cross, and overcome the calamities of
this mortal life. As he was to become man, so he willingly subjected
himself to all those miseries to which man is exposed; and as he came down
from heaven for the sake of all, so he took upon him the infirmities of
all; so that from the moment of his birth, to the hour of his death, he
was, as the prophet truly expresses it, “despised and rejected of men; a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.” Isa. 53:3. There was no
calamity incident to human nature, which he did not suffer, and,
particularly, extreme poverty. He says of himself, “The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to
lay his head.” Matt. 8:20. In the discharge of his office, he underwent
the most bitter persecutions, being exposed to hatred, calumnies, and
reproaches. In his last days he submitted to the most ignominious
sufferings, so that, as the prophet expresses it, “We did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.” Isa. 53:4. His transcendent love
met with the highest ingratitude, his illustrious miracles were rewarded
with revilings, and his heavenly doctrines with calumnies and lies. And
since our blessed Lord suffered all this, why shall we expect to be
exempted from sufferings and injuries?

2. Thus the blessed Jesus, by his example, has shown us the true and only
path to heaven. 1 Pet. 2:21. Let us therefore tread in his steps, and
learn to imitate him in all the different scenes of his most holy and
afflicted life. He went before, that we might in holy patience follow him.
Whence we may learn, how far they are from the true and right way, who
never regard this blessed pattern, but refuse to follow it. If men will
still walk on in darkness and shut their eyes against this light, how
great must their darkness be! The blessed Jesus himself calls to them,
saying, “I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk
in darkness, but shall have the light of life.” John 8:12.

3. All the sufferings of true Christians in this life, are not worthy to
be compared with the eternal glories reserved for them in the world to
come; for their temporal afflictions are but for a moment, but their
glorious reward shall endure forever. 2 Cor. 4:17, 18. An everlasting
possession is well worth contending for. Couldest thou but for a moment
behold what eternal glories they enjoy, who in this life were exposed to
all torments and sufferings, thou wouldest cheerfully submit to them all,
and take up thy cross with joy; thinking all things but as dross, that
thou mightest win Christ and be a partaker of his glory.

4. Lift up, therefore, the eyes of thy mind to heaven, and view, with St.
John, that vast company clothed in white garments, and following the Lamb,
concerning whom this account is given to the inquiring Evangelist: “These
are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes,
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before
the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple.” Rev. 7:14,
15. Such are the proper meditations for devout souls. Thus we read of
Moses, “By faith, Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh’s daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of the reward.” Heb. 11:24-26.

5. Hence we learn that the saints in all ages have esteemed the reproach
of the cross of Christ as their greatest treasure. And we may depend upon
it, that no man can be admitted to the joys of the next world, who has not
fought manfully under the banner of the cross in this world. How can we
imagine that those blessed spirits will own us to be of their company in
heaven, if we did not bring with us the sign of the cross? They would not
know us, and we would be strangers among them. “He that overcometh,” saith
the Lord, “the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot
out his name out of the book of life.” Rev. 3:5. And what does St. Paul
say? “I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to
me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.” 2 Tim. 4:7, 8.




Chapter LVII.


                 Consolations Against The Fears Of Death.


    _Christ hath abolished death, and hath brought life and
    immortality to light through the gospel._—2 TIM. 1:10.


This sentence is full of divine comfort against the fears of temporal
death. For if “Christ hath abolished death,” why should we fear it? And if
“life and immortality be brought to light,” why should we not rejoice to
pass through the gates of death, to take possession of them? But since
there is no man so holy, but that at some time or other he is afraid of
death, I shall here subjoin the chief heads of consolation, which I shall
divide into two parts. The first contains those consolations which arise
from _Christ’s sufferings and death, and the fruits of them_. The second,
those that arise from the consideration of _the vanity of the world_. Each
of these parts shall comprehend seven arguments of comfort.

2. I. The first and most powerful remedy against the fear of death, is the
most holy and innocent death of Jesus Christ, by which he destroyed the
power of death. The power of death consists in the continual dread,
anxiety, terror, and trembling that arise from the thought of the severe
judgment that is to follow. With this the soul is oftentimes so afflicted,
that it is, as it were, continually dying, yet cannot die. This is the
power of death, yea, is even the second and eternal death: and this
terrible state the devil makes yet more dreadful by his suggestions. Upon
this account he is said “to have the power of death” (Heb. 2:14); that is,
to terrify and torment the conscience with hellish fears and terrors. This
was David’s case, as he complains, “My heart is sore pained within me; and
the terrors of death are fallen upon me.” Ps. 55:4. So again, “The sorrows
of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid.” Ps.
18:3, 4. Now the blessed Jesus has taken away this power of death,
changing it into a calm sleep, a blessed rest of soul and body. When the
soul is at rest, the body sleeps peacefully, so that the peace of the soul
gives peace also to the body. Hence every true and faithful Christian may
be properly said not to taste of death; according to that promise of our
blessed Lord, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my sayings,
he shall never see death.” John 8:51.

3. The second ground of comfort is, the resurrection of our bodies. For
Christ has so far destroyed the power of death, that it not only cannot
torment our souls, but cannot even keep our bodies perpetually. As the
power of Christ’s death in us protects us from tasting the bitterness of
it; so, by the power of his resurrection, our mortal bodies shall also be
raised again to a glorious immortality.

4. For (1), the foundation of our resurrection is the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, as he himself says, “Because I live, ye shall live also.”
John 14:19. “I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live.” John 11:25. “I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth;
and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God.” Job 19:25. “For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive.” 1 Cor. 15:21, 22.

5. (2) This is also founded upon God’s veracity. “Thy dead men shall
live.” Isa. 26:19. “Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones: Behold, I
will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. Behold, I will
open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O my
people.” Ezek. 37:5, 12. “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt.” Dan. 12:2. “Verily, verily, I say unto you, The
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God: and they that hear shall live. The hour is coming in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.” John 5:25, 28, 29. “And I
saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God.” Rev. 20:12.

6. (3) It is also founded upon the omnipotence and glory of Jesus Christ.
As in the resurrection of Lazarus, he was glorified, when he cried out,
“Lazarus, come forth” (John 11:43); so will he also, in the last great
day, manifest his power and glory, by showing himself to be the Lord of
the dead and living. Rom. 14:9. “I will ransom them from the power of the
grave; I will redeem them from death; O death, I will be thy plagues; O
grave, I will be thy destruction.” Hosea 13:14.

7. (4) The divine justice is also engaged for the confirmation of this
truth. As it has received fulfilment in that sentence, “Thou shalt surely
die” (Gen. 2:17); so also must it be fulfilled in our resurrection after a
complete satisfaction for sin. For when sin itself is at an end, the wages
of sin ought to have an end likewise. This is strictly agreeable to the
justice of God.

8. (5) This is also further confirmed to us by the examples of those who
have been already raised from death unto life. Such was the case of the
widow’s son (1 Kings 17:22); the Shunammite’s son (2 Kings 4:35-37); the
dead body that was raised by touching the bones of Elisha (2 Kings 13:21);
the daughter of Jairus (Matt. 9:25); the widow’s son at Nain (Luke 7:15);
Lazarus (John 11:43); and Tabitha (Acts 9:41).

9. (6) Christ hath redeemed both soul and body to everlasting life.

10. (7) The beautiful parables derived from nature, as the grain of wheat,
in John 12:24, claim attention. The apostle says: “Thou fool, that which
thou sowest is not quickened except it die,” etc. 1 Cor. 15:36, etc. Upon
this account, burying-places are, in the German tongue, called _God’s
fields_ (_Gottesacker_).

11. A third comfort against the fears of death is, the fruit of Christ’s
resurrection; that is, that eternal, incorruptible, and immortal state
purchased for us by Jesus Christ. For as by the transgression of the first
Adam, all his posterity were made subject to death; so by the obedience of
the second, all are restored to life and immortality. Upon which account
it is said, “Behold, I make all things new.” Rev. 21:5. This renovation
consists in an entire freedom from sin, misery, and death, and is a state
of righteousness, joy, and eternal life. For this cause it is also called
Paradise: “In thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.” Ps. 16:11. If it be Paradise, it follows, that no
grief, pain, sorrow, or sighing: no hunger, thirst, cold, heat, or any
other evil, can enter there. These all belong to this transitory life, but
that eternal life is “an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and
that fadeth not away;” as we are told by St. Peter. (1 Peter 1:4.) This
is, indeed, the glorious fruit of Christ’s resurrection: for by Christ all
things are renewed and restored; corruption is changed into incorruption;
that which was transitory, into that which is eternal; our filthiness,
into spotless purity; our grief, into joy; our sorrows, into triumphs; our
sins, into righteousness; the divine anger into mercy; the curse into
blessings; our poverty into riches; our diseases into health; our contempt
into honor; our reproach into glory; our disquiet into everlasting rest;
our miseries into pleasures; our death into life. Now death is the
entrance into this blessed state: so that temporal death is the gate to
everlasting life, and all these joys.

12. The fourth consolation against the fear of death, is prayer. So we
read of the Son of God, that “being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly.” Luke 22:44. And “in the days of his flesh, he offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was
able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.” Heb. 5:7.
Indeed, the prayers of dying people are strong and earnest; they proceed
from the bottom of the heart, ascend through the clouds, and reach the
ears of the Almighty. “The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
to all that call upon him in truth.” Ps. 145:18. “I will be with him in
trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him.” Ps. 91:15. “Fear thou not,
for I am with thee; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.” Isa. 41:10.

13. The fifth consolation is, the glorification of our bodies. “Our
conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby
he is able to subdue all things unto himself.” Phil. 3:20, 21. What
greater glory can we conceive, than that our bodies shall be, like the
glorified body of Jesus Christ? He showed us his glorified body upon Mount
Tabor (Matt. 17:2; Mark 9:2, 3), that he might inflame us with a desire of
the same glory. Oh! what a glorious temple of God shall our body then be!
Of this, the royal and priestly garments under the law, were but a faint
shadow and resemblance.

14. The sixth is, the presence of the holy angels, who carry our departing
souls into Abraham’s bosom. Our soul enters into the regions of eternal
glory, and joins the society of blessed spirits. This is what is meant by
“Abraham’s bosom.” Luke 16:22. That rest of the soul consists entirely in
a freedom from the fears and terrors of death. So “Return unto thy rest, O
my soul. For the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee: for thou hast
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.” Ps.
116:7-9. For then the soul, being delivered from the yoke of the flesh,
will rejoice like a prisoner rescued from long captivity.

15. The seventh comfort is, the eternal duration of our future glory.
“They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun
light on them, or any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” Rev. 7:16, 17.
“My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings,
and in quiet resting-places.” Isa. 32:18. And “I will extend peace to her
like a river. And as one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort
you.” Isa. 66:12, 13. “My servants shall eat, and drink, and rejoice.”
Isa. 65:13. Such eating and drinking, are to be understood of their
exalted pleasure, arising from their vision of God, “Now we see through a
glass darkly; but then face to face.” 1 Cor. 13:12. “We shall see him as
he is.” 1 John 3:2. “As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I
shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.” Ps. 17:15. O happy
day, when we shall see God face to face! How ardently did holy David long
for it, saying, “When shall I come and appear before God?” Ps. 42:2.

16. In short, the joy of eternal life will consist: 1. In the beatific
vision of the face of God. 2. In the presence of Christ our Redeemer, in
all his glory and majesty: “Father, I will that they also whom thou hast
given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory which thou
hast given me.” John 17:24. 3. In the most exalted enjoyments of all the
gifts, graces, and pleasures of the Holy Ghost, “the fountain of life.”
Ps. 36:9. 4. In the society of all the Elect, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs. “And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and
come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” Isa.
35:10.

17. II. Thus much for those consolations that arise from the nature,
offices, and promises of the blessed Jesus. I come now to consider those
that may be drawn from the consideration of the vanity of the world. Of
these there are also seven.

18. First, this life, how great and glorious soever it may appear to some,
is made up of misery and sorrow. 1 Cor. 15:31. Every day steals away a
part of our life, and as our years increase, our life decreases; so that
every moment of our time is divided betwixt life and death. How many and
various diseases are there, which, like slow poisons, waste and consume
our bodies! How are we tormented with sorrow, broken with labors, and
distracted with care! So that the wise man truly pronounced that “the day
of death is better than the day of one’s birth.” Eccles. 7:1. “Is there
not an appointed time to man upon earth? Are not his days also like the
days of a hireling? As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow, and as a
hireling looketh for the reward of his work: so am I made to possess
months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.” Job 7:1-3.
“Man that is born of a woman, is of few days and full of trouble.” Job
14:1. But a holy and happy death puts an end to all these miseries.

19. Secondly, we are exposed to many and very grievous sins, from which
nothing can deliver us but a happy death. Thus St. Paul complains, “I see
another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?”
Rom. 7:23, 24. What is life but a continued course of sin? So that it was
a prayer of one of the ancients, “Lord, let me die, that I may cease from
sin.” And if the whole creation is travailing in pain, and waiting to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
children of God (Rom. 8:21, 22), how much more ought we to sigh after it?
How full the world is of offences and stumbling-blocks, which we are
continually obliged to see and suffer, whether we will or not! And these
offences will so increase in the last days, that the souls of the
righteous shall be vexed like righteous Lot’s in Sodom. 2 Pet. 2:8. “I
returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun;
and behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they
had no comforter. Wherefore, I praised the dead which are already dead,
more than the living which are yet alive.” Eccles. 4:1, 2. How many
pestilent errors in matters of faith; how many heresies, superstitions,
false prophets and false Christs there are, so that, if it were possible,
even the elect might be deceived! Matt. 24:24. Upon this account God takes
his faithful people out of all these dangers and troubles. How many
dreadful mischiefs, and mournful events, how many wars, butcheries,
plagues, and famines occur! Such, and so great, are they, that indeed no
Christian would wish to see or endure them.

20. Thirdly, all must die without distinction. “Death hath passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned.” Rom. 5:12. Since so many holy and
excellent men, so many Patriarchs, Prophets, and so many other righteous
men are dead, who would not willingly follow them? “Take away my life, for
I am not better than my fathers” (1 Kings 19:4), said the prophet Elijah.
“It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment.” Heb.
9:27. “All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower
of the field. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; because the spirit
of the Lord bloweth upon it.” Isa. 40:6, 7. “I am a stranger with thee,
and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.” Ps. 39:12.

21. Fourthly, no man dies by chance; but God is the Lord of life, and he
has appointed the bounds of its duration. “His days are determined, the
number of his months are with thee.” Job 14:5. “Thou turnest man to
destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men.” Ps. 90:3. “In thy
book all my members were written.” Ps. 139:16. “The very hairs of your
head are all numbered.” Matt. 10:30. “God is thy life, and the length of
thy days.” Deut. 30:20.

22. Fifthly, “To die is gain.” Phil. 1:21. We gain more than we lose by
dying; righteousness, instead of sin; glory, for misery; heavenly riches,
for earthly; instead of the short-lived friendships and relations of this
world, we gain an eternal fellowship and union with the saints in heaven;
instead of this mortal, diseased, and frail body, we gain a heavenly and
glorious one; we change banishment for our own country; misery, for peace;
and this world for heaven. In short, what is there in this world, that we
cannot have infinitely better in the next? If thou seekest riches, honors,
or glory; with friends, pleasures, peace, or enjoyments, all these thou
shalt enjoy in a far higher degree in the next world.

23. Sixthly, Man would be the most miserable creature in the world, if he
were obliged to abide in it forever. “If in this life only,” saith St.
Paul, “we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.” 1 Cor.
15:19. It follows, therefore, that we are designed for a better world. So
that, in truth, it is a very affecting instance of divine mercy to take us
out of this valley of tears, and translate us to a better place. “The
righteous is taken away from the evil to come. He shall enter into peace;
they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.” Isa.
57:1, 2. “Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; yea, saith the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors.” Rev. 14:13.

24. Seventhly, since we cannot with these bodily and sinful eyes behold
the glory of God, nor enter with these mortal bodies into the “new heavens
and new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness” (2 Peter 3:13); let us
cheerfully put off this earthly tabernacle, that we may be clothed with a
heavenly and spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15:44. “Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.” 1 Cor.
15:50. Great, therefore, is the mercy of God, who exchanges these filthy
rags for a shining garment, in which we may celebrate the eternal
marriage; a beautiful, festive garment, fit to be worn in the everlasting
rest; a priestly robe, with which we may enter into the very holy of
holies.




Conclusion Of The Second Book.


At the close of this Book, I desire to submit one or two points to the
consideration of the Christian reader.

In writing these Books I have had no other object in view than that, in
connection with our pure religion and confession of faith, as set forth in
the Church of the Augsburg Confession, and repeated in the Formula of
Concord (which I publicly and sincerely adopt, and in accordance with
which I desire these writings of mine to be understood), purity and
holiness of the life might be promoted. For purity of doctrine is of no
benefit, when it is not adorned by a holy life. We ought to guard the
purity of doctrine with watchful eyes, but sustain holiness of life with
even greater earnestness. Of what advantage are great skill and learning
without godliness? It is much better, in the eyes of God, to train up a
devout man, than to make a learned man of him. There are many who teach
the _doctrine_ of Christ with great zeal, but there are few who in their
practice conform to his _life_. As to this point the Christian reader is
referred to the Preface of the First Book, and to the Conclusion of the
Fourth Book.

2. If any one should allege that I have treated too diffusely of the
doctrine of Christian faith, I beg to give the following answer: Our evil
life is also very extensive—the evils under which we labor are very
serious—our redemption is a great work—and our crosses are manifold. But
let any one who desires greater brevity, read the several chapters in the
First, Second, and Third Books, which treat of Repentance, Faith, Love,
Humility, Meekness, Patience, and the Cross, and he will find the whole
Christian life described without prolixity. Nevertheless, if thou wilt
read the whole work, thou wilt be abundantly rewarded for the time and
labor which thou hast thus expended.





