BOOK III.




Preface To The Third Book.


As there are different degrees of age and maturity in the natural life; so
are there also in the spiritual. This life has its first foundation in
sincere repentance, by which a man sets himself heartily to amend his
life. This is succeeded by an increase of light, when by contemplation,
prayer, and bearing the cross, a man is daily improving in grace, and
growing up to perfection. The last and most perfect state is that which
consists in firm union, which is founded in, and cemented by, pure love.
This is the state which St. Paul calls the “perfect man,” and “the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ.” Eph. 4:13.

2. To explain these three different states, is the design of these three
books; so that I think that (with my Book of Prayer), the whole body of
Christianity is contained and explained in them, as far as is essentially
necessary; though, perhaps, not so perfectly as might be wished. As for
the Fourth Book, I thought fit to add it to the rest, to show how
harmoniously the Holy Scriptures, Jesus Christ, human nature, and the
whole creation agree together; and how all things centre in the one
Eternal, which is God!

3. That the reader may not mistake the design of this Third Book, I would
remark that it proposes to instruct him how to seek and find the kingdom
of heaven within himself (Luke 17:21); and that, in order to this, he must
devote and consecrate his whole heart and soul to God; that is, not only
his understanding, but his will and affections also. It is a notion too
prevalent at this day, that men are very good Christians, if by reading or
discourse they have attained to some kind of intellectual knowledge of
Jesus Christ. This is that which generally passes under the name of
Divinity, which the generality take to be nothing but a science, or a set
of doctrines or opinions to be learned only in theory, not regarding the
other most noble powers of the soul, namely, the will and the affections.
But _all_ these must be consecrated to God in Christ; and when thou hast
done this, thou mayest assure thyself that thou art entirely dedicated to
him. For there is a wide difference betwixt the understanding by which we
know, and the will or affections by which we love the Lord Jesus. Our love
may be perfect, though our knowledge be not so. To know Christ with our
understanding, and yet not to love him, is nothing worth; on the other
hand, it is infinitely better to love him, than merely to be able to
dispute and discourse about him. Eph. 3:19. Let us learn, therefore, so to
seek Christ with our understanding, that we may also love him with the
entire strength of our will. By this we may be assured that we know him
truly, if our knowledge be productive of love. Otherwise, we may be said,
indeed, to find him and know him, but it will be to our condemnation. So
our blessed Lord tells us, “Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.” Matt. 7:21. Moreover, there are
two ways of obtaining wisdom and knowledge. The one consists in reading
and discussion; the other in prayer and charity. The one makes us learned,
the other holy. And between these there is a great difference. If men be
learned, and not lovers of God, they breathe nothing but pride and
arrogance; but if holy, they are humble, and think meanly of themselves.
If thou take the first method, thou wilt never find thy internal treasure;
if thou take the latter, thou canst not be disappointed. Such is the
argument of the Third Book.

4. And now, how glorious, how noble, and happy a thing is it, that our
chief and most valuable treasure, that is, the kingdom of God, is not to
be sought _without_, but to be found _within_ us, that we continually
carry it about with us, hidden from the world, and that neither the world
nor the devil can rob us of it; and that this is not to be obtained by
profound learning, skill in languages, or variety of books, but by a
devout and humble spirit. Here then let us exercise our greatest care and
diligence, and turn our thoughts inward to that hidden, celestial, and
eternal good, that divine, that incomparable treasure. Why do we spend our
time and pains in the pursuit of external comforts, whilst so great a
treasure as the kingdom of God, with all its blessings, lies within us?
For in our heart and soul is the true school of the Holy Spirit, the true
habitation of the Holy Trinity, the very temple of God (1 Cor. 6:19), the
true house of prayer, wherein he desires to be worshipped “in spirit and
in truth.” John 4:23, 24. For though God by his universal presence is in
all things, though not included in them (Isa. 66:1), but after an
incomprehensible manner filling heaven and earth; yet in a particular and
proper sense, he dwells in the soul of the enlightened Christian, taking
up his seat and habitation there, as it were in his own image and
similitude. Here he operates in a way suitable to himself, answering and
aiding every groan and sigh of the devout soul. For how is it possible
that He should deny anything to him with whom, and in whom he lives? In a
word, there is nothing more pleasant and agreeable to divine love, than to
communicate itself to all that unfeignedly seek it.

5. In order to this, however, the soul must be at rest, which it never can
be till disengaged from the world. This even some heathens were sensible
of, and accordingly one of them tells us, “that the soul is incapable of
wisdom till it is composed and at rest.” There is a fine passage in St.
Cyprian to this purpose. “This,” says he, “is the true rest and security
of the soul, when the man, being delivered from the storms and tempests of
the world, raises his heart and eyes unto God, and endeavors to be like
him. By this he comes to understand, that all which the world calls
beautiful and valuable, is truly hidden in his own soul, so that he
neither expects nor desires anything from without. O celestial treasure,
to be delivered from the chains and fetters of this world! O chief and
boundless good, not to be obtained by any labor of ours, nor by our
interest with the great men of this world; in short, not to be gained by
our industry and study; but solely and entirely, by the grace and favor of
God. For as the light of the sun proceeds from itself, the day breaks from
itself, the fountain flows from itself, the rain falls from itself, and
waters the earth; so the Holy Spirit descends freely into that soul, which
has raised itself from the world unto God.”

6. These words of St. Cyprian express a great truth, and are a sort of
epitome of this Book. In a word, this turning inwards of the soul, very
often gives us a view of the inward treasure of our souls, though but for
a moment. And one such moment is better than heaven and earth, and all the
creatures. Hence St. Bernard truly observed, “that he who has once learned
to descend into himself, to seek the face of God, and taste the sweetness
of his presence in the inmost recesses of the heart, will think it more
tolerable to suffer even the pains of hell for a season, than, after
having tasted the sweetness of this divine exercise, to return again to
the pleasures, or rather, to the lusts and wearisome gratifications of the
world and the flesh, arising from the insatiable cravings of the inferior
appetites.” In short, such a soul not only feels the highest happiness, by
finding in itself the presence of God; but also the deepest misery, in
being deprived of it. By this the true Christian is fully instructed, that
by dying to the world, he lives in God, as the fountain of life; and, on
the other hand, that the more he lives to the world, the more he dies unto
God: that the soul which is dead to the world, truly lives unto God, and
is his joy, or, as the Song of Solomon expresses it, is better than the
taste of wine, or the smell of all spices (Cant. 4:10); while on the other
hand, the hearts of worldly men are but sour grapes, as the grapes of
Sodom, which are as gall, and their clusters are bitter. Deut. 32:32. The
soul that is dead to the world, may be discovered by these tokens. It
resigns its own will to the will of God in all things; it suppresses
self-love; it mortifies the desires of the flesh; it avoids worldly
pleasures; it esteems itself as the meanest of all, and is not apt to
judge or censure a neighbor. Such a one refers all his injuries and wrongs
to the God of righteousness, to whom vengeance belongeth; he is not puffed
up with the applause of men, nor grieved by their revilings; in a word, he
bears everything with patience and without repining. A noble instance of
this resigned temper we have in king David (2 Sam. 23:15-17), when he
poured out before the Lord the water of the well of Bethlehem, after which
he had so earnestly longed, and which three mighty men of his host had
brought for him at the hazard of their lives. This was an action of great
self-denial; for he would not gratify his desires by tasting that for
which three men had ventured their lives.

7. Herein consists the true perfection of the Christian life. For
perfection is not, as some suppose, a sublime, spiritual kind of relish
for heavenly enjoyments; but it is the denying our own will, the contempt
of the pleasures and profits of this life, the acknowledging our own
vileness, constant resignation to the will of God, and unwearied love and
unfeigned compassion for our neighbor. In a word, it is that degree of
love, which, allowing for human infirmities, thinks of nothing, seeks
nothing, desires nothing but God. This is that true Christian virtue, true
liberty, and true peace, which consists in overcoming the flesh and
fleshly desires, as will appear in this Third Book, and as thou wilt learn
from thine own experience, if thou wilt apply the truth. For which great
end, I pray that divine grace may descend both upon the reader and writer,
that it may please God to begin, strengthen, and perfect his good work in
us, to the praise and glory of himself. Amen.




