Chapter XXXIV.


Showing How A Man Should Seek The Wisdom Of God By Prayer; Containing Also
A Useful Treatise On Prayer, Wherein The Reader Is Taught How The Heart Is
To Be Moved Unto Prayer, And Brought Into A Quiet Sabbath, So That Prayer
  May Be Wrought In Us By The Lord; The Whole Being Set Forth In Twelve
                                Sections.



Section I.


 All That We Have Lost In Adam We Recover Fully And Completely In Christ.


    _In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
    knowledge._—COL. 2:3.


In the beginning God formed man out of the dust of the earth, and breathed
into him the breath of life, and man became a living and immortal soul,
adorned with perfect wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and blessedness,
after the image of his Creator. For where there is divine wisdom, there is
blessedness; and where there is blessedness there is divine wisdom. Man,
therefore, wanted nothing in Paradise to make him completely happy. But
when, being seduced by the temptation of the serpent, he turned away from
God, and fell into sin, then was this divine image in man effaced, and he
became subject to the devil, to death, and to misery. For as soon as this
divine image was defaced in him by sin, he could discover nothing in
himself but misery, blindness, and the curse.

2. But in order that Adam, that is, all men in Adam, might not utterly
perish, God himself was made man; that is, he was pleased to send his Son
to take our nature upon him, and to be born of a virgin. The Son of God
has, by his holy life and doctrine, as by a pattern, shown us again the
way of wisdom and salvation in which we are to walk. For he has not only
delivered us from our sins by his most bitter death, but has moreover
given us a commandment, that “we should walk, even as he also walked.” 1
John 2:6.

3. We are, therefore, begotten again by him, through faith, to be the sons
of God; nay, we are made sons of God in and with his own Son. For “as he
is, so are we also in this world.” 1 John 4:17.

4. In this Son “all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden.” For
whatsoever was lost in Adam, is perfectly to be found in Christ. Rom.
5:18, 19.

5. If we would, in this life, have a foretaste of these great and glorious
treasures, it must be obtained by prayer, diligent searching, and
continual knocking. For no man can have admission into the kingdom of God,
unless he walk in the new birth, and seek it earnestly of God. No man can
be delivered from the power of sin and the devil, unless he repent, and
offer up his prayers in the name of Christ. For though Christ has
purchased for us all good things, yet without faith no man can be partaker
of them; in and by faith he must also pray, seek, and knock. In a word, it
is by prayer only that we can obtain those “good and perfect gifts which
come down from above, from the Father of lights.” James 1:17.

A PRAYER.

O Eternal God and Father, teach me, I beseech thee, by thy Holy Spirit,
that even as I have lost all by dying in Adam, so I may recover all by
being made alive again in Christ. Grant that I may daily die to myself, by
continual mortification and repentance, and devote and give myself up
entirely to thee; that so all the good things which I have lost may be
restored to me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



Section II.


               The Evils That Follow The Neglect Of Prayer.


    _Ye have not, because ye ask not._—JAMES 4:2.


1. The neglect of prayer is a violation of the _commandments_ of Christ,
who commands us to “pray without ceasing” (Matt. 7:7; Luke 18:1), not for
His sake, for he well knows what we stand in need of (Matt. 6:32); but for
our own, that we may have a portion of the treasures and inheritance of
God. He that lives in the neglect of prayer is a breaker of the first and
second commandments, even as to blaspheme God is to bring voluntary
destruction upon himself.

2. He that neglects the duty of prayer is a despiser of the _promises_
annexed to the performance of that duty. “Call upon me, and I will deliver
thee” (Ps. 50:15); “Ask, and ye shall receive” (John 16:24); for he
thereby represents God as unmindful of his promises, or as not able to
fulfil them.

3. By the neglect of prayer, our faith, which is the great treasure and
foundation of the inward man, by degrees decays and perishes. For not by
the arm or power of flesh, but by faith in Christ, can we conquer sin,
death, and the devil. 1 John 5:4. Prayer is the nourishment of faith; and
this is that wisdom and eternal life which we must seek for by diligent
prayer.

4. The Lord Jesus departs from them that despise prayer; so that they are
blinded and walk in darkness, knowing neither themselves nor God, but are
strangers to his will. They shut the kingdom of heaven against themselves;
and, being destitute of light to know the will of God, they fall into many
dangers and temptations, and sometimes into despair: whereas, on the
contrary, where there are the Holy Spirit and faith, there the world is
overcome.

5. He that neglects prayer enters into a state of carnal security, and
every kind of iniquity. Such a man is not sensible how deeply he is
engaged in sin; but rushes into all the avenues of destruction which lie
open to receive him. The good things of this world which God has given
him, such as health and riches, he regards as things that come by chance,
or are secured by his own labor; and upon that account he has no gratitude
to his Creator and Benefactor.

6. As man, since his fall, is exposed to continual dangers, both of body
and soul, so is he particularly in danger from the devil, evil spirits,
and wicked men, who, like the devil, are continually plotting the
destruction of the righteous. Whosoever, therefore, neglects prayer, will
be, in the midst of these temptations, like a ship tost in a storm,
without help or hopes of escape.

7. Such a one also leads a most unhappy life; he is in continual
difficulties and fears, being perplexed, doubtful, and uneasy about the
success of his affairs. His head and hands are full of business; yet he
sees but little fruit of his labors, and even that little is in the end
unblessed. Therefore, though the Scripture says that “the wicked may be
seen in great power,” yet it adds, “they pass away, and are not.” Ps.
37:35, 36. They are “like the chaff which the wind driveth away.” Ps. 1:4.
On the other hand, they that seek unto God by prayer “shall flourish like
a palm tree, and grow like a cedar in Lebanon.” Ps. 92:12. And “though
many are the afflictions of the righteous” (Ps. 34:19), yet the wicked
undergo more pain and trouble to go to hell than the righteous do to
obtain heaven.

A PRAYER.

Most merciful and compassionate Father, thou knowest that man renders
himself miserable by his own negligence and sloth, whilst he transgresses
thy commands, and neglects the duty of prayer, contemning and slighting
thy most certain and faithful promises. But because thou lovest thy
creatures, and art not willing that any should perish, therefore it is
that thou dost so earnestly invite us to the exercise of prayer. Give me
grace to lay this continually to heart, that I may be able to offer up my
prayers aright, through thy Son Jesus Christ, and be delivered from the
punishments and miseries due to the despisers of that holy duty. Amen.



Section III.


                    The Benefits Of Continual Prayer.


    _Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full._—JOHN
    16:24.


1. Man, since his fall, is become slothful and inactive in everything that
is good. He, therefore, that would escape this unhappy state, and the
destruction that will certainly attend it, must stir himself up by prayer;
and by holy meditation conquer his aversion to divine things, and devoutly
consider with himself the advantages of prayer. Let him reflect, that he
thereby praises, honors, and adores the eternal, living, and true God;
that he does not worship any strange God; but offers up his most earnest
supplications to the only one and true God, whose commands, like an
obedient child, he ought to obey, and show forth the praises of his
Creator, Father, and Saviour.

2. He that prays does not despise the promises of God, but testifies by
his prayers that he sets a just value upon them, acknowledging that God is
true, and that he neither can nor will lie.

3. Prayer is the life of faith, causing it to flourish and prosper like a
tree by the river side, and faith is the root of all that is good in us.
Faith is our power, our spiritual consolation, our strength against all
our enemies and temptations, yea, faith is our “victory that overcometh
the world” (1 John 5:4); and consequently everything else that opposes and
hinders us in our spiritual warfare.

4. By prayer, we receive the Holy Spirit. Luke 11:13; Zech. 12:10. By
prayer, we make room for the Holy Spirit to work and exert his power in
us, and by this means to come and make his abode with us. John 14:23. By
prayer, we obtain the true light and knowledge of God, so as perfectly to
understand his will; and, by prayer, we abide in his kingdom, and are
partakers of the blessings of heaven.

5. By prayer, we shake off carnal security, resist sin, and, by
vanquishing flesh and blood, “fight the good fight, and hold faith and a
good conscience.” 1 Tim. 1:19; 6:12.

6. By prayer, we oppose temptations, dangers, afflictions, the devil, and
wicked men. For prayer is a strong tower of defence against our enemies,
and the holy fortress to which we must have recourse (Eph. 6:18; Prov.
18:10; Ps. 31:3); and though the devil and wicked men raise the greatest
opposition, yet “all things work together for good to them that love God.”
Rom. 8:28.

7. Lastly, he that continually watches unto prayer may always thankfully
rejoice in the Holy Ghost; according to the doctrine of St. Paul, “Rejoice
evermore; pray without ceasing; in everything give thanks.” 1 Thess.
5:16-18. For the comfortable addresses made to God, the eternal King, by
prayer, are an effectual remedy against sorrow, trouble, misery, and
affliction; and produce joy, peace, and tranquillity in the hearts of the
faithful; and when our prayers are right, we are assured that all our
righteous designs shall prosper in our hands “whilst we cast our care upon
God.” 1 Pet. 5:7. “The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing.” Phil.
4:5, 6. “Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass.” Ps. 37:5. For all solicitude arises from a distrust of
God, which naturally proceeds from the neglect of prayer. On the contrary,
faith and prayer give us confidence towards God, and are the proper
antidote against all anxiety and trouble of mind.

A PRAYER.

Help me, O Lord my God, that I may continually call to mind, that it is
for my own sake that thou invitest and urgest me to the exercise of
prayer. Do thou rouse me, and I shall arise; awaken thou me, and I shall
awake, and follow Christ alone. Amen.



Section IV.


The True Christian Chooses The Narrow Way In Christ, Rather Than The Broad
                               Way In Adam.


    _We glory in tribulations._—ROM. 5:3.


1. The Scripture teaches us that when Adam was placed in Paradise, God
showed him the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and forbade him to
eat of it (Gen. 2:9, 17); so that Adam was thus placed between time and
eternity. Life and death, light and darkness (Deut. 30:15), were set
before him, that he might qualify himself for eternal glory in the narrow
way. Our case is just the same. For since the fall of Adam, Christ comes
to us, and endeavors to draw us from the broad way in Adam, to the narrow
way, which is himself; and this he does gently and without violence,
resolving to force no man either to his salvation or his condemnation. He
shows us the way by his prevenient grace, which is bestowed on all men
without exception. Christ now says, “Enter ye in at the strait gate; for
wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction; and
many there be that go in thereat. Because strait is the gate, and narrow
is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” Matt.
7:13, 14.

2. Here we plainly see two paths set before us: the one is the way of the
world, in which many walk, because they continue in Adam, and refuse
Christ; the other is the way of God, in which few walk, because they
prefer the broad way in Adam. Many are the difficulties which attend both
these paths. If you conform yourself to the world, you will meet with many
troubles and vexations; and, not being established in the truth of God,
your lot finally is eternal damnation. But if you enter into the way of
God through Christ, and persevere in prayer, you must expect to suffer
with Christ, from the opposition of this evil world: but, at the same
time, your heart shall be constantly filled with the refreshing
consolations of the Spirit of truth, and in the end, you shall obtain
everlasting life. 2 Tim. 2:11, 12; 3:12.

3. He that prays, fights against the devil and his own corrupt nature;
overcomes himself, the devil, and all the enemies of his salvation; and
shall at last with Christ, the Captain of his salvation (Heb. 2:10), enter
into everlasting rest.

4. But he that lives in the neglect of prayer, makes no progress in the
conquest of his spiritual enemies; but is a miserable slave of the world,
and shall at last, with the prince of darkness, be condemned to
everlasting misery.

5. It is better to fight now, and to enter triumphantly into everlasting
glory, than not to fight, and yet endure many afflictions, and at last be
doomed to everlasting destruction.

A PRAYER.

Oh that men would but consider these things! They would then loathe and
despise this present world; would hate and deny themselves, and would
follow Christ alone, in the narrow way of the cross. That we may,
therefore, seriously lay these things to heart; that we may renounce the
old Adam within us, and put on the new man, Christ Jesus: and at last,
through the narrow way, enter into everlasting life, may God of his
infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



Section V.


Considerations Which Should Move The Heart To Commune With God In Prayer.


    _Am I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off_?—JER.
    23:23.


1. It is of great use to us, to have before us certain heads which may
serve as encouragements to the exercise of earnest prayer, which is that
worship in spirit and in truth, which God requires of all his servants.

2. I. First, then, we must consider that “God knows what things we have
need of, before we ask him.” Matt. 6:8.

3. II. That God draws, invites, and encourages us to the exercise of
prayer, and assuredly promises that he will hear our prayers. Ps. 50:15.

4. III. That God is no respecter of persons, but has an equal regard for
all mankind. Acts 10:34.

5. IV. That he is as sinful who presumes to pray upon the opinion of his
own righteousness, merit, and holiness, as he that is afraid to pray out
of a sense of his own sins and unworthiness. Luke 18:11, 14.

6. V. That God is not confined to any certain place, where only we ought
to worship him; but that he is everywhere to be found, and is always “nigh
to them that call upon him.” John 4:21, 22; Ps. 145:18.

7. VI. That God is, in his own eternity, unchangeable, and not confined to
any certain time; but is always attentive to the prayers of his servants.
1 Thess. 5:17.

8. VII. That God anticipates our prayers, and gives us both natural and
supernatural blessings, which yet, without prayer, nobody can truly enjoy.

9. These considerations will renew and awaken every soul that shall duly
attend to them (Eph. 5:14): they will cleanse them from darkness and
error; establish them on the foundation of truth; elevate them towards
God; and inflame them with a lively devotion. For from them flow the
following lessons:

10. I. That God commands and encourages us to pray, not for His own sake,
as if He were ignorant of our wants, but for our sakes, that being
quickened by prayer we might know and acknowledge them ourselves.

11. II. That God does not stand in need of any minute declarations of our
necessities, but knows, even before we ask him, what things we have need
of. Isa. 65:24; Ps. 139:2.

12. III. That God, who never slumbereth nor sleepeth, needs not to be
awakened by our cries, fastings, and watchings; but that these exercises
are profitable for man, to awaken and rouse him from the sleep of sin. Ps.
33:18; 34:15.

13. IV. That God is a thousand times more ready to give, than man is to
receive. Jer. 32:41.

14. V. That the goodness and mercy of God towards mankind are infinite
(Ps. 103:12), but that the negligence and sloth of men in praying,
seeking, and knocking, are excessive. Matt. 7:7.

15. VI. That God is impartial and just in all his works, and is by no
means the cause of our blindness, infirmities, ignorance, or miseries; but
that wretched man himself is in fault, by neglecting to pray or to seek.
Deut. 32:4; Ps. 92:15.

16. VII. That the true worshipper may at all times and in all places,
offer up his prayers in spirit and in truth to God the Father, through
Christ, provided he do not hinder himself. John 4:21, 23; Luke 18:1, etc.

17. VIII. That whosoever neglects prayer, deprives himself of the blessed
opportunities of speaking to God. Ps. 19:14. Thus the sinner inflicts
punishment on himself.

18. IX. That the diligent worshipper doeth good to himself; not of himself
but by the prevenient grace of God, which is freely given to all men
without exception.

19. Let him that is unacquainted with the preceding heads of meditation,
know that he is still far from Christ, and has tasted but little of the
truth. He who knows them, and believes them not, is guilty of a very great
sin; and, lastly, he that believes them and yet is inactive, and does not
stir up himself to the practice of them, but, on the other hand, lives on
from day to day, in a state of doubt and indifference, is a great sinner,
and shall be beaten with many more stripes than he who knew not his Lord’s
will, and therefore did it not. Luke 12:47. Let the one last mentioned
look carefully to himself, that he may be seriously converted, and not
perish in his sins.

A PRAYER.

O Lord, and merciful Father, awaken me by thy Holy Spirit, that I may not
only know those things, but may practise them by a lively faith, and
become a true worshipper in spirit and in truth. Amen.



Section VI.


  The Omniscient God Knows What We Stand In Need Of, Before We Ask Him.


    _Thou understandest my thought afar off._—PS. 139:2.


1. The truth of these words is confirmed by our blessed Saviour: “Your
Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him” (Matt.
6:8); and by David: “He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?” (Ps.
94:9); and by St. Paul: “He is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the heart.” Heb. 4:12. For our God is not as man, who stands in need of a
long account of our necessities. All the possible successions of time are
in his sight but as one single moment, in which all things, both past and
to come, are beheld as actually present. Therefore, he numbered the hairs
of our heads before we were born, and understands all our thoughts before
we pray. In a word, all things are naked and open in his sight. Heb. 4:
13. These and similar meditations may be of use, for the encouragement of
those who begin the exercise of prayer; so that they may always have
certain sentences of Scripture ready at hand, upon which they may
meditate, and which they may apply to themselves, by comprising the sense
of them in a short prayer. This will be easily understood by those that
are exercised herein.

2. A man that walks abroad in an open spacious field, and in a clear day,
finds himself encompassed with light; which light, if it were spiritual,
instead of being natural, would even penetrate the spirit itself. Just so
are all creatures, visible and invisible, in the sight of God. He discerns
and comprehends all things, and nothing can be hidden from him. “The
darkness hideth not from him; but the night shineth as the day.” Ps.
139:12. He himself is the all-seeing eye, to whom all things are as clear
as a mote in transparent crystal would be to our bodily eyes.

3. This consideration is of great use to the inexperienced, in order to
purge their hearts from the thick clouds of darkness and error, and to
quicken them in prayer; by which, when truly roused and awakened, we
discover many great and noble truths that had hitherto been hidden from
our eyes. Many are apt to think, that God knows and sees no more than they
themselves do; which is the effect of egregious blindness and ignorance,
and will merit a proportionable punishment. Ps. 7:9.

A PRAYER.

Almighty and everlasting God and Father, the Searcher of hearts, and the
Judge of all our secret thoughts, who seest, knowest, and hearest all our
designs and purposes before they are brought to pass! Behold, I appear
before thee, to confess my necessities, not with any design to awaken thee
by my cries, as if thou wert ignorant of me, or of my concerns; but to
stir up myself to know and consider, that thou knowest all my necessities,
and that the very hairs of my head are numbered by thee. Assist me, Holy
Father, that I may truly know and consider these things, that my soul may
joyfully submit to thy good pleasure, and that I may wait upon thee in
true resignation and obedience. Amen.



Section VII.


   That God Invites And Engages All Men To The Exercise Of Prayer, And
                    Promises To Hear Their Petitions.


    _Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
    delivered._—JOEL 2:32.


1. These words ought to be carefully considered; for it is not sufficient
to believe that God knows all things; we must also remember that God
commands us to pray, and promises to hear us. Thus, “Whatsoever ye shall
ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.” John 16:23. “Everyone
that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that
knocketh, it shall be opened.” Matt. 7:8. “Men ought always to pray, and
not to faint.” Luke 18:1. “If any one lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him.” James 1:5. “If we ask any thing according to his will, he
heareth us.” 1 John 5:14. “All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing, ye shall receive.” Matt. 21:22. In all these places, both a
command and a promise are expressed; which must needs make an impression
upon every man that has not a heart of stone; and he that does not believe
them, is in a desperate state, and deserves not the name of a man. But if
these things are true, and acknowledged to be so, why do we not believe
them? Why do we not pray? Why are not our prayers heard? Why do we not
receive the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit? Verily, because we do not
pray _with faith_, nor wait upon God with _constancy and patience_. For
the property of true faith is to submit ourselves to God, in a quiet and
peaceful resignation of mind; but he that wavers, is unfaithful and
inconstant, and makes his own prayers void. Moreover, he denies the truth
and power of God, making him either unable or unwilling to supply our
wants. Both these are signs of a perverse spirit.

2. On the other hand, faith gives quietness to the soul, and makes it
capable of divine grace. God requires nothing from man but that he should
be quiet, and rest from all his works, and especially from himself. The
spirit and mind of man are like waters, upon which the Spirit of God is
perpetually moving. Gen. 1:2. So soon as our spirit is quiet, and at rest
from the impetuous motions of worldly thoughts, then God rests upon it,
and speaks forth the word of his power into such quiet and still waters;
and the moment of this divine influx is of more value than the whole
world. Still waters are easily warmed by the sun, but violent and rapid
streams seldom or never. Unbelief sacrilegiously robs God of his honor,
destroying the very names of faith and truth. This changes the Christian
into a heathen and atheist, and, unless repented of, will lead to his
everlasting destruction.

A PRAYER.

O Eternal, faithful, and righteous God, who canst not lie; I know that
thou dost graciously invite, encourage, and impel all men, for their own
infinite advantage, to pray unto thee; and dost offer thy grace and mercy
equally to them all, without distinction or partiality. Grant, I beseech
thee, Holy Father, that I may seriously lay these things to heart, and
attain a true, firm, and upright faith, and not be deaf to the invitations
of thy infinite mercy; but may constantly and cheerfully submit myself to
thee, and expect with patience thy light within my soul. Amen.



Section VIII.


  God Is No Respecter Of Persons, But Has An Impartial Love For All His
                                Creatures.


    _The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
    works._—PS. 145:9.


1. I am now indeed convinced (some one may say), that God knows my
necessities better than I can discover them to him; that he has commanded
prayer, and promised to hear it: but I am not yet fully satisfied, whether
I in particular am not excluded from the benefit of these promises?—Come,
then, and let us now show that God is no respecter of persons, in
opposition to those blind guides, who, by their false interpretations of
some places of Holy Scripture, particularly Rom. 9:13, Mal. 1:2, and the
like, have endeavored to prove that God has an aversion to some particular
persons, and a partial fondness for others; contrary to the plain and
indisputable testimonies of Holy Scripture, which we ought firmly to fix
in our minds, that we may not be perverted by the false glosses of
unreasonable men.

“Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in every
nation, he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with
him.” Acts 10:34, 35.

“The Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a
mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward. He
doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the
stranger, in giving him food and raiment.” Deut. 10:17, 18.

“God accepteth no man’s person.” Gal. 2:6.

“There is no respect of persons with God.” Col. 3:25.

“As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live.—As for the
wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he
turneth from his wickedness.—None of his sins that he hath committed shall
be mentioned unto him.” Ezek. 33:11, 12, 16.

“This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit,
for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show
forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting.” 1 Tim. 1:15, 16.

“God will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the
truth.” 1 Tim. 2:4.

“God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.” 2 Pet. 3:9.

These and such testimonies of Scripture ought to be deeply imprinted on
our minds, that every one may know, that all men are equally dear to God;
that all men were created by him according to his image, and redeemed by
Jesus Christ. Moreover, God has sworn by himself, that he desires not the
death of a sinner. Hence God assists us all by his prevenient grace, not
waiting till we are worthy to receive it. He comes to us, before we come
to him; he knew us, before we knew him; he loveth us, before we love him;
he loved us while we were yet his enemies. Rom. 5:10. He, therefore, is
blind and impious, who dares assert that God does not love all men alike.
Such a one scorns the God of heaven, accuses him of injustice, and makes
him a respecter of persons.

2. But when it is said that God loved Jacob, and hated Esau (Rom. 9:13),
such language is not to be understood of them personally, or as indicating
only hatred, but refers to the exclusion from the inheritance in the land
of promise—not to a hatred which refuses salvation, but to the refusal of
temporal blessings. And though we are all sinners, yet God has a greater
regard for those that love him than for those that continue in their sins
and blindness, neither acknowledging God for their Father, nor bringing
forth the fruits of repentance. God takes no pleasure in the wickedness of
these men; but rather desires that all should be saved. And whereas it is
said that “he hath mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he
hardeneth” (Rom. 9:18); we must know that he hardeneth none but those who
by their unbelief and impenitence have hardened themselves. These, indeed,
he does at length, with reluctance, leave to themselves; and being thus
forsaken, they naturally fall into a state of entire obduracy. And whereas
it is said, that “it is not of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth
mercy” (Rom. 9:16); it is plain that God doth elect and anticipate us by
his grace, and not we ourselves, and that he is the Author and Giver of
all our graces; so that whatsoever good we do, is owing to him, and not to
ourselves.

3. This is the true interpretation of those places, which some perverse
minds have interpreted, as if God had decreed to damn a great part of
mankind (as the poets feigned of Saturn, who hated and devoured his own
children). This is a doctrine that tends directly to subvert our faith,
and to precipitate men into despair, or into a rude, lawless and Epicurean
mode of life, as appears by woful experience. From all which snares, and
deceits of the devil, may the Lord deliver us! Amen.

A PRAYER.

O Eternal and most righteous God, who acceptest not the persons of men;
but art so just in thy dispensations towards us all, as to anticipate us
with thy grace and favor, not waiting till we are already worthy, but
bestowing thy prevenient grace to make us so; teach me, by thy Holy
Spirit, gratefully to acknowledge thy boundless mercy towards us. Let thy
light arise in my heart, that I may not, with the wicked world, disown
that grace which thou hast already bestowed upon me, which is that
treasure hidden in the field, the earnest of the inheritance of the
saints; but may diligently search after it, find it, taste it, and enjoy
it. Amen.



Section IX.


 Showing That It Is Equally Sinful To Pray To God Upon The Presumption Of
      Our Own Merit, And To Forbear On Account Of Our Unworthiness.


    _Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no
    more worthy to be called thy son._—LUKE 15:21.


1. He that prays upon the presumption of his own holiness and piety,
walketh not in the direct and plain path of the children of God; but turns
to the right hand, outruns his Saviour, and, like a sacrilegious robber,
deprives him of the honor due unto him (since He alone is our
righteousness, our holiness, and our sanctification, 1 Cor. 1:30), and
depends entirely upon his own unprofitable works; not acknowledging the
merit of Christ alone, but depending upon human righteousness, and
believing that God hears our prayers, not for the sake of Jesus Christ,
but for the sake of man’s good works. But this is directly contrary to
Scripture. “If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall
stand?—But with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous
redemption.” Ps. 130:3, 7. A man may as well say, that the operation of
his eyes causes the light of the sun, as that his own righteousness is the
cause of his receiving the grace of God. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Elias,
&c., were all saved by grace; all joining in that petition, “Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, &c.” Ps. 143:2.

2. He, on the other hand, that neglects to pray from a sense of his
manifold transgressions, judging himself upon that account unworthy to
speak to God, turns to the left hand, and sinks in his own misery and
unworthiness, affronting the Son of God, and (without repentance) running
into despair; whilst he thinks that the passion and death of Christ are
not sufficient to atone for the sins of the whole world. Against this
temptation, let us call to mind, that “where sin abounded, there grace did
much more abound.” Rom. 5:20. For our misery appeals to the mercy of God,
our weakness to his power, our unworthiness to his majesty, our
unrighteousness to his righteousness.

“This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.” 1 Tim.
1:15.

“As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live.” Ezek. 33:11.

“There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.” Rom. 8:1.

“As for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day
that he turneth from his wickedness.” Ezek. 18:21; 33:12.

“For this (the remission of sins) shall every one that is godly pray.” Ps.
32:6.

“Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thyself over wise.” Eccles. 7:16.

“If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” 1 John 1:9.

“Righteousness shall look down from heaven.” Ps. 85:11.

3. If I resolve not to pray till I know myself to be worthy, I shall
certainly never do it at all. And if I should not desire God to bestow
upon me his grace and favor, till by my own strength I became just and
holy, I should never obtain anything. Alas, poor man, what canst thou
bestow upon him who standeth not in need of thy gifts? Rom. 11:35. Or what
canst thou obtain by the workings of thy corrupt nature, which, however
specious in thine own eyes, are of no value in the sight of God? Rom.
3:24. Verily, nothing at all. Away, then, with all those who glory in
their own righteousness, and pretend to justify themselves; yea, let all
creatures keep silence before God. Thine own worthiness will here avail
thee nothing, and thine unworthiness shall do thee no harm; for the Lord
Jesus Christ, thy Saviour, is he that “forgiveth thy unrighteousness, and
covereth all thy sin.” Ps. 32:1. But rather conclude with thyself, that as
a drop of water is swallowed up in the sea, so are all thy transgressions
in the boundless and incomprehensible mercies of Jesus Christ.

A PRAYER.

O Merciful and compassionate Father! who teachest me in thy holy word how
I ought, in thy Son Jesus Christ, to walk in the narrow way, turning
neither to the right hand nor to the left; that I may neither fall through
a vain presumption of my own piety, nor be cast into despair by the gloomy
prospect of my guilt, and so die in my sins; grant that I may seriously
consider that neither my good works can merit, nor my sins hinder, the
grace of Christ, my Redeemer; that so I may continue firm and steadfast
amidst all my temptations; that I may neither be misled by the evil spirit
of presumption and spiritual pride that walketh at noonday, nor be afraid
of the destroying angel of despair that walketh in darkness; but that,
having conquered the weakness of my nature, I may continue steadfast in
the faith, filled with spiritual joy and consolation. Let thy grace,
blessed Lord Jesus, begin, carry on, and perfect this good work in me.
Amen.



Section X.


 The True Worshipper Ought Not To Seek After God In Any Particular Place;
           For He Finds Him Everywhere In Spirit And In Truth.


    _The hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet
    at Jerusalem, worship the Father. The true worshippers shall
    worship the Father in spirit and in truth._—JOHN 4:21, 23.


1. Where shall we find God? Jer. 23:23. Must we look for him in
consecrated temples? Must we seek him in the ends of the earth? Must we
search for him in the stars, or at Jerusalem, or upon the top of Mount
Tabor? No! but “in spirit and in truth” (John 4:23) seek and find him. We
are, indeed, sometimes forced to the fatigue of long journeys, in order to
make our complaints, and beg the protection of the princes of this world;
but God is everywhere; “He filleth heaven and earth” (Jer. 23:24), and is
nearer to all creatures than they are to themselves. “He is above all, and
through all, and in us all.” Eph. 4:6. The utmost dimensions of space, and
even the boundless extent of eternity, appear to him as but a single
point. Ps. 139:7. As a man that walks at noonday, in an open field, is
environed with light, whether he discern it or be blind, so are all
creatures surrounded with the presence of God. These are the waters upon
which the Spirit of God moves, penetrating through all beings and all
spirits, though ever so pure and glorious. God is always near to us,
though many are not so to him, having no more perception of the
communications of his presence than a blind man has of the light, which he
sees not, though surrounded by it. God never turns away from us; but we,
being turned away from him, fall into that degree of blindness, as to say,
that God has withdrawn himself from us, and is become unkind to us;
whereas, the change is only in ourselves, and in our own hearts, by which
we are tempted to charge God foolishly. Thus the sinner, by turning away
from God, becomes his own tormentor; whilst God continues unchangeably
just and good in all his works (Ps. 145:8); however often man, being
blinded and turned away from God, may represent him as an angry, unjust,
and unmerciful being.

2. Hence, then, we may gather the genuine sense of those passages of
Scripture, which say that “the kingdom of God is within us,” and not
without us (Luke 17:21), and that we have nothing to do with “them that
are without.” 1 Cor. 5:12. These, without all dispute, are not to be
understood of any external place, but of the spirit or inward man,
according to the faith. To confine the kingdom of God to any certain
place, is antichristian, even as our blessed Lord has told us that men
will say, “Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there.” Matt. 24:23. But if any
place could save or condemn a man, then Lucifer himself could never have
become a devil in heaven; nor would Adam ever have sinned in paradise. So
if any place would condemn a man, then should no man living be saved;
since this whole world lieth in darkness, and all the inhabitants thereof
are under the dominion of the devil, who is the prince of it. John 12:31.
He therefore that has faith, though with Jonah he were in the depths of
the sea, yet would be in the kingdom of God; and he that has it not,
though he were in the church, heard sermons, and would join in acts of
communion, yet in the sight of God he is _without_, and has no part in, or
title to, the kingdom of God.

A PRAYER.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who art the only way, light, and gate of heaven, I
praise thee from the bottom of my heart, that by this meditation, thou
teachest me how I am in thee, and thou in me, in whatsoever place I am;
how thou, my true and only High Priest, art with me, and deliverest me
from my sins, whensoever I lift up my heart to thee. Though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with
me. Teach me, O Lord, always to acknowledge this, and not after the manner
of this ungrateful world, to undervalue or despise this hidden treasure;
but that I may in true faith seek, find, taste, and enjoy it. Amen.



Section XI.


 The Worshipper Is Not Restricted To Certain Times Of Prayer, But May At
Any Hour Address God In Prayer, Provided That He Does Not Hinder Himself.


    _In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
    salvation have I helped thee.—Seek ye the Lord while he may be
    found, call ye upon him while he is near._—ISA. 49:8; 55:6.
    _Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of
    salvation._—2 COR. 6:2.


1. From what has been already said concerning _the place_, and what we are
now observing further upon that head, it is plain, that he is truly happy
who is in the kingdom of God. The reason of this is, because he has the
treasure within him, wheresoever he is; and that he, who, through
unbelief, is not in the kingdom of God, is truly a stranger and foreigner,
however he may with other Christians, hear sermons and receive the
Sacrament. The _place_ will neither save us nor condemn us; that can be
done by nothing but _faith_ or _unbelief_ existing in the heart and spirit
of man. The true Christian, in whatever place he lives, as he has the
Spirit of Christ within him, so he has, by consequence, a principle of
grace, pardon, and remission of sins; for Christ is in him. I speak not
this to discourage the external exercise of preaching; but for the comfort
of all sincere souls under necessities, sickness, or in strange lands;
when they are assured that they are truly in Christ, that Christ is in
them, and that they are not “without” but “within.” This should also alarm
the sinner, who, though living among Christians, yet, in the sight of God
is excluded. For every unbeliever cuts himself off from the body of
Christ, and from the most valuable privileges of his communion; so that a
wicked man, under the agonies of sickness, would receive no benefit by
having the Holy Sacrament, though the priest, or even the pope himself
stood by him; or by being brought and laid in the midst of the church. But
if a man has within him a true and living faith, it could do him no harm,
though he should die in a heathen country, or on the sea, without the
comfort of the Holy Sacrament, or a priest; because Jesus Christ, the true
High Priest, is in him, and even the kingdom of God, as our blessed Lord
abundantly testifies John 4:21; Luke 17:21; Matt. 24:23. How blind then
and miserable are those men who seek for blessedness from man, confining
it to a certain place, and look to external things. This, however, is the
case with many thousands who thus lose the internal treasure. Externals
are but means, which though not to be despised, yet are not to be valued
as the end itself, to which they are intended to lead. Christ is the great
treasure of man, who can bestow himself without the use of means, where
they cannot be had. We come together in the church, that with one accord
we may exhort and admonish one another in the divine Presence, call upon
God to avert public evils and calamities, and exercise one another in
divine matters, that so we, who are otherwise totally blind in spiritual
things, being excited by these means, may at length understand and see
that God is not contained “in the heaven of heavens” (1 Kings 8:27), nor
confined to any place; being, as Job witnesseth, “high as heaven, deeper
than hell, longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.” Job 11:8, 9.

2. What we have observed of place, may be also applied to _time_, to which
the eternal and unchangeable God is by no means confined, so as not to be
always at liberty to hear our prayers. Great men and princes of this world
are not always to be spoken with, and frequently refuse admittance to
their petitioners; being engaged either by the necessities or diversions
of life. But our God cannot be thus separated from his creatures; at one
view, He sees, and hears, and considers all things that are done upon the
earth, and “understandeth our thoughts afar off.” Ps. 139:2. He numbereth
“the very hairs of our heads” (Matt. 10:30); and “a thousand years in his
sight are but as one day.” Ps. 90:4; 2 Pet. 3:8. God is not capable of
alteration or change; is confined to no time, limited by no place, always
ready to hear and to help us; yea, he is continually “standing at the
door, and knocking, that we may open to him.” Rev. 3:20. So that he is
always ready, but we are not. Whereas if we would constantly and without
ceasing wait for Him, we should never fail to receive a ready answer to
all our prayers.

3. But alas! the concerns of this lower world have so great an influence
upon our minds, distracting our thoughts, and withholding us from devout
retirement, that we must endeavor to purify our minds from all thoughts of
the creature, according to a devout writer, who advises us, “to lay aside
all thoughts of this or that thing, time or place, and bring all the
powers of our souls into profound repose.” And in this sabbath or rest of
the soul, in this quiet cessation from the cares and labors of corrupt
nature, when we pray, God descends with his living word, and the soul of
man perceives and tastes the truth and love of God; of which, before this
patient preparation, it was wholly ignorant and insensible. So that the
soul cannot forbear crying out in the words: “The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth!” (Exod. 34:6.) “Now, I find thy prevenient grace helping my
infirmities, and assisting me to pray as I ought.” Then thou wilt be
amazed at the blindness of thy own heart, which gave thee so imperfect a
notion of God, as to believe that God was to be persuaded with external
ceremonies, and clamorous prayers, and that he stood in need of a long
relation of thy wants and necessities; whereas He sees to the very bottom
of thy soul, and “understandeth all thy thoughts afar off.”

A PRAYER.

Almighty, eternal, and most merciful God and Father! Thy goodness and
truth are higher than the heavens, deeper than the sea, wider than the
earth; all places are to Thee the same, and in thy sight all times are
alike. Thou art above all places and all times, and yet dost penetrate and
fill all things. Thou art nearer to me than I am to myself; thou
anticipatest me with thy grace, and embracest me with thy mercy, which,
through my blindness and misery, I could neither know nor hope for. Grant,
that by thy Holy Spirit, I may seriously lay these things to heart, and
for the future, look up to thee as my merciful Father, who knowest all
things, and art present at all times, and in all places, that I may no
more presume to judge of Thee by any natural blindness, and no more
persuade myself that Thou art to be awakened, or prevailed upon by my
crying; that thou needest any long discourses of mine, or requirest any
certain time for prayer. But give me grace to consider, that the true
worshipper may have access to Thee at all times, and in all places, and
that thy goodness is always and everywhere present with us; but that no
man can enjoy it, or taste of thy sweetness, unless he be first awakened
and encouraged by Thee to engage in devout prayer. That I may worthily and
effectually perform this, give me thy Holy Spirit, who may work in me to
will and to do according to thy good pleasure. Amen.



Section XII.


   The Considerations Stated Above, Not Only Dispose The Heart To True
             Prayer, But Also Furnish Various Useful Lessons.


    _It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and
    while they are yet speaking, I will hear._—ISA. 65:24.


1. The _first_ lesson which we learn is, that God has not commanded us to
pray for his own sake, for he knoweth all things; but that we, being
excited by these means, may be led to understand that he does know all
things. God has so tender a concern for us, that he seems not to know
anything, till we reflect within ourselves, that he does indeed know it.
Hence it comes to pass, that when men do not diligently pray, they seem to
think that God does not know. And, on the contrary, when we exercise
ourselves in prayer, we soon learn that God knoweth all our necessities,
and hath numbered the very hairs of our heads before we were born. These
are thoughts that cannot enter into the hearts of those who despise the
duty of prayer.

2. _Secondly._ We need not apply to God, as we do to one another, with a
long account of our wants: all that we have to do is, daily to exercise
ourselves in prayer, so that the inner man may enter into the kingdom of
God.

3. _Thirdly._ God is (as Dr. Tauler says) a thousand times more ready to
give, than we are to receive, through prayer and hope.

4. _Fourthly._ God stands in no need of any external ceremonies of ours,
our watchings, fastings, or cryings, to awaken him, who “neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth.” Ps. 121:4. He not only foreknows our desires and
prayers, but even our existence (Jer. 1:5); yet, on the other hand, the
dulness and stupidity of men may by these exercises be excited,
encouraged, and instructed to consider and understand the tender mercies
of God towards all mankind.

5. _Fifthly._ Hence we discover the goodness, truth, and loving-kindness
of God towards all men; and, on the other hand, the blindness and
unbelief, the stupidity and unspeakable dulness of mankind towards God,
who have so great a contempt of the mercies of God, and are so backward in
their prayers and endeavors to obtain his grace.

6. _Sixthly._ God is righteous in all his works; and so far from his being
the author of our miseries, blindness, and ignorance, we are indeed the
cause of it ourselves; whilst, in contempt of his commands, we neglect to
implore his mercies, and beg the blessings which he has promised to bestow
on all that ask him. This is sufficient to vindicate the justice and
impartiality of God in all his dealings towards us, and to lay the blame
of all our sins and punishments upon ourselves, who are indeed the authors
of both.

7. _Seventhly._ God is not confined to any certain time and place, but
desires to be worshipped at _all times_, and in _all places_, in spirit
and in truth.

8. These observations will rectify many mistakes, and open a man’s eyes to
discover things, of which he would otherwise have been ignorant. But
though it is a shameful thing for a Christian to be ignorant of these
matters, yet it is much more so to know, and not to reduce them to
practice.

A PRAYER.

Awaken us, O God, that we may watch; draw us to Thee, and we will run in
the true way, which conducts to the kingdom of God; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.




