Chapter XIX.


 He Who Is Most Of All Conscious Of His Misery, Is Most Of All Acceptable
 To God; And His Christian Knowledge Of His Misery, Urges Him To Seek The
                              Grace Of God.


    _To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
    contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word._—ISAIAH 66:2.


These comfortable words, our gracious and merciful God hath spoken by the
prophet, in order to cheer our hearts, when they are most oppressed with
misery and sorrow. Be not thou therefore ashamed to be bruised in spirit,
and abased in thine own eyes. Humble thyself in the dust, and deem thyself
unworthy of all grace and favor; so shalt thou be raised out of thine own
vileness, and obtain, in Christ, acceptance with Almighty God.

2. He who is still _something_ in his own estimation, is not duly humbled
and depressed in his heart; nor can he expect to be regarded by that Being
who looks upon the poor and contrite ones only. “If,” says the apostle, “a
man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth
himself” (Gal. 6:3): and the reason of this is, that God is _all in all_,
alone; and the creature must consequently become a bare and empty
_nothing_. So great and so practical is this truth, that man is not only
to believe it in his heart, but to express it in his life and conduct.

3. If ever thou designest, then, to give all the glory and honor to God,
that HE may be ALL, alone, thou must surely thyself become _nothing_ in
thine own eyes; and entertain a very low opinion of thyself, and of thy
profiting in spiritual things. For how is it possible that God should be
_all in all_, whilst thou thyself continuest to be _something_? By this
self-exaltation thou invadest the sovereignty of God, and appropriatest
that to thyself, which is his proper due and prerogative. “It was _before
the Lord_,” said David to Michal, who had reproached him, “and I will yet
be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight.” 2 Sam. 6:21,
22.

4. A man that will be _something_, is the matter out of which God is wont
to make _nothing_; but he, on the contrary, who loves to be reputed as
nothing, and who, in his own judgment, is so, is the matter out of which
the Almighty maketh _something_. He that will be wise in his own opinion,
is the matter out of which God maketh a fool; and he who is truly sensible
of his own folly and nothingness, is that of which God forms a wise and
great man. He who, before the Lord, sincerely confesses himself to be the
greatest and most miserable of sinners, is, in the sight of God, the first
and greatest of all men. He who believes himself to be the chief of
_sinners_, shall be honored by the Lord as the chief of _saints_. Matt.
23:12; Luke 1:52.

5. This is that humility which God exalts; that misery which he regards;
that _nothing_ from which he createth _something_. And as, at the
creation, the glorious frame of heaven and earth was brought forth out of
_nothing_, so must man be reduced to a deep sense of his vileness and
nothingness, if ever he be exalted to glory and to dignity.

6. Reflect upon the example of David, whose misery God beheld, and to whom
he granted the richest gifts of his grace. Consider, again, the example of
Jacob, who confessed, “I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies.”
Gen. 32:10.

7. But above all, lay to heart the example of Christ, the grand and
blameless pattern of a Christian. He was abased below the meanest of men;
was made a worm and a curse for our sake (Ps. 22:6), despised and rejected
of men. Isaiah 53:3. But the lower he sunk, the higher did he afterwards
rise, when he received a name which is above every name.

8. But who is that blessed and lowly one who is _nothing_ in his own eyes?
It is he who inwardly and in his heart esteems himself worthy of no divine
benefit, whether bodily or spiritual. For he that arrogates anything to
himself, esteems himself to be _something_; and is, therefore, the
farthest removed from divine grace and from this new creation. So
destructive is the spirit of self, that it renders even grace of no
effect, and shuts out that which contains all things in it. For if a man
judge himself worthy of anything, he then does not take all things as a
free gift from the hands of God. Whatever we are, however, is of _grace_
and not _merit_; nor can we call anything our own, except our sins, our
helplessness, and our misery. All else belongs to God.

9. A man considered in himself, that is, independently of God, by whom he
subsists, is no more than a shadow. And as the shadow of a tree constantly
conforms to the tree on which it depends, so should man conform to the
will of God from whom he has his very life and being; as the apostle says:
“In him we live, and move, and have our being.” Acts 17:28. It is true,
the fruit will sometimes appear in the shadow of the tree; yet it does not
therefore belong to the shadow, but to the tree: so all the good fruits
that may appear in thy life and conduct, are not the produce of thy own
self and thy ability, but of God alone, who is the original source whence
all good fruits proceed. And as the apple grows not from that gross
substance the wood, which is seen by the eye, but from the seminal virtue
which the tree contains, and which is made active from above; so the new
man, and the fruit he bears, spring not up from anything that is gross and
visible to the eye, but from a supernatural and invisible seed.

10. Now, man is by nature a dry tree; but God is his strength, whereby
life is renewed in him, and he himself is made fat and green in the house
of God. God is the “strength of our life” (Psal. 27:1), says the Psalmist:
and hence we “shall bring forth much fruit whilst we abide in Christ.”
John 15:5.

11. When a man is thus wretched and poor in his own eyes, and has nothing
in the world in which to trust but the pure grace of God, manifested in
Christ Jesus, then God graciously “looks upon him.” This divine regard
must be understood in a divine sense. The look or countenance of God, is
not as the countenance of men, destitute of life and virtue: but it is
accompanied with a living power and influence that supports and revives
the faint and penitent sinner. And as none but the humble and contrite are
capable of this heavenly regard; so the more fully they receive the
consolation which God grants, the less do they think themselves worthy of
it. Such a one deems himself unworthy of all blessings divine and
temporal. He says with Jacob, “I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, and of all the truth which thou hast shewed unto thy servant:”
for behold, since thou gavest me thy Son Jesus Christ, I come with two
bands, with the blessings of grace and of glory. Gen. 32:10. And truly, if
a man should weep a sea of tears, it were by no means sufficient to
purchase or deserve the least part of heavenly comfort: the grace of God
cannot be merited by men, who deserve nothing but wrath and eternal
damnation.

12. Whoever thus acquaints himself in faith with his own misery, is truly
one of those poor and contrite men, to whom the Lord graciously looks.
Without this previous brokenness of heart, man cannot expect to enjoy this
blessed aspect of God, nor indeed that grace and kindness which is
promised to the poor in spirit only. In this weakness and poverty the
apostle glories, when he says: “If I must needs glory, I will glory of the
things which concern mine infirmities” (2 Cor. 11:30): and he adds the
reason: “that the power of Christ may rest upon me.” 2 Cor. 12:9. For so
great indeed is the mercy of God, that he will not see the work of his
hands destroyed: but the weaker the creature is in itself, the more is it
sustained by the power of an Almighty Being. For in the weakness of the
creature, the power of God is exalted, as the Lord declared unto Paul: “My
grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.”

13. The more vile and miserable therefore a Christian is in his own
opinion, the more freely God looks upon him, to the greater manifestation
of the riches of his glory. And in bestowing this heavenly consolation, he
does not look at all on man’s merit, but barely on his want and poverty.
And this comfort can in no degree be compared with any human comfort, all
which it infinitely exceeds. In such a sense, then, God looks to the
contrite man and comforts his spirit.

14. By “the poor and contrite man,” is not to be understood, a man that is
poor in the outward sense of the word, or who is altogether destitute of
human help and relief; but _he_ is the poor man, who labors under the load
of his sins, and is grieved for them. If sin were not in the world, there
could be no misery: but now so much misery cannot befall a man, but that
he is still worthy of much more. Ps. 103:10. Far be it therefore from us
to grieve, because we have not many temporal benefits conferred upon us;
since we are not worthy even of the least of them, no, not of life itself.
Our flesh and blood may think this a hard saying; yet every penitent
sinner ought to be a severe judge in his own case, and ought not to make
the least allowance to his carnal propensities. This is the order in which
we are to obtain God’s favor and mercy.

15. And what has man now left to boast of, or what language shall he
employ when he opens his mouth? The best course he can take will be to say
simply, “Lord, I have sinned; have thou mercy upon me!” And, truly, God
himself requires no more from a man than that he humbly deplore his sin,
and in the unfeigned language of repentance pray for pardon. Whoever
neglects this, may be said to have slighted the best and most needful part
of his being, Weep not therefore, O Man! on account of thy _body_, that it
is naked and sick, pinched with hunger and cold, insulted and persecuted;
or because it is confined by bonds and a prison: but humble thyself before
the Lord, and bewail the woful condition of thy _soul_, which is
constrained to dwell in so wretched a house as thy body is, a house of sin
and death. “O wretched man,” says the apostle, “who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?” Rom. 7:24. This free and Christian acknowledgment
of thine own inward misery, this godly sorrow, this thirst after divine
grace, this faith leaning on Christ alone, open, in Christ, the door of
grace, by which God enters into thy soul. “Be zealous, therefore, and
repent. Behold, I stand,” saith the Lord, “at the door and knock; if any
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with
him, and he with me” (Rev. 3:20): which supper is nothing else than the
remission of sin, attended with heavenly comfort, with life and
blessedness. This is the door of faith (Acts 14:27), through which the
Lord, at the right time, enters into the soul; and after the day of toil
and sorrow is over, refreshes her with the light of his countenance. Then
it is, that “mercy and truth meet together; righteousness and peace kiss
each other; that truth springs out of the earth, and righteousness looks
down from heaven.” Ps. 85:10, 11. Then it is that the woman, that poor
sinner, but now a penitent, anoints the feet of her Lord, washes them with
tears, and wipes them with the hairs of her head, expressing thereby all
the marks of an unfeigned and deep humility. Luke 7:37. Then it is, that
the spiritual priest (Rev. 1:6), in the holy ornaments of faith, offers up
the true sacrifice, even a broken and lowly spirit, with the incense of
true contrition and prayer. Ps. 51:19. Then it is that the true sanctified
water of purifying (Numb. 8:7) is applied,—the tears which grief for sin
caused to flow; and now, through faith and by the power of the blood of
Christ, the spiritual Israelite is washed and cleansed.

16. And thus, O Christian! is seen how by the sense of thy own misery, and
by faith in Christ attending it, thou mayest attain the grace and favor of
God. To conclude, the more wretched and miserable any one is in his own
judgment, the more dearly he is beloved of God, and the more gracious is
the regard which the Lord will bestow upon him.




