Chapter XXXVII.


               Reasons Why God Certainly Hears Our Prayers.


    _Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in
    mercy unto all them that call upon thee. Give ear, O Lord, unto my
    prayer; and attend to the voice of my supplications. In the day of
    my trouble I will call upon thee; for thou wilt answer me._—PS.
    86:5-7.


Thus saith the prophet Jeremiah, “It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not. They are new every
morning; great is thy faithfulness. The Lord is my portion, saith my soul;
therefore will I hope in him.” Lam. 3:22-24.

2. In these words the Holy Spirit gives us strong consolation in our
afflictions, drawn from the goodness and lovingkindness of God; without
which we should immediately be consumed. As in the natural world light and
darkness, by the appointment of God, alternately succeed each other, so do
light and darkness, joy and sorrow, in the spiritual world. Hence there is
a necessity that the light should spring up after darkness, and joy after
sorrow, in the souls of the righteous. Ps. 97:11. For both our life and
our well-being depend entirely upon the loving-kindness of God: “For in
him we live, and move, and have our being.” Acts 17:28. He is the
never-failing fountain and spring of life and happiness. His works testify
this, for by the effects we judge of the cause. Since, therefore, God is
the Maker and Creator of all things that have life, it follows that He is
LIFE itself; and as He is the original of all that is good, it follows,
that He himself is the Supreme GOOD and LOVE itself. For this reason He is
called the Living God, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God”
(Matt. 16:16); not only from his essence, as being an original, necessary
Being, but also from the effects which he produces; because he giveth and
preserveth breath, and life, and motion to all things. Acts 17:25; Ps.
104:27. “Thou (O Belshazzar), hast praised the gods of silver and gold, of
brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not
glorified.” Dan. 5:23. “They have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no
water.” Jer. 2:13. “The Lord is thy life, and the length of thy days.”
Deut. 30:20. “The Lord is the strength of my life.” Ps. 27:1. Whence it
follows, that God is in effect the life of every living creature, and
produces and preserves life in all, according to the words of St. Paul,
“Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for
ever.” Amen. Rom. 11:36. “Christ is all in all.” Col. 3:11.

3. Now though all creatures derive their life from God, yet man has
received it from his Maker in a more eminent degree; for as he is endowed
with a rational soul, it follows that he enjoys a more noble life than the
rest of the creatures. The life of angels again is more noble and glorious
than that of men, because the glory and majesty of God manifest themselves
more illustriously in them. Hence also, angels are described in 2 Thess.
1:7, as “mighty,” because they are not subject to vanity and change like
man. But the most noble life is that of Jesus Christ our Lord, because he
is _God_ and _Life_ itself; according to St. John, “This is the true God,
and eternal life” (1 John 5:20); that is, He is God of God, Light of
Light, very God of very God. (Nicene Creed.)

4. And as God is the fountain and principle of life, so he is also of all
good. For he is the supreme and eternal GOOD, and whatsoever bears the
marks and characters of good, is derived from this original. Thus, every
creature has received a small portion of the divine goodness, by which it
bears witness of its Maker, and in some manner calls upon man to do the
same. Thus the vine speaks to us, “Consider, O man, that the sweetness of
my juice, with which I cheer thy heart (Ps. 104:15), is the gift of my
Maker.” And so the bread: “That virtue, O man, by which I satisfy thy
hunger, is bestowed on me by my Creator and thine.” This is the meaning of
that saying of St. Augustine: “That God has, as it were, shed some drops
of his divine goodness upon all the creatures, that they might thereby
contribute to the happiness of man.” And the Psalmist says: “Thou crownest
the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness.” Ps. 65:11.

5. That which, in nature, we call the _goodness_ of God, is, by the
Scriptures, called the _grace_ of God; this bearing relation to the soul,
and that to the body. And as God has, by a thousand ways, discovered his
goodness in the great Book of nature, so he has, in innumerable instances,
discovered his grace and mercy in the Book of his word, all which are
completed in Christ, who is the great centre of all the treasures of
divine goodness and love that are distributed in heaven and earth.

6. Now, as it is the nature of every good being to be communicative, and
otherwise it ceases to be good (for who can tell what is good, unless it
thus discover itself?); so no man could know whether God were good and
gracious unless he had communicated his grace and goodness to others. Who
could have known the inestimable benefits of Christ as a Saviour, if he
had not so abundantly manifested his love towards us?

7. But why was God pleased to manifest his goodness, grace, and mercy to
mankind? It was for this reason: that we might believe in him, love him
above all things, and call upon him in all our troubles; and he was
pleased to make this manifestation of himself, that it might be, as it
were, the first incentive to kindle the flames of devotion in our hearts.
For how should we call on him of whom we have not heard? Rom. 10:14. As
Almighty God discovered himself to Moses, when he passed by, and he, upon
the sense of his goodness, grace, and mercy, immediately began to pray
(Exod. 34:8, 9), so has He, in like manner, manifested himself to us, and
made all his goodness pass before us, that we also might learn to praise
him.

8. But you will say, How has God manifested himself to me? If he would
show himself to me, as he did to Moses, why should I not praise him as he
did? To which I answer: This is done in Christ Jesus, in whom he
manifested all his goodness after a visible manner. “We beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.”
John 1:14. And did we but seriously consider all that our blessed Saviour
has done for us, we should, doubtless, exclaim: “The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and in
truth.”

10. And thus we see in what sense the type, which may be discerned in this
narrative of Moses, was fulfilled by the incarnation of Christ. For God,
descending from heaven in him, was pleased to make his glory pass before
us.

11. When Paul and Barnabas wrought great miracles at Athens, the heathens
cried out, “The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.” Acts
14:11. This was their judgment of the matter; but we may in a very proper
sense say, that all the goodness and grace of God did, by Christ, come
down to us upon earth, in order that we might thereby be drawn to God, and
that the spirit of faith and prayer might be bestowed on us. For by prayer
only we obtain the grace and favor of God.

12. Let us now produce some reasons which may convince us, that God hears
our prayers.

13. And _first_, such is the power of prayer and entreaty, that they often
pacify and prevail upon, not only the compassionate and kind, but even
morose and harsh tempers; of which we have an instance in the case of the
widow, who by her continual prayers, prevailed even upon that unjust
judge, who neither feared God, nor regarded man. Luke 18:4, 5. For prayer,
as it proceeds from the spirit, and is, as it were, the strength of the
soul, has a marvellous power and influence upon the minds of others, so as
to be able to soften and mould them into any form of benevolence. Now as
God is not a harsh Being, but merciful in the highest degree, the most
sincere love, the most perfect patience, the most generous compassion, the
most ardent love itself, and in a word, the most absolute perfection; so
he cannot but be tenderly moved by the ardent and devout prayers of his
servants. Were it otherwise, it would follow, that God is not supremely
good, loving, and merciful. Now, as true as it is that he is all this; so
true it is that he is easy to be entreated by devout and humble prayer.

14. Tauler says: “God is moved with so vehement a love towards us, as if
his divinity itself depended on us, and his only aim and design were, to
discover to us the abyss of his divinity, and the fulness of his essence
and nature; so that all may belong to us, even as it belongs to him.” And
again, “We were created, and are called and invited to things immeasurably
great, and eternal; wherefore God is exceedingly displeased with us, when
we prefer the empty and trifling vanities of the world before him, who is
ready, not only to bestow all things else, but even Himself upon us.”
Again, “So great is the love of God towards us, that he will deny us
nothing: yea, he anticipates our prayers, meets us (as it were) half-way,
and courts our friendship, being a thousand times more ready to give, than
we are to receive.”

15. The _second_ argument is found in the _truth and promise of God_.
“Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee.” Ps. 50:15.
“Thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee.” Ps. 86:5. The Lord, we see, is _good_; and
if this be not sufficient, he is also _ready to forgive_; and if this do
not satisfy us, he is also _plenteous in mercy_. But to whom? Even _to all
those that call upon him_. Hence, it is said, “The Lord is nigh unto all
them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will
fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and
will save them.” Ps. 145:18, 19; Isa. 65:24; John 16:23; Matt. 7:7, 8.
_Ask_, but rest not there; _seek_ also; neither think this sufficient, but
_knock_. “For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh,
findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.” “What things
soever ye desire, when you pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them.” Mark 11:24. Compare this with Luke 11:9. And that God
will keep his promise, is as certain, as that he really is what he, in his
holy word, has declared himself to be. And that he may hear us, and pour
his abundant goodness upon us, he has commanded us to pray often, to pray
earnestly, and without ceasing. Luke 18:1; 1 Thess. 5:17.

16. A _third_ argument for our prayer, is God’s paternal tenderness, which
is thus illustrated. “If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a
father, will he give him a stone?—If ye, then, being evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?” Luke 11:11, 13. And is
not God this Father, “of whom the whole family in heaven and in earth is
named”? (Eph. 3:15) whom St. Paul calls, “The Father of mercies, and God
of all comfort?” 2 Cor. 1:3. Shall man then be merciful, and shall God,
that created that merciful heart, be unmerciful? Shall he that gave to
parents such tender affection, be without compassion himself? Why should
God call himself a Father, if he be not of a paternal disposition? So
that, in short, we must conclude, either that God is unjustly styled our
Father, or else he will hear the prayers of his children that call upon
him. Hence, it is said, “Thou, O Lord, art our Father.” Isa. 63:16. And,
“I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.” Jer. 31:9. But if
the affections of a mother be so great, that she cannot but have
“compassion on the son of her womb” (Isa. 49:15), why should we think God
so void of mercy? Why should we question God’s compassions toward us, if
we approach him with penitent and contrite hearts? How do the mother’s
bowels yearn over her beloved son, when she sees him laboring under any
dangerous disease? So the Almighty God says of himself: “Therefore, my
bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the
Lord.” Jer. 31:20.

17. A _fourth_ argument is, the _intercession of Christ_. With what ardent
prayer did he, in the time of his humiliation upon earth, recommend his
Church to his Father, and intercede for all believers!

18. Thus, “Holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou hast
given me; that they may be one, as we are. Sanctify them through thy
truth; thy word is truth. I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of
the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. Neither pray I
for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word. Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me
where I am; that the love wherewith thou hast loved me, may be in them,
and I in them.” John 17:11, 17, 15, 20, 24, 26. Nor did he pray so for us
only upon earth; for even now he continues his intercessions for us at the
right hand of God. “Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is
passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God;—let us come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time
of need.” Heb. 4:14, 16; 7:26; 9:11; Rom. 8:34.

19. A _fifth_ argument is, _the testimony of the Holy Spirit_, who
“beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God” (Rom.
8:16), and this witness in our hearts cannot deceive us. For if this
testimony be in us of a truth, we shall have a demonstrative evidence that
we are God’s children, and that he hears us in Christ when we pray unto
him.

20. _Sixthly_, because God and Christ are with us, and dwell in us _by
faith_, how can we suppose that God will not hear our sighs and groans?
“Thou understandest my thought afar off. There is not a word in my tongue,
but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether.” Ps. 139:2, 4. Think not,
therefore, that God is separated from thee by any distance of place, that
may hinder thy prayers from coming to him, “for he is in thee, and thou in
him.” Acts 17:28; John 17:23. Since, therefore, he lives and works in
thee, why should he not hear thy prayers? “Lord, all my desire is before
thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee?” Ps. 38:10. “Let the words of
my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight.” Ps.
19:14.

21. _Seventhly_, because the Holy Spirit, who is truly God, is also the
Spirit of prayer, and himself maketh intercession in us with sighs and
groanings unutterable. Zech. 12:10; Rom. 8:26. Why then shouldest thou
imagine that God will not see, hear, and regard that which he himself
works in thee? Therefore it is impossible that even the feeblest sigh
proceeding from the Holy Spirit in us, and tending towards God, can be
lost or come to nought. For as it proceeds from God, so it goes to him;
and whatsoever is in him cannot perish. The deeds are wrought in God, and
will be made manifest. John 3:21.

22. _Eighthly_, God is not forgetful like men, as “a book of remembrance
is written before him, for them that fear the Lord, and that think upon
his name” (Mal. 3:16): so that he cannot be forgetful of our prayers. God
cannot forget that which is good, nor will he call the sins of the
penitent to remembrance. So mighty and so abundant is the grace of God,
that he blots out our sins, and calls not our transgressions to mind. But
the good which he himself has wrought in us, he can never forget; for then
he must forget himself and his own works. It is therefore impossible that
God should disregard those prayers which his own Holy Spirit works in us;
any more than he can forget his word, or be unmindful of his promise.
“Since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still,” saith God
by the prophet. Jer. 31:20. And again, “Thou tellest my wanderings; put
thou my tears into thy bottle.” Ps. 56:8. So he assures us that “He will
ever be mindful of his covenant.” Ps. 111:5. And what is this covenant?
Nothing else but the remission of our sins, confirmed to us by the death
of Christ, and sealed by his Holy Spirit. Eph. 1:13.

23. And now, perhaps, thou wilt say, If these things are so, how comes it
to pass that God does not hear and grant my petitions? I have often
prayed, and called, and sighed, and all to no purpose.

24. Thus much, indeed, must be granted, that many a man prays a great
while for that which he does not obtain; and thence we judge that his
prayers are not heard. What then becomes of these our reasons for
believing that prayer will assuredly be heard? This is a very great trial,
and has given much disturbance to many sincere and well-disposed souls.

25. But here we must observe, that the certainty of God’s hearing our
prayers, is incontestably proved by the arguments already produced, which
are built upon an immovable foundation; whence it appears, that God does
as certainly hear our prayers, as He is (1.) merciful, and a lover of
mankind. (2.) As he is true in all his promises, yea, eternal truth
itself. (3.) As he has a fatherly tenderness for us. (4.) As Jesus Christ
is our mediator. (5.) As God and Christ dwell in us; which are all truths
so certain and evident, that no believing heart ought to question them.

26. But we complain that God does not presently give us what we ask for,
and, therefore, that our prayers are not heard. For this two reasons may
be given: 1. That God hears our prayers, regarding more our happiness than
our desires. 2. That he reserves to himself the liberty of bestowing the
blessings which we ask, either upon our bodies or our souls, as he shall
think most proper. Thus, perhaps, we ask of God some temporal blessings,
who seeing them to be unfit for us, gives us spiritual ones; by which
means we not only receive what we prayed for, but so much the more, as the
good of the soul is to be preferred to that of the body. For as the soul
is much more noble than the body, and spiritual blessings are more
excellent than earthly; so much better is it for us, that God should give
us his eternal and spiritual blessings rather than those transitory and
fading enjoyments in which we are generally most delighted. He hears our
prayers, not always with respect to our bodies, but to our souls; which is
of far greater importance. If it should please God to visit you with some
bodily disease, and you pray for health, doubt not; your prayers will be
heard, and you shall certainly enjoy, if not the health of your body, yet
the health of your soul, which is much to be preferred. Every man in his
sound senses must think so. What advantage would it be to have the body in
health, but a sinful, distempered soul, liable to eternal death? When it
is well with the soul, a man may say with David, “Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My
flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion forever.” Ps. 73:25, 26. And with the suffering Job, “I know that
my Redeemer liveth.” Job 19:25. And from Him the soul may derive life.
Therefore David, comparing spiritual blessings with earthly, tells us:
“The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and
silver.” Ps. 119:72.

27. But, perhaps, you will say that you pray for both; the health of your
soul as well as of your body; and for spiritual blessings, as well as
temporal. To this the Lord himself answers thee, “My grace is sufficient
for thee” (2 Cor. 12:9); which was the reply given to St. Paul, though he
had desired to be answered in his own way. And thus it appears, that God
always hears our prayers, if not with regard to our bodies, yet certainly
to our souls.

28. Besides, God has reserved to himself the liberty of accomplishing our
desires either in this world, or the next, as he shall deem most proper.
Wherefore if thou dost not receive the blessings for which thou prayest,
consider that it is not good for thee to enjoy them here, but that the
answer to thy prayers is reserved for the other life, which is more noble
and durable, and more capable of pure enjoyments than this. There the Lord
will bestow on thee a thousandfold, for all that He seemed to deny thee
here. As He cannot forget our prayers, so He cannot fail to answer them
graciously; if not in this life, yet certainly in that which is to come.
As many prayers as thou offerest up here, so many blessings shalt thou
receive hereafter; for then “we shall reap if we faint not.” Gal. 6:9.
Then will the Lord say to the believing soul, “Behold thy prayer which
thou offeredst to me. See, here is that for which thou didst pray, and a
thousand times more than thou didst desire.” And for this time of
retribution we must patiently wait.

29. That man would be a very foolish husbandman, who would expect to reap
as soon as he had sown; and who, when he had done this, would cry out with
tears, that he had sown much seed, but could see no sign of harvest. Thou
fool! wait till the season of harvest arrives, and then thou shalt receive
the fruits of thy labor with a blessed increase. These are the complaints
which many people make: “I have prayed,” says one, “so often; I have so
often sighed from the bottom of my soul; but I see no prospect of being
heard, so that all my prayers, and sighs, and tears, are in vain.” Ah,
impatient soul! Thou hast scarcely sowed, and dost thou already talk of
harvest? Wait for the precious harvest of eternal life, and thou shalt
reap an abundant crop of glory! “For whatsoever a man soweth, that shall
he also reap.” Gal. 6:7. There thou shalt gather with joy the fruit of the
numerous prayers, which, as so many precious seeds, thou hast sown in
tears. Psalm 126:5. This is the word and promise of God, which shall
certainly be fulfilled, either here or in the other world. Thus, when thou
art taking thy last sad farewell of a dying child, husband, wife, or
friend, thou must consider that this is the season in which the bodies of
thy friends, and thine own also, are, as it were, to be sown and committed
to the earth; but that the harvest of the resurrection is at hand, when
“the angels, the reapers, shall gather the sheaves, and put them into
barns.” Matt. 13:30, 39. There we shall find that our prayers, sighs, and
tears were not lost, but only sent beforehand, to be received again with
usury, finding all things in God that ever our souls could conceive or
desire. So the promises of God, and the arguments produced to sustain
them, shall stand firm and unshaken in Christ Jesus, to be eternally
fulfilled to all believing souls, to their everlasting joy and salvation,
for which we shall render eternal thanks and praises to God.




