Chapter LIV.


      Comforts Under Secret And Spiritual Temptations Of The Devil.


    _Behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as
    wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and
    when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren._—LUKE 22:31, 32.


How great and implacable the enmity of the devil is to all mankind, we are
abundantly informed, not only by Scripture (as 1 Pet. 5:8, “Be sober, be
vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may devour.” Eph. 6:12, and Rev. 12:12, “Woe to the
earth, and to the sea, for the devil is come down unto you, having great
wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time;” and from the
history of Job), but also more particularly by daily experience, and the
many grievous and dangerous temptations with which he assaults the souls
of good men in their spiritual warfare. At one time he assaults our faith,
at another time our Christian calling, and then interrupts and disturbs us
in the exercise of our devotions; all which is clearly expressed in the
history of our Lord’s temptation. Matt. 4:3, etc. Hence we may learn that
no man is safe from his temptations. For if he spared not Christ our Head,
how can sinful men expect to escape him? For which reason our Lord himself
advises us, “Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.” Matt.
26:41.

2. Among the various temptations with which the devil afflicts the soul,
this is one, namely, the tormenting a man with blasphemous, profane,
impure, and troublesome thoughts, so as to sink him deep into melancholy
and wretchedness. And these abominable suggestions are so crafty, sudden,
and violent, that they will not give a man a moment’s rest. Upon this
account St. Paul calls them, “the fiery darts of the wicked one.” Eph.
6:16. As a public enemy is perpetually casting fire into a besieged town;
so the devil is continually vexing such souls with his hellish
suggestions. And as the wounds of an envenomed arrow are most exquisitely
painful; so the wounds caused by the fiery darts of Satan, are far more
sharp and intolerable than the severest bodily sufferings. Wherefore we
shall here present some select heads of comfort against these secret and
internal temptations, all drawn from the Word of God. _First_, as to the
words prefixed to this chapter, it is plain that they were uttered by our
blessed Saviour, with the utmost tenderness, and most ardent compassion.
Whence we may gather, that the being afflicted with these temptations, is
no mark of God’s displeasure, much less that he designs to destroy us
thereby, and deliver us up into the hands of the enemy. On the contrary,
such a temptation is nothing but a chastising rod, whereby God intends to
humble a man, and to draw him to Himself. This appears from the example of
St. Peter, whose confidence and self-conceit opened a door to the most
grievous temptation, and to the sin which followed. And St. Paul tells us
of himself, “Lest I should be exalted (saith he) above measure through the
abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh,
the messenger of Satan to buffet me. For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee.” 2 Cor. 12:7-9. From which words we may learn three
things: 1. That St. Paul, and all others that are exercised with these
trials, are humbled thereby. 2. That all those sufferings come upon us by
the counsel of God. 3. That the utmost fury of the devil against a man who
is so tempted, cannot exclude him from God’s favor, which is expressed in
these words, “My grace is sufficient for thee.”

3. The _second_ ground of comfort is contained in these words: “Satan hath
desired you.” From these words we may learn, that though the devil is
always desirous and ready to cast his fiery darts at us, yet has he no
power without the particular leave and permission of God; who never gives
him more than a limited permission, beyond which he cannot go. To this
belongs that place of St. Paul, “God is faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above that ye are able.” 1 Cor. 10:13. To which we may add
the example of Job, against whom the devil dared not attempt anything,
till he had first obtained leave of God; and even that clogged with a
limitation. See chap. 1:12.

4. The _third_ consolation arises from these words of our Lord: “I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.” In what manner, and with what
affection the blessed Jesus prayed for us to his Heavenly Father, we are
told in John (chapter 17), namely, that He would be pleased to keep his
faithful servants from the evil of the world; that he would dwell in them,
and they in him; and that of those whom he had received of his Father, he
might lose none. This prayer, were it but heartily applied to the
distressed soul, would support it with a divine courage so as to abide in
Christ by faith, not doubting but that Christ in her, by the same faith,
would conquer and triumph over all her enemies.

5. The _fourth_ comfort may be drawn from John 17:21, where our blessed
Lord prays for us, and begs of his heavenly Father, that we may abide in
Christ, and Christ in us. And St. John tells us, that “greater is he that
is in us, than he that is in the world.” 1 John 4:4. Christ dwells in
every believing soul by faith; and all the assaults of the devil cannot
dispossess this illustrious guest. And as Christ himself, in whom God
himself, that is, all “the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily” and
personally (Col. 2:9), was tempted by Satan, thou must not, therefore,
think that Christ is not in thee, because thou thyself art likewise
tempted. And if Christ be in thee of a truth, thou needest not fear what
the devil can do unto thee: for Christ will certainly defend the place of
his own residence, against all opposers. Moreover, thou hast within thee
the Holy Spirit, who “helpeth thine infirmities, and maketh intercession
for thee with groanings that cannot be uttered.” Rom. 8:26. Whensoever
thou findest these within thee, thou mayest assure thyself, that the Holy
Spirit dwelleth in thee, and he will not forsake thee, as our blessed Lord
assures us: “The Father shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you forever.” John 14:16. Lastly, God has promised, that he
will dwell in the humble and contrite heart: “I dwell with him that is of
a contrite and humble spirit.” Isa. 57:15; 66:2. And such, undoubtedly,
are all those who are tormented with these temptations of Satan.

6. The _fifth_ ground of comfort, is contained in our Saviour’s promise:
“I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.” O divine comfort! as if
our Lord had said: “Your infirmities shall never be so great, but that
there shall be some sparks of faith left. Yea, though you feel in
yourselves no comfort, and, on that account, are apt to think your faith
quite extinct, yet will I never suffer the smoking flax to be entirely
quenched.” Isa. 42:3. But, now, if you ask, How shall I know this? I
answer, 1. By the earnest longing of your soul after faith. For, to desire
and pray for faith above all other things, arises from a living spark of
remaining faith. 2. By your resistance of temptation, which is a certain
token of the presence of faith; and this resistance and opposition appear
plainly in this, that all these wicked and blasphemous thoughts arise in
your soul sorely against your will, and that you bear them with more pain,
than you would any external violence offered to your body. Now whatsoever
a man suffers of this kind against his will, is resisted by faith, and
shall never be imputed to him as sin; for nothing but a voluntary
violation of the divine law, makes a man sinful in the sight of God. If
Adam had not yielded to the suggestions of Satan, he had not had sin; but
as soon as he submitted his will to that of the tempter, he fell into the
transgression. Whence it follows, that it cannot be sin, which is not
attended with the consent of the will. A besieged city cannot hinder the
enemy from throwing fire into it, but the inhabitants must endeavor to
prevent it from spreading, and burning the town to ashes. So we cannot
avoid the fiery darts of the devil, with which he delights to afflict the
heart; but as we do not consent to them, but rather resist, they must at
last be quenched, and can do us no harm. By such tokens as these we may
discover, that our faith, however weak, is not extinct.

7. Being once assured of this, we may likewise certainly depend upon
victory; and this opens to us a _sixth_ fountain of comfort. To this,
therefore, refers that comfortable saying of our Saviour: “The prince of
this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.” John 14:30. “Be of good cheer;
I have overcome the world.” John 16:33. Whatsoever Christ did, he did for
our sakes; that he himself, with all his benefits and merits, might be
entirely ours. Since, therefore, he has conquered Satan, it follows that
he has conquered him not only for himself, but for us also: his conquest
is ours. All this was prefigured in the contest between David and Goliath.
1 Sam. 17:8, 9, 50-53. The conditions were, that if Goliath overcame
David, the people of Israel should be the servants of the Philistines; but
if David overcame Goliath, the Philistines should serve Israel. Now, even
as David’s victory was counted as the victory of all Israel, so the
victory of Christ avails as the victory of all believers. Hence St. Paul
says: “Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.” Eph. 6:10.
And, “Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.” 1 Cor. 15:57.

8. _Seventhly_, we ought to be comforted by the examples of the saints,
who have also been cruelly tempted. Of these our blessed Saviour speaks,
saying, “When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.” By these
words, our Saviour plainly sends us to be instructed by the examples of
our brethren, who have been tempted and persecuted by the devil in like
manner with us. Hence St. Peter says: “Knowing that the same afflictions
are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.” 1 Peter 5:9.

9. _Lastly_, we ought to be comforted by the example of Jesus Christ
himself. Matt. 4:1, etc. Over him, though he was the beloved Son of God,
the devil had so much power, as to hurry him from place to place, and use
him with so much insolence, that it is wonderful the Son of God should
suffer it from that rebellious, apostate spirit. But this was the
condition of the humble Jesus, who emptied himself of all his glory and
majesty, that he might be tempted as man, and be made like unto his
brethren.




