Chapter VIII.


The Calling Of God Is Earnest And Sincere, And Directs Us To Come To Him.


    _He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that
    he may judge his people._—PS. 50:4. _He hath called us with a holy
    calling._—2 TIM. 1:9.


God, our heavenly Father, by all the methods and arguments of love, is
continually calling and drawing us to himself. So great is his love
towards us, that it is as if his own essence and blessedness were affected
by our wandering from him. Hence, all his works of creation, both in
heaven and earth, all the wonders of his providence, tend to this one
great end, namely, to recall and bring back fallen man to himself. All his
words and all his actions, call to the soul to return to the love of God
from which it fell, by hearkening to the tempting insinuations of Satan.

2. God invites us to believe in his Son, and to follow the steps of his
meekness and patience, and by this means, to be reunited to himself, our
chief Good. For as when God called to Elijah, and the fire passed by, and
the strong wind that rent the mountains; yet God was not in them, but came
at last in the still small voice (1 Kings 19:11, 12); so at this day he
descends and manifests himself in humble, quiet, and peaceable souls. And
as Ahasuerus sustained Esther when she fell down at his feet, for fear of
his majesty (Esther 5:2; 8:3, 4); so God comforts and supports the humble
man, who has a true sense of his own nothingness, and trusts not in his
own strength. And were not God to support him with the everlasting arm of
his omnipotence, he would sink under the apprehensions of his own
unworthiness. Such a man is so humbled in his own eyes, that he would seem
to sink below the vilest of all creatures. But no sooner does the mighty
King of heaven cast a look upon such an humble soul, but it is
strengthened and refreshed with the divine consolation. This is the
consequence of true humility, when deeply rooted in the soul; the lower
the soul sinks in its own esteem, the higher it rises in the sight of God.
If to this there be added, external contempt and reproaches, they sink the
soul yet more deeply into self-abasement, and by consequence bring her so
much the nearer to God. This is the soil most fit to produce that peace of
spirit “which passeth all understanding.” Phil. 4:7. This is the fruit of
trials, injuries, and afflictions. By these God prepares and purifies thee
for himself, that at length thou mayest return to him, and he return to
thee, and dwell in thee. And this consummation is not to be obtained by
fine words and airy speculations, but by manifold afflictions. It is not
talking or thinking of humility, that makes a man humble; but bearing the
cross with patience; without which thou hast only the appearance, and not
the reality of virtue. Upon this account the man that treats thee with
reproach and contempt, ought to be regarded as in truth thy benefactor.
For these two virtues, meekness and patience, are not to be gained except
by various conflicts and severe trials, which are very great and grievous
to human nature. For how canst thou exercise these virtues, unless in the
time of suffering? Meekness regards the ground of the soul, which is best
tried in the hour of adversity. And patience respects the inner man, who
is to go out with Christ, bearing his reproach. Heb. 13:13. And thus the
man is conformed to the most holy and innocent life of Christ; and Christ,
with his death and passion, lives and governs in him.

3. There is also another, namely, an _inward_ calling of God: when he
kindles in the devout soul the fire of his love. By this means he conveys
himself to the soul, for he himself is love. For it is as impossible to
possess God without a true perception of his love, as for a man to live
without a soul. For that Christ doth “dwell in our hearts by faith”
(Ephes. 3:17), is only to be discovered by love ruling in us. 1 John 4:16.
And this divine love cannot rest in our hearts, until they are emptied of
the love of the world (1 John 2:15), and entirely and absolutely fixed
upon God. It will be, therefore, a very useful exercise for a man often to
examine his own heart, and see what is uppermost in his affections, God,
or himself, or any creature: whether he loves life or death: what it is
that principally engages his affections, and engrosses his thoughts. If
upon inquiry thou findest thy heart set upon anything but God, that thou
hast any affection that does not ultimately centre and terminate in him,
then God cannot enter into thy soul, though thou shed as many tears as
there are drops in the ocean, and thou must abide forever without him.
Unhappy mortals, what are you doing? Why do you suffer a deceitful world
to impose upon you by the love of the creatures, and insinuate itself into
the centre of your souls, which God requires to be consecrated to his own
use? It was for this end that we came into the world, that by
mortification of our own will, and contempt of the world and creatures, we
should return to God, and be reconciled to him; so that as the body is to
return to the earth again, the spirit should also return to God that gave
it. Eccl. 12:7. If thou returnest not in this life, thou art undone to all
eternity. By that in which thou hast placed thy joy and thy delight here,
shalt thou be judged hereafter. Let then this conviction be deeply fixed
in thy heart: Whensoever thy heart is emptied of the world and the
creatures, it shall forthwith be filled with all the fulness of God; yea,
assure thyself, that were it necessary to leave heaven and earth, God
would certainly do it, in order to take possession of a soul thus emptied
of the world, and prepared to receive him. On the other hand, if thou be
full of the world, God cannot enter. The more delight any man takes in the
creatures, the farther is he removed from God. How lamentable a case this
is, I need not stay to explain. This then is a certain conclusion, that
not through worldly joys and pleasures, but through many tribulations, we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven.




Chapter IX.


                  The Purifying Influence Of True Faith.


    _God purifies their hearts by faith._—ACTS 15:9.


The property of true faith, is to purify the heart from the world, and all
earthly, vain, and perishing desires; in a word, from all things in which
corrupt nature delights itself, whether riches, honors, or pleasures.
Faith fixes its eye upon those things only, that are invisible and
eternal; and when all impediments are removed, a union quickly follows;
and there can be no union of things, except they be alike. God is pure
action, and wheresoever he finds a soul empty of the world, there he
delights to operate, and manifest himself, as the spring of life and
comfort to the afflicted longing soul. Therefore the usual language of
Christ in the Gospel to the sick, whom he healed, was, “Thy faith hath
made thee whole.” Matt. 9:22; 15:28. His meaning was not, that this was
the effect of the mere act of faith; but that faith had so cleansed,
purified, and humbled the soul, that it was now fit for the more exalted
manifestations of the divine power and presence. Hence, when our blessed
Lord could find no souls so qualified in Nazareth, he could do no mighty
works there. Mark 6:5. For where the creature is, God cannot enter; one
hinders the other. No man can more heartily desire the assistance of God,
than He desires to communicate it to a devout and well-disposed soul. For
as God fills such a soul with his light, consolation, and gracious
presence; so the longing soul rises as naturally towards God, as the fire
burns. When God has once taken possession of such a habitation, he
operates in it all the wonders of his grace, in which he rejoices as once
he did in our Lord Jesus Christ; because in him he accomplished his own
will, without any impediment. For no work or action can please him, which
does not begin and end in him. And as God delights thus to operate in man,
so he continually waits to see when we are fit to receive him; being more
ready to give, than we are either to ask or to receive. Take heed,
therefore, that thou neglect not the present opportunity. For after this
life is over, we shall all receive according to our works, and according
to the principle of love that ruled in our hearts, whether it be good or
bad, God or the creature. And this is so certain, that should all the
saints of God intercede with tears of blood for any one man, it would be
lost labor. For that which has possessed thy heart, and engrossed thy
affections here, shall be thy lot and portion to eternity.

2. And as true faith purifies the heart from worldly love; so it does also
from inordinate affections, as anger and impatience; planting meekness and
patience in respect to our neighbor in their stead. For God works nothing
in the souls of believers, but that which is agreeable to his own nature.
Now what is He, but mere love, patience, and gentleness itself, as he has
manifested himself in our blessed Lord Jesus Christ? As then the love of
God overflows towards all men, having mercy upon all; so it produces the
same love in every Christian soul, a love free and universal; making no
difference either of friend or foe, but being equally united to God, and
to the whole race of mankind. Moreover, this love rejoices in all the good
things that God bestows upon man, and is pleased with that variety of
gifts which are bestowed upon the several members of Christ’s body; to
each of which it pays a proper and proportionable respect. For as there is
a mutual agreement between the several members of the natural body, in
which the more ignoble parts, as the hands and feet, serve the more noble,
as the head, the eyes, and the heart; so ought there to be the same
agreement between the members of the spiritual body of Christ. Wherefore,
if we meet with any member of Christ, who is more worthy than ourselves,
we ought proportionably to love and esteem him more than ourselves. And
the greater the portion of divine grace and favor which he has received
from Jesus Christ, our supreme Head, is, the greater respect and love we
ought to pay him. For this good is common to all, as being derived from
our universal Head, Christ Jesus. But we cannot enjoy it without charity,
which makes all our neighbor’s blessing our own; and whatsoever we love in
God, and for his sake, considered as a universal good, is properly ours.
And as by charity, all our neighbor’s blessings are made our own,
therefore, how many, or how great favors soever God bestows upon a good
man, they are no less mine than his, if I love them as the gifts of God,
and for His sake. Yea, if any man receive the blessings of God with fear
and humility, not being exalted with pride and arrogance; and if I can
behold them in him, and love them for God’s sake, and as proceeding from
Him, they are as properly mine as his. This is the way by which we become
spiritually rich in God, and are made partakers of all the blessings of
heaven and earth; yea, and of all the happiness that is laid up in store
for the children of God, by the mediation of our spiritual Head, Christ
Jesus. So deep, so close is this union, that I am actually and properly
possessed of all the blessings which our head Christ Jesus has diffused
through all his members, whether men, or angels, in heaven and earth. And
the effect of this inward love is patience, by which a man readily and
willingly takes up his cross, as a preparation for very exalted gifts of
God. For no cross comes without its special grace. This made one of the
holy men of old exclaim: “Hail, bitter cross, full of grace and glory.”
And St. Peter says: “This is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief.” 1 Pet. 2:19.

3. And they, who from love to the cross of Christ, willingly bear their
own, are thereby made partakers of an eminent pleasure and of peace of
mind. He, then, that labors under any cross, external or internal, and
yet, although his heart may bleed, without complaining bears it patiently,
for the sake of his suffering Redeemer, may rest assured, that his
sufferings shall end in glory, and his sorrow shall be turned into joy.
The divine consolations are ever at hand to the resigned and patient soul;
which peace is that inestimable pearl, the riches of the inward man, which
no man can explain or comprehend but he that has it. In a word, this is
that “peace which passeth all understanding,” of which St. Paul speaks in
Phil. 4:7.




