Chapter XXV.


 All Mankind Are To Be Considered As One Man, Or As Being Many Members Of
                             One Great Body.


    _Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why do
    we deal treacherously every man against his brother?_—MAL. 2:10.


As all the creatures, the fire, air, earth, water, sun, moon, and stars,
equally and without any respect of persons, serve and minister to mankind,
doing the same service to the poor as to the rich; to the peasants as to
the citizens; to him that labors for his bread, as to him that sitteth on
the throne; by this God teaches us to look upon our neighbor as part of
ourselves, and all of us together as making up but one man. And as he has
commanded all the creatures to pay honor and obedience to man, he designs
thereby to instruct us that we are the image of God, and ought to live in
a constant imitation of him.

2. If we do not this, and accept not the service of the creatures with
thanksgiving, we are unworthy of the least service from them. Now as the
creatures pay equal service to all men, solely on account of the image of
God which they bear, how much more incumbent is it upon us to love and
honor our neighbor, as bearing that divine image. So that the creatures
themselves instruct us by their example in the duties which we owe to one
another; for as they regard all mankind but as one man, so ought we to do
likewise.

3. Lastly, forasmuch as all of us enjoy the love and favor of the same
God; are all equally created in the same image; as the love of God is
universal to us all, and his blessings equally bestowed on all; as we all
labor under the same necessities, and stand in need of the same mercies,
and are obliged to pay him the same duty and service; as we are all
partakers of the same nature, and bear the same name (for the poorest and
meanest is as truly a man as the greatest); as we all receive an equal
tribute of service from the creatures; and, as it is appointed for us all
once to die; upon all these accounts we are, each one, obliged to love our
neighbors as ourselves, and promote peace, unity, and charity among
ourselves.

4. From all that has been said, it appears, that there is a twofold
brotherhood among men: First, as we are all the creatures of God, and owe
to him our being, and all the comforts and supports of it, as well as the
other creatures; and secondly, as we are distinguished from the rest of
the creatures, and have a closer and more heavenly relation one to
another, being all created in the image and likeness of God. But there is
yet a much more noble brotherhood discovered to us in the Gospel, by which
we are all brethren of, and in, the Lord Jesus Christ, and members of his
spiritual body under Him, our Head, of whose fulness we all receive our
different measures and proportions of grace. Ephes. 1:23.



Chapter XXVI.


            Charity, The Foundation Of The Greatest Strength.


    _Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
    peace._—EPH. 4:3.


As the greatest strength arises from concord, and the greatest weakness
from discord; it follows, that the closer this concord is, the greater
will the strength be. But in order to be united among ourselves, it is
necessary that we begin first with being united unto God. The closer our
union is with God, the stronger will it be with our neighbors. For it is
impossible that he who is sincerely and heartily united to God by love,
should hate his neighbor, whom God so sincerely loves. Yea, the more
ardently any man loves God, the more tenderly will he love his neighbor;
and the more he loves him, the closer will he be united to him.

2. Upon the diminution or increase of our charity, therefore, depends the
decay or increase of our union; and when both are perfect, the strength
arising from them is invincible. Whence it plainly appears, that when men
love God, they must of necessity love one another, and are thereby united
in a perfect bond of union and peace. But when once they come to forget
God, and to care for nobody but themselves, then faction and discord
arise, which end in ruin and confusion. Here we see the advantages of
concord, and the many public and private blessings that flow thence; and
how all the miseries that attend confusion and discord, rob us of those
blessings, which every single person may enjoy in the safety and peace of
the public. In a word, so great are the benefits of this universal love of
God and man, that so long as it is preserved, no power can destroy or hurt
us.

3. Hitherto we have been ascending by gradual steps, from the lowest
creatures to God, our chief Good, being taught and convinced by the
creatures, of the obligations under which we are to love and worship God.
Hence we descend again from the Creator to the creature; that is, from the
love of our Creator, to the love of the creatures.



Chapter XXVII.


              Of The Nature, Properties, And Fruits Of Love.


    _Take heed that the light which is in thee be not darkness._—LUKE
    11:35.


That nothing is properly our own but our love, is too plain to need any
proof. Hence, if our love be good, and rightly applied, our hearts and the
treasures that are in them, are good likewise; but if otherwise, then we
ourselves and all that we have, are evil. It is our love only that makes
us either good or bad. And as, when our love is right and duly placed,
there can be nothing better; so, when it is otherwise, there can be
nothing worse.

2. And, since we can call nothing our own but our love, it follows, that
on whatsoever being we place our love, to that we dedicate ourselves and
all that we have. Whensoever we abuse or misapply our love, we throw away
and lose all that we have. So then, if all our goodness consist in the
rectitude of our love, and all our evil in the misapplying of it; it
follows, that virtue itself is nothing else but our love, truly and
properly placed; and vice nothing else but a perverse and irregular love.
Whosoever considers these properties of love, cannot be ignorant wherein
the greatest good, and the greatest evil of man, consist.



