Chapter XXXVI.


He Who Does Not Live In Christ, But Gives His Heart To The World, Has Only
  The Outward Letter Of The Scriptures, But He Does Not Experience Their
                    Power, Or Eat Of The Hidden Manna.


    _To him that overcometh, will I give to eat of the hidden manna,
    and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
    written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it._—REV.
    2:17.


By this Scripture we are taught, that no man can taste the inward
sweetness of heavenly joy and comfort hidden in the Word, who does not
first vanquish his own flesh and the world, with all the pomps and lusts
thereof, and the devil himself. But those that crucify their flesh daily,
with all its desires and lusts, by serious contrition and repentance, who
die daily to themselves and to the world, and to whom this life is a cross
and affliction; these are divinely fed with the heavenly manna, and drink
the wine of the joy of paradise. Those, on the other hand, that love the
pleasures of this world rather than those of heaven, render themselves
altogether unfit to taste the hidden manna, preserved for him alone that
overcometh. The reason is, because _like things_ (according to the
proverb) rejoice _in their like_; and things of a contrary nature do not
unite one with another. Since, therefore, the word of God is spiritual, it
is no wonder that worldly minds take no pleasure in it. For as the body
receives no strength from the food which the stomach does not digest; so
the soul receives no strength from the divine word, unless it be entirely
converted into itself, that is, into its own life and nature.

2. Yea, as a man that is sick of a fever acquires a distempered appetite,
and deems the coarsest trash more pleasant than wholesome food; so those
that are sick of a spiritual fever, that is, of the love of the world, of
pride and covetousness, loathe the good word of God as bitter and insipid
food. Those, on the other hand, that have the Spirit of God, find in it a
hidden manna, and a secret sweetness, which transcends all other delights;
but then it is not to be tasted by such as are carried away with the
pleasures of a profane world.

3. Many hear the glad tidings of the Gospel repeatedly, and yet are but
little affected with what they hear. They do not feel any fervency of
spirit, any sense of spiritual joy. The cause is plain; they are not led
by the good Spirit of God, but by the corrupt spirit of the world; nor
have they heavenly, but earthly minds, which cannot receive the things of
God. Whoever, therefore, wishes to obtain a sound understanding in
spiritual matters, to feel the power of the word of God, and to eat of the
hidden manna, ought by all means to conform his life to the word which he
reads, and to the life of Christ which is set before him. It is then that
the Lord feeds the humble with grace (1 Pet. 5:5), satisfies the meek with
his love, and supports the patient with his comfort; rendering his yoke
pleasant, and his burden light unto them. For the sweetness of this
heavenly manna cannot be tasted except under the yoke of Christ, according
to the promise of the Lord: “He hath filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich he hath sent empty away.” Luke 1:53.

4. “The words that I speak unto you,” saith the Lord, “they are spirit and
they are life.” John 6:63. Whence it follows, that a carnal and voluptuous
man, who has no spiritual understanding or taste, cannot possibly perceive
or relish the words of Christ. These must be apprehended in spirit, and in
an inward tranquillity of mind, attended with great humility and fervent
desires after God. In this order, the Word of God must be received and
digested, if ever it is to afford a vital nourishment to the soul; which,
if it be neglected, then truly the Word is no more than an empty sound,
and an external letter. As a man that hears the sound of a harp, and
understands not its melody, receives no pleasure from it; so no man can
perceive the virtue hidden in the Word, unless he endeavor to express it
in his life, and thoroughly to conform himself to it in his spirit.

5. For this reason, the Lord says: “I will give him a white stone, and in
the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that
receiveth it.”

6. This is the testimony of the hidden Spirit, who witnesses to the divine
Word: and in like manner, the Spirit of the Word gives testimony to our
spirit (Rom. 8:16), whence both unite, and so become one spirit. 1 Cor.
6:17. This is that new name, which no man knoweth but he that hath it. As
no man perceives the sweetness of honey, but he that tastes it; so the
name of this divine testimony, written in the hearts of good souls, no man
knoweth but he that possesses it. He only understands the nature of
heavenly comfort, and of divine visitations, who really tastes them. This
name and testimony are called _new_, because they are the blessed effect
of the _new birth_, and come _from above_.

7. Blessed is the man to whom God thus gives himself to be tasted! Thus
were the prophets of old fed with this heavenly bread, and sustained by
the eternal Word proceeding from God, and communicating itself unto them.
This made their tongues so free and so ready in the delivery of the divine
oracles. And from this inward sense, with which they were so powerfully
affected, the Holy Scripture has been derived, and handed down to us for
our edification.

8. Even at this day, God does not cease still to speak unto all men, and
inwardly to feed them with his Word: but alas! most men have shut their
ears against his voice, and will rather hear the world than God, and
follow their own lusts, than the motions of the good Spirit of God. They
cannot eat of the hidden manna, because they greedily adhere to their
carnal propensities, and contemn the tree of life, with the fruit thereof.

9. But surely such men are awfully blinded, since they will not understand
that God can afford infinitely greater pleasures than this world is
capable of imparting. He that has once tasted the goodness of God, will
esteem the whole world, together with its most exquisite pleasures, to be
nothing but gall and bitterness. Our first parents were beguiled by the
world; and by eating of the forbidden tree, they brought no less an evil
upon themselves than death itself: and yet we are so much besotted with
the pleasures of this world, as to follow freely their steps, and to obey
the forbidden lusts of the flesh, which cause our death. Rom. 8:13.

10. Christ says: “If any shall eat of me,” the true tree, and the true
bread of life, “he shall live for ever.” John 6:51. And what is it to _eat
of him_, but to believe in him, to rejoice in him, to delight in him, and
to rest and to take pleasure in nothing but him alone? The world bestows
poor and inconsiderable wages, and yet it is served with great labor and
earnestness; whereas God grants an eternal and never-fading reward; and
yet with what sluggishness, coldness, and backwardness is his service
performed! How few there are, who adhere to God with as much care and
faith, devotion and obedience, as profane worldlings do to mammon, and the
world! We see them often take long and tedious journeys for a little
money; but for the sake of heaven, it grieves them to move even a foot.

11. In all classes men seek and love the world more than they regard God.
Many a scholar studies day and night to attain preferment and honor, who
will hardly take time to say the _Lord’s Prayer_ for the good of his soul.
The men who avoid no labor to get the bread that perishes, will undergo
none to procure that which is incorruptible. There are many who fear no
difficulty, flee from no danger, and, in an earthly warfare, stare even
death in the face; influenced by no other motive than to gain a little
fleeting fame, or at best, to be ranked among nobles and heroes: whereas
there is hardly one to be found that will enter into a combat with the
corrupt propensities of his flesh, although this is the way to obtain a
kingdom in heaven. We see the victors of many nations, and the subduers of
vast kingdoms, who little care to overcome themselves. There are large
numbers who do not regard the loss of their immortal souls, if they can
but gain the perishing goods of this world. All these, certainly, have not
tasted the hidden manna of the divine Word; for they do not overcome the
world, but are themselves overcome by it. Whosoever will taste the
sweetness of this heavenly manna, must, for the sake of the love of God,
despise the world, and overcome it. When he complies with these terms, he
is refreshed again with that comfort of the Holy Ghost, which no man knows
save he that receives it.

12. This, therefore, must be done. The tree of life must first be planted
in us, before we can eat of its fruit: and the heart that wishes to be
quickened with heavenly comforts, ought first to be truly converted from
the world to God. But we, being intoxicated with worldly pleasures, do not
see that the joys of heaven are far more excellent than all that this
world affords. That which God gives, is infinitely more true and more
substantial than all which the creature can bestow. And that teaching
which comes from above, through the inspiration of the divine Spirit, is
far more noble and solid than that which is conveyed to us by man’s
understanding, and imprinted on the mind with much toil and labor. The
flowers and fruits which are the productions of nature are nobler and
better than those which are fashioned of the finest gold by the hand of
art; even so, one drop of divine consolation is more satisfactory, and
incomparably better, than a whole ocean of worldly lust and pleasure.

13. Whenever, therefore, thou desirest to taste any heavenly comfort,
withdraw thy heart from the joys of this world. As if the Lord were to
say, “If any will understand me, let him seriously attend to what I say;
if any will see me, it surely behooves him to fix his eye upon me alone.”
Who can doubt but that our heart and senses, and all the faculties of our
souls ought to be converted to God, and fixed on him alone, if ever we
desire to see, hear, and understand God; nay, to taste him and his
goodness? For thus he expresses himself in the Prophet: “When ye shall
search for me with your whole heart, ye shall find me.” Jer. 29:13.

14. Many at this day are held in great admiration on a very light account.
Oh! a learned man! (they say), a rich man! a great man! a wise man! But
scarcely any regard how meek, how humble, how patient, or how devout any
man is. Of this perverse judgment, there is no other cause, than that the
people of this world only admire the _exterior_ of a man, and pass by what
is _within_ the mind, which alone is worthy to be esteemed and valued. Let
him that praises a man because he is a great traveller, and has seen many
cities and countries, consider whether it be not far better to have seen
God. Let him that admires another, because he has served several monarchs,
and attended on emperors, kings, and princes, tell us whether it be not
far more excellent to be the servant of God, to wait on the King of
Heaven, to hear Him speak in the heart, and to serve Him faithfully? Many
who enjoy nothing but the things of this world, will say, “We have
abundance of learned men and great scholars in this age; arts and sciences
are greatly advanced among us.” But such men as these, do not know the art
of arts, the science of sciences, which is divine Love; a benefit
preferable to all other knowledge and learning, but which seems to be
almost wholly extinct in this degenerate age, together with faith itself,
that produces it. The number of those that are in truth divinely “taught
of God,” is apparently but small (Isa. 54:13); and so of those that care
to be instructed in the humble and meek life of Christ. Matt. 11:29. Yea,
to speak plainly, there are among the most learned at this day, some who
are, perhaps, the most alienated from the life of God, and know but little
of that truth which is in Jesus. They are those who confine knowledge to
words and terms artfully contrived; when indeed solid erudition and
learning consist not in _words_, but in _things_, and in a real and
eternal wisdom. Upon the whole, whoever calls this world a wicked world,
is not mistaken in his judgment.

15. Others will praise a man, because he keeps a rich and plentiful table,
and fares sumptuously every day; but they do not consider that the very
crumbs dropping from God’s table, are transcendently better than the
choicest dishes of the wealthy and greedy; and that the hidden manna, and
the incorruptible bread, descending from heaven, and prepared by the Lord
himself, afford the most savory and most delicious food for nourishing the
soul. Ps. 23:5.

16. Whoever enjoys God and his Word, is disgusted at nothing, and nothing
can displease him; for he enjoys God in all. But what can delight him, who
does not taste the sweetness of God, and the goodness of his Word? GOD
alone is the joy of the soul. He infinitely surpasses all earthly joy and
transient mirth. He is the eternal Light, which incomparably exceeds all
created lights. May he be pleased to influence our hearts with his hidden
pleasure! May he purify our spirits, and all the faculties of our souls!
May he enlighten and quicken, correct and revive all that is within us!
And, O! when shall that glorious hour appear, in which the Lord will
satiate us with his presence, and replenish us with all that he himself
is! Isa. 55:12.

17. But as we are not yet prepared for so transcendent a joy, so we cannot
partake of it, while we are confined to this state of imperfection. Let
us, therefore, be content with the crumbs of comfort which fall from the
Lord’s table, and patiently wait for that time, wherein we shall be
refreshed with his joy for evermore!

18. Hear the words of our blessed Saviour: “Behold, I stand at the door,
and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me.” Rev. 3:20. Is it not, then, a
foolish thing to slight so great a favor, and to treat contemptuously the
King of kings, who, like a heavenly guest, comes to see thee? Is it not
disgraceful to let a friend stand knocking without, and refuse to admit a
man to thy presence, who has nothing at heart but thy welfare? How
unaccountable then must it be to debar the great God from thy heart, who
stands in no need of thy presents; but, after the manner of princes,
brings his own royal dainties with him when he approaches the house of a
poor subject! He will feed thee with heavenly bread, and with that hidden
manna which is preserved for those that overcome.

19. When the Lord says, “Hear my voice, and open the door,” he compares,
as it were, the heart of a man to a house full of noise and clamor, where
music, though ever so sweet and melodious, cannot be heard. So the voice
of the divine Visitor cannot enter a profane heart, whilst it is hurried
about with the cares and desires of this world. Such a heart closes the
door against this Visitor, and consequently cannot taste the sweetness of
the celestial manna. But when this noise and tumult cease, it is then that
these secret whispers are best perceived in men. And O! that thou, with
Samuel, couldest answer: “Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth.” 1 Sam.
3:10.

20. The truth of this internal, spiritual, and heavenly supper is also
attested elsewhere. The apostle speaks of some, that “have been once
enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come.” Heb. 6:4. By this we are taught, that in whomsoever
the Holy Ghost freely resides, there the virtues and powers of the world
to come are also tasted. It is then that the soul feeds on that manna,
which is hid in the gracious Word proceeding out of the mouth of God, and
by which all the saints live.

21. The efficacy of this living Word was also tasted by the royal prophet,
through the Holy Ghost, when he burst forth into these words: “In thy
presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore.” Ps. 16:11. From this lively sense, he also invited others to an
enjoyment of the same sweetness, saying, “O taste and see that the Lord is
good. There is no want to them that fear him.” Ps. 34:8, 9. Of the plenty
and dignity of this heavenly banquet, he hath thus expressed himself:
“Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.” Ps. 23:5. “Thy loving
kindness is better than life.” Ps. 63:3. “They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of
the river of thy pleasures.” Ps. 36:8. And lastly, “Let all those that
seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee; and let such as love thy
salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified. But I am poor and needy;
make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help and my deliverer; O Lord, make
no tarrying.” Ps. 70:4, 5.

22. From all these, and many other places besides, it may abundantly be
known who those are that are inwardly fed with the good Word of God, and
with the hidden manna of the world to come; even those that are poor in
spirit, who entirely rely on divine comfort. These only are worthy to
taste of this heavenly manna, and of the divine gift, of which David
speaks at large: “How amiable,” says he, “are thy tabernacles, O Lord of
hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; my
heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.” Ps. 84:1, 2. By this
Scripture we may understand, that the least pleasure of the world to come,
infinitely exceeds all the joys of this world; and that one day passed
there, is far more excellent than a thousand years here. Whoever has
tasted these exquisite pleasures, will discard the things of this life, as
empty and insipid. The whole world becomes a burden, a trouble and
vexation of spirit, to such a person. He is like one that is accustomed to
delicious fare, and consequently cannot partake of what is coarse.

23. This is so sacred a hunger and thirst, that none but God alone can
satisfy it, and he only, by his love. This is that spiritual fulness with
which the saints are satiated, according to the words: “Eat, O friends,
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.” Song of Sol. 5:1. These
spiritual enjoyments the Lord bestows on his friends, in order to unite
them the more closely to himself, and to make them the sooner forget the
perishing things of this world. A few crumbs of this bread, a few drops
pressed from this heavenly vine, ought to excite our desires after that
plentiful and abounding fountain, which shall flow for us hereafter.

24. In order that the Lord might excite in us so sacred a thirst, and that
he might make us long the more earnestly after such heavenly objects as
these, it was expedient that he should first himself thirst upon the cross
for our sakes. John 19:28. As he himself satisfies and quenches our hunger
and thirst, so ought we again to satiate his thirst and ardent desire of
loving. He more fervently thirsts after us, than we do after him;
according to that which he hath himself declared: “My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work” (John 4:34): and the
will of God was, to save men from everlasting destruction. If we but
thirsted after him as he thirsts after us, we should then drink so
plentifully of his Spirit, that even “rivers of living water would flow
from our bodies” (John 7:38): that is, nothing should be seen in us, but
what is spiritual, lovely, and consolatory. Nay, he would make us
overflow, as it were, with a torrent of divine goodness and consolation,
so that soul and body, and all that is within us, should triumphantly
rejoice in the living God. For nothing is of so great and so divine an
amplitude as a man’s soul, after it has gained true freedom and liberty.
Such a soul comprehends God, heaven, and earth. And again, nothing is less
than a man’s soul in its nothingness and humiliation, when it humbles
itself under God and all his creatures.




