Chapter XL.


            A Conversation Between Faith And The Mercy Of God.


    _Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have
    kissed each other._—PS. 85:10.


The goodness of God comes forth to meet us, and gives merciful answers to
the prayers of faith; “for mercy shall compass us about.” Ps. 32:10. It
calls to us: “Return, saith the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon you: for I am merciful, and I will not keep anger forever. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the Lord
thy God.” Jer. 3:12, 13. To which faith answers, “Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to thy lovingkindness; according unto the multitude of thy
tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.” Ps. 51:1. Mercy calls, “Him
that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out.” John 6:37. Faith answers,
“Draw me; we will run after thee.” Cant. 1:4. Mercy says, “The Lord hath
sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to comfort all that mourn.” Isa.
61:1, 2. Faith answers out of Psalm 51:12: “Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation; and uphold me with thy free Spirit.” Mercy says, out of Isaiah
43:25 and 44:22, “I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions,
and, as a cloud, thy sins.” Faith answers out of Psalm 25:18, “Look upon
mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins.” Mercy comforts us
and says, out of Psalm 103:13, “Like as a father pitieth his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him.” To which faith answers, out of
Isaiah 64:8, “But now, O Lord, thou art our Father.” Mercy says, “Come
unto me.” Matt. 11:28. Faith answers, “Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul.” Ps. 25:1. Mercy says, “Thou hast played the harlot with many
lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord.” Jer. 3:1. Faith answers,
“I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him: Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants.” Luke 15:18, 19. Mercy
says, “This my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found.” Luke 15:24. To which faith answers, “I have trusted in thy mercy;
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” Ps. 13:5. Mercy proclaims, out
of Isaiah 55:1, “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters.” To
which faith answers, “As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so
panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the
living God; when shall I come and appear before God?” Ps. 42:1, 2. Mercy
says, “Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases.”
Ps. 103:3. Faith exclaims, “Enter not into judgment with thy servant.” Ps.
143:2. Mercy says, “I am the way, the truth, and the life.” John 14:6.
Faith answers, “Shew me thy way, O Lord; teach me thy paths. Lead me in
thy truth, and teach me.” Ps. 25:4, 5. Mercy promises, “I will ransom them
from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death: O death, I
will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction.” Hosea 13:14.
Faith answers, “He that is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God
the Lord belong the issues from death.” Ps. 68:20. Mercy says, “I am the
resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live.” John 11:25. To which faith answers, “I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:
and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God.” Job 19:25, 26. Mercy says, “Fear thou not; behold, I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands.” Isa. 41:10; 49:16. “Thou art mine;
neither shall any man pluck thee out of my hand.” John 10:28. To which
faith answers, “Into thine hand I commit my spirit; thou hast redeemed me,
O Lord God of truth.” Ps. 31:5.




Chapter XLI.


   The Great Benefits, And The Great Efficacy Of Praise Offered To God.


    _In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. I call to remembrance
    my song in the night; I commune with mine own heart._—PS. 77:2.


This passage is an excellent rule of life, teaching every man how to
conduct himself under the cross. As the word of God is the rule of our
life in prosperity, according to the Psalmist: “I will instruct thee and
teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine
eye” (Ps. 32:8); and “Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory” (Ps. 73:24): yea, moreover, as the word of God ought
to be the rule of our faith, as the Psalmist tells us, “Thy word is a lamp
unto my feet, and a light unto my path” (Ps. 119:105): and “Hold up my
goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not” (Ps. 17:5)—so also ought
it to be our rule and direction in bearing the cross, as David teaches us,
saying, “In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord;” that is, I will look
up to God, who has laid this cross upon me, and beg of him comfort and
assistance in the day of my trouble.

2. Hence may every Christian learn, when he is in affliction, not to fix
his thoughts too much upon the immediate causes or instruments of his
sufferings; but to lift up his heart to God; to apply to himself the
divine promises; to pray and sing praises to his God: and these are the
true and certain consolations of an afflicted soul. David says, “In the
day of my trouble I sought the Lord.” As a mind oppressed with grief eases
itself by communicating its troubles to a faithful friend, so is our
afflicted spirit refreshed and comforted when we offer prayer and
thanksgiving to God. Thus David “called to remembrance his song in the
night, and communed with his own heart” (Ps. 77:6); that is, when it was
night he longed earnestly for the morning, that he might rise and comfort
his weary soul by prayers and thanksgiving unto God his Comforter: in the
mean time, he communed with his own heart, and poured out his soul in
secret; and God, who saw and heard in secret, who understood even the most
secret sighs and breathings of his dejected spirit, comforted,
strengthened, and refreshed him.

3. Amongst other things that may be learned from this beautiful passage of
the Psalmist, this is one, that the singing of holy hymns and praises to
God, proceeding from a truly devout soul, are attended with great
advantages and spiritual blessings.

4. The truth of this appears, 1. From nature itself. 2. From the efficacy
of prayer. 3. From the examples found in the Old Testament. 4. From the
examples in the New. 5. From the examples of holy men in both, who were by
this means filled with the Holy Ghost. 6. From the nature and properties
of the Psalms. 7. From the frequent use of the blessed Psalms among the
ancients, whenever they were under any adversity. All these considerations
prove that there is a great virtue or efficacy in psalms and hymns of
praise. By this I would not be understood to mean nothing but bare words
and empty sounds, void of faith and devotion; but rather such a vigorous
faith, such an ardent devotion, as may break forth into holy hymns and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in the heart unto the Lord. Let
us briefly describe this subject.

5. As to the first, namely, the book of the world, or nature, it is clear
that the praise of God is the great end of the whole creation. That this
is the grand employment of the angelical choirs, appears from many
passages in the Revelation of St. John, as also from Isaiah 6:3 and the
148th Psalm; which, inviting all creatures to praise God, for whose glory
they were created, begins with the angels (ver. 2), “Praise ye him, all
his angels; praise ye him, all his hosts.” From the angelical he descends
to the sidereal world, saying, “Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him,
all ye stars of light.” To which may be referred the words of Job (chap.
38:7): “When the morning stars sang together.” Thence he descends to the
sea, calling on the waters, and all the numerous inhabitants of the
waters, to praise the God that made them. Thence looking up to the regions
of the air, he calls to “the fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind
fulfilling his word.” Thence he passes to the earth: “mountains and all
hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars.” Thence to the living creatures:
“beasts, and all cattle; creeping things and flying fowl.” Thence to men,
beginning with the rulers of the world: “kings of the earth, and all
people; princes, and all judges of the earth. Both young men and maidens,
old men and children, praise the name of the Lord.” And lastly, to the
church of God, “his saints, a people near unto him—praise ye the Lord.”

6. The second argument was the efficacy of the prayer of faith. This is
attested by the word of God, the examples of holy men, and daily
experience. For we are assured by all the promises of God, that not one
devout prayer, not one sigh or tear, comes from us in vain. “Put thou my
tears into thy bottle.” Ps. 6:9; 56:8. “They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy.” Ps. 126:5. “The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to
all that call upon him in truth.” Ps. 145:18. Nothing, indeed, in this
world can be successful without prayer; forasmuch as every good and every
perfect gift cometh down from God, and must be asked of him. Without
constant prayer a man can neither live nor die in peace. Now, as the
offering of praise to God is nothing else but the prayer of a devout soul
overflowing with divine joy, in which holy men of God have celebrated and
conveyed to posterity the mercies and wonders of God their Creator; it is
plain that the singing of praises to God is an act of devotion, full of
spiritual comfort and advantage.

7. Thirdly, this is confirmed by many examples found in the Old Testament.
Exod. 15; Deut. 32; 1 Sam. 2; Isa. 12; 26; 38; 64; Jon. 2; Hab. 3; and the
whole Book of Psalms.

8. Fourthly, this is confirmed by the examples of the New Testament;
especially those two divine hymns of Mary and Zacharias (Luke 1:46, 68),
of which the Christian Church has appointed one to be sung in the morning,
and the other in the evening, as a morning and evening sacrifice unto God;
thereby instructing us, that singing psalms and praises unto God ought to
begin and end the day. Such, too, is the exhortation of the Psalmist, “It
is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, O Most High: to shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and
thy faithfulness every night.” Ps. 92:1, 2. But why such lovingkindness
“in the morning”? Because “it is new every morning.” Lam. 3:23. And why
such “faithfulness every night”? Because “the Lord, that neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth,” is our guardian by night. Ps. 121:3. To this we
may add what we are told by St. Matthew (chap. 26: 30), that Jesus Christ
himself at his last Supper, sung a hymn with his disciples. And St. Paul
says to the Ephesians (chap. 5:18, 19), “Be filled with the Spirit;
speaking to yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody in your heart to the Lord; giving thanks always, etc.”
And again: “Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom;
teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.” Col. 3:16, 17. And
St. James says, “Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry?
let him sing psalms.” James 5:13.

9. Fifthly, by the praises offered to God by the holy men of the Old
Testament and the New, who were filled with the Holy Ghost. Of this we
have two instances. First, when Samuel had anointed Saul to be king, he
gave him a sign, saying, “Thou shalt meet a company of prophets with a
psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they
shall prophesy. And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou
shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.” 1 Sam.
10:5, 6. The second is, when Saul had sent messengers to take David, they
met several companies of prophets, and both they and Saul himself began to
prophesy. 1 Sam. 19:19-24. Similar to this is that which we read
concerning Elisha (2 Kings 3:15), that when the minstrel began to play,
that holy man prophesied.

10. In the Old Testament there were several kinds of divine music; some of
trumpets, some of psalteries and harps, some of cymbals, and other kinds
of musical instruments. From this some imagine that the _Songs of
Degrees_, as some of the Psalms are called, took their names. For they did
not sing all the Psalms to the same instrument, but adapted their
instruments to their subject, whether it were cheerful or sorrowful. All
these various kinds of music with which, under the Old Testament, they
sang praises unto God, being a part of the external ceremonial service,
have now ceased; and our spirit, soul, mind, and mouth are become the
trumpet, psaltery, harp, and cymbal of God. To which St. Paul alludes,
when he says, “Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.” Col. 3:16.
By which expression we are by no means forbidden, either in public or
private, to praise God with voices or instruments of music; but it
requires that all this be done with true devotion, in the spirit, and from
the heart, lest religion should be thought to consist in empty sounds and
the external pomp of divine service. For the New Testament, see, for
example, Acts 4:24-31.

11. Sixthly, the nature and properties of the Psalms prove the same thing.
Some of them are supplicatory, others consolatory; some penitential,
others doctrinal; and, lastly, others prophetical: from which variety of
style and intention the devout soul may reap a correspondent variety of
comforts and benefits.

12. Seventhly, we are instructed by the examples of Moses and David that
songs of praise were used upon different occasions. As (1) _Against
enemies_. These may be called prayers for protection. Such is Psalm 68,
which the man of God sang when he was advancing against his enemies: “Let
God arise, let his enemies be scattered.” Some think that Psalm 91 was
composed by David in the time of that great pestilence, which, in the
space of three days, swept away 70,000 men. 2 Sam. 24:15. And I doubt not
that many a man has been protected in national calamities by a proper use
of this Psalm. (2) _In time of victory over enemies._ These we may call
Psalms of victory. Thus David, when he had gained six victories, composed
the 18th Psalm, as may be gathered from 2 Sam. 22: 1. So Jehoshaphat
marched against the Moabites with singers going before him, who were to
bless and praise the Lord with a loud voice; and he conquered. 2 Chron.
20:21, etc. (3) _In great calamities._ Thus we read (1 Sam. 21:13) that
David, when he changed his behavior before Achish, composed the 34th
Psalm, as appears by the title. So he sang Psalm 3, when he fled from
Absalom. So when the apostles, in great difficulties, prayed in the words
of the 2d Psalm, “the place was shaken where they were assembled
together.” Acts 4:31. And these are Psalms of mourning or lamentation. (4)
There are also eucharistical Psalms. So David sung the 105th Psalm before
the ark of the covenant. 1 Chron. 17:16. (5) There are complaining Psalms,
as the 102d appears to be by the inscription; also some against
calumniators, as the 4th, 7th, 52d; also against diseases, as the 30th.

13. Thus much concerning the efficacy and admirable benefits of divine
hymns and thanksgivings. Whence it appears that it is the duty of a
Christian to praise God as well as to pray to him every day. For (1), it
being the constant employment of the holy angels to bless and praise God,
when the Church on earth does the same, there arises thence a divine and
heavenly communion betwixt the Church on earth and the Church in heaven;
fulfilling, in some measure, that petition of the Lord’s prayer, “Thy will
be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” Matt. 6:10. Come, then, ye devout
souls, and when ye retire into your closets to pour out your souls before
God in secret, remember also to praise him with a Psalm of thanksgiving.
(2) Moreover, it would be quite proper, and becoming a Christian, to
accustom children, from their infancy, to sing psalms and praises unto
God, according to the Psalmist, “Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings
hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies” (Ps. 8:2): the
advantage of which, is expressed in the following words—“that thou
mightest still the enemy and the avenger.” (3) We are encouraged to this
duty by God’s gracious acceptance of it, and delight in it; upon which
account the Psalmist calls upon him, saying, “Thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the praises of Israel.” Ps. 22:3. (4) Experience itself teaches
us that by divine hymns we kindle flames of devotion in our souls, and
receive rich returns of spiritual joy, lively comfort, solid peace, and
rest in God.




