BOOK II.




Preface To The Second Book.


As in nature, my dear Christian reader, the destruction of one thing is
the production of another; even so is it in a true Christian life. The
old, carnal man must be destroyed and pass away, that so the new spiritual
man may be produced in his place. And as our carnal life is directly
contrary to the holy life of Christ (which in the preceding Book is
sufficiently declared); it is absolutely needful that we renounce this
carnal life, before we can attain the spiritual life of Christ, or follow
him in those steps which he has been pleased to leave us. Thus, for
instance, thou must put an end to thy pride, before thou canst be truly
humble; thou must cease from wrath, before thou canst possess the virtue
of meekness. And this is the reason why the spiritual Christian’s life
ought to proceed from true _repentance_. This is also the design and
substance of the preceding Book, as plainly appears both from the order in
which the chapters are arranged, and from the _Conclusion_ appended to the
whole Book.

2. Since, however, there will be occasion to treat of the doctrine of
repentance in some chapters of this Second Book, I shall now give some
account of the whole method into which this Book is digested. As the main
design of the First Book was to lay open the nature of Original Sin, and
the deadly influence which it has upon all our actions; so it is but fit
that the Second Book should begin with JESUS CHRIST, that everlasting
wellspring of man’s salvation, in whom alone we find help and a remedy
against the destructive poison of Original Sin, and against that flood of
calamities and miseries which thence proceeds. All this on man’s side, is
effected by FAITH, apprehending that salvation which is merited by Christ.
This matter is explained in the first three chapters of this Book. As,
however, that _faith_ which leads the soul to this fountain, and draws
thence effects so excellent and good, also brings forth living and sound
_fruits_; the next three chapters (IV-VI), are spent in describing the
same more at large. But, even as the fruits of righteousness and of the
Spirit are to grow up in us and wax strong, so must the fruits of the
flesh, in proportion, decay and decrease. And this is the daily,
effectual, and unfeigned repentance, wherein a Christian ought constantly
to be employed, if ever the flesh be mortified, and the Spirit be restored
to dominion. It was, therefore, judged expedient, to give here a clear
description of the difference betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, and of the
properties of a daily repentance. Here consult Chapters VII-X. But
inasmuch as from this habitual repentance, and the mortification of the
_old_ man (the life of a true Christian being nothing else but a constant
crucifixion of the flesh), the _new_ man is daily to come forth, it is
impossible to find a more perfect pattern, than that which our Lord Jesus
Christ himself has left us. And for this reason, the life of Christ ought
to be a mirror unto us, in which to view ourselves and him; and by
beholding him, to embrace the more freely his poverty and reproach, his
contempt and sorrow, his cross and passion, his agony and death. And this
holy life of Christ is the death of the flesh, and is accompanied with the
exercise of prayer, love, and humility. This is set forth at large in
Chapters XI-XXV.

3. Thus are the humility and lowliness of Christ a true ladder of
ascension for a penitent soul; by means of which we ascend into the heart
of God, as of a loving Father, and calmly repose in his paternal
affection. It is the _human_ nature of Christ with which we begin our
spiritual life, and rising up higher and higher, arrive at last at his
_divine_ nature. It is then that we contemplate in Christ the heart of our
Father in heaven. It is then that we behold him as the sublime, the
everlasting, essential, and infinite Good; we behold him as the
immeasurable omnipotence, as the unfathomable mercy, the unsearchable
wisdom, the purest holiness, the unspotted and endless righteousness, the
most perfect goodness, the noblest beauty, the most perfect graciousness,
and, at last, as the most joyful salvation. These points, as they chiefly
make up Christian contemplation, so they are explained in Chapters
XXVI-XXXIII. But because no one can ever arrive at this state without
prayer, hence the ensuing ten Chapters (XXXIV-XLIII), treat upon the
nature of _prayer_, and the exercise of divine _praise_. And since this
life, grounded on maxims of sound and unfeigned religion, will soon be
attended with _crosses_ and _tribulations_, there follow fifteen Chapters
(XLIV-LVIII), wherein are considered the _cross_ of Christians, and the
virtue of _patience_, the practice of which is thereby exceedingly
promoted. To all this, something is added of the nature and conquest of
those deep _spiritual temptations_, with which Satan harasses those that
adhere to the Lord, and who endeavor to be faithful to the end.

God grant that we may all be true followers of Christ, not ashamed of his
holy life; but follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, and be led at last
to the living fountains of waters, where the Lord will wipe away all tears
from our eyes! Amen.

JOHN ARNDT,
General Superintendent in the Principality of Lüneburg.




Chapter I.


Jesus Christ, The Son Of God, Is Given To Us By Our Heavenly Father As Our
   Help Against The Damnable And Deadly Poison Of Original Sin, And The
    Pernicious Fruits Thereof, As Well As A Protector Against All The
           Calamities And Evils Both Of The Body And The Soul.


    _With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation._—ISA.
    12:3.


As our distemper is exceedingly great, mortal, damnable, and out of the
power of any creature to remove; therefore it is needful that we should
have a remedy proportioned to the disease; a high, a divine, an
everlasting, remedy and help, entirely derived from the pure mercy of God.
As our original disease was caused by the wrath, hatred, and envy of the
devil (Gen. 3:1): so God, in tender compassion, was moved to heal the
mortal wound of our sin by his infinite mercy. And as Satan had used his
utmost endeavors and subtlety, in order to infect, slay, and condemn us,
God was pleased, in his infinite wisdom, to give us his beloved Son, in
order to restore us to that life, happiness, and salvation which we had
lost. Hence he has made the precious blood of Christ to be the grand
restorative of our nature, and the cleanser from all the contagion of sin.
He hath given us his quickening flesh, to be our bread of life; his holy
wounds, as a sovereign balsam to heal our wounded condition; and his
precious death, to be an abolition of our death, both temporal and
eternal. 1 John 1:7; Acts 20:28; John 6:32, etc.; Isa. 53:5; 25:8.

2. But so disabled, so weak, and undone, is fallen man, that he cannot so
much as apply this precious medicine even when it is freely offered: so
little health, so much weakness is there in him. Nay, we even, by nature,
strive against our cure, and reject the remedy which should help
us.—Wherefore, O Lord, unless thou shouldst draw me after thee (Cant.
1:4), and, as a faithful physician, administer to me what thou hast
ordered, the best prescriptions will avail me nothing. Take me, therefore,
entirely into thine own hands, and trust me not to myself. If I be left to
myself, the eternal ruin of my soul will be my lot. Therefore “turn thou
me, and I shall be turned: heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; for
thou art my praise.” Jer. 31:18; 17:14. As long as thou keepest back thy
mercy, and hidest thy face from my sorrow, I shall remain in a diseased
condition. Ps. 30:3. Whilst thou forbearest to quicken me, I am tied down
by the chains of death. Therefore I cry with David, “I am poor and needy;
make haste unto me, O God. Thou art my help, and my deliverer; O Lord,
make no tarrying.” Ps. 70:5.

3. O blessed Lord! shall not thy mercy be strong enough to raise a sick
soul from her languishing illness? a soul that is not able to raise
herself? Wilt thou not condescend to come to me, since it is not possible
that I should come to thee? Didst thou not love me, even before I had so
much as a thought of loving thee again? Thy mercy is so prevailing and so
strong, that it has even overcome thyself. Was it not mercy that nailed
thee to the cross, and gave thee up to death? What is so strong as to
encounter and conquer thee, if it be not the strength of thy own mercy?
What has might sufficient to apprehend thee, and to bind and conduct thee
to death, but thy love only, wherewith thou hast loved and quickened us,
when we were dead in trespasses and sins? Eph. 2:1. For thou wouldst
thyself undergo the pangs of death, rather than suffer us to be forever
bound over to death and eternal damnation!

4. Thy mercy, O Lord, has made thee all our own, and put a title to all
thy merits into our hands. When thou becamest a tender infant, it was
wholly for our sakes, unto whom thou art “born a child.” Isa. 9:6. When
thou wast made an offering for our sins, and when thou wast slain as an
innocent lamb on the cross, it was to give up thyself unto us, and freely
to impart unto us all things beside. O excellent gift of God! a good
wholly appropriated to us, even our own peculiar good and treasure!

(_a_) Behold! beloved Christian, the wisdom of God! God has by means of
this everlasting good made himself our own property, that he might thereby
in return make us _his own_. For having purchased us “with a price,” we
are no longer our own, but his who hath bought us. 1 Cor. 6:19, 20. For
whosoever receives so excellent a gift, receives also the Giver himself,
from whom it proceeds. And again, whosoever possesses any good as his own,
he makes it his own to all intents and purposes, and to the best advantage
he can. Thus, likewise, is CHRIST become thy own and proper GOOD. Thou
canst apply him in such a manner, as to obtain by him everlasting life and
salvation.

(_b_) CHRIST is become the true medicine of thy soul, to restore thee—thy
meat and thy drink, to refresh thee—thy fountain of life, to quench thy
thirst—thy light, in darkness—thy joy, in sadness—thine advocate, against
thy accusers—wisdom, against thy folly—righteousness, against thy
sin—sanctification, against thy unworthiness—redemption, against thy
bondage—the mercy-seat, against the judgment-seat—the throne of grace,
against thy condemnation—thy absolution, against thy fearful sentence—thy
peace and rest, against an evil conscience—thy victory, against all thine
enemies—thy champion, against all thy persecutors—the bridegroom of thy
soul, against all rivals—thy mediator, against the wrath of God—thy
propitiation, against all thy trespasses—thy strength, against thy
weakness—thy way, against thy wandering—thy truth, against lying and
vanity—thy life, against death. He is thy counsel, when thou hast none to
advise thee—thy power, in the midst of thine infirmities—thy Everlasting
Father, when thou art forsaken and fatherless—thy Prince of Peace, against
the adversary—thy ransom, against thy debt—thy crown of glory, against thy
reproach—thy teacher, against thy ignorance—thy Judge, against thy
oppressor—thy King, to destroy the kingdom of Satan—thine everlasting High
Priest, to intercede for thee.

5. (_a_) Consider now, O Christian, what an excellent gift the Lord JESUS
CHRIST is. Let it be thy daily prayer and supplication to make a true
saving use of all those heavenly benefits, and to improve all the
_offices_ of Christ to the end for which they are designed. If he be thy
Medicine (Matt. 9:12), fear not but thou shalt be healed: since he is thy
Bread (John 6:51), thy soul shall be filled. Is he to thee a Fountain of
Life (Isai. 12:3), then truly thou shalt thirst no more. Is he to thee a
Light (John 8:12), then thou shalt remain no longer in darkness. Is he thy
Joy (Luke 2:10), what then shall afflict thee? Is he the Advocate (1 John
2:1) that pleads thy cause, what adversary shall cast thee? Is he thy
Truth, who shall deceive thee? Is he thy Way, who shall make thee to err?
Is he thy Life (John 14:6), who shall slay thee? Is he thy Wisdom, who
shall seduce thee? Is he thy Righteousness, who shall condemn thee? Is he
thy Sanctification, who shall reject thee? Is he thy Redemption, who shall
imprison thee? 1 Cor. 1:30. Is he thy Peace (Eph. 2:14), who can disturb
thee? Is he thy Mercy-Seat (Rom. 3:25), who can arraign thee? Is he thy
Throne of Grace (Heb. 4:16), who can give sentence against thee? Is he thy
Discharge and Absolution (Colos. 2:14), who then dares impeach thee? Is he
the Champion and the Captain of thy Salvation (Heb. 2:10), who shall be
able to stand against thee? Is he thy Bridegroom (John 3:29), who then
shall snatch thee from him? Is he thy Ransom (1 Tim. 2:6), who will arrest
thee? Is he thy Crown of Glory (Heb. 2:7), who then shall reproach thee?
Is he thy Master (John 13:13), and Teacher, who then shall correct thee?
If he be thy Judge (2 Thess. 1:9), who shall oppress thee? If he be thy
Propitiation (1 John 2:2), who shall accuse thee? If he be thy Mediator (1
Tim. 2:5), who shall set God against thee? If he be thy Advocate (1 John
2:1), who shall prosecute thee? Is he thy Immanuel (Isai. 7:14), who shall
be against thee? Is he thy King (John 12:15), who shall expel thee out of
his kingdom? Is he thy High Priest (Heb. 7:25), who can refuse his
intercession and sacrifice? Is he thy Saviour (Matt. 1:21), who shall
destroy thee?

(_b_) How canst thou have a more excellent, a more valuable present? It is
a present of greater worth than thou thyself, than all mankind, and all
the world besides. It is a present that infinitely surpasses all the sins,
miseries, and calamities of the whole world. Christ hereby is all our own,
both as to his divine and his human nature. It was by sin we had forfeited
the richest of all treasures, the Sovereign Good, even God himself: and it
is by Christ, that all is made up again, and God himself given to us as
our property. And for this reason, Christ is called Immanuel (Isai. 7:14),
(which being interpreted is, _God with us_), that in him we might have
both a God and a Brother.

6. (_a_) Consider now, O Christian! what an immense, what an infinite good
thou hast in Christ thy Redeemer, and to what spiritual benefits thou art
entitled by him. If people were but better acquainted with the sources of
this heavenly comfort, then no cross, no affliction, would seem any longer
insupportable to them; because Christ would be all in all, and by his
presence alleviate the miseries of this life. Christ himself is ours not
only as a crucified Christ, but also as he is glorified, together with all
the majesty that resides in him. “All things are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come; all are yours; and ye are Christ’s; and Christ is God’s.”
1 Cor. 3:21-23.

(_b_) Alas! poor, miserable, accursed, and condemned sinners, that we by
nature all are! How came we to be favored and honored with so high and
inestimable a gift? For thou, O Lord Jesus, art to us—Jehovah our
Righteousness—a Mediator between God and man—our everlasting Priest—the
Christ of God—a Lamb without spot—our propitiatory oblation—the fulfilment
of the law—the Desire of the patriarchs—the Inspirer of the prophets—the
Master of the apostles—the teacher of the evangelists—the light of the
confessors—the crown of the martyrs—the Praise of all the saints—the
resurrection of the dead—the first-born from the dead—the glory of the
blessed—the consolation of the mourners—the righteousness of sinners—the
hope of the afflicted—the refuge of the miserable—the entertainer of
strangers—the fellow-traveller of pilgrims—the way of them that were
mistaken—the help to them who were forsaken—the strength of the weak—the
health of the sick—the protector of the simple—the reward of the just—the
flaming fire of charity—the Author of faith—the anchor of hope—the flower
of humility—the rose of meekness—the root of all the virtues—the exemplar
of patience—the enkindler of devotion—the incense of prayer—the tree of
health—the fountain of blessedness—the bread of life—the Head of the
church—the bridegroom of the soul—the precious pearl—the rock of
salvation—the living stone—the heir of all things—the redemption of the
world—the triumphant Conqueror of Hell—the Prince of Peace—the mighty lion
of Judah—the father of the world to come—the guide to our heavenly
country—the sun of righteousness—the morning star—the inextinguishable
light of the celestial Jerusalem—the brightness of the everlasting
glory—the unspotted mirror—the splendor of the divine majesty—the image of
the paternal goodness—the treasure of wisdom—the abyss of eternity—the
beginning without beginning—the word upholding all things—the life
quickening all things—the light enlightening all things—the truth judging
all things—the counsel moderating all things—the rule directing all
things—the love sustaining all things—the whole comprehension of all that
is good.

(_c_) This is the great and infinite gift, which God has so freely
bestowed upon mortal men.




