Chapter XXXVIII.


            Seven Helps Or Aids For Our Infirmities In Prayer.


    _Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not
    what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh
    intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he
    that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit,
    because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the
    will of God._—ROM. 8:26, 27.


Since our prayers are, alas! very weak and imperfect, let us see what
assistance God has given us in his holy word, in order to help us in that
duty.

2. The _first_ help is our only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ, the
Son of God. 1 John 2:2. He is our advocate, and pleads our cause before
God, when we are hardly able to express what we want. He is therefore
called the _Logos_, or the eternal _Word_ of the Father, because God by
him has discovered his will to us; as He is also called the Mediator,
because He pleads our cause before God. A type of Him we have in Moses,
the mediator of the Old Testament; to whom the people, flying from the
face of God in Mount Sinai, said, “Speak thou with us” (Exod. 20:19). And
when Moses complained that he was slow of speech, and of a slow tongue,
when he was commanded to appear before Pharaoh; God tells him, “Aaron, thy
brother, can speak well. He shall be to thee instead of a mouth.” Exod.
4:10, 14, 16. So we also, when we should pray, are dull and slow of
speech, and therefore we must fly to Christ, our heavenly Aaron, who is to
us instead of a mouth. The same thing is expressed to us by the
mercy-seat. Exod. 25:17, 21. Therefore Christ commands us to pray in his
name (John 16:23), who is our eternal High Priest, having an everlasting
priesthood (Heb. 7:16), interceding for us (Rom. 8:34), “in whom we have
boldness, and access with confidence by the faith of him.” Eph. 3:12.

3. The _second_ help is God the Holy Ghost. “I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and of
supplication.” Zech. 12:10. This spirit is given us as a testimony of the
divine grace, and of our adoption. Hence St. John says, “Hereby know we
that we dwell in him, because he hath given us of his Spirit.” 1 John
4:13. And St. Paul, “Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.” Rom.
8:15, 16. He was also typified by the anointing of the priests under the
law. Exod. 28:41; 29:7. Thus God has anointed us with the Spirit of Christ
(1 John 2:20); that we should offer to him daily the fruit of our lips.
Ps. 69:30, 31; Heb. 13:15. This Spirit of God is the author of all those
devout aspirations which we meet with, such as: “O Lord, hear; O Lord,
forgive; O Lord, hearken and do.” Dan. 9:19.

4. The _third_ help to strengthen us in prayer, is found in _the promises
of God_. “Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee.”
Ps. 50:15. “He shall call upon me, and I will answer him.” Ps. 91:15. See
also Ps. 145:19; Luke 11:11, 13, and 18. “Before they call, I will hear.”
Isa. 60:24. “The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open to their prayers.” Ps. 34:16. “Whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord shall be delivered.” Joel 2:32. “Ask, seek, knock.” Matt. 7:7.
“The Lord is rich (in mercy, Eph. 2:4) to all that call upon him.” Rom.
10:12. See also Luke 11:11-13; 18:6, 7.

5. The _fourth_ help in prayer, is _the remembrance of the saints_, whose
prayers God has heard. Look at the examples of the ancients, and be
strengthened. And, indeed, we must needs be so, when we seasonably call to
mind instances of God’s providence and divine assistance. Upon this
foundation all the prophets of old built their prayers. Thus, when God was
angry with Israel for the sin of the golden calf, and said to Moses: “Let
me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them” (Ex. 32:10); “then Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach,”
as the Psalmist expresses it (Ps. 106:23), putting God in mind of his
former mercies, saying, “Lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy
people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt, with great
power, and with a mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and
say, For mischief did he bring them out to slay them in the mountains, and
to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath,
and repent of this evil against thy people, etc. And the Lord repented of
the evil which he thought to do unto his people.” Exod. 32:11-14.

6. David had recourse to the same remedy in almost all his Psalms; putting
God in mind, as it were, of his former mercies, goodness, and
faithfulness. So Ps. 25:6, “Remember thy tender mercies.” Ps. 77:5, etc.,
“I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times,” etc. Ps.
85:1-6, “Lord, thou hast been favorable unto thy land: thou hast brought
back the captivity of Jacob. Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy
people; thou hast covered all their sin. Thou hast taken away all thy
wrath; thou hast turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger. Turn
us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease. Wilt
thou be angry with us forever? Wilt thou draw out thine anger to all
generations? Wilt thou not revive us again; that thy people may rejoice in
thee?”

7. How admirably does the prophet Isaiah use the same form of supplication
(chap. 63:10-16), putting God in mind of his former mercies, and opening,
as it were, by this key, the immense treasures of his compassion. “Where
is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the shepherd of his flock?
where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him? That led them by the
right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing the water before
them, to make himself an everlasting name? That led them through the deep,
as a horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? As a beast
goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest: so
didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. Look down
from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy
glory; where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels,
and of thy mercies towards me? Are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not:
thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.”

8. This prayer of the prophet is founded upon these arguments: (1.)
Because the love of God is _eternal_, therefore it will not be withheld
from _me_. (2.) I acknowledge myself to be a sinner but, at the same time,
I remember that thy grace has been extended to sinners who repented.
“Remember not the sins of my youth.” Ps. 25:7. (3.) My sins have been very
great, but let thy mercy also be great. (4.) Remember that I am the work
of thine own hands. “Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as
the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again? Thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit.” Job 10:9, 12.

9. The _fifth_ comfort in prayer is, _the tender love of God_ to mankind,
and his promises to help the afflicted. “Look upon mine affliction and my
pain; and forgive all my sins.” Ps. 25:18. Again, “This poor man cried,
and the Lord heard him.” Ps. 34:6. Thus we are assured that God does not
despise the miseries of the distressed, although proud men may do it. For
God judges not as corrupt man judges; he has not eyes of flesh, nor doth
he see as man seeth. Job 10:4. And as it generally happens among us, that
the more need a man has of friends, the fewer he finds; so, on the other
hand, God has a more tender and particular regard for him that is
destitute and afflicted. “The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart, and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.” Ps. 34:18. “Thou hast
seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy
hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the
fatherless.” Ps. 10:14. And, indeed, such are the proper objects of divine
mercy. To enhance the comfort and certainty of these promises, the
Psalmist mentions various classes of the afflicted; so that none who are
in distress may despair: “The Lord executeth judgment for the oppressed;
which giveth food to the hungry. The Lord looseth the prisoners; the Lord
openeth the eyes of the blind; the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down;
the Lord loveth the righteous; the Lord preserveth the strangers; he
relieveth the fatherless and widows.” Ps. 146:7-9. To this may be referred
what the prophet Isaiah says, “To this man will I look, even to him that
is poor, and of contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my word.” Isa.
66:2. And “The expectation of the poor shall not perish forever.” Ps.
9:18. And “He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer.” Ps. 102:17.

10. The _sixth_ help is, the consideration of _God’s unspeakable
compassion_. He puts a better construction upon our prayers than we
intended, and understands our necessities more perfectly than we can
express them. He makes merciful allowance for our infirmities in prayer;
according to the words of Abraham, “Let not the Lord be angry, and I will
speak.” Gen. 18:30. Hence St. Paul says, “Blessed be God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort, who comforteth us in all our tribulation.” 2 Cor. 1:3. Compare
this with Ps. 103:8. By virtue of this compassion of God, none of our
prayers are in vain. God keeps an exact account of all our sighs and tears
(Ps. 56:8), for the sake of those tears which Christ our blessed Saviour
shed, who, in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers and supplications
with strong crying and tears. Heb. 5:7.

11. The _seventh_ help in prayer, is the remembrance of the _covenant of
grace_, which God has made with us. “This shall be the covenant,” etc.
Jer. 31:33. And, “The covenant of my peace shall not be removed, saith the
Lord, that hath mercy on thee.” Isa. 54:10. “Ho, every one that thirsteth,
come! I will make an everlasting covenant with you.” Isa. 55:1, 3. In this
covenant of grace the assurance that our prayers shall be heard is
contained. “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while
he is near.” Isa. 55:6.

12. What we have said upon this head, is most happily exemplified in the
prayer of Daniel. “O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the
covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his
commandments.—And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth
out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown,
as at this day.” (Here is the putting God in mind of his former mercies.)
“Hear, O our God, the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the
Lord’s sake.” (This is pleading the name and merits of Jesus the Messiah.)
“O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do.” (These are the
groans of the Holy Spirit.) “O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open
thine eyes, and behold our desolations” (in regard of his promise);
“because for our sins, and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and
thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us.” (Here is a
confession of sin, and an acknowledgment of misery.) “For we do not
present our supplications before thee, for our righteousnesses, but for
thy great mercies” (this is an acknowledgment of man’s unworthiness, and
of God’s mercy, which is followed with a remembrance of the covenant);
“For thy city and thy people are called by thy name.” Dan. 9:4, 15, 17,
18, 19, 16.




