Chapter XXI.


              Of The Power Of The Noble Virtue Of Humility.


    _Be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth
    grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty
    hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time._—1 PET. 5:5, 6.


Without true humility all prayer is in vain. Our Lord Jesus Christ is the
Book from which this noble virtue is best learned; as he is, indeed, a
perfect mirror to us of all the virtues and graces. Look on his life, and
thou wilt find it made up of nothing but love and humility. Look on his
doctrine, and thou wilt discern it to be absolute wisdom and truth; a
doctrine consisting not in words, but in a living power; and in very deed
itself.

2. Now, in order that we might perfectly learn how to practise this virtue
of humility, he taught it not only by words, but also by deeds and by his
holy example, forasmuch as he humbled himself unto death, even the death
of the cross. Phil. 2:8. Behold, then, O Christian, how this gracious
virtue has its foundation, and its highest and most excellent ground, not
in any angel, not in any apostle or eminent saint, but in Jesus Christ
himself. And therefore he saith: “Learn of me” (Matt. 11:29), which is as
if he had said: “Look ye upon me how I abase myself under all, who yet am
above all. Behold, as much higher as my majesty is, so much lower is my
humility: and so much dearer should this virtue be to you, as I your Lord
and your God have described and delineated it in my whole life.” Observe,
he saith, “Learn of me.” But what? Not to do mighty wonders, not to work
signs and miracles, or show any great work of creation, but to be _meek_
and _lowly_. “And if I did not teach you this with mine own example,”
saith the meek Lamb of God, “ye would not believe that this virtue is so
high and so noble.”

3. The humble Jesus chose to exemplify this as his concluding work: after
his last supper, he took a towel and girded himself, and then “washed his
disciples’ feet;” that so he might by such example implant this virtue in
all that should be ever called by his name, and might most sensibly
imprint it on the heart of every one to whom this Gospel should come.
Wherefore he also saith: “Know ye what I have done to you?” John 13:4, 5,
12. “Do ye indeed consider what it is that I have done? Will ye remember
this that I have now done to you? Will ye be ready to serve one another in
the same manner? And will ye humble yourselves one to the other, and
submit gladly even to the meanest offices of charity? O learn of me, by
what you have at this time seen me do: for I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done to you. Whosoever then shall forget my
humility, the same shall forget a principal part both of my doctrine and
my example, and shall never find rest unto his soul. Therefore let this my
example be a rule for your whole lives, and let my life evermore be set
before your eyes as a representation of humility.”

4. And now let us show that without humility all prayer to God is utterly
vain. Humility is a bright light in the heart, in which there is at once
discovered to us our own nothingness, and the high majesty and overflowing
goodness of God. Hence the more any man knows himself, the more he must
needs come to the knowledge of his own nothingness. For when a man sees
his own emptiness, and learns that he is destitute in himself of
everything that is good, he begins to pray the more earnestly for the
grace and mercy of God. He pants after, and betakes himself to God, as to
the origin and fountain of all good things; desiring to know him aright,
to praise him, and to honor him as he should. This desire being thus
begotten in him, he pours out his heart by himself, and says, “When shall
I come and appear before God?” In this humility he looks at God’s majesty
and greatness, as also at his superabundant love and grace. And hereupon
the streams of grace flow down into such a faithful, humble soul, by
prayer. And divine grace being thus communicated to the thirsty soul,
there is hereby begotten in it a spirit of prayer, which ceases not to
ascend in holy aspirations, and to bring down the blessings of peace and
righteousness. Through such grace of God there is a descent of the Holy
Spirit into the soul, whose influences thereby grow continually stronger
and stronger: and the “love of God” is by this means “shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost” (Rom. 5:5), which is given to us through the
prayer of humility. For when the believing soul, conscious of her own
vileness, reflects upon the humiliation of the Son of God, and beholds him
humbling himself so as not only to put off the form of _God_, that he
might appear in that of _man_, but even to suffer the greatest of evils in
this vile form, for the vilest of his creatures; by this reflection and
consideration, he is not only made humble, but hence, also, in this his
humility, there springs up a most noble flame of love to God, which burns
more and more day by day. And in this divine flame of love, the soul,
being attracted by faith to God, is hence made to love all men in God, and
in Christ; as calling to mind the exceeding great love of the Godhead
towards mankind; and particularly how her Heavenly Father has in Christ
loved her, and called her to the participation of his goodness. When thus
the soul is drawn to God, and included in his love, the consequence is
this, that as to all those who are beloved by God, the soul also cannot
but love in like manner as God loveth them.

5. Hence it follows, that if any good befall our neighbor, charity will
rejoice; but if any evil happen to him, it will sorrow. And the humble and
the charitable person, behaving himself courteously and lovingly towards
his neighbor on all occasions, does not rashly judge him, if he behold his
misery; much less does he behave himself haughtily and superciliously
towards him, or treat him with contempt. 1 Cor. 13:4. For the soul that is
truly humble, can never so put off the sense of her own misery and
vileness, as to despise another, or to esteem herself better than any; for
she remembers the mire out of which she herself has been delivered. And
while she stands, she knows well enough that she does not stand by her own
strength, but solely by the help of divine grace.

6. Humble charity judges itself in the first place, examines itself before
all, and influences us to condemn ourselves rather than others: and a
neighbor’s calamity will cause the soul to descend into herself, and
deplore herself before God. In another’s fall, the lowly and loving soul
reads her own defaults, her own sins and transgressions, her own calamity
and misery.

7. Moreover, by humility a man is confirmed in the knowledge of God, and
established in hope. Having a consciousness of his own ignorance,
blindness, and folly, in divine matters, he gives thanks to God for the
revelation of his word, and imprints it more diligently on his heart. But
considering also, that as he has no knowledge of God and divine things in
himself, so likewise all his own abilities are nothing before God: he is
hence established in a godly hope, placing his confidence in nothing but
God only.

8. Another fruit of humility is, that it renders a man acceptable to
others, even in the very outward course of his life. For it avoids
contentions and quarrels, and composes the whole man to gentleness and
benignity. Yea, a man is conformed by means of it even to Christ himself,
who says in one of the Psalms: “But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was
as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth. Thus I was as a man that heareth
not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.” Ps. 38:13, 14. Such a faithful
and humble man as this is a living member of Christ, in whom Christ
liveth.

9. Besides, humility brings with it true inward peace of the mind; so that
he who is the possessor of it can by no miseries and calamities whatever
be unduly distressed or disquieted, but may with St. Paul say: “Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ?” Romans 8:35. And he is mindful
always of that saying: “My grace is sufficient for thee.” 2 Cor. 12:9.

10. True humility also begets silence. He who is endued therewith, as he
is sensible of his own ignorance and foolishness, will beware of speaking
a great deal, or of being over-forward to teach others.

11. In short, it is impossible to enumerate how many spiritual benefits
and fruits, how many heavenly treasures of virtues and graces, are
comprehended in, and flow from, this most noble virtue; so that it may
deservedly be regarded as a spiritual treasury. It is, therefore, not
without reason, that the Son of God, our light, life, salvation, and
treasure, would have us to learn it even of _himself_. O that this holy
wish of our Lord might be fulfilled by all Christians; and that they would
with all diligence learn from Him this most excellent virtue!

12. If it be asked, What is the means for acquiring this virtue, and by
what way may one arrive at so great a treasure, which abounds so richly in
the gifts of celestial grace? I answer, that there are two: first, ardent
and devout prayer; and secondly, constant meditation on Christ crucified.
Let us look earnestly to the passion and death of Christ, and let us
meditate on it, as on a holy Book of life, till this root of the Christian
virtues, with all which accompany it, grow up day by day in our hearts, as
in a fruitful and well-cultivated soul.




