Chapter XVI.


  Showing How Christians Are To Seek And Obtain Favor And Glory Through
                            Christ, In Heaven.


    _Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise, etc._—PS. 109:1, etc


This is a prayer of the eternal Son of God. The purport or substance of
this prayer, may be more fully expressed in this manner:

“My Heavenly Father! thou knowest that in this world I have not sought my
own glory, but the glory of thy holy name, and the salvation of all men:
and therefore am I so bitterly persecuted, blasphemed, contemned, and
vilified. Nevertheless, this is my comfort, that thou art my Father, and
that I am thy only begotten Son: lo! this is my glory, in heaven with
thee. And this my glory wilt thou in due time manifest and bring to light;
that by thy glorifying of me, the world may see who it is whom they have
blasphemed and persecuted.” John 12:28.

2. Hence we are to learn, that such have the greatest glory and praise in
heaven, who in this world are the most persecuted for righteousness’ sake.
This we may gather from the example of our Lord himself. From him, the
true Book of Life, we may learn true wisdom. But that we may the better
understand that his example and holy life are our Book of Life, let us
carefully observe the following considerations: (1) Christ never sought
upon earth his own glory in anything, but accounted it sufficient for him,
that God alone was his glory. So let us, in like manner, reject the empty
glory and praises of this world, in whatever we do; endeavoring only that
God be glorified in us, saying, “Ah, Lord God! give us also such a heart,
even the heart of Christ thy Son, that we may have our glory in _Thee_
alone, and not in _ourselves_; that we may have our glory in heaven, and
not upon earth.”

3. (2) It was the highest glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he was the
only begotten Son of God. And for this reason did the world persecute,
vilify, and blaspheme him. Here let our prayer be like this: “Grant us
also, Holy Father, that we may count it our greatest glory and joy, that
we are thy children; that so we may also obtain the eternal enjoyment of
thy love and promise, and may, by virtue of our adoption, come to possess
in thee an everlasting inheritance. Remind us, also, that if the world
hate, envy, reproach, and persecute us, it has done the same to thy dear
and holy child Jesus.”

4. (3) It is the glory of the Lord Jesus, that he wrought so many divine
works, that he went about continually doing the most wondrous acts of
grace and beneficence to mankind: and that he did this from pure love
only, and from the highest compassion for the miseries of fallen nature;
although he received nothing but hatred and most heinous ingratitude in
return. “Grant us, blessed God, grateful and faithful hearts, so that we
may be always ready to do good to as many as we possibly can; and that we
may never be deterred from acts of charity, by the unthankfulness of the
world, ascribing not to ourselves, but to thy name only, the glory of all
that we do.”

5. (4) It is the highest glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, that out of pure
love, he laid down his life for us; that he purchased us with his own
blood; that he was obedient to the Father, even unto death; that with the
greatest meekness he endured the vilest reproach; and with the utmost
patience, bore the pains of the cross. “O God, our glory, help us, that we
may also overcome our enemy with love; that we may subdue our flesh with
godly obedience; bear the reproach of the world with the meekness and long
suffering of Christ; obtain the victory through patience; and being thus
made strong in the Lord, be more than conquerors through him that loved
us!”

6. (5) The highest glory of the blessed Jesus, is his exaltation to the
right hand of God, and the name given him, which is “above every name;
that, at the name of Jesus, every knee, both in heaven and in earth,
should bow, and all tongues confess him to be their Lord.” Phil. 2:9-11.
“Help, O gracious God! that we may esteem it our highest glory to be made
conformable to our ever-blessed Head and Saviour; that so when he shall
hereafter appear in power and majesty, we also may appear with him in
glory, after we have here endured the contempt of the world, and continued
faithful to the end, when every man shall have praise of God.” 1 Cor. 4:5;
2 Cor. 4:17.

7. (6) The glory of Christ the Lord is, that he is the only Head of his
Church in general, and of every member thereof in particular; a glorious
King of his people; and an everlasting High priest, making intercession
for us. “Help us with thy grace, O God most gracious, that we may evermore
account it our greatest glory, that we are members of thy Son, and
subjects of his kingdom, and that we may enjoy all the privileges and
benefits purchased by his high-priestly intercession, sacrifice, and
benediction.”

8. (7) Another branch of the glory of Christ is, that God has most
wonderfully displayed and magnified his name throughout the whole world:
and has (in opposition to all his enemies, blasphemers, and persecutors,
who would not own him to be the Son of God), in the most public and solemn
manner attested his cause, declared him to be his Son by mighty signs and
wonders, and established faith in his name amongst many nations and
languages. Notwithstanding that God held his peace for a while, and vailed
the glory of his Son under the mystery of the cross; yet did it break
forth the more gloriously like the sun. For, “out of Zion, the perfection
of beauty, God hath shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep
silence.” For though God, who is our glory, may seem now and then to be
silent, and to hold his peace when we are insulted and persecuted; yet is
there nothing more certain, than that after the short hour of probation,
he will no longer keep silence, but with a high hand deliver us from the
reproach which we suffered, and “remove his stroke away from us,” that we
may rejoice in his salvation. Ps. 39:10. However, “it doth not yet appear
what we shall then be.” 1 John 3:2.

9. The conclusion of the whole is this: It is God alone who is to be _our
glory_; it is not the world, nor wealth, nor honor, nor greatness, nor the
arm of flesh, that I may call my glory; but God, and only God, is my
glory! Wherefore, “let not the wise man glory in his wisdom” (as it is
written), “neither let the mighty man glory in his might, nor let the rich
man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he
understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord.” Jer. 9:23, 24; 1 Cor.
1:31.




