Chapter XXXV.


Prayer Is The Sign Of A True Christian, That Is, Of One Who Is Anointed Of
                                The Lord.


    _Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and
    needy._—PS. 86:1.


These words give us an admirable account of the grounds and reasons of
prayer; that it is quickened by affliction and a sense of misery, and is a
mark of a true Christian.

2. I. For, first, every Christian is anointed and baptized with the Holy
Spirit (1 John 2:20), who, when he is not resisted nor grieved, but
obeyed, is continually groaning (Rom. 8:26) in the heart of man, raising
and exalting the devout soul from earth to heaven. For as spirituous
liquor extracts the strength and virtue of the herbs and flowers on which
it is poured; so man, who is the flower of God, planted by the Lord
himself, “a plant in the house of God” (Isa. 61:3; Ps. 92:13), must
receive the preparation of the Holy Spirit, that his odor and sweet smell
may therewith ascend up to God. Whosoever will faithfully attend to the
workings of the Holy Spirit, and not resist his operations, will soon be
convinced of the truth of these observations; he will perceive a devout
sigh springing up from his heart, and breaking forth into these or the
like words: “Great God, Holy Father, have mercy upon me!” As myrrh,
frankincense, or other sweet perfumes, by being thrown upon burning coals,
send forth a smoke and delicious fragrance, which they would not do
without the help of fire; so whenever the fire of the Holy Spirit touches
our hearts, and He is not hindered, there immediately arises a most
fragrant perfume of sighs and prayers. And these are “golden vials full of
odors, which are the prayers of saints.” Rev. 5:8. Whence it appears, that
devout sighs and prayers are the truest sign or indication of the Holy
Spirit in the heart of man.

3. II. The soul of man is also called the temple or habitation of the Holy
Ghost; and what is more likely to be heard there, than the prayers of its
divine Inhabitant, who is emphatically called, “The Spirit of grace and of
supplication”? Zech. 12:10. Hence prayer, when it proceeds from the very
bottom of the heart, is a certain sign of the indwelling of the Holy
Spirit. I do not here refer to the prayers of hypocrites, of whom God
speaketh by the mouth of his prophet, saying: “This people draw near me
with their mouth, but have removed their heart far from me” (Isa. 29:13);
but the true prayer, which is of the operation of the Holy Spirit, arises
from the depth of the soul; and is like plentiful springs of water, for
which the more deeply you dig, the higher you may raise them. Christ is
the pure and beautiful fountain of salvation. Let every one, therefore,
that thirsteth, come and drink. Isa. 55:1. His spring is very deep,
namely, his eternal Divinity. “He that believeth on him, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water” (John 7:38); that is, prayers and the
gifts of the Holy Ghost.

4. III. This is confirmed by the office of the Holy Spirit, which is, “to
teach and to comfort” (John 16:7-13), neither of which he can do, unless
He speaks; and that He cannot do, unless He have a church and a temple to
speak in. This temple is the heart of man; and his language consists of
the devout aspirations of the souls in which He operates; he has a secret
and heavenly voice, which our heart hears, for he beareth witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God,—whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
Rom. 8:15, 16. Man cannot receive comfort, unless his heart, by being
broken and contrite, be made capable of consolation. Ps. 51:17. This is a
very significant figure taken from human bodies. For when the arm, or any
other part, is broken, or bruised by some accident, what pleasure the
broken and bruised part feels when soothed with some healing ointment! How
does it assuage the throbbing pains of the limb, and, as it were, lull it
into soft repose! So when the heart is wounded with affliction and sorrow,
is broken and bruised with a lively sense of its misery, then the Holy
Spirit shows himself truly a Comforter, shedding forth the oil of heavenly
consolation into our afflicted breasts. For “he healeth the broken in
heart, and bindeth up their wounds.” Ps. 147:3. “Heal me, O Lord, and I
shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.”
Jer. 17:14.

5. IV. Hence then we may learn the advantage of afflictions, and the
benefit of the cross. Our blessed Lord has told us, “They that be whole
need not a physician, but they that are sick.” Matt. 9:12. Come,
therefore, thou divine Physician of souls; for we all have need of thee!
“Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy” (Ps.
86:1),—poor in righteousness and true holiness. So great is the poverty of
man, that unless he be covered with the mercy of God, and clothed with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ (Isa. 61:10), he must appear with shame and
nakedness before the judgment of God and all his holy angels; and in this
respect, man is by nature reduced so very low, that there is not a more
indigent creature in the world. We may here apply that which was spoken to
the church of Laodicea, “Thou knowest not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.” Rev. 3:17.

6. Moreover, the misery of which the Psalmist complains, is the effect of
poverty. He that is poor, may easily be conceived to be miserable. He
certainly is so, who is forsaken by all, has none to help him, wanders
about, having neither house nor home, nor a place where to lay his head.
And now, what state can we conceive to be more wretched, than that of a
man by nature? He has no place where to rest himself, and knows not
whither to fly for refuge! “If in this life only we have hope in Christ,
we are of all men most miserable.” 1 Cor. 15:19. Let us then acknowledge
our poverty and spiritual misery in this life; we shall then receive the
instructions and consolations of the Holy Spirit. He will teach us in our
poverty, to sigh earnestly after the riches of divine grace and mercy; and
in our spiritual misery and banishment, to lift up our eyes to God that
dwelleth in the heavens. For our blessed Lord has assured us, that “in his
Father’s house are many mansions” (John 14:2); and the Psalmist, that
“when our fathers and mothers forsake us, the Lord will take us up.” Ps.
27:10. Come then, ye that are in want and banishment, think upon your
heavenly country. Ye that are poor, naked, and destitute, remember that
the righteousness of Christ is your clothing, and the garment of salvation
(Isa. 61:10); therefore, take ye care to preserve this clothing, “lest ye
walk naked, and men see your shame.” Rev. 16:15.




