Chapter XXXVI.


On The Benefits And Power Of Prayer, And On Its True Ground Or Foundation.


    _Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
    may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need._—HEB.
    4:16.


“Hear my voice according to thy lovingkindness, O Lord” (Ps. 119:149),
saith David; pointing out thereby the foundation of our prayer, namely,
the grace of God; and this is conveyed to us through our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is “full of grace and truth,” and of whose fulness we ought
all to receive. John 1:14, 16. For this reason he is also called the
_Throne of Grace_ (Heb. 4:16; Rom. 3:25), upon which the eye of faith in
prayer ought continually to be fixed, according to the example of the
children of Israel, who always offered up their prayers with their faces
towards the mercy-seat. For in his name, and for his sake alone it is,
that God has promised to hear our prayers (John 16:23); and thus even the
holy prophets of old prayed: “O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant,
for the Lord’s sake.” Dan. 9:17.

2. I. _First_, the benefit of our prayers is well expressed by holy David
in the latter part of the above-mentioned verse (Ps. 119:149): “Quicken me
according to thy judgments.” For life proceeds from the grace of God. But
what is our life without divine grace? Therefore says the holy Psalmist,
“Thy lovingkindness is better than life.” Ps. 63:4. This quickening virtue
is also derived to us through Christ Jesus. It was for this purpose that
he took our flesh and blood, that by the quickening virtue of his body, we
also might be quickened. And this we receive only by the means of prayer,
which draws down a quickening power into our souls, to heal all our
spiritual infirmities; like that which flowed from His body whilst on
earth, to cure and heal the diseases and distempers of all those that
touched him. Luke 6:19. Thus when we are afflicted and sorrowful, and can
lay hold on Jesus Christ by the prayer of faith, we immediately find, as
it were, new life and vigor flowing into our souls from that inexhaustible
fountain of divine grace. This may be attested by the experience of many
languishing and afflicted souls.

3. Whence we may learn: 1. That an afflicted soul cannot be refreshed or
comforted without prayer; as appears from the example of Christ, in the
history of his passion (Matt. 26:39), who has himself also for that reason
given us a form of prayer. Matt. 6:9, etc. And we have, indeed, great
reason to be thankful to God, who has given us prayer to be as an
universal remedy to all afflicted souls. 2. Where the prophet says, “Hear
me according to thy lovingkindness” (Ps. 119:149), he shows us that prayer
is the proper means of obtaining mercy and the graces of the Holy Spirit,
such as the increase of faith, charity, patience, the knowledge of God,
devotion, inward peace and joy. These are such gifts, such graces, such
heavenly treasures, as are better than heaven and earth. Moreover, hence
we obtain strength and victory against the world, the devil, and all our
enemies; which spiritual strength consists only in prayer. That was the
power by which David and all the saints conquered their enemies, as
appears by the example of Moses, Elias, Jehoshaphat, and others, who
always prevailed by faith and prayer. 3. Every man has need of prayer in
respect to his office, condition, and employment, in which no man can act
either prudently or successfully without prayer. We are, indeed, in this
miserable world, like people sailing amidst rocks and quicksands, and
exposed to innumerable dangers; for which reason we ought the more
fervently to implore the guidance and protection of the Holy Spirit.

4. II. Therefore, holy David adds, “They draw nigh that follow after
mischief; they are far from thy law.” Ps. 119:150. And this is a proper
season for prayer. For what the devil cannot do himself, he leaves to be
accomplished by wicked men, who are as so many executioners of his malice,
and who make it their continual employment to disturb and injure good men.
From these no man is secure; but here the most effectual help is prayer.
Thus, “I will call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised; so shall I
be saved from mine enemies.” Ps. 18:2. “Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul. O my God, I trust in thee; let me not be ashamed; let not mine
enemies triumph over me. Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed; but
let them be ashamed which transgress without cause.” Ps. 25:1-3.

5. But it ought to be carefully noticed that David says, his enemies are
far from the law of God. These are all they that persecute others,
forsaking the word of God, and being far from his fear; whence it follows,
that as they are far from God, so God is far from them, and nothing but
destruction hangs over their heads. On the other hand, the faithful,
pious, and devout soul approaches God through prayer.

6. When, therefore, we are daily lifting up our hearts to God, and learn
to converse with him, we approach continually nearer and nearer to him,
and by degrees, forgetting this lower world, from earthly we become
heavenly and spiritual; like Moses, whose face, when he had conversed
forty days and forty nights with God, shone like the sun. Exod. 34:29. For
as we easily learn the customs and manners of those with whom we converse,
and are not so well pleased with any company as that to which we are
accustomed, so by continual and daily prayer, we grow daily more and more
acquainted with the manners and language of our heavenly country, and are
more and more inflamed with divine love. Moreover, prayer is a
preservative against sins, temptations, and all kinds of evils; according
to that saying of Christ: “Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation.” Matt. 26:41. But if even then anything befall us, we know
that it is by the immediate permission of God; and from it with all due
submission and resignation to his will, we may lawfully pray to be
delivered.

7. III. David proceeds: “Thou art near, O Lord: and all thy commandments
are truth.” Ps. 119:151. Here he assures us, that the second and the third
foundation of prayer, are the presence and the truth of God.

8. How great soever our calamities may be, there is no one consideration
that gives us so much ease and comfort, as that of the presence of God
with us: according to that Scripture: “Fear thou not, for I am with thee:
be not dismayed, for I am thy God.” Isa. 41:10. In consideration of his
presence, we may with assurance call upon him in all places, and upon all
occasions. For though our Saviour tells us, “Thou, when thou prayest,
enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly” (Matt. 6:6): yet we are to consider, that these words
were spoken against the hypocrites of those times, who, from a vain
ostentation, used to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners
of the street; but they are by no means binding on any man to pray in any
one particular place.

9. We read of the patriarch Isaac (Gen. 24:63), that he went out at the
eventide into the field to meditate. And it is plain (Luke 6:12), that our
blessed Lord went alone “into a mountain to pray, and continued all night
in prayer to God.” We may, therefore, in all places, and at any time, pray
to God; but more especially when we are alone, and not disturbed by the
conversation of others. Let us continually stir ourselves up to this
divine conversation with God, remembering the words of the Psalmist, “Thou
art near, O Lord.” Now if this be true, as it most certainly is, we cannot
do better than to be often conversing with him; according to that
Scripture, “Call ye upon him while he is near.” Isa. 55:6. “The Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him.” Ps. 145:18.

10. IV. So, too, the veracity of God is a strong obligation upon us to
pray, because we know, 1. That he has commanded it; “Call upon me.” Ps.
50:15. 2. That he has promised to hear us; “Before they call, I will
answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.” Isa. 65:24. 3. That
he has not only promised to hear, but has actually heard the prayers of
the faithful. This is plain, from the examples of Moses, David, Samuel,
Joshua, and of Cornelius in the Acts, whose “prayers and alms ascended up
for a memorial before God.” Acts 10:4.

11. Many other examples are to be found in the Holy Scriptures. And that
thou mayest not think that, because thou art not such a one as Moses,
David, Elias, or Joshua, therefore thou shalt not be heard as easily as
they were, thou art to consider that they all were men “subject to like
passions as we are.” James 5:17.

12. Who was Cornelius? Acts, ch. 10. He was a heathen. Who was Manasseh? 2
Chron. 33:12, 13. A most grievous sinner. Yet God has promised that he
will hear the miserable. Ps. 34:7. “This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him.” And “He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not
despise their prayer.” Ps. 102:17. “The expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever.” Ps. 9:18. The cases just mentioned illustrate these
promises.

13. V. But as the Psalmist adds: “Concerning thy testimonies, I have known
of old, that thou hast founded them for ever” (Ps. 119:152), this
consideration exceedingly encourages our prayers and strengthens our
faith, and is another immovable foundation of prayer. The word and promise
of God are built upon an eternal foundation, being nothing else but God
himself and his Son Jesus Christ; in him the Word of God, and the
salvation of man were founded “before the foundation of the world.” Eph.
1:4. Whatsoever is built upon an eternal basis, no temporal thing can
overturn. It is this that St. Paul had in his eye when he tells us that
neither height, nor depth, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
angels, nor principalities shall be able to separate us from the love of
God. Rom. 8:38.

14. And what greater consolation can we wish? Or who can refrain from
rejoicing, when he considers that our faith and prayer are founded upon
that which is eternal? Hence it is said, “Behold, I lay in Zion for a
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste” (Isa. 28:16); or, as
St. Peter explains it, “shall not be confounded” (1 Peter 2:6): and St.
Paul, “Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ” (1 Cor. 3:11); and again, “The foundation of God standeth sure,
having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his.” 2 Tim. 2:19.

15. Against this foundation even the gates of hell shall not prevail.
Matt. 16:18. This, in short, is the foundation of our salvation, our faith
and blessedness, which is more secure than heaven and earth.

16. For prayer is a conversation with God—a key of heaven—a free access to
God—a familiarity with God—an opener of his mysteries—a spiritual
banquet—a heavenly enjoyment—a nurse of virtues—a conqueror of vices—a
medicine of the soul—a remedy against infirmities—an antidote against
sin—a pillar of the world—a seed of blessing—an increase of faith—a
support of hope—a parent of charity—a path of righteousness—a preserver of
constancy—an ornament of holiness—a fire of devotion—a light of
knowledge—a repository of wisdom—the strength of the soul—a remedy against
faint-heartedness—a foundation of peace—the joy of the heart—a jubilee of
the soul—a faithful companion in this earthly pilgrimage—the shield of a
Christian soldier—a rule of humility—a forerunner of honor—a nurse of
patience—a guardian of obedience—a fountain of quietness—the conquest of
devils—a comfort of the sorrowful—a triumph of the just—the joy of the
saints—a helper of the oppressed—the ease of the afflicted—the rest of the
weary—an ornament of the conscience—an advancement of graces—an acceptable
sacrifice—an encourager of mutual goodwill—the refreshment of this
miserable life—the sweetening of death—a foretaste of the heavenly
life—the earnest desire of everlasting salvation.




