Chapter XIII.


      Showing That God’s Love Appears In All His Works, Even In His
                              Chastisements.


    _He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us
    according to our iniquities._—PS. 103:10.


As love is the root and principle of all the divine acts and operations,
it follows that even afflictions, which are the work of God, proceed from
love, and ought to be received by man as instances of God’s favor. For
love is the root of all the operations of God.

2. Hence no man ought to murmur against God when He corrects him, or
repine at His chastisements, or quarrel with His judgments. Our sufferings
are not chargeable upon God, but upon ourselves. It would become us much
better to bear his corrections without remitting our love towards him;
even as he punishes us, and yet tenderly loves us still. This would be a
true instance and proof of the sincerity of our love to God.

3. And though there is no proportion between the love of God towards man,
and the love which the most perfect Christian bears to God, the one being
infinite and the other finite; yet is it our duty continually to aim at
the highest degrees attainable by us. We should endeavor that our love may
be holy, pure, sincere, and persevering, even in the midst of sufferings
and afflictions; as the love of God towards us is ardent, pure,
unchangeable, and everlasting, even whilst he punishes and afflicts us for
our sins. If we do not this, we are the most ungrateful of all his
creatures; every one of which, in its order and capacity, answers the
transcendent love of God with a pure love and obedience.



Chapter XIV.


      Showing How, And On What Account, Man Is Obliged To Love God.


    _If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it
    would utterly be contemned._—CANT. 8:7.


Hitherto we have distinctly considered the obligations that man lies under
to God; which is a doctrine founded upon that natural relation that is
between the giver and the receiver; and this is, as it were, a perpetual
light of nature, to direct us to the several branches of our duty to God.
For as God has bestowed freely upon man everything that he possesses
(whence the obligation arises), it plainly follows that man is obliged to
offer up and restore unto God all that he has received from him. On the
other hand, if God had given nothing, and man received nothing, there
would have then been no obligation, nor any rule or measure of duty.

2. But as the love of God is the first and chief benefit which he has
bestowed on man; so it is but just and reasonable that he who has so loved
us should be loved by us again. Man, then, has nothing from himself, nor
from others originally, but all things from God; and by consequence, is
obliged solely to God. And this obligation cannot otherwise be discharged
than by loving him entirely with all our hearts and with all our strength.

3. Lastly, as man continually depends upon God for his life and being; as
he continually enjoys His favors and blessings, and, by His command and
order, the service and assistance of the creatures; nothing less can be
expected from so dependent a being, than love to Him who has so generously
and bountifully blessed him.



Chapter XV.


Showing That All The Creatures Continually Remind Us Of The Love Which We
                               Owe To God.


    _Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her
    voice?_—PROV. 8:1.


As God has loved man above all the creatures, or, to speak more properly,
has loved him only, having created them all for his sake; so this
perpetual love of God calls upon us, and exhorts us to love him with all
our hearts; yea, all the creatures of the universe, whilst by God’s
command they serve us, and minister to our necessities, do, as it were,
with united voices call aloud, and put us in mind of the natural
obligations we are under to magnify and adore, to serve and love so
gracious a Benefactor, and that freely and willingly; even as they, by
God’s command, freely and cheerfully assist and minister to us.

2. And as their love and service to us are not false and hypocritical, but
sincere and faithful; so ought ours to be to our Creator. As they employ
their whole strength night and day to serve us; so ought we night and day
to be diligent and earnest in the service of God. As all the creatures, in
their order, serve and minister to man alone; so ought all the powers of
our souls and bodies to be employed solely in the service of God. And as
the greatest natural pleasure which man has in this world, arises from the
use and enjoyment of the creatures; so nothing is more acceptable to God
than the sincere services of a devout soul; nothing delights him more than
love, arising from a lively faith in Christ, operating in a free and
willing spirit. From what has been said, it is plain that the creatures
exhort and instruct mankind to love God: 1. With all their strength; 2.
Freely and willingly; 3. Heartily and sincerely; 4. Solely and entirely.



