Chapter XVIII.


Showing How The Sorrows And Pains Of Christ Should Teach Us To Subdue The
                           Lusts Of The Flesh.


    _My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death._—MATT. 26:38.


The third branch of the cross of Christ consists in the unspeakable sorrow
and sufferings which began at his very birth. For as his most holy human
soul was filled with the light of divine knowledge and wisdom, by virtue
of the personal union of his two natures, he saw all that he should
experience in the future, as if it were already present; and thus his soul
was, from the beginning, filled with the deepest sorrow, and suffered
inward pain. He foresaw his future inconceivable and inexpressible agony
of soul, and his unspeakable bodily pains. For the more delicate, pure,
and innocent, the human nature in Christ was, the greater were the pain
and anguish that affected him. Of this those sorrows and spiritual
torments, that are wont to work upon the inmost soul, are a sufficient
proof. For inasmuch as the constitution of the soul, by reason of its
immortality, exceeds that of the body in worth and delicacy; so also her
pains exceed those of the body in depth and acuteness. For this reason the
Lord never rejoiced upon his own account, and with reference only to
himself; but it was when he saw that his Heavenly Father was known and
worshipped, and his divine works manifested unto the world. Hence “he
rejoiced in spirit” at the return of the seventy disciples. Luke 10:21.

2. Since all those things, which he was to suffer, from his own people and
countrymen, were known to him, he could not but be highly afflicted and in
constant sorrow; and this was also still more the case, the more nearly he
approached the time appointed for his passion. This he himself testifies,
saying, “I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straitened
till it be accomplished!” Luke 12:50. And the time of this baptism being
come, he says, “My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death” (Matt.
26:38): intimating thereby the excessive and unutterable grief and anguish
of spirit, that forced from him that sweat, which “was as it were great
drops of blood.” Luke 22:44. And what pains he suffered besides, in his
tender and sensible body, no tongue can sufficiently declare. _First_,
because sin is an infinite and inexpressible evil. For, its full
punishment and atonement could not but cause torment so exquisite, that to
a mere man it had been altogether insupportable.

3. The _second_ reason of this exquisite grief was, because he bore the
sins of the world: not merely those sins which from the beginning of the
world had been committed, but those also which men should become guilty of
through all ages, down to the very end of the world. And, therefore, such
as are the number and malignity of _all_ sins, of _all_ men, through _all_
generations; such also were the pain and sorrow endured by the Lord. For
which cause he prayed in Gethsemane, “O my Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me.” Matt. 26:39.

4. _Thirdly_, the sufferings of Christ were heightened by that perfect
love which he bore to his heavenly Father. The greater our love is, the
greater is also the grief occasioned by what interferes with it: as on the
contrary, the less it is, the less are we troubled by that which thwarts
it. Since, therefore, Christ loved his heavenly Father with most exalted
and consummate love, his affliction must needs have been the more
grievous, on account of the heinousness of sin, with which fallen men so
shamefully insulted so beloved a Father. Hence the sins of the whole
world, with the pains he endured for them, did not so much affect him, as
the sorrow he felt on account of the indignity offered to a God, who, in
his very nature, is love itself. And it was upon account of this love of
the Father (which deserved all the returns of love the creature was able
to make), that Christ sustained most exquisite pains, and a most
ignominious death; in order that by a satisfaction proportionable to the
offence, he might regain for wretched mortals that love and favor of God
which they had forfeited by their offences.

5. In the _fourth_ place, the suffering of Christ was endured on account
of his perfect love to mankind. For as he died for all, and bore the sins
of all, so also was he exceedingly desirous to see the object of his death
accomplished, which is the salvation of all men. Hence the unbelief and
impenitence of men, which hindered this love from taking effect upon
sinners, caused him most grievous and bitter torments: but especially was
he pained that they threw away their souls when he desired to save them.
Not to mention the cruel hatred and envy, wrath and blasphemy, by which
some were hurried on, even to trample on that blood which was designed to
redeem them. He himself says, “Reproach hath broken my heart” (Ps. 69:20);
lamenting not so much his own, as the condition of them who reproached him
in so heinous a manner.

6. _Fifthly_: another circumstance which pierced the very heart of our
Lord, was his being forsaken of God, notwithstanding he was the Son of God
himself. For though it is true that God could not forsake him, who himself
was God, and did not cease to be God even when he hung on the cross, when
he expired, and when he was buried; yet does he complain of being forsaken
by him. Ps. 22:1; Matt. 27:46. But this lamentable complaint the Lord
poured out, in order to show that God withdrew from him, as a man, the
support of his comfort, hiding himself for a while in this dark hour. He
manifests also, by this exclamation, the extreme misery in which he then
was.

7. The _sixth_ aggravation of the anguish of Christ, was on account of his
Person, for he was very God. Whence it is plain, that all the reproaches
and blasphemies uttered against him were an infinite evil, as being
directed against the entire Person of Christ, who was true God and man;
and so he endured, both as God and man, the revilings of his enemies in
his whole Person. All this left a most exquisite impression of sorrow upon
his soul.

8. And, in the _seventh_ place, who is able sufficiently to explain what
pains the Lord suffered in his most innocent, most holy, most tender, and
delicate _body_? Or who can doubt that a body most innocent, most
delicate, most noble, most pure, conceived by the Holy Ghost, personally
united with the divine nature, filled with the Spirit of God, and with all
the fulness of the Godhead; I say, who can doubt that such a body should
not feel most grievous and bitter pains, when smitten, scourged, wounded,
pierced, crucified, and put to death? No words are sufficiently expressive
to set forth the pain and acuteness thereof. What is all our affliction,
if compared with this suffering of the Lord? We, as sinners, have justly
deserved eternal death and damnation; and yet even the smallest cross is
too heavy a burden for tender Christians, who do what they can to shake it
off, though it is designed as wholesome medicine, to procure the health of
the soul. Surely, he who is a sincere lover of Christ, can wish no other
condition, of life, but such as comes up nearest to the original of the
blessed life of Christ. 1 Peter 2:21. This conformity of our lives to the
life of Christ we ought to account our greatest gain and dignity in this
world. Let the true lover of Christ rejoice in this, that he has been
thought worthy to suffer with Christ, his Head and Saviour.

9. Since, then, affliction is to be the companion of a Christian in his
way to heaven, or, to use the apostle’s phrase, since he must, “through
much tribulation, enter into the kingdom of God” (Acts 14:22); what cause
can we assign why we should not willingly walk in the same path? For we
know that the Son of God himself travelled this way before us, and by his
holy example sanctified it, not having “entered into his glory but by
sufferings.” Luke 24:26. And since, notwithstanding all the insults of the
enemy, he entered into glory at last; we may also assure ourselves, that
our affliction, which is but for a moment, shall be followed in the end by
an everlasting weight of glory and happiness. 2 Cor. 4:17.

10. In fine, as the Lord did not spare himself, but devoted himself
entirely to the service of others, undergoing all from no other impulse
than fervent love and charity; so this love, of our Redeemer should awaken
love in our souls, and never should we grow faint and weary under any
affliction whatever.




