Chapter V.


                     Wherein Does True Faith Consist?


    _Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God._—1
    JOHN 5:1.


Faith is a sincere confidence, and a firm persuasion of the grace of God
promised to us in Christ Jesus, for the remission of sin and eternal life;
and it is enkindled in the heart, by the word of God and the Holy Spirit.
Through this faith we obtain the forgiveness of our sins, without any
merits of our own, of mere grace (Eph. 2:8), and for the sake of the
merits of Christ alone; that so, our faith might rest on a firm and solid
foundation, and remain unmoved by perplexity and doubts. This forgiveness
of sin constitutes our justification before God, which is true, solid, and
eternal; for this righteousness is purchased neither by men nor angels,
but by the obedience, merit, and the blood of the Son of God himself. We
appropriate and apply it to ourselves by faith; and hence the
imperfections which still adhere to us cannot condemn us, since, for the
sake of Christ, who now lives and works within us, they are covered with a
veil of grace. Ps. 32:1.

2. By this cordial and unshaken faith, man wholly dedicates his heart to
the Almighty, in whom alone he seeks his rest. To him only is he now
united, and with him alone he enters into delightful fellowship. He
partakes of all things that are of God and of Christ, and is made one
spirit with the Lord. From him he receives divine power and strength;
together with a new life, attended with new joys, new pleasures, new
consolations, in which are found peace, inward ease, and durable
satisfaction, together with righteousness and holiness. And thus man is
born anew of God by faith. For wherever there is true faith, _there_
Christ is verily present with all his righteousness, holiness, and
remission of sin; with all his merits, justification, grace, adoption, and
inheritance of eternal life. This is the new birth and the new creature,
springing from faith in Christ. Hence, the apostle calls faith a
_substance_ (Heb. 11:1); understanding by it, a sure, solid, and unshaken
confidence in “things hoped for,” and a lively conviction of “things not
seen.” For the consolation conveyed by a vital faith is so powerful, as to
convince the heart of the divine truth by inward experience, and by the
tasting of the heavenly goodness in the soul, and of the peace of God,
that passes all understanding; yea, it is so mighty as to enable its
possessors to die with a joyful heart. In this consist that strength of
the spirit, that might of the inner man, that vigor of faith, that holy
boldness; this is that confidence toward God, that exceeding and abounding
assurance, which are so copiously set forth by the holy apostles. 2 Tim.
2:1; Eph. 3:12, 16; Phil. 1:14; 1 John 3:21; 1 Thess. 1:5; 2:2.

3. That for which a man will dare to die, must be rooted in the soul, and,
by the operation of the Spirit of God, afford an inward assurance. It must
be a cordial, powerful, and eternal comfort, infusing heavenly and
supernatural strength into the soul, by which the fear of death and the
love of the world may both be subdued. Now all this begets so solid a
trust in Christ, and so close a union with him, as neither death nor life
is able to dissolve. Rom. 8:38; 2 Tim. 1:12. Hence St. John says:
“Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world.” 1 John 5:4.

4. _To be born of God_ is in truth no vain figure, no empty name; it must
necessarily be a lively and powerful change, worthy of the majesty of an
omnipotent God. To believe that the living God could beget a dead
offspring, that lifeless members and useless organs could proceed from
him, were very wickedness. It is sure and undoubted that God, being a
_living_ God, cannot but beget a _living_ man, even the new man in Christ
Jesus. And our faith is the victory which overcomes the world. 1 John 5:4.
Who can question whether it be endued with strength sufficient for the
conquest? It is, it _must be_ a lively, vigorous, potent, divine, and
victorious principle; but all its power is derived from him who is
embraced by it, even Christ. By means of faith, we return into God again,
and become one with him; and from Adam, as from an accursed vine, we are
transplanted into Christ, the living and blessed vine. John 15:4. In
Christ, we possess everything that is good, and in him, are justified.

5. As a scion, when grafted on a good tree, grows, flourishes, and bears
fruit, but, without it, withers away; so man, when out of Christ, is as an
accursed vine, whose grapes are bitterness and gall; and all his works are
sin. Deut. 32:32, 33; Rom. 14:23. But when he is _in_ Christ, he is
righteous and blessed; because “_he_ was made to be sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.” 2 Cor.
5:21.

6. It is most evident, from what has been advanced, that works cannot
possibly justify a sinner; because, before we can perform any good work,
we must be engrafted into Christ by faith: and it is equally clear, that
justification is entirely the gift of God, freely conferred on man and
preceding all human merit. How shall a dead man see, hear, stand, walk, or
do any good thing, unless he be first raised from the dead, and endued
with a new principle of life? So neither canst thou, O man, who art dead
in sins, do any work that is good or acceptable, unless thou be first
raised unto life by Jesus Christ. Thus righteousness proceeds only from
faith in Christ. Faith is like a new-born babe, weak and naked, poor and
destitute, and laid before the eyes of the Saviour; from whom, as from its
author, it receives righteousness and sanctification, godliness, grace and
the Holy Ghost.

7. The naked child is thus clothed with the mercy of God. He lifts up his
hands, receives all from God, and is made a partaker of grace and health,
truth and holiness. It is, therefore, this receiving of Christ in the
heart, that makes a man holy and happy.

8. Righteousness proceeds therefore solely from faith, and not from works.
Indeed, faith receives the whole Christ, and accepts him, together with
all that he has. Then sin and death, the devil and hell, must flee, and
are unable any longer to preserve their ground. Nay, so effectually and so
powerfully do the merits of Christ justify the sinner, that if the sins of
the whole world were charged on one man, they would not avail to condemn
him, if he believed in Christ.

9. Inasmuch, therefore, as Christ lives and dwells in thy heart by faith
(Eph. 3:17), never, O believer! indulge the thought, that his indwelling
in thee, is a dead work unattended with any vital power. Rather believe
that it is a quickening principle, a mighty work, and an effectual
transforming of thy mind. Faith effects two things: it first _engrafts_
thee into Christ, and gives him freely to thee, with all that he has; and
then, it _renews_ thee in Christ, that thou mayest grow, flourish, and
live in him. The wild graft is introduced into the stock, for no other end
than that it may flourish and bear fruit. As by the apostasy of Adam and
the temptation of the devil, the seed of the serpent was sown in man,
growing up into a tree and bearing the fruits of death; even so by the
divine word and the Holy Spirit, is faith sown in man, as the seed of God.
See Chap. II. In this seed all divine virtues and properties are, in a
most wonderful manner, comprehended; which gradually expand themselves
from day to day. This tree is adorned with a profusion of heavenly fruit;
as love, patience, humility, meekness, peace, chastity, righteousness. And
thus the whole kingdom of God descends into man. For true and saving faith
renews the whole man, purifies the heart, sanctifies the soul, and
delivers from the love of the world. It unites with God; it hungers and
thirsts after righteousness; it works love; and it brings peace, joy,
patience, and comfort in adversity: it overcomes the world; it makes us
sons of God, and heirs of the treasures of heaven; and it constitutes us
joint-heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ. But if any one should not be
conscious of that joyfulness which faith imparts and does not experience
its consoling influences, let him not, on that account, despair; but
rather let him trust in the grace which is promised in Christ: for this
promise ever remains sure, immovable, and everlasting. And though, through
the infirmities incident to human nature, he should stumble and fall; yet,
if the sinner return by unfeigned repentance, and more cautiously watch
against the sin which so easily besets him, the grace of God will not be
withdrawn. For Christ is and will ever be _Christ_ and a Saviour, whether
the faith that embraces him be strong or weak. A weak faith has an equal
share in Christ with a strong faith, for faith, whether it be weak or
strong, possesses the whole Christ. The grace which is promised is common
to all Christians, and is eternal, and on this grace faith must rely,
whether it be weak or strong. The Lord will revisit thy soul in his own
time, with a sense of his gracious favor, and of his abundant
consolations, although, at the present, he may think fit to put a veil
over it in thy heart. Ps. 37:23, 24; 77:7-10. Upon this subject, see Book
II.




