Chapter XV.


 Showing How Christ, The Eternal Word Of The Father, Perfects His Work In
            The Hearts Of The Faithful, By Love And Humility.


    _Examine yourselves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
    Christ is in you?_—2 COR. 13:5.


As the faithful soul is often obliged to bear the temptations and
suggestions of the Evil Spirit; so, on the other hand, it receives the
divine consolations from the mouth of the eternal Word speaking in it. Of
this Tauler speaks: “We know,” says he, “that the eternal Word is so very
near the ground of the human soul, that its own nature and being are not
more essential and familiar to it, than that Word is. This eternal Word is
continually speaking in man, though his perverse heart, deluded by the
devil, neither hearkens nor attends to it. For the great adversary makes
him deaf by his wicked insinuations, the love of the world, and carnal
inclinations.” For the devil to this day tempts all men, as he did Eve
(Gen. 3:4), by those things which he knows to be most agreeable to our
tempers and inclinations,—by riches, honors, friendships, our own nature,
the love of the creatures, and infinite other ways, in which he influences
and affects our imaginations. For as he is industriously busy about us for
our destruction, so he narrowly observes the particular bias of our
affections, and knows all the secret arts of raising our passions; and
when by thus striking our imaginations, he has discomposed our spirits, we
immediately become deaf to the calls of the Holy Spirit and the Word.
These suggestions of Satan we must oppose; for so far as we attend to
them, we are the nearer to our ruin; but if thou stop thine ears to his
insinuations, and turn thyself unto God in the centre of thy soul, thou
hast already conquered him. And as true friends, united in affection, are
particularly delighted in mutual conversation; so if thou sincerely love
God, thou shalt frequently hear his voice within thee. “If a man love me,”
saith Christ, “he will keep my words” (John 14:23): not only those which
he hears in the outward and visible temple and congregation of the
faithful; but those also which are heard in the true temple of the soul,
without which the outward hearing availeth little. And this inward voice
of God thou canst not hear, unless the love of God be in thee.

2. “The most certain token of love to God,” saith St. Gregory, “is this,
that we receive all the adversities which God shall think fit to lay upon
us, without any impatience in thought, word, or actions. If we do this,
without doubt we truly love God; if not, it is certain that we do not love
him sincerely, but prefer ourselves and our own things to him; though
nothing can be properly said to be a man’s own but sin; everything else is
God’s.” Take heed, therefore, that thou prefer not even the gifts of God
before Himself; whom if thou love purely and above all things, then thou
shalt continually hear him speaking peace to thy soul, according to that
saying of our blessed Lord, “He that loveth me, to him will I manifest
myself.” John 14:21. This manifestation is made by the opening of the
understanding, by the illumination of the heart, by the spirit of wisdom,
of understanding, of might, and of fear (Isa. 11:2), and especially by the
purifying and enlightening of the inward eyes (Eph. 1:18), to see and know
Jesus Christ.

3. But as the devil is wont to stop the inward ears of men by his
suggestions; so he also blinds their eyes by self-love, by the love of the
world and the creatures, and by inward and outward pride. For as by true
and genuine love, we hear Christ; so by faith and profound humility, we
must see him; for that only can purify our hearts from vain pride. For it
is not without reason that our blessed Lord tells us, “Blessed are the
pure in heart; for they shall see God.” Matt. 5:8. And for this cause it
is that God sends us so many crosses and afflictions, that we may thereby
be brought into the depths of profound humility, which is an exercise more
profitable to us than all the delights and glories of this world. And now,
though heaven, and earth, and hell itself, should unite their forces
against thee, yet bear up with constancy and patience, remembering that
all shall work together for thy good; as it serves to produce in thee true
humility, by which thou shalt see Christ. Look at him, O man, and consider
how he that is God (John 1:1; Acts 20:28; Rom. 9:5), most high and
omnipotent, by whom were made the heavens and the earth, and who could
easily again have reduced all things into nothing; yet for the sake of
this wretched creature man, submitted himself to the most bitter
sufferings. Phil. 2:5-8. Be thou, therefore, O sinful and wretched
creature, ashamed of that pride, vainglory, and self-love, which have
taken possession of thy heart. Learn to submit thyself to every cross that
shall be laid upon thee, of what sort soever it be, whether inward or
outward; and so subject thy proud, swelling spirit to the thorny crown of
Christ, that thou mayest imitate thy humble and crucified Lord by a true
contempt of thyself; making this the great end and design of all thy
actions, to be conformed to the meek and suffering life of the blessed
Jesus, that so thou mayest come to an experimental knowledge of him. For
what avail a few cold, formal reflections upon the sufferings of our Lord,
whilst we are destitute of that meek and patient spirit with which he bore
them? Of what benefit is it to entertain our fancies with a few dead
speculations about his passion, whilst our hearts are full of pride,
ambition, and worldly love? This, surely, is not the way to the true
vision and experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ. The Spirit of Jesus
operates most deeply in the valley of humility. And in this consists the
essence of humility, that a man look upon himself and all that he ever
has, or ever can do, as nothing. For if there be any good in thee, it is
not of thyself; it is the gift of God.

4. And this humility thou must practise, if ever thou expect to see
Christ. For the hidden mysteries and wisdom of God are revealed to the
meek and humble, but are hidden from the wise men of this world. Ps. 51:6;
Matt. 11:25; 1 Cor. 1:20, 26. For in this humility alone consist the
knowledge and understanding of pure and divine truth, in which is the
essence of eternal blessedness. In this the greatness of the divine
majesty manifests itself, which the more clearly we discern, the deeper
root humility takes in our souls. And the most certain sign of divine
illumination is, that a man grow daily more and more humble, and be less
fond of himself. For self-love and pride are the fountains of all the
darkness, error, and iniquity that are in us. On the other hand, they that
are truly enlightened by God, glory in contempt and sufferings, and
rejoice to imitate their suffering Redeemer. This is the groundwork and
spirit of Psalm 119. The royal prophet well knew that without such a
thirst after godliness, no divine light and wisdom would enter the soul,
and no divine answer be given to it. And this is the real purport of that
long Psalm.

5. In a word, this humble and resigned state of soul, is that in which God
particularly delights to operate. And he that has this, carries in his
soul the comfortable presence, and in his body the suffering marks of the
Lord Jesus; and considering himself as unworthy of the least of God’s
mercies, he uses them all with reverence and fear, having his eye, like a
good servant, fixed on his Master; and therefore he is honored with His
more immediate conversation, and grace.




