Chapter I.


                 Showing What The Image Of God In Man Is.


    _Be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and ... put on the new
    man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
    holiness._—EPH. 4:23, 24.


The image of God in man, is the conformity of the soul of man, of his
spirit and mind, of his understanding and will, and of all his faculties
and powers, both bodily and mental, to God and the Holy Trinity. For the
decree of the Holy Trinity was thus expressed: “_Let us_ make man in our
image, after our likeness,” etc. Gen., 1:26.

2. It is evident, therefore, that, when man was created, the image of the
Trinity was impressed on him, in order that the holiness, righteousness,
and goodness of God, might shine forth in his soul; diffuse abundant light
through his understanding, will, and affections; and visibly appear even
in his life and conversation: that, consequently, all his actions, both
inward and outward, might breathe nothing but divine love, purity, and
power, and, in short, that the life of man upon earth might resemble that
of the angels in heaven, who are always engaged in doing the will of their
Heavenly Father. In thus impressing his image on man, God designed to
delight and rejoice in him, just as a father rejoices in a child born
after his own image: for as a parent, beholding himself, or _another
self_, in his offspring, cannot but feel the greatest complacency and
delight; so, when God beheld the express character of his own Person
reflected in an image of himself, his “delights were with the sons of
men.” Prov. 8:31. Thus it was God’s chief pleasure to look on man, in whom
he rejoiced, and rested, as it were, from all his labor; considering him
as the great _masterpiece_ of his creation, and knowing that in the
perfect innocence and beauty of man, the excellency of his own glory would
be fully set forth. And this blessed communion our first parents and their
posterity were always to have enjoyed, had they continued in the likeness
of God, and rested in him and in his will; who, as he was their author,
was also to be their end.

3. It undoubtedly is the essential property of every image, that it be a
just representation of the object which it is intended to express; and as
the reflection in a mirror is vivid in a degree proportioned to the
clearness of the mirror itself, so the image of God becomes more or less
visible, according to the purity of the soul in which it is beheld.

4. Hence God originally created man perfectly pure and undefiled; that so
the divine image might be beheld in him, not as an empty, lifeless shadow
in a glass, but as a true and living image of the invisible God, and as
the likeness of his inward, hidden, and unutterable beauty. There was an
image of the wisdom of God, in the _understanding_ of man; of his
goodness, gentleness, and patience, in the _spirit_ of man; of his divine
love and mercy, in the _affections_ of man’s heart. There was an image of
the righteousness and holiness, the justice and purity of God, in the
_will_ of man; of his kindness, clemency, and truth, in all the _words_
and _actions_ of man; of his almighty power, in man’s _dominion_ over the
earth, and inferior creatures; and lastly, there was an image of God’s
eternity, in the _immortality_ of the human soul.

5. From the divine image thus implanted in him, man should have acquired
the knowledge both of _God_ and of _himself_. Hence he might have learned,
that God, his Creator, is all in all, the Being of beings, and the chief
and only BEING, from whom all created beings derive their existence, and
in whom, and by whom, all things that are, subsist. Hence, also, he might
have known, that God, as the Original of man’s nature, is all that
_essentially_, of which he himself was but the image and representation.
For since man was to bear the image of the divine goodness, it follows
that God is the sovereign and universal goodness _essentially_ (Matt.
19:17); and, consequently, that God is essential love, essential life, and
essential holiness, to whom alone (because he is all this _essentially_),
worship and praise, honor and glory, might, majesty, dominion, and virtue,
are to be ascribed: whereas these do not appertain to the creature, nor
belong to anything but God alone.

6. From this image of the Divine Being, man should further have acquired
the knowledge of _himself_. He should have considered what a vast
difference there was between God and himself. Man is not God, but God’s
_image_; and the image of God ought to represent nothing but God. He is a
portraiture of the Divine Being; a character, an image, in which God alone
should be seen and glorified. Nothing therefore ought to live in man,
besides God. Nothing but the Divinity should stir, will, love, think,
speak, act, or rejoice in him. For if anything besides God live or work in
man, he ceases to be the image of God; and becomes the image of that which
thus lives and acts within him. If therefore a man would become, and
continue to be, the image of God, he must wholly surrender himself to the
Divine Being, and submit entirely to his will; he must suffer God to work
in him whatsoever he pleases; so that, by denying his own will, he may do
the will of his Heavenly Father without reserve, being entirely resigned
to God, and willing to become a holy instrument in his hands, to do his
will and his work. Such a man follows not his _own_ will, but the will of
God; he loves not himself, but God; seeks not his own honor, but the honor
of God. He covets no estates nor affluence for himself, but refers all to
the Supreme Good; and so being contented to possess him, rises above the
love of the creature and the world. And thus ought man to divest himself
of all love of himself and the world, that God alone may be all in him,
and work all in him, by his Holy Spirit. Herein consisted the perfect
innocence, purity, and holiness of man. For, what greater innocence can
there be, than that a man should do, not his own will, but the will of his
Heavenly Father? Or what greater purity, than that man should suffer God
to work in him, and to do everything according to His pleasure? Or, what
greater holiness, than to become an instrument in the hands of the Spirit
of God? To resemble a child, in whose breast self-love and self-honor do
not yet prevail, is, in truth, the highest simplicity.

7. Of this entire devotedness to the Divine will, our Lord Jesus Christ,
while he sojourned in our world, was a _perfect_ example. He sacrificed
his own will to God his Father, in blameless obedience, humility, and
meekness; readily depriving himself of all honor and esteem, of all
self-interest and self-love, of all pleasure and joy; and leaving God
alone, to think, speak, and act, in him, and by him. In short, he
invariably made the will and pleasure of God his own, as the Father
himself testified by a voice from Heaven: “This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased.” Matt. 3:17. The Lord Jesus Christ, blessed forever, is
the true Image of God, in whom nothing appears but God himself, and such
manifestations as are agreeable to his nature; namely, love, mercy,
long-suffering, patience, meekness, gentleness, righteousness, holiness,
consolation, life, and everlasting blessedness: for by him, the invisible
God was willing to be discovered and made known to man. He is indeed the
image of God in a more sublime sense; that is, according to his
_Divinity_, by virtue of which, he is himself very God, the express and
essential image of his Father’s glory, in the infinite splendor of the
uncreated light. Heb. 1:3. But of this point no more can at present be
said: our design being to speak of him only as he lived and conversed in
his holy _humanity_, while he tabernacled upon the earth.

8. It was in such a holy innocence as this, that the image of God was, in
the beginning, conferred on Adam, which he should have preserved in true
humility and obedience. Sufficient it surely was for him, that he was made
capable of all the benefits of the divine image; of sincere and unmixed
love and delight; of undisturbed and solid tranquillity of mind; of power,
fortitude, peace, light, and life. But not duly reflecting that he himself
was not the _chief good_, but merely a mirror of the Godhead, formed
purposely to receive the reflection of the divine nature, he erected
himself into a _God_; and thus choosing to be the highest _good_ to
himself, he was precipitated into the greatest of all evils, being
deprived of this inestimable image, and alienated from that communion with
God, which, by virtue of it, he before enjoyed.

9. Had self-will, self-love, and self-honor, been excluded, the image of
God could not have departed from man; but the Divine Being would have
continued to be his sole glory, honor, and praise. As everything is
capable of its like and not of its contrary, and in its like acquiesces
and delights, so man, being in the similitude of God, was thereby prepared
to receive God into himself, who was also ready to communicate himself to
man, with all the treasures of his goodness; goodness being of all things
the most communicative of itself.

10. Finally, man ought to have learned from the image of God, that by
means of it he is united to God; and that in this union, his true and
everlasting tranquillity, his rest, peace, joy, life, and happiness alone
consist. He should have learned that all restlessness of mind and vexation
of spirit, arise from nothing but a breach of this union, by which he
ceases to be the image of God; for man no sooner turns to the creature,
than he is deprived of that eternal good which is to be derived from God
alone.




