Chapter XXXI.


He Who Principally Loves Himself, Actually Sets Up Himself In God’s Stead.


    _O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion
    of faces._—DAN. 9:7.—_Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
    thy name give glory._—PS. 115:1.


As God is the beginning and end of all things, so the first and chief love
of man is due to him. And whosoever transfers it to any other object,
really and truly makes that his god; which is the greatest affront that
can be offered to his divine Majesty. For as it is the nature of love to
unite the lover with the thing beloved, so the fixing of our love upon any
creature separates and alienates us from the Creator. Whosoever
principally loves himself, certainly loves everything else solely for his
own sake; which he ought to love purely for the sake of God; and so all
his love is founded in and upon himself, which ought to be fixed entirely
upon God.

2. Hence he is employed in doing his own will instead of God’s; he usurps
God’s right; attempts to invade his kingdom; sets up an authority in
opposition to God’s kingdom; and actually rebels against his Maker and his
God.



Chapter XXXII.


Love To God, The Source Of All That Is Good; Self-Love, The Source Of All
                                  Evil.


    _O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine
    help._—HOS. 13:9.


Love is the efficient cause of all things; and as there are two sorts of
love, the love of God and the love of ourselves, and as these are directly
opposite to each other, it follows, that the one must be extremely good,
and the other extremely evil. But forasmuch as it is plain that the
preference is to be given to divine love, it follows, that this alone is
good. For the love of God is a divine seed in us, from which no evil, but
all good things proceed. This love unites itself to its object, which is
God, its chief, its only Good, in whom it rests, triumphs, and rejoices,
even as God does in it. For joy and pleasure arise from love, as we learn
in Psalm 18:1, 2. This spreads itself over all the world, and, like God,
its author and object, communicates and bestows itself upon every worthy
receiver. And truly, as love finds all things in God, and is happy in the
enjoyment of him, it stands in need of no creature.

2. But as from divine love proceeds nothing but good, so from self-love
proceeds nothing but evil. This is the root of all the iniquity, sin,
blindness, ignorance, and misery, of which human nature is capable. By
this a man makes his own will his god; and, as the true God is the
fountain of all good, so this false god, this vain idol, our self-will, is
the fountain of all evil. Moreover, as the creatures which we are so fond
of, are made out of nothing, and are so weak and uncertain that they are
always tending to their original state, and, in the meantime, are nothing
but poverty, misery, and sorrow; it follows, that as man is changed into
the nature of the thing which he loves, he must likewise partake of their
inconstancy, their poverty, and misery, and can have no rest in the
enjoyment of them. If the creature is vanity and sorrow, the heart that
cleaves to the creature enters into its vanity, and must be partaker of
its sorrow.

3. Thus self-love, when it rules and is uppermost in men, makes them
enemies to God, fills them with all iniquity, and brings them into
subjection to the creatures. As the love of God dilates and enlarges the
soul, so the love of ourselves contracts and straitens it, making it
unjust, corrupt, proud, and covetous. As the love of God makes us quiet,
easy, peaceable, and benevolent; so the love of ourselves makes us
unquiet, turbulent, and ill-natured. As the love of God reinstates us in
the liberty of the sons of God; so self-love makes us slaves to the
creatures. The one gives us firmness and constancy of mind and will; the
other makes us inconstant and changeable. The one makes a man courteous,
courageous, generous, and obliging; the other makes him sour, timorous,
mean, and an enemy to everybody but himself.



Chapter XXXIII.


                Of The Love Of God, And The Love Of Self.


    _The carnal mind is enmity against God._—ROM. 8:7.


As it is plain that by the love of God, or the love of self, all the
motions and operations of our will are governed and directed, and that all
other desires and inclinations have their birth and bias from them; it
follows, that upon them depends all our knowledge, either of good or evil.
For as the love of God is the principle by which we know and judge of all
the good that is in man; so self-love discovers to us all the evil. And
whosoever understands not what self-love is, knows not what evils there
are in man; just as he that understands not the love of God, cannot know
the good that is in Him. For no man can judge of either good or evil who
knows not the springs and fountains from which they flow. The love of God
is a shining light, discovering to us not only itself, but its enemy,
which is self-love; on the contrary, self-love is a thick darkness,
blinding the eyes of men, that they cannot see the good or evil that is in
them. These, then, are the two roots of good and evil, which, whosoever is
ignorant of, cannot rightly judge of either.

2. For as man consists of two parts, namely, soul and body; so in respect
of one, he sets his heart upon honors, dignities, and preferments; whilst
the other tempts and draws him to fleshly and sensual pleasures. So that
whosoever thus loves himself, must be a slave either to honor or pleasure,
which he looks upon as his greatest happiness, as gratifying that
inclination to himself, which is uppermost in his heart. And from these
two kinds of self-love spring many others, as various as are the means and
instruments of obtaining the honors, or fulfilling the lusts, which have
taken possession of our hearts. And these are chiefly three: 1. Pride, or
an inclination to be eminent and popular in the world. 2. Pleasure and
luxury, by which we indulge and gratify the flesh. 3. Covetousness, or an
inordinate love of worldly things. Whosoever eagerly seeks honor, cannot
but hate everything and every person that stands in his way and hinders
his designs; whence proceed anger, revenge and envy of all those who are
possessed of any advantages which we want, or which seem to eclipse or
lessen the figure which we desire to make in the world. Hence also proceed
indolence and sloth, and a mean fear of laboring or sufferings, both of
which are ungrateful to flesh and blood. In a word, all sins and
iniquities proceed from this fruitful fountain of self-love.



