Chapter XXVII.


  Showing How The Lord Jesus Manifests Himself To The Loving Soul As The
                    Highest Love And The Highest Good.


    _To him that loveth me, I will manifest myself._—JOHN 14:21.


If thou duly considerest Christ crucified thou wilt see nothing in him but
pure, perfect, and unutterable love, and he will show thee his heart, and
say, “Behold, in this heart there is no deceit and no lie (Isaiah 53:9),
but the highest faithfulness and truth are there. Incline thy head unto
me, and rest upon my heart; open thy mouth, and drink out of my wounds the
sweetest love, which out of the heart of my Father springs up and flows
through me.”

2. When thou shalt have tasted this love, thou wilt forget and despise,
for its sake, all the world, and be desirous of nothing else but of this
love. Thou wilt say to thy Lord, “O Lord, give me nothing more than the
sweetness of thy love; nay, if thou wouldst give me the whole world, I
would desire nothing else but thee and thy love.”

3. O happy is the soul which feels this love! for in that soul Christ is
truly known, and manifested to be nothing else but pure love, and to be
the love of the souls of men. These words state a most happy experience;
for that Christ is the love of our soul he clearly shows by his spiritual
coming and delightful refreshing of the soul; and when the soul tastes but
a drop thereof it is filled with joys. For infinite love is so great that
our hearts cannot comprehend it. This the holy martyr Ignatius owned, who
always used to call the Lord Jesus, his Love, and said: My Love is
crucified.

4. In this love of Christ all our works ought to be done (1 Cor. 16:14);
and then they proceed from Christ out of true faith, and are well-pleasing
to God, whether we eat, or drink, or sleep, or perform the duties of our
calling. All that comes forth of a believing love is made pleasant to God
and men; for it is done and wrought in God. John 3:21.

5. Although this love of Christ is the highest good in heaven and upon
earth (for all good things are contained therein), yet is God so willing
and ready to bestow it upon us, that he hath sent, even his dear Son, into
this misery, to make us partakers in him of this inexpressible treasure,
through faith. And he is much more ready to give us this precious good
than we are to receive it.

6. This love, “shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost” (Rom. 5:5),
when felt in us, affords us more joy than all the world can give. And if
all creatures were present, a believing and loving soul would part with
them, yea, not so much as look upon them, because of the superabundant
sweetness of the love of God. And if all creatures should begin to speak,
the voice of the love of God would be stronger and more delightful than
the voice of all the creatures. For this love binds and unites the mind
unto Christ, and replenishes it with all good. This precious good is
indeed known, seen, and tasted in the spirit, but no words can express it.
All words are much too weak to set forth even the shadow thereof; and no
man’s tongue can reach that precious and lovely good of which the spirit
of man is sensible. Therefore also St. Paul says, that he heard in
paradise words that were “unspeakable.” 2 Cor. 12:4.

7. And when this precious good withdraws from the soul, there is then
greater sorrow than if all the world had been lost. Then the soul calls
and cries, “O thou delightful love, I have scarcely tasted of thee; why
dost thou forsake me? My soul is as a child that is weaned of his mother
Ps. 131:2. Oh, thy loving-kindness is better than life! (Ps. 63:3); let me
taste thereof. My soul thirsteth for thee (Ps. 42:2) only, and nothing
else can satisfy me, or make me joyful.”

This holy love causes also, that without it the whole life is imbittered
to a believing and loving soul, and is accounted as death and misery. Yea,
for the sake of this love, man desires to die, to put off the earthly
tabernacle, and to be at home, and present with the Lord, according to the
words of St. Paul. 2 Cor. 5:8.




Chapter XXVIII.


    Showing How The Highest Good Is Perceived And Tasted In The Soul.


    _O taste and see that the Lord is good._—PS. 34:8.


God is an eternal, perfect, infinite, substantial, communicative Good,
full of love and joy; and therefore he desires to be known in living
faith, in spirit, and in truth. This cannot however be, except a man
really taste and feel in his heart the goodness, sweetness,
loving-kindness, and comfort of God.

2. If this were to be performed there must needs be in man something
conformable to God, and capable of knowing him, that so we might be made
partakers of the highest good. Now this is the soul of man: into the soul
God was willing to pour forth his goodness, yea, to dwell there, and to
manifest and make known himself more and more.

3. But since man has lost this sovereign good by sin, and the devil has
obtained a habitation in, and possession of, him; working in man all his
own works, as pride, covetousness, lust, anger, envy; man, therefore,
“through the faith of the operation of God” (Col. 2:12), must be turned
again from the world unto God, from Satan unto Jesus Christ (Acts 26:18),
and Satan with his works must be driven out and be utterly dispossessed.
As long as Satan works in man, God works not in him; His works are
hindered, so that the soul cannot taste that God is good. Indeed, the
reason why there are so few that know God aright is, that in the greatest
number of men the works of darkness and of Satan have the ascendency. The
most part adhere to the world, to the creatures, and to themselves.

4. But they who will rightly know and taste the Lord’s goodness, must be
joined unto him, and be one spirit with him. 1 Cor. 6:17. And the more
this is done the more does God manifest himself in the believing, loving
soul; the more the heart is turned from the world unto God, the more God
is united to the soul. All love to the world and to the creature must be
turned out, if the love of God ever enter in. “If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him.” 1 John 2:15. Where God finds a soul
empty of the world, he fills it with heaven, with himself, and with all
his goodness. The more the heart is emptied of love to the world, the more
God fills it with his light and comfort. “Therefore,” as an ancient father
says, “in an empty, still, and quiet soul, it can be better felt than
expressed what God is.”

5. If then a man would really know that God is good, even the highest
Good, he must taste his goodness in his heart. The Scripture testifies
thereof outwardly, but the heart must feel it inwardly, and must taste the
living word. It must “taste the good word of God and the powers of the
world to come.” Heb. 6:5. Thou canst never better understand that God is
kind and loving, than when thou feelest his comfort. None can better teach
thee that God is a Being full of joy than God himself, when he rejoices in
thee. And so it is also with all other things of God. If he do not
perform, and himself work all in thee, thou wilt never come to a living
knowledge of him. “To know God without God, is impossible,” says St.
Augustine. Therefore, that man will never be able to know rightly what God
is, unto whom God does not make known and manifest himself. But when a
heart feels the living word of God, then it knows and understands that God
is all, all-good, and the true, perfect, eternal Good, and better than all
for which any heart can wish or desire.

6. When this is known and tasted in the soul, according to the words of
Psalm 63:3, “Lord, thy loving-kindness is better than life;” then the soul
begins to scorn the world with its joys and pleasures. She has in God
satisfaction, even full satisfaction, and, in short, ALL. For the world,
with all that is in it, is made up only of individual things, which are
imperfect and inconstant; but God is the true, perfect, universal, and
eternal unchangeable Good.

7. For this reason David says, “Whom have I in heaven but thee, O Lord?
and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee.” Ps. 73:25. This
is the language of a soul which has tasted the perfect good, from which
all love to the world and creatures is removed, and which has no pleasure
nor delight in the world and in earthly things, but in God alone, the
highest Good. And this is the true, sensible, and experimental knowledge
of God, nay, the true love of God above all things, which is felt and
tasted in the heart; for when God is rightly known, he is loved, praised,
and honored above all things.

8. Now, if we have the eternal, perfect good, wherein there is all good,
and which alone is ALL, why should we love that which is imperfect? For
where the true, perfect good is known, there it is also beloved above all
imperfect things, that is, above all creatures whatsoever.

9. Thus the living knowledge of God expels the love of the world; and thus
man begins to despise the world, with all the vanities thereof, saying,
with King Solomon, “Vanity of vanities, all is vanity;” nay, all under the
sun “is vexation of spirit.” Eccles. 1:2, 14. Thus love to the world is
abolished in the heart, and there remains only love to God, and to the
eternal good which abideth for ever.




