BOOK IV.




Preface To The Fourth Book.


     All Creatures Are Messengers Of God, Intended To Lead Us To God.


    _By him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are
    in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or
    dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created
    by him, and for him; and he is before all things, and by him all
    things consist._—COL. 1:16, 17.


The eminent prophet Moses exhibits to us two powerful witnesses of God, in
the book of Creation. The first is the universe; the second is the
inferior world, that is, Man. Both of them, the universe and the heart of
man, furnish glorious testimony in the Scriptures, by which the Creator
and Preserver of all things is revealed, and also formed in our hearts.

2. We shall, therefore, introduce in this Book the testimony of both, that
is, first, of the universe, and secondly, of the inferior world. Thus we
shall learn that all creatures are, as it were, the guides and messengers
of God, whereby we are to be brought to Christian knowledge, and also to
God in Christ.

3. It is therefore unnecessary to attempt to prove that this Book also
belongs to True Christianity, although there are some who might entertain
a different opinion. If they desire additional evidence, they may find it
in the passage quoted above (Col. 1:16, 17), and also in the Introduction
of the Gospel according to St. John, and in very many passages of the Old
and the New Testaments. Let them consider specially Psalms 19; 104; 139;
and the words of St. Paul in Rom. 8: 22, concerning the groaning of the
whole creation, and in 1 Cor. 15:42-52, concerning the resurrection of the
dead; in that case they will judge me with more gentleness and favor. And
they will also assent to the Saviour’s own method of teaching, who used to
explain and demonstrate to his disciples and followers the mysteries of
his kingdom and of true Christianity, by beautiful illustrations taken
from the book of nature. But if they oppose the very Sacraments
themselves, which are so many witnesses and seals of divine grace taken
from the great book of nature, then I refer them to St. Ambrose, Basil,
Theodoret, and others, who have written largely and learnedly upon the six
days’ creation.

4. Thus much may suffice in defence of my method and design; to which I
beg leave to subjoin only this admonition, as the great argument of the
whole, namely, that it is the duty of a true Christian to use God’s
creatures to his honor and glory, so that God in all things may be
glorified, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

5. Observe the method by which the creatures lead us unto God. An
indulgent father invites his children to come to him; and if they are
backward, offers them an apple or some other engaging present. This he
gives, not that the child should be in love with the present, but be
induced by it to be more fond of the giver. Just so God deals with us; he
invites us by all the engaging invitations and promises of the Gospel; and
not content with that, he offers us many great and noble gifts, “doing us
good, and giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness.” Acts 14:17. All these blessings are so
many messengers sent from God to draw us to himself, and to instruct us
how to taste the goodness of the Giver and Creator in that of the
creature.

6. But so perverse is man, that his heart is set upon his gold and silver,
his houses, estates, honors, and pleasures, which, however good in their
kind, are yet in the sight of God of no value; they are only given us by
God, to draw us to himself. For this reason it was, that God made man so
needy and helpless a creature, that by the variety of his blessings and
multitude of his benefits, he might draw him to himself, and teach him by
these various instances of his love and goodness, that all the comfort and
sweetness which he tastes in the creature, really proceeds from the
Creator; and that he alone is able to comfort, relieve, and support us,
when these perishing worldly comforts forsake and leave us.

7. But the greatest of all God’s messengers, the most excellent of all his
gifts, is the Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, in whom are
all the fulness and perfection of divine love and goodness. His mercy is
over all his works, and “by him all things were made.” John 1:3. “By him
all things consist.” Col. 1:17. “He upholdeth all things by the word of
his power.” Heb. 1:3.

8. Having said thus much by way of preface, I begin the First Part of this
Book, treating in general of the six days of creation, to promote the
knowledge, glory, and praise of God.

9. Of man, we shall speak more particularly in the Second Part; and I
intreat my readers to read the _Conclusion_ to my Second Book, before they
begin to judge me. For I again protest and declare that I desire my
writings to be understood in accordance with the Symbolical Books of the
Church of the Augsburg Confession, and in no other sense.




Part I.


      Treating Of The Works Of The Six Days Of Creation, In General.



Chapter I.


                   Of Light, The Work Of The First Day.


    _God said, Let there be light; and there was light.—He covereth
    himself with light as with a garment.—God is light, and in him is
    no darkness at all._—GEN. 1:3; PS. 104:2; 1 JOHN 1:5.


In those words in Job 38:19—“Where is the way where light dwelleth? and as
for darkness, where is the place thereof?” it is intimated that the nature
of light is very difficult to be explained, and that its original is not
to be comprehended by finite understandings. For though we know something
of it by means of sight, yet it is but little; however, let us employ that
little to promote the glory of God.

2. First, then, we say that light is a noble, subtle, and pure principle,
separated from the darkness in the morning of the creation, when God
“commanded the light to shine out of darkness.” 2 Cor. 4:6. By this the
world is enlightened and comforted, and all its beautiful variety is
distinctly known and apprehended. By this, as some think, the light of
life was conveyed into the great world, incorporating itself with every
creature. From this pure brightness and glorious splendor, light and
beauty flowed into the sun, constituting it thereby the great luminary of
the day, which it governs and directs. Jer. 31:35. Whence, also, the
Creator himself calls the light _day_. Gen. 1:5, 14.

3. But as it is the duty of a Christian to contemplate the works of God
with spiritual eyes, so as therein to see the Creator, and by the work be
led to praise the Maker; let us take a nearer view of this subject, and
see how the light and the sun bear witness of God and Christ.

4. And the first conclusion that naturally presents itself is this: If God
created so beautiful, refreshing, enlivening, clear, and shining a light;
how much more lovely, comfortable, and refreshing a light must _He_ be
_himself_? Therefore, the commentator upon St. Dionysius, to the question,
“Why God first of all created light?” answers—Because from his own
essential light, the visible light almost naturally proceeds, as that
which bears the nearest resemblance to his own nature; and therefore he
calls light, a little after, “the image of the goodness of God;” adding,
that the light in God was transcendent and above comprehension; in angels
and men, intelligible; in the sun, visible.

5. And, whereas God made the light, in order that the true external form
and beauty of the creatures might be distinctly seen and apprehended, it
follows that there is also another secret or concealed light, by which the
internal form of the creatures may be likewise known, and from which
nothing can be hidden. And this light is the eternal wisdom of God, which,
being compared with the natural and created light, has been fitly called
the brightness of the everlasting light.

6. Of this St. Dionysius writes in these words. “As the visible light
directs, governs, and fills the visible world; so the incomprehensible and
heavenly light, fills and enlightens all heavenly spirits. It also
purifies the soul from darkness and error, and brings it into communion
with the light of God. It is at first no more than a twilight, or faint
glimmering of light; but when it is tasted, loved, and desired, then, in
proportion to our love, it increases more and more unto the perfect day.
Wherefore this transcendent light exceeds all lights, being, as it were,
the centre and fountain of them all. From its fulness it enlightens all
spirits; and, being the original of all light, it comprehends under it all
the degrees of spiritual, angelical, rational, and natural light. And as
ignorance separates deluded souls from the light; so the presence of this
divine light, collects, unites, perfects, and delivers from ignorance and
error, all that are enlightened by it: it converts them to the truth,
reducing their various imaginations to the standard of pure and simple
truth, and fills their souls with pure and uniform light.” Thus far St.
Dionysius.

7. In the light of the sun, also, shines forth the pure, deep, and ardent
love of God. For whom did he create the sun? Certainly not for himself,
for he needeth not the sun, nor any other created light, being himself a
light infinite and eternal. It was for our sakes, therefore, that he
created it; so that every ray of light proceeding from the sun, is indeed
a ray of divine love towards mankind.

8. And as the eternal wisdom of God is likewise a bright sun, clearly
discovering his mercy and beneficence; therefore, according to the nature
and properties of the visible sun and light, it may also be called, an
image of the divine goodness.

9. The created light determines the order, figures, and distinctions of
all created things; for without it, the whole world would be nothing but
darkness and confusion. So that upon this account also, the light is an
image of the divine wisdom.

10. The created light, by its brightness and splendor, causes everything
to turn to it; so the goodness of God draws all things to itself, as the
centre and principle of all things.

11. The light of the sun is pure and spotless; so is the love of God
towards mankind. Hence also the divine wisdom, being a spotless light, is,
agreeably to this property of the sun, the spotless mirror of the divine
majesty.

12. As the light flows plentifully and freely from the sun; so the love of
God descends plentifully upon us. As the sun shines freely upon all,
without respect of persons; so the divine love overflows upon all mankind.
As the light proceeds from the nature and essence of the sun; so does the
love of God flow from his very nature and essence.

13. Moreover, as God created the external light for the world and visible
bodies; so it is worth inquiring, whether he did not at the same time
provide an inward and spiritual light for the soul. For God took not less
care of the soul, than he did of the body. Now this light of the soul is
God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the ever blessed and
undivided Trinity, by whom our understandings are enlightened through
faith. “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee.” Isa. 60:1.

14. Now as the sun enlightens the world, so does Christ enlighten the
soul. “That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world” (John 1:9); and is, therefore, called by the prophet Malachi,
“The Sun of righteousness.” Mal. 4:2. St. James calls God, “the Father of
lights.” James 1:17. The Holy Ghost appeared upon the Apostles in the form
of fiery tongues (Acts 2:3); and from this eternal light proceeds the
light of grace, the light of wisdom and divine knowledge, the light of
truth and life, the light of joy and consolation, the light of God’s
countenance, the light of faith and all Christian virtues.

15. This light is the chief beauty and glory of the creatures. God is said
to be clothed “with light as with a garment.” Ps. 104:2. “The glory of the
Lord” (Luke 2:9), is also the beauty of the blessed saints and holy
angels. The highest majesty and glory of the elect in the other world,
will consist in light and splendor. “The righteous shall shine forth as
the sun in the kingdom of their Father” (Matt. 13:43; Dan. 12:3); which is
also expressed in the appearance of the woman clothed with the sun. Rev.
12:1. Lastly, as the light is the greatest ornament of this visible world;
so the everlasting light shall be the chief glory of the heavenly
Jerusalem. Rev. 21:11.

16. The more light any creature has, the more noble it is. This appears
from the angels, the sun, moon, stars, and precious stones. So virtue
itself is a most glorious light, and all the redeemed in the next world,
shall be full of light and glory, and accordingly shall be distinguished,
as “one star differeth from another star in glory.” 1 Cor. 15:41.

17. Light is refreshing: and who can doubt but, when the day of eternal
light arrives, the blessed saints shall be refreshed with joy unspeakable?
Without question, the light of the everlasting Sun of righteousness shall
give us infinitely more delight and joy, than this created sun, which only
gives light to a world of misery and sorrow.

18. The light awakens those that sleep; so Christ, our light, rouses us
from the sleep of sin. “Awake, thou that sleepest, and Christ shall give
thee light.” Eph. 5:14.

19. The light directs the traveller in his way: so saith Christ—“I am the
light of the world; he that followeth me, shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life.” John 8:12; 13:46.

20. Moreover, as light has a vital power in it; so in Christ, our light,
“was life; and the life was the light of men.” John 1:4. “The Lord is my
light and my salvation; he is the strength of my life.” Ps. 27:1.

21. As the light cannot be seen but by itself; so God cannot be known but
by Himself: “In thy light shall we see light.” Ps. 36:9.

22. As the external light chases away the darkness, and the spirits of
darkness; so Christ, who is the light of God in us, chases away unbelief,
and all the works of darkness and Satan. God must speak the word in us, as
he did at the first creation, “Let there be light!” or we shall for ever
remain in darkness. This made the Psalmist say, “Thou wilt light my
candle; the Lord will enlighten my darkness.” Ps. 18:28. “To give light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.” Luke 1:79. “I saw
an angel come down from heaven; and the earth was lightened with his
glory.” Rev. 18:1.

23. When the daylight is gone, the moon, regent of the night, arises with
a pale lustre: so, without the light of Christ, man is nothing but
darkness; and the boasted light of reason is but dim obscurity.

24. And as he would be called foolish, who preferred being enlightened by
the moon, rather than by the sun; so are they much more foolish, who
prefer the wisdom of this world, to the eternal wisdom of God in Christ
Jesus. And as none but a madman would make use of the light of a candle in
sunshine; so no man in his senses would think himself more enlightened by
worldly wisdom, than by the divine wisdom. Strange madness! that a man
should expect more light from the creature, than from the Creator, the
Father of lights, God blessed for ever! Whosoever duly apprehends my
meaning, has in him the beginning of the divine, eternal, and heavenly
wisdom, which is the subject of the whole 119th Psalm.

25. As the sun is the ornament of heaven, so Christ is the ornament of his
church, and of the new heaven, and new earth in their future glory, where
it will be manifested to all the elect, that he is “the brightness of his
Father’s glory, and the express image of his person.” Heb. 1:3; Col. 1:15.

26. As dwellings are pleasant, in proportion as they receive the light, so
“God dwelleth in light.” 1 Tim. 6:16. And the heavenly Jerusalem is
described as full of sweet and refreshing light. “It hath no need of the
sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God enlightens
it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.” Rev. 21:23.

27. Ah the light makes all things clear and plain; so there is nothing in
heaven or in earth, no spirit, no being, nor the very thoughts of the
heart, that can be hidden from the light of divine wisdom. Heb. 4:12, 13.
Hence the Psalmist says, “Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance.” Ps. 90:8. And “Thou
understandest my thought afar off.” Ps. 139:2.

28. As the light communicates itself to all creatures, and diffuses itself
over the world; so God communicates himself to all creatures, particularly
to men, delighting most of all in doing them good.

29. Lastly, the light and sun are a witness of the glorification of our
souls and bodies at the resurrection. The glorification of our souls is,
indeed, in some degree accomplished in this life by the Holy Spirit,
according to the words of St. Paul, “We all, with open face beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.” 2 Cor. 3:18. These,
however, are but the imperfect beginnings, and first glimpses of eternal
happiness; but hereafter both soul and body shall be clothed with
everlasting light and glory. Hence St. Paul says, “There is one glory of
the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: so
also is the resurrection of the dead.” 1 Cor. 15:41, 42. “They that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever.” Dan. 12:13.

30. Of this we find an image in the transfiguration of our Lord, when “his
face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.” Matt.
17:2. This was the heavenly brightness the splendor of the everlasting
Sun. So the face of Moses shone like the brightness of the sun, so that
the children of Israel could not look upon him. Exod. 34:29; 2 Cor. 3:7.
And this was the consequence of only a few days passed in the divine
presence. How great then must that glory be, which will be the result of
our eternal union and converse with him! The lustre of the face of Moses
was terrible to look on, but the glory of Christ was refreshing and
comfortable.

31. Rev. 1:14, 16. The eyes of him that had the seven stars in his hand,
were “as a flame of fire.” And the same Jesus Christ, who is the eternal
light, shall so glorify us at the last day, that our whole bodies shall
shine like lightning. Matt. 6:22; Luke 11:36.



