Chapter LI.


                Comfort For Those That Are Weak In Faith.


    _A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
    not quench._—ISAIAH 42:3.


In this verse the holy prophet comforts those that are weak in faith by
two beautiful similitudes, excellently adapted to the purpose. For as a
bruised reed (to which he first alludes) must be handled very gently, lest
it be entirely broken to pieces; and as the smoking flax, when once it has
taken fire, must be continually encouraged by a gentle breath, for fear of
blowing it out; so our blessed Redeemer, who knows our infirmities, treats
us with great gentleness, reviving from time to time the spark of faith
within us, with the soft and gentle breath of his Spirit, that we may not
be discouraged by our manifold infirmities, but be enlivened and
strengthened under them. Isaiah 57:15. And because this weakness of faith
is a very grievous temptation, to which all Christians are more or less
exposed; therefore has the Holy Spirit, in the Word of God, furnished us
with very strong consolations against it, which ought to be deeply rooted
in our mind, that we may have them in readiness, and apply them with
success in the sad hour of temptation.

2. (1) We must carefully remember, that faith is not of ourselves, but is
the gift and work of God; “This is the work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he hath sent.” “No man can come to me, except the Father which hath
sent me, draw him.” John 6:29, 44. “Who believe, according to the working
of his mighty power.” Ephes. 1:19. “By grace are ye saved through faith;
and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any
man should boast.” Ephes. 2:8. “Let us run with patience the race that is
set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.”
Heb. 12:1, 2. “The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us.” Rom. 5:5. “We have the first fruits of the
Spirit, which helpeth our infirmities.” Rom. 8:23, 26. Now, since faith is
the work of God, and not our own, it follows, that it is not in our power
to have it in such measures and proportions as we please. And whereas he
has promised to save us by faith, it follows, that he knows how strong our
faith ought to be, for the obtaining that great end, and will strengthen
it accordingly. Therefore this was the answer of God to St. Paul: “My
grace is sufficient for thee.” 2 Cor. 12:9. “A man can receive nothing,
except it be given him from heaven.” John 3:27.

3. (2) Whilst we are in this life, we must not expect to arrive at the
highest pitch of perfection. This God permits, with a design to cure that
natural pride and vanity of spirit to which the best of us are subject, by
the daily sense of our great and manifold infirmities. To this we may
refer the words addressed by St. Paul to the Philippians, “Not as though I
had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after, if
that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus.” Phil. 3:12. As if he had said, “Though I am not yet so strong in
faith, as to be able to apprehend him as I ought, yet I am apprehended in
him; that is, I am in Christ Jesus by faith.” Let us, considering these
things, bear patiently the infirmities of our nature, till we can attain
to perfection.

4. (3) God does not despise or reject our weak faith, but cherishes,
strengthens, and improves it, and at last crowns it with a blessed
conclusion. In this sense we are to understand and apply those golden
passages that follow: “A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking
flax shall he not quench.” Isaiah 43:3. “Thou hast been a strength to the
poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a
shadow from the heat.” Isaiah 25:4. “Strengthen ye the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be
strong, fear not; behold, your God will come and save you.” Isaiah 35:3,
4. “He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might, he
increaseth strength.” Isaiah 40:29. “The Lord God hath given me the tongue
of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary.” Isaiah 50:4. “I revive the spirit of the humble, and the
heart of the contrite ones.” Isaiah 57:15. “The Lord hath sent me to
preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted,” and to
comfort all that mourn. Isaiah 61:1. In this sense we may understand that
passage in Exod. 34:26. “Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s
milk;” that is, thou shalt not grieve the tender, weak faith of a babe in
Christ. A strong and vigorous faith can bear anything, can pass through
the flames of fire, and the floods of water; but a young, tender faith,
must be softly and gently treated, like a bruised reed, which is in
continual danger of being broken to pieces. “I have satiated the weary
soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul.” Jer. 31:25. They that
labor under the weakness of faith, are the poor in spirit, to whom the
blessing is promised, “Blessed are the poor in spirit.” Matt. 5:3. They
that feel the weakness of their faith, are sick in spirit: and to them
must be applied for their consolation, that passage in St. Matthew, “They
that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.” Matt. 9:12.
“Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations.” Rom. 14:1. “To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak.” 1 Cor. 9:22. “I will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick.” Ezek. 34:16. “Him that cometh to me, I
will in no wise cast out.” John 6:37. On these promises, full of divine
consolation, let all who are weak in faith entirely depend, and satisfy
themselves that God is faithful and true (Psalm 33:4), and will not fail
in his promises. To this head also we refer the instances of those that
have been weak in faith. Such was the man (Mark 9:23, 24), who, when our
Lord said, “If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
believeth;” answered with tears, “Lord, I believe; help thou mine
unbelief!” The nobleman. John 4:47. The disciples in the ship. Matt. 8:24.
St. Peter sinking in the sea, when our Lord stretched out his hand and
supported him. Matt. 14:31. Therefore, says St. Paul, “Comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient towards all men.” 1 Thess.
5:14.

5. (4) God has, indeed, the greatest concern for those that are weak in
faith. Our Lord himself tells us, “They that be (strong and) whole need
not a physician, but they that are sick (and weak).” Matt. 9:12. The
shepherd leaves his ninety and nine sheep in the wilderness, and goes
seeking that which was lost, until he find it (Luke 15:4); and as tender
mothers show the most attention to their weak and sickly children; so does
our Heavenly Father to those that are weak in faith.

6. (5) But if thou say in thy heart that thou perceivest scarcely a grain
of faith in thyself, then I would ask, Dost thou sincerely desire to have
faith? If thou dost, all is well; fear not. For since it is God that
worketh in us “to will,” it follows, that whosoever finds in himself that
good will and desire, finds in himself the work of God. Hence let him be
encouraged and assured that he who has given us _the will_, will also give
us the power _to do_. Phil. 1:6; 2:13.

7. (6) God is so compassionate to devout prayers and desires, that he
never disappoints the hopes of those that trust in him. “Lord, thou hast
heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt
cause thine ear to hear.” Ps. 10:17; 9:18. Wherefore, thy faith is as
great as thy desire of obtaining it. “For God trieth the hearts and
reins.” Ps. 7:9. “Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I
deliver him.” Ps. 91:14.

8. (7) It is therefore better to glory in the weakness, than in the
strength of our faith. For it is the will of God concerning us, that we
fall not into spiritual pride. “My strength is made perfect in weakness.
Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me.” 2 Cor. 12:9. Let this be thy comfort
when thou laborest under weakness of faith.

9. (8) Faith, though it be ever so weak, is still faith. For our salvation
depends not upon the worthiness of our faith, whether it be strong or
weak, but upon Jesus Christ, on whom it lays hold. As, therefore, a
precious jewel may be held by the hands of a little infant as well as of a
strong man, so a weak faith may as well lay hold on the merits of Christ
Jesus (the true Christian’s only hope and treasure), as that which is much
stronger, and by consequence, both be capable of the same righteousness
and blessedness. And as the apple of the eye, small and delicate as it is,
can perceive not only the light and splendor of the meridian sun, but even
the sun itself, though so many times larger than the earth, so does the
eye of faith, though weak and infirm, perceive and feel the Sun of
righteousness (Mal. 4:2), the Lord Jesus Christ, with all the bright rays
of his spiritual gifts and graces.

10. (9) Such is the nature of faith, that it is sometimes stronger and
sometimes weaker; and sometimes the light thereof seems to be darkness.
This has been attested by the examples of almost all the saints,
particularly David, and Abraham, who is called “the father of the
faithful” (Rom. 4:11; Gal. 3:7); and yet (Gen. 12:11) he was afraid that
the Egyptians would put him to death on account of Sarah, his wife, and
this, too, after he had received the promise. Moses also, at the water of
Meribah, betrayed a want of faith. Numb. 20:10-13; Exod. 17:7. David’s
faith was sometimes so strong as to raise him, as it were, up to heaven;
and then again so weak as to leave him to sink, as it were, into hell, and
make him complain to God that “he was cut off from before His eyes.” Ps.
31:23. Whence it follows, that we must not conclude because a man’s faith
is weak, that therefore he has none at all; or that they who are
contending against the weakness of faith, are therefore forsaken by God.
We know that fire is often hidden under ashes, though neither light nor
heat appear; we know that the trees are alive, though in winter they are
stripped of their leaves: so we may in like manner conclude, that those
people may have faith towards God, in whom we do not at all times discern
signs or tokens of it. For the Spirit of the Lord is like the wind, that
bloweth when and whither it pleases. John 3:8.

11. (10) He that complains of the weakness of his faith, shows plainly,
that faith is striving and struggling within him, and a _striving faith_
is a true faith; for there is a continual struggle in every man between
faith and unbelief. He is perpetually assaulted by temptations to
unbelief, so that his life is one continued combat; and he is obliged to
be as watchful, as though he were in the midst of drawn swords, and
expected every moment to be cut in pieces. Here is the trial of the
Christian’s faith; here is the exercise of his patience, to unite his
earthly heart with Christ; to make the barren soil of his soul fit to
receive the heavenly seed; to make the darkness of corrupt nature capable
of the divine light. The flesh is continually inclining to the broad way
of the world, and endeavoring to tyrannize over the spirit; the darkness
is no sooner scattered, than it endeavors to recover its ground, and
spread itself again over the face of the soul. This is what all the saints
have confessed and lamented, and it is a most certain token of the
presence of true faith. On the other hand, where there is no faith at all,
there is no cause found for striving. Here let the languishing soul call
to mind that comfortable assurance given us, that “God will not suffer us
to be tempted above that we are able; but will with the temptation also
make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.” 1 Cor. 10:13. “God
giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increaseth
strength.” Isa. 40:29.

12. (11) Let us be assured, that whensoever, in our greatest infirmities,
we can but think upon Jesus Christ, he will be with us, and dwell in us by
faith. Thus it is said, “In all places where I record my name, I will come
unto thee, and I will bless thee.” Exod. 20:24. For we cannot so much as
think upon God, without his special presence and assistance. Moreover,
being engrafted into Christ, as branches into the living vine (John 15:1,
etc.), we truly live in him, and draw life and nourishment from him. “Our
life,” and the strength of our faith, are “hid with Christ in God” (Col.
3:3); and the Holy Spirit witnesseth the same in our hearts, by the joy,
peace, and comfort, which he produces there. Rom. 8:16. As in the Old
Testament, there was no Prophet who heard not God speaking in him; so
under the Gospel, there is no Christian but hears Christ speaking in him,
and, from time to time tastes the unction of the Holy Spirit. And so
strong is this union of our faith with Christ, that all the power of death
and hell cannot dissolve it; because Christ, who is the life and root of
our faith, is immortal. Though thou hast not always so lively a perception
of this in thy heart, yet “greater is he that is in thee, than he that is
in the world.” 1 John 4:4.

13. (12) When we are weak in faith, let us look up unto Christ Jesus our
Redeemer, and merciful High Priest, who offered up himself for us on the
cross, and is praying that our faith may be strengthened; as he did for
St. Peter, “I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not” (Luke 22:32);
to whom also he stretched out his almighty and saving hand, when he
thought himself sinking into the sea. Matt. 14:31. And he saith, “Holy
Father, keep them through thine own name; neither pray I for these alone,
(the Apostles), but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word.” John 17:11, 20. So also we are told, “We have not a high priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Who is at the right
hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.” Heb. 2:17; 4:15; Rom.
8:34. This intercession ought to be our comfort when our faith is weak and
languishing; from whence we should, by a lively and steadfast faith,
expect a blessing.

14. (13) Our next support is, the divine mercy, which is inexpressibly
great, as infinite as God himself. Of this let no man despair. This mercy
of his anticipates us, waits for us, supports us, and endures forever. And
this he never denies to any one. Come then, ye that complain of the
weakness of your faith, cast yourselves into the protecting arms of divine
love, which will never leave you nor forsake you.

15. (14) God, who has wrought the beginning of faith in us, has graciously
promised, that he will “perform it until the day of Jesus Christ” (Phil.
1:6); that he will “stablish, strengthen, settle us” (1 Pet. 5:10); and
that we shall be “kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
receiving the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls.” 1 Pet.
1:5, 9. This is the end that God proposed to our faith, when he first gave
us the beginning of it. Faith being, therefore, the operation and work of
God, must be perfected by its divine Author. For this cause the Epistle to
the Hebrews (Heb. 12:2) calls the blessed Jesus, not only the _Author_,
but also, the _Finisher_ of our faith. And Christ himself tells us: “No
man shall pluck my sheep out of my hand.” John 10:28.

16. (15) To this end he has given us various means whereby our faith may
be strengthened and preserved, namely, the Word, the Sacraments, and
prayer. “Lord, increase our faith” (Luke 17:5), said the disciples. “Lord,
help thou mine unbelief.” Mark 9:24. Moreover, God has promised “his Holy
Spirit to them that ask him.” Luke 11:13. “The Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities.” Rom. 5:5; 8:26. In a word, this is the end and design of
Christianity, that we may grow and be perfected in faith.

17. (16) Lastly. Our faith is founded on God’s eternal love to us, “Whom
he did predestinate, them he also justified.” Rom. 8:30. But we are
justified by faith alone in Christ Jesus. Rom. 3:28. “God hath chosen us
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth.” 2 Thess. 2:13. Come then, comfort thyself with these promises;
sink not under the weakness of thy faith! When thy faith seems to be at
its lowest ebb, then is thy Saviour nearer to thee than thou thinkest.
This was the case with the disciples; when they looked upon themselves as
lost in the tempest, then Christ was at hand to save them. Matt. 8:24-26.
Let us also be persuaded, that our Redeemer and Saviour is never so near
us, as when we think ourselves in most danger.




