Chapter VI.


The Perfection And Salvation Of Men Depend On Union With Christ By Faith;
  But To This They Can Contribute Nothing, Whereas They Rather Interfere
 With The Grace Of God By Their Perverse Will; But Christ, And He Alone,
                       Accomplishes The Work In Us.


    _Without me ye can do nothing._—JOHN 15:5.


As man by his apostasy from God, through ambition and self-love, was
separated from him, and fell from the perfection in which he was created,
so he must of necessity return to his original tranquillity and happiness,
by a _union_ with God; in which the whole of human perfection consists. It
was therefore necessary, that the Son of God should become man, in order
that human nature, being again united to God, might thereby be restored to
its primitive integrity and perfection. As the divine and human natures
are united in the one Person of Christ, so must we all, through grace, be
united to him by faith, as to our eternal and sovereign Good. In this
manner it pleased God to rectify the exceeding corruption of our nature by
the abounding goodness of his grace. This union is declared by the Son of
God himself: “I will betroth thee,” says he, “unto me for ever, in loving
kindness and in mercies.” Hos. 2:19. For since our nature is infected and
corrupted by _sin_, which is the greatest of evils, it could not be
restored and healed but by GOD himself, the sovereign Good.

2. Now as the union of the divine and the human natures in Christ is
eternal, and is never to be dissolved, insomuch that even death itself
could not break asunder so sacred a bond: so Christ our Head is to be so
firmly united with his faithful members, that neither life nor death may
ever be able to separate them from him. This is also declared by the
prophet Hosea, in the Person of Christ: “I will,” says he, “betroth thee
unto me for ever.”

3. This union by faith, is of the highest necessity, because “our
iniquities have separated between us and our God.” Isa. 59:2. And this
deplorable state will continue to all eternity, unless Christ dwell in us
here by faith. Moreover, we are not able to do the least good, unless
Christ himself work it in us. Hence, says the apostle, “Not I, but the
grace of God which is with me.” 1 Cor. 15:10. And the Lord himself says:
“Without me ye can do nothing” (John 15:5); the truth of which he
illustrates by the beautiful parable of the vine and the branches. Whence
it naturally follows, that if we are, or do, any good at all, it is
altogether to be ascribed to God alone; according to what is said by the
prophet: “Thou hast wrought all our works in us” (Isa. 26:12); and by
another: “I am like a green fir-tree. From me is thy fruit found.” Hos.
14:8.

4. O man! consider therefore, what thou art, and what thou canst do. What
hast thou been able to contribute to thy restoration and the renovation of
thy depraved nature? Surely nothing. As thou couldst not afford any help
toward thy bodily birth, nor create thyself; so neither canst thou bring
any assistance towards thy new birth or regeneration. Thou canst indeed
lose, corrupt, and destroy thyself; but to renew, to restore, to heal, to
justify, and to quicken thyself, is a work entirely beyond thy strength.
Couldest thou contribute anything that God might become man? No. There is
nothing therefore that thou canst arrogate to thyself, or ascribe to thy
own ability. Indeed, the more a man attributes to his own will, strength,
and ability, the more effectually does he obstruct divine grace, and the
renewal of his corrupted nature. Let us therefore wholly renounce our own
strength, our own wisdom, our own will, and self-love, that, being thus
resigned to God alone, we may suffer his power freely to work in us, so
that nothing may, in the least, oppose the will and operations of the
Lord.

5. Until thou art brought to this, O Christian, that thy mind becomes
merely passive, and that thou purely _sufferest_ the operation and will of
God, it is evident, that God is impeded by thee, so that he cannot unite
himself with thy soul; or by true renovation of thy corrupt nature
establish his image there. For our own will, self-love, ambition, the
opinion of our own wisdom, and whatever we arrogantly claim to ourselves,
are so many impediments, why God cannot freely operate in us, and effect
his good will. For as a man’s own will more and more corrupts and depraves
him; so the will of God more and more perfects and restores him.

6. Hence, it was said by Bonaventura, that “the highest perfection of
religion, consists in renouncing our own will.” And by Augustine, “If _to
love God_ is the greatest good to man, _to love himself_ must needs be his
greatest evil. And, if such is the nature of good, that it diffuses and
communicates itself; of necessity self-love must be a great evil, since it
engrosses to itself both its own and the goods of others, and will not
part with any of them.” Of this even the pagan Seneca himself was not
ignorant when he said: “That only is an accession to virtue, which is a
denial of thy own will.” And again: “Unless thou departest from thyself,
thou canst not approach God, who is above thee.”

7. Our _own will_ is nothing else but a defection or apostasy from God.
Defection verily is easy, smooth, and pleasant; but the recovery from it
is bitter, troublesome, and difficult; yea, even beyond all the power of
the creature. For man, by his own strength, can neither return, nor in any
wise help himself, whether in will or deed. Man’s will is captive, and his
works are dead. Christ alone is able to help, in the beginning, the
progress, and the end. He lays before us two means, the _law_ and the
_gospel_; or _repentance_ and _remission_ of sin. Through the _law_, in
the first place, thou must die with Christ, and by true sorrow and
brokenness of heart sacrifice thy own will. Thou must become as nothing in
thine own eyes, and resign thyself wholly to Christ. Then grace and
forgiveness of sin are conferred through the _gospel_, and man, that was
dead before, is made alive by faith. Whence it appears, that no man can by
his own strength convert and quicken himself. For it is absolutely
necessary that he hate, deny, and lose himself; that he be displeased
with, and die unto, himself; and that his hope be placed entirely in God
alone, by whose grace he expects to live.

8. But even this self-hatred, denial, and mortification, are not the
effect of our own will and ability. “It is not,” says St. Paul, “of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.”
Rom. 9:16. It is God therefore alone who operates all this in us by his
grace, and by the power of his good Spirit: so that our justification is
not derived from any creature whatsoever, but from God alone, whose work
and gift it is. For the most dangerous enemy any man has, is _himself_;
insomuch that we have great reason to implore the Lord to deliver us from
ourselves and all that we have by nature, and then to bestow that which
flows from his grace. By our own strength we are not able to perform the
least good, if God, himself, even after conversion, do not graciously
operate in us. Who is there that can endue us with love and mercy, but
God, who is LOVE itself, and from whom all other graces proceed?
Therefore, Christ _alone_ is our help and support, when the help of men
cannot avail. But after all, be the condition ever so low to which man has
been brought by the fall of Adam, he is now raised again by Christ, and
even exalted to a higher degree than he possessed before. But of this more
shall be said in Chapter XI.




