Chapter V.


     Of The Waters, And Their Productions, The Work Of The Fifth Day.


    _See_ GEN. 1:20-22; PS. 104:25.


That is unquestionably the best philosophy which gives the best account of
the works of God. And this knowledge every true lover of God ought to
seek, that he may thereby know how many glorious creatures God has created
for our use and benefit. Let the pretenders to philosophy look to it, that
they spend not their time in inquiries, which, instead of teaching them
true knowledge, lead them into ignorance and forgetfulness of God and his
creatures.

2. The first thing to be observed and admired, is the mutual relation
subsisting between the different parts of created nature. Thus the heavens
generate rains, dews, winds, and cooling breezes in the air; and then send
them down to us. So the earth produces its fruits in the air; and they
bud, blossom, and ripen, and are nourished by the air, without which they
would quickly languish and die.

3. Among the productions of the watery element, are the rivers. In one
place springs up the Rhine, in another the Danube; here is the Elbe, there
the Nile. As from one bough of a great and fruitful tree, spring many
little branches, and much fruit; so one great branch of the world of
waters, as the Rhine or the Danube, is connected with rivulets, lakes, and
fountains, which all flow into it.

4. As for the living creatures that arise from the sea, they are without
number, God having blessed it with so great fruitfulness, both for its
vast extent, and the use and benefit of mankind, that out of this vast
repository there arise, at certain seasons, prodigious quantities of fish,
varying in their kinds every month. For such is the nature of sea-fish,
that they are not to be caught except at certain seasons.

5. And here it is observable, that the sea and all its productions, have
their proper order, time, and motion, appointed to them by God. So in the
heavens, the stars have their stated times, regular order, motion, rising,
and setting. The earth at certain seasons produces different fruits and
vegetables; and, in that sense, is in perpetual motion, and never rests
until it has brought forth all its fruits. So likewise the sea has its
laws of motion, flux and reflux, and produces all its fruits at such
appointed seasons as may best serve the use and benefit of man.

6. Let us now take a survey of the wonderful power and wisdom of God in
the sea, and inquire what spiritual inferences may be drawn from it. “Who
hath shut up the sea with doors,” saith God to Job, “when it brake forth,
as if it had issued out of the womb? When I made the cloud the garment
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it, and brake up for it
my decreed place, and set bars and doors, and said, Hitherto shalt thou
come, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed? Hast thou
entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of
the depth?” Job 38:8-11, 16. In these words, God points out the great and
dreadful ocean as an obscure image and resemblance of his unsearchable and
incomprehensible power. For it is a very surprising miracle, that God
should by his word alone, as with bars and doors, inclose the sea so
strongly, that it should not be able to overflow its bounds. No less
wonderful is its ebbing and flowing; so that the sea, being, as it were,
conscious and mindful of the divine command, so soon as it touches the
earth, seems to fly back and retire in a fright, as at the presence of God
himself, like Jordan and the Red Sea. Josh. 3:16; Ps. 114:3. “He gathereth
the waters of the sea together, as a heap; he layeth up the deep in
storehouses.” Ps. 33:7.

7. God tells Job, that he has “made the clouds to be the garment thereof,
and thick darkness a swaddling band for it” (Job 38:9); which plainly
appears, when its waves roll and toss themselves up to the clouds, that,
as it were, receive them into their embraces, and cover them with darkness
and horror, so that they seem to be blended with each other. Then appear
the mighty wonders of God, which a man cannot behold without fear and
astonishment, as it is described in Psalm 107:25, etc.

8. To this work of the fifth day, belongs also that passage of the
Psalmist: “So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the ships; there is
that leviathan whom thou hast made to play therein.” Ps. 104:25, 26.

9. As for the greatness of the sea, who can but admire the power of God,
which, notwithstanding that so much water flows into the sea every day,
and has, from the beginning, yet suffers not its waters to exceed their
appointed quantity? And though its waves sometimes rage and swell, and
lift themselves like mountains; yet are they quickly put at rest, and
settled within their proper bounds. These are clear demonstrations of the
mighty power of God.

10. Here too we may not improperly speak of the islands. Who can behold,
without wonder, several large and populous countries, and entire kingdoms,
lying in the midst of the sea, as if they had been planted there? Who can
tell on what foundations they are built, and what it is that keeps them
immovable in the midst of violent storms and tempests? Some of them,
encompassed with vast rocks growing out of the sea, seem to be built and
founded on them. Upon the whole, their fruitfulness, tillage, and the
occasion and manner of their being peopled, are what we may rather admire
than understand. So that the sea is as populous as the earth. For as the
earth is much less than the sea, it is probable that God would not suffer
the greatest part of the globe to be uninhabited, and therefore he planted
it with islands: so that none of the miracles and blessings which he works
in the sea, might escape the observation of mankind. Therefore, to these
islanders also did he send the Gospel of truth, by his holy Apostles,
“shaking both the sea and the dry land, after the Desire of all nations
was come.” Hag. 2:6, 7.

11. No less wonderful is the vast multitude of creatures that inhabit the
sea; for some affirm that there is as great abundance and variety of them
in the sea, as on the land. Who can behold without astonishment,
prodigious shoals of fish rising from the depths of the sea, like a flock
of sheep, and offering themselves to the use and necessities of mankind?
So that the sea is a great storehouse of God, out of which he feeds the
greatest part of mankind, and out of which, too, he produces many other
excellent works, such as pearls, amber, and coral.

12. I might here mention the many bold voyages that have been performed
within the memory of us and our fathers, to the most distant parts of the
East and West; and all this chiefly by the assistance of the magnet, which
seems to have nothing in it either of beauty or use, and yet the greatest
things are performed by it. By this the pilot steers his ship, and keeps
his way in the pathless waters; and by constantly pointing to the pole, it
guides the mariner to his intended port. Of these voyages, and of the
islands, countries, people, and other useful discoveries, there are many
volumes extant, to which I refer the reader.

13. The huge whales, mentioned by David (Ps. 104:26), give us a great idea
of the mighty power of God. Of this God himself takes notice when he talks
with Job: “His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like
bars of iron. He is the chief of the ways of God. He drinketh up a river
and hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth. By
his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the
morning. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.
Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, and a flame goeth out of his mouth. When
he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid; by reason of breakings they
purify themselves. He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the
sea like a pot of ointment.” Job 40:18, 19, 23; 41:18-21, 25, 31.

14. Thus much for the greatness of the sea; which is a very striking
illustration of the power of God. “Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand?” saith Isaiah. Isa. 40:12. To which the Psalmist
answers, “Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in the
earth, in the seas and all deep places.” Ps. 135:6. All that remains is,
to praise, honor, and glorify the wisdom of God, which is so wonderfully
manifested in the deep; the riches of his goodness in that vast variety of
fishes, and other productions of the sea, for the use and benefit of man;
and in a word, to adore and magnify him in all his works.

15. Let us consider how this doctrine of the sea may bring to our
remembrance that twofold sea mentioned in Scripture: the sea of affliction
and misery, and the sea of grace and comfort; the depths of misery, and
the abyss of divine mercy. For what is this life and world of ours but a
troublesome and tempestuous sea? As the sea is never at rest, but is
perpetually ruffled with winds and waves, so is the life of man. Sometimes
we fancy ourselves safe and out of danger, when suddenly a stormy wind
arises, and the floods swell, to the great danger both of body and soul.
As the sea has its ebb and flow, so has the life of man. Hence we read
that the Lord dries the sea, the waters of the great deep. Isa. 51:10;
Jer. 31:35; Ps. 107:25. Moreover, as the freshest waters when they come
into the sea grow salt, so all the pleasures, glories, honors, and riches
of this mortal life, however sweet and pleasant at first, soon grow bitter
and unsavory. And all that cleave to them, thereby forfeit the sweet
consolations of heaven, and are drowned and overwhelmed in bitter fears
and perplexing sorrows.

16. As the sea has many rocks and quicksands, on which vessels split and
are lost, so in human life, many there are who split upon the rocks of
covetousness, and run foul of the quicksands of worldly pleasures, and are
lost to all eternity. As the sea, after some days, throws up the carcasses
that have been cast into it, so the world vomits us out, after it has
entertained us a little while; so that it is our highest wisdom to look
out betimes for a haven of salvation in the land of the living. As the
mariner sails at random without his compass, and has no certain guide but
his needle, which is continually pointing to the pole, so Jesus Christ is
our loadstone, continually drawing our hearts towards him and heaven, that
we may not float up and down at random, or be lost in the sea of this
world. As the depth of the sea is unsearchable, according to Job, “Hast
thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the
search of the depth?” (Job 38:16); so is our life an unsearchable abyss of
misery and sorrow. Whence the Psalmist says, “Out of the depths have I
cried unto thee, O Lord.” Ps. 130:1. And, “Deep calleth unto deep at the
noise of thy waterspouts; all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.”
Ps. 42:7. So that our life is nothing but a vast sea of calamity and
sorrow.

17. To this abyss of misery and sin we must oppose the abyss of grace and
consolation. And the first comfort is the boundless mercy of God, which is
higher than the heavens, and deeper than the sea. Of this the prophet
Micah speaks, “He will have compassion on us, and cast all our sins into
the depths of the sea.” Micah 7:19. As the Egyptians were drowned in the
Red Sea (Exod. 14:28), so must all our sins be drowned and washed away in
the blood of Christ. And though the abyss of our misery be ever so great,
yet the merits of Jesus Christ are greater.

18. A second comfort is, the consideration of the many wonders that God
has wrought in the water; and that the blessed Jesus assisted his
disciples when they were in danger by sea. Matt. 8:26. He stretched out
his hand to Peter when he was afraid of sinking. Matt. 14:31. So, at this
day, he is never nearer to us, than when we are sinking in the floods of
affliction; and we never so fully experience his presence and assistance,
as when we are under the cross. “When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee.”
Isa. 43:2.

19. A third consolation is contained in these words of the prophet
Zechariah: “It shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the
hinder sea.” Zech. 14:8. So also the prophet Ezekiel (Ezekiel 47:8) saw a
stream of water flowing out of the temple near the altar into the sea,
healing and quickening everything that was touched by it. This signifies
the fountain of grace and consolation opened by the Holy Spirit, by the
preaching of the Gospel, whereby the bitter waters of affliction are to be
refreshed and sweetened; so that the cross shall be no longer a Dead Sea,
but a water of life, and a well of salvation. According as it is said, “In
the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.” Ps.
94:19.

20. A fourth consolation against the stormy sea of this world, is
contained in Psalm 65:7. “God stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of
their waves, and the tumult of the people.” As if he had said, When all
things threaten ruin and destruction, when wars rage, and desolation seems
to be at hand; then can God easily still the waves. So did the blessed
Jesus, Matt. 8:26. “The lord on high is mightier than the noise of many
waters.” Ps. 93:4.



