Chapter XIX.


 Showing How We Should Behold In The Crucified Christ, As In The Book Of
  Life, Both Our Sins, And Also The Displeasure, The Love, Justice, And
                              Wisdom Of God.


    _And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
    written within and on the back side._—REV. 5:1.


Christ crucified is set before our eyes as a Book of Life, whence we may
learn the sacred wisdom of God, which is in him eminently displayed. For
the whole Scripture, the Law and all the prophets, are completely
fulfilled in him by his most perfect obedience, wherein he was faithful
even unto death, and suffered the most cruel torments for the sins of the
world. And this perfect internal and external obedience and suffering, is
that Book of Life written within and without. Rev. 5:1.

2. In the first place, the Crucified Jesus presents us with a deplorable
sight of our sins, both as to their number and heinousness. By the
lamentable complaint into which he burst forth, he manifested that inward
anguish of soul, which he suffered for the hidden and secret sins of our
hearts. In his wounded and mangled body, bleeding on the cross, he leads
us to behold and read, as in a book, the malignity of those sins which we
have committed by all our members, in having yielded them up to the
government of lust.

3. Besides this, the devout soul may behold in Christ Crucified, the
justice of God in judging sinners. There was no other means by which to
remove both our sin and the punishment attending it, than this high
atonement made by the Lord himself. And hence we may learn that God is so
far from letting any sin go unpunished, that he will rather deliver up his
most beloved Son unto death than connive at the transgression of a sinner.
Rom. 4:25.

4. Hence the soul may, further, contemplate the infinite love and
condescending mercy of the Heavenly Father, most wonderfully displayed in
our Crucified Saviour. Rather than that we should forever perish in our
wretched state, and be subject to eternal death and damnation, he would
have his own Son make satisfaction for us; which we ourselves, yea, and
all the other creatures besides, had never been able to perform.

5. The contemplation of Christ Crucified will, in the next place, lead us
to a sight of the most gracious will, providence and fatherly care of God,
as it respects the recovery of lost mankind. No opposition was so great,
no difficulty so stubborn and obstinate, which he did not conquer by his
beloved Son, the author of our salvation. That we might inherit
everlasting joy, he left nothing untried, nor did he spare even his own
Son.

6. In the same Book of Life (the _Crucified Jesus_), appears also the
infinite wisdom of God, namely, in finding out a means of salvation, such
as could never have entered into the thoughts of any creature whatever,
and which, at the same time, revealed both the justice and the mercy of
God. For the work of our salvation was so wisely ordered, that by
manifesting the infinite mercy of God, his justice was not at all
infringed; as, on the other hand, Christ by his death has so atoned for
sin, that in satisfying the claims of strict justice, his infinite mercy
is rendered more bright and conspicuous. And as by eating of the forbidden
tree, the first Adam (Gen. 3:1), brought us under the curse; so God in his
marvellous wisdom has, by the tree of the cross, taken away the curse, and
restored his blessing. 1 Peter 2:24. Yea, by the unsearchable counsel of
the divine wisdom, it is so brought about, that through the death of
Christ, all things detained under the power of death are restored to life,
death itself being destroyed at last. 1 Cor. 15:26. By his pains and
torments is purchased for us eternal pleasure in heaven; by his griefs and
sorrows are gained joys celestial without end. And by this wonderful work
of God, though foolish in the eye of the world, he hath confounded the
wisdom of the wise; and by the foolishness of God (1 Cor. 1:25), he has
manifested a wisdom altogether unfathomable to men.

7. In Christ Crucified farther appears the brightest and fairest pattern
of patience and meekness that was ever seen. So far was he from revenging
the injuries done him, that he made intercession to his Father for his
revilers, yea, even laid down his life for the sins of those who put him
to death.

8. The believer discovers, moreover, in Christ the most astonishing
humility, wherein he was so eminent, that he readily underwent the most
ignominious death of the cross. Thus are the death and passion of Christ
become to a faithful soul, redemption from hell, an avenue into paradise,
a complete reconciliation with God, a victory over the devil, that great
enemy of souls; a full satisfaction for sins, and in one word, an entire
recovery of that original righteousness which had been lost.

9. By all this, it sufficiently appears to a Christian soul, that Christ
Crucified is indeed a Book of Life, teaching nothing but the eternal and
infallible truths of God. Let us then silently sit down at the feet of our
Crucified Lord, who, as the great Teacher of souls, and Book of Life, will
not neglect to instil into an humble heart, the lesson of a living faith,
and of a holy life consequent on it; provided we desire to be not dead,
but living members of his body, and to be so controlled and influenced
both by his life and his death, as to produce abundant living fruits.




Chapter XX.


   Of The Power And Necessity Of Prayer, In These Holy Contemplations.


    _I will seek him whom my soul loveth._—SONG OF SOL. 3:2.


Since the living knowledge of God and of Christ crucified, is not to be
attained, unless we keep our eye constantly fixed upon the innocent and
holy life of Jesus Christ our Lord; and since we cannot arrive at this
elevation of mind, but by devout, humble, believing and earnest prayer; it
is, therefore, highly necessary to make some further inquiry into the
nature of prayer. It consists not so much in an utterance of words, as in
a meditation or intercourse of the believing heart with God, and in a
lifting up of the soul, and of all her faculties and powers, to our
Heavenly Father. Ps. 19:14; 25:1. As it is impossible to find God without
prayer, so prayer is a means for seeking and finding him. Matt. 7:7, 8.

2. And as it falls under a threefold denomination, it being either _oral_,
_internal_, or _supernatural_ (according to St. Paul: “I will pray with
the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also;” 1 Cor. 14:15);
so we shall now consider each of these in order.

3. _Oral prayer_ is an humble address to God, and an external exercise,
which conducts the soul to the internal duty of prayer, and leads man into
the interior recesses of his own heart; especially if the words uttered be
digested in faith, and if, by attentive application, they be well pondered
and considered. This often proves a means of elevating the spirit and soul
so near unto God, as to enjoy with faith a truly filial intercourse with
Him, our heavenly Father.

4. _Internal_ prayer is offered up without intermission, in faith, spirit,
and mind, according to the words of our Saviour: “The true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth” (John 4: 23); also those
of David: “Let the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O
Lord.” Ps. 19:14. And again: “I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit
made diligent search.” Ps. 77:6. Hereby, says St. Paul (speaking of the
Spirit of adoption), we cry, Abba, Father. Rom. 8:15. By this internal
prayer, we are led on gradually to that which is _supernatural_; which,
according to Tauler, “consists in a true union with God by faith; when our
created spirit dissolves, as it were, and sinks away in the uncreated
Spirit of God. It is then that all is transacted in a moment, which in
words or deeds has been done by all the saints from the beginning of the
world.” For this reason this supernatural prayer is unspeakably more
excellent than that which is chiefly external; for therein the soul is by
true faith so replenished with the divine love, that it can think of
nothing else but of God only. Or if another thought should enter
inadvertently into the heart, it proves but an occasion of trouble and
sorrow; and the soul cannot be at ease till the intruding thought has
again vanished. A soul that has once arrived at this happy state gives but
little or no employment to the tongue: it is silent before the Lord: it
panteth and thirsteth after God (Ps. 42:1, 2): it longeth, yea, even
fainteth for him (Ps. 63:1; 84:2). It loves him only; it rests in him
alone, not at all minding the world, nor worldly affairs. Whence it is
still more and more filled with an experimental knowledge of God, and with
such love and joy as no tongue is able to utter. Whatever the soul then
perceives, is beyond all possibility of being expressed in words. If one
should ask a soul under these contemplations: _What dost thou perceive?_
the answer would be: A good that is above all good. _What seest thou?_ A
perfection of beauty, transcending all other beauty. _What feelest thou?_
A joy surpassing all joys. _What dost thou taste?_ The inexpressible
delight of love. Nay, such a one would tell you that all the words that
possibly could be framed, were but a shadow, and came infinitely short of
the inward delight which was experienced. This is the voice of the eternal
Word; this His speech to a loving soul; according to that saying of the
Lord: “He that loveth me—I will manifest myself unto him.” John 14:21.
Whatever is felt here, whatever is seen here, is above nature. Here voices
are heard, and words perceived that are termed words of the understanding
and the mind.

5. This is the school in which the soul learns to know God aright, and, as
it were, to taste him. Ps. 34:8. Whilst she knows him, she loves him: and
whilst she loves him, she longs for the full enjoyment of him. This is the
true sign of love, to desire wholly to possess the beloved object, to be
intimately united with, and altogether transformed into it.

6. This the soul now and then perceives in a glance, which lasts but for a
moment, and then vanishes again; but it puts the soul upon fervent
desires, to recover, if possible, that beam of heavenly joy which darted
upon her, and to regain this divine taste, which so lovingly moved her.
And she desires all this, in order to be more intimately united to her
beloved. From this affectionate desire spring up both internal and oral
prayer; the soul being fully convinced that these heavenly pleasures and
visitations are to be attained only by prayer. And in all this, the
wonderful wisdom of God appears, by which everything is managed in the
most perfect order.

7. Thus none is permitted to attain unto mental prayer, but he who begins
with that which is oral; and none can have an access to the _supernatural_
prayer, or to a union with the highest and most delightful Good, but by
_mental_ prayer. But this highest can only be known by an experimental
perception, not expressible by words.

8. And this is the cause why God so strictly, so frequently, and so
earnestly enjoins prayer (Ps. 50:14); because it is a sacred pledge and
bond, by which God draws us up to himself; and by elevating us into his
immediate presence, detains us there a while, and unites us with himself,
who is the source of all that is good. And thus we are always reminded of
him; without this gracious order, we would think less frequently on him,
and would not share in the gifts of his mercy.

9. If, therefore, thou desirest that thy prayer be acceptable to God, see
that thou perform it not with a divided, but with a whole and entire
heart. But this is not to be attained, except by frequent exercise and
continual and unwearied application. Without this, thou canst not reap the
fruits of prayer. On the contrary, as often as thou givest attendance to
any external work, take care that thou set not thy heart wholly upon it.
If thou eatest and drinkest, or attendest to any other outward affair
incident to this life, see that thou bestow not thyself, that is, thy
whole heart, upon it. For thy heart is to rest entirely in God alone, and
closely to adhere to him by internal prayer. The more thou offerest up
thyself to God by this prayer, the more will the divine light display
itself in thy mind. And again, the more the knowledge of God is enlarged,
the more delightful will be thy sense and perception of the highest good;
the more ardent also and affectionate will be thy love to the Lord; and in
fine, the more capable wilt thou be of enjoying him. The soul thus
disposed will in a supernatural manner taste of a happiness so high and
transcendent as infinitely to exceed all the language and expressions of
men.

10. Of this threefold prayer, Jesus Christ himself has furnished us with a
bright and perfect pattern, whence we may learn the nature and method of
it, if we but attentively consider his manner of praying. We find that he
often continued whole days and nights in prayer to God. Luke 6:12. He
prayed with a fervency that made him triumph in prayer, and rejoice in
spirit. Luke 10:21. He has, therefore, both by example and words, taught
us the method of praying; and leaving us a pattern to follow, has
commanded us to watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation. Matt.
6:9. He also most frequently recommends to us the duty of prayer (Matt.
26:41); thereby testifying that nothing was more pleasing, nothing more
acceptable to him than our prayer; he having enjoined it for no other
reason than to show us how entirely he loved us, and how desirous he was
that by prayer we should partake of the highest and most precious good.

11. Lest, however, we should allege that so noble an effect as that which
results from a due performance of prayer was not attainable by us, the
Lord did not think it enough to say: “Ask,” but he has encouraged us also
with a promise annexed: “And ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.”
John 16:24. He moreover excites us to pray by his own example, for amid
his sufferings he prayed for us, as the Evangelist records: “For being in
an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood falling down to the ground.” Luke 22:44.

12. Set, therefore, this mirror of prayer before thine eyes, and study to
persevere therein. Whenever thou feelest thyself faint and weak in prayer,
then seriously advert to thy Lord Jesus Christ, who prayed not for
himself, or upon his own account, but for thee and upon thy account, and
thus sanctified thy prayer and blessed it, and added life and efficacy to
it. Him, therefore, behold, who, though he was true God, and consequently
in actual possession of all things, yet as man, obtained for thee of his
Heavenly Father, all things by prayer. And hence as his whole life was a
continual and uninterrupted prayer, and a perpetual longing to do the will
of God: so he finished it with praying upon the cross. Luke 23:46.

13. If then thy Lord and Saviour prayed so fervently upon thy account, and
was heard; surely he will not suffer thy prayers to be poured forth in
vain. Did he procure all things for thee by prayer? And thinkest thou that
thou canst obtain the least blessing without it? Thou knowest that without
divine grace, light, and knowledge, and, in fine, without faith, not one
can be saved; but it is no less plain that these and all other graces can
be obtained by prayer alone. It is the Lord whom thou must entreat by
fervent prayer, so as to obtain from him faith, love, hope, humility,
patience, the Holy Spirit, together with the whole train of Christian
virtues, which he is both able and willing to give, as well as to
strengthen in thy soul. It is He alone that createth them in the heart.
But as he that hath them not, cannot give them, so the Lord, whose gift
they are, will not give them without being asked.

14. If then thou art truly desirous of pouring out thy soul before the
Lord in fervency of spirit, there is not a more ready and effectual means
of doing this than with the eyes of thy mind to behold the mirror of the
most meek and humble life of Christ: to keep thy eyes attentively fixed
upon the poverty, the reproach and contempt, the griefs and sorrows, and
the most ignominious death of thy blessed Redeemer. Into this Book of
Prayer, if thou diligently look, thy heart and mind will become inflamed
with most affectionate and ardent desires. And though the devil and the
flesh will not cease to assault thee with temptations on all hands, yet,
by means of prayer, they shall be subdued at last.

15. Nor is the duty of prayer only stirred up and revived by the
contemplation of Christ crucified, but the heart is also cleansed thereby.
Without this purification of the heart by faith (Acts 15:9), our prayers
will prove altogether ineffectual in the sight of God: whereas, after a
sincere application to the Lord by prayer, the Spirit of God is wont to
visit the heart with his gracious presence, as he descended upon the
apostles, even then, when they were with one accord praying at Pentecost.
Acts 2:1.

16. With reference to the temptations that are wont to attend the duty of
prayer, thou must behave thyself under them as the Lord himself did. In
the midst of the agony which he suffered on the mount of Olives, “he
prayed the more earnestly.” Luke 22:44. Thus thy prayer shall prove at
last the victory over all thy enemies. By prayer the Lord manifests
himself unto his people. By prayer we learn to practise true humility; for
by prayer the highest is united to the lowest; the most High God to the
most humble heart. And this humility is the very channel through which
abundance of divine grace is infused into the soul. The more this grace
humbles man, the more grace itself gets rooted in the soul. And again, the
more a soul is enriched with grace, the more she improves in humility.

17. The most considerable temptation and obstruction in prayer seems to be
when God withdraws the grace of a fervent and lively devotion. And yet it
is in this case that we ought the more to stir ourselves up to prayer and
supplication. It is true, a prayer poured forth in a spirit of power and
fervency must needs be acceptable to God; yet that which climbs up to the
throne of grace in affliction, temptation, spiritual dryness, and
brokenness of soul, is still more pleasing in his sight. For as the heart
of a father is sooner softened into paternal tenderness, by the trembling
words of a sick and languishing child, than by the strong voice of one in
perfect health; so is the secret affliction, and feeble effort of a soul
affected with a sense of her weakness in faith, of her poverty in spirit,
and of her want of spiritual life and comfort, far more acceptable to our
infinitely good God than the more vigorous petition of a soul elevated by
a sense of faith and divine consolation. Only hold out patiently in these
spiritual straits, and be assured that the Lord, in his own time, will
certainly “restore unto thee the joy of his salvation.” Ps. 51:12.




