Chapter I.


        Of The Great Internal Treasure Of An Enlightened Believer.


    _Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which
    is in you, which ye have of God?_ 1 COR. 6:19.


That the hearts of believers are the habitation of the Holy Trinity, is
largely attested in Scripture, as Lev. 26:11; Isa. 44:3; 57:15; Joel 2:27;
John 14:23; 17:23; Rom. 8:9-11; 1 Cor. 2:11, 12; 3:16; 6:19; 2 Cor. 6:16;
Gal. 2:20; Ephes. 3:17; 4:24; Col. 3:10; 1 John 4:13. But who is there
among Christians that understands, values, or inquires after this immense
and hidden treasure? I thought it desirable, therefore, to explain at
large the spiritual and heavenly dignity of the true Christian, and to
show every one how to seek and find this sublime treasure in himself. The
foundation of this doctrine has been already laid down in Book I, proving
how the Word of God, through faith, exerts its power in the heart of man.
And in Book II, it has been shown how God discovers himself to the devout
soul, as the highest love, goodness, beauty, holiness, and wisdom.

2. But as this high treasure cannot be worthily perceived or understood,
except in the still and quiet sabbath of the soul, in which the Holy
Spirit teaches us inwardly by meditation on the Word, in which he
enlightens us, and “searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God” (1
Cor. 2:10); upon this account, we must first of all learn, how to bring
the soul to that quiet state of internal rest. Something has been said by
way of foundation upon this head, in the chapters treating of Prayer,
inserted in Book II; which comes now more fully and perfectly to be
handled in this Third Book: namely, how this hidden treasure, this pearl
in the field of our hearts (Matt. 13:44, 45), is to be sought for by
entering into ourselves, or rather into God. And this is the inward
sabbath of a heart cleansed and purified by faith (Acts 15:9), and
enlightened by the Holy Ghost. From this treasure of the Spirit and
kingdom of God, hidden in the believing soul, sprang the wisdom of all the
enlightened, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and other men of God that
have ever existed. This pearl, then, is worth looking after, this field is
worth tilling, and this gift of the Spirit and divine grace must be
stirred up in us; even as a spark of fire, which by continual application
of breath, is blown up into a bright flame. 2 Tim. 1:6.

3. But that thou mayest more fully and distinctly apprehend in the
commencement of this Third Book, which relates entirely to the inward man,
how the children of God are to be drawn from the exterior to the interior
man, or the ground of the heart; that they may search, know, purify, and
change it, and keep their spiritual eyes fixed upon God, and his kingdom
in the inmost recesses of the soul; that the reader, I say, may more fully
understand this, I shall first of all more generally in this chapter, and
then more particularly, touch upon and explain the several heads of this
doctrine, referring occasionally to the Theology of Dr. John Tauler, and
quoting him as often as possible in his own words. And here I may remark,
that as the Holy Scripture, great and sacred as it is, regards the heart
of man; so likewise, the whole divinity of Tauler aims at the inward man,
the ground of the heart, and deepest recesses of the soul. Hence it is,
that he again and again inculcates, “that God and the kingdom of God, are
purely to be enjoyed, sought for, and found in the ground of the heart:”
that is, whatsoever the Holy Scripture and its true interpretation,
discover outwardly, all that ought to be really, spiritually, and truly
felt and experienced in the ground of the soul. This cannot be without a
frequent entering into the centre of the heart; so that the more deeply a
man retires from the world, so much the more closely he is united to God;
and the oftener the devout Christian practises this exercise, the more
clearly will the kingdom of God, and this hidden treasure, be manifested
in his soul. He that does not perceive in himself these fruits of the
Spirit, or the new man, will never be one jot more acceptable in the sight
of God for all his great knowledge and science; but shall be reckoned
among those of whom Christ says, that they shall say in the last day,
“Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name?” Matt. 7:21. For it is
not the external appearance, but the internal reality, that will avail in
the sight of God; not that which consists in the letter, but that which
flows from the Spirit, and consists in the Spirit. This is the true ground
of the distinction mentioned in the Preface, betwixt one taught by the
world, and him that is taught of God; that is, betwixt a _learned_ man,
and a _holy_ man. The learned man is instructed outwardly by the letter;
but the holy man by God, inwardly by the Holy Ghost, by the “anointing”
which teacheth all things. 1 John 2:27. The wisdom of the learned consists
in words; the wisdom of the holy man, in power. For “the kingdom of God is
not in words, but in power.” 1 Cor. 4:20.

4. But as a general account of this will not be sufficient for the simple
and unlearned, to bring them to this fundamental knowledge of themselves,
I shall therefore descend to a more particular explication, asking them,
at the same time, to attend to the “Five Parts” of their Catechism, and to
understand how these are not to remain _without_ them, but must be
_within_ them. First, therefore, thou believest that God delivered his law
upon Mount Sinai, written upon two tables of stone; and that this law is
the will of God, which thou art obliged to obey. You do well to believe
this. But this faith profiteth not, unless God himself write his law in
your heart (Jer. 31:33), and accomplish his will in you. Now this can
never be effected, unless, having now become a Christian, you dedicate
your whole heart to God, and offer up your will to him, that His will may
be fulfilled in you. The royal prophet David, who well knew the dignity
and necessity of this divine operation, employs especially the whole 119th
Psalm in earnest prayers to God, that he would vouchsafe to guide and
govern him according to his law and testimonies, that so this heavenly
work might not by any means be hindered in him. Further, you believe that
Christ is your righteousness, your life and salvation. 1 Cor. 1:30. You do
well to believe this, “for other foundation can no man lay than that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. 3:11): “Neither is there salvation in
any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved.” Acts 4:12. Yet, remember that you must have
Christ within you; that is, you must lay hold on him inwardly by faith,
and make him, both as to his Person and office, your own. For if Christ be
thine, it follows that all things which are God’s are also yours; and that
if he had ten thousand worlds and kingdoms full of righteousness and
blessedness, yet by faith all are thine. For the righteousness of Christ
is greater than all these. So in like manner, though the guilt of ten
thousand worlds lay upon thee, yet should it not be able to hurt thee.
This then is the treasure which thou must have within thee, as our Lord
tells us, “The kingdom of God is within you” (Luke 17:21): that is,
“righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” Rom. 14:17.—Thou
believest that Christ is the eternal Word of the Father; that he is the
true life and light of man. John 1:4. Thou believest aright. But then,
thou must take care, that this Word speak in thee, that this light shine
in thee, that this life live in thee. For unless thou hast this inward
treasure in thy soul, and art united to Christ by a living faith,
everything else shall avail thee nothing. Again, thou thinkest thyself
obliged by duty and interest, to pray to God, to give him thanks, and to
praise his name (Psalm 92:1, 2), and in this thou judgest right. But take
care that Christ himself pray within thee, and the Holy Spirit groan
within thee (Rom. 8:26); for as he is “the Spirit of grace and of
supplications” (Zech. 12:10), so, in order to make thy prayers effectual,
it is necessary that he also pray in thy heart, the temple of spirit and
truth. John 4:23. If this be not done, thy prayers are all of little
avail.—Thou believest that in Baptism thou receivest remission of sins,
the new birth, and adoption as a child of God. Thou believest aright. But
unless thou find in thyself the fruit of baptism, the new birth, the
unction of the Spirit, and divine illumination, thy baptism shall avail
thee nothing.—Thou believest, according to the words of St. Matthew (Matt.
26:26), that in the external Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, thou
receivest the true, essential body and the blood of Christ. Thou believest
aright. But if thou dost not also eat it inwardly and spiritually, thou
wilt not only lose all the benefits of that institution, but dost also eat
and drink condemnation to thyself. 1 Cor. 11:29.—Thou believest that
Christ was the true Lamb of God offered for us upon the cross. John 1:29.
Yet consider: What good can this do thee, unless the same Lamb of God
become the daily food and nourishment of thy inward man? 1 Cor. 5:7. It
appears, therefore, that thy treasure ought to be _within_ thee, and that
unless thou seek it there, thou shalt never find it.




