Chapter XIII.


Showing How The Love Of God Enters Into The Soul, When It Is Empty Of The
                          Love Of The Creatures.


    _If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
    him._—1 JOHN 2:15.


He that desires to become the habitation of God, must first divest himself
of the love of the world, and then exercise himself in the love of God. No
man can receive the one, without quitting the other; or be filled with the
Spirit of God, before he be emptied of the spirit of the world. As the
magnet by a touch draws iron to it; so God first touches, with his divine
love, the soul which he intends to draw and unite to himself.

2. Now this divine love is so great, that, like the sun, it shines upon
all; yea, it shines more universally than the sun itself, displaying
itself equally upon all men. So that it is not the fault of God, who is
pure light, and pure love, but of men, if they do not perceive or enjoy
it. For when God approaches men with the highest love, and most ardent
affection, he generally finds their hearts full of the love of the world,
and all uncleanness, that is, of covetousness, pride, lust, hatred, envy,
and evil thoughts, which force him to retire and to withdraw his graces
from them. Whence it appears, that since God is ready, like the sun in the
firmament, to communicate the rays of his light freely to every purified
soul, it is not His fault, but theirs, if they are not enlightened by it.
As, therefore, we know these things, let us keep ourselves from the love
of the world, and turn to the living God, watching diligently unto prayer;
let us labor earnestly for the love of God in Christ, by which we are
united to him. Let us knock at the door of his holy wounds, and from
thence expect salvation. If we do this, God will open to us, and give us
admission into that high state of uniting love, in which we shall be
refreshed with all the treasures of God. And who can doubt that the God of
mercy, the fountain of happiness, will fill the heart of man with greater
and more substantial joys, than any which this perishing world can afford?

3. Whosoever, therefore, loves God, shall be loved by all the saints and
holy angels. If I love God, then I share in the love of all the
inhabitants of the city of God, a love that far surpasses the highest
degree of worldly affection. And as all the heavenly host have the highest
love of God, and rejoice in his honor, so is their joy proportionably
great at every step of our conversion, and their happiness is enhanced by
every advance which we make in the love of God.

4. Now one evidence of divine love is this, that we use the creatures with
fear and humility. He that is endued with a habit of divine love, whether
he eat or drink, or whatever he doth, doth everything like a dutiful son,
with reverence and fear, having his eye constantly fixed upon the glory of
his Heavenly Father. 1 Cor. 10:31. From this fear of God flow the many
deep sighs and passionate groans of the devout soul, which, by degrees,
raise him from earth to heaven. For he discovers so many corruptions and
impurities in himself, obstructing the light and quenching the flames of
the Holy Spirit, that he is forced to cry out with St. Paul, “O wretched
man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” Rom.
7:24. And truly, these sighs and groanings must frequently ascend to the
mercy-seat of God, that by the assistance of divine grace we may bear up,
and not faint under the manifold miseries of this wretched state, and the
pressure of a vile earthly body. Thus did all the holy men of old time
when they labored under the sense of spiritual infirmities: they raised
their broken spirits unto God by devout sighs, penitential tears, and
humble acknowledgments of their misery, which reverted into their own
bosoms with a large increase of grace and spiritual strength. He that does
not sincerely seek after God, but has his soul intent on something else
besides him, shall never find him. On the other hand, he that seeks him
alone, in the integrity of his heart, shall surely find him, and be
admitted to all the blessings and happiness that are to be found in the
presence of God. He that seeks God in truth, finds God, and all things
that are God’s; and whosoever seeks for nothing else, and looks for
nothing else but God only, unto him God manifests himself, and confers
upon him all whatsoever is laid up in his divine heart, that the same may
as properly be said to belong to man, as to God.




Chapter XIV.


                  Of The Exercise Of Patience And Love.


    _He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter._—ISA. 53:7.


Whosoever would rightly prepare his soul for union with Jesus Christ,
must, like him, be clothed with the meekness and patience of the lamb.
Yea, he must have the very same mind that was in Christ, and become a lamb
even as he was. Let this be thy rule and thy guide in all thy actions. He
tells us himself, “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
wolves.” Matt. 10:16. This is truly thy case; and whatever way thou
turnest thyself, remember that thou art in the midst of wolves, to whose
violence thou art continually exposed; and against this thou hast no other
remedy but patience, meekness, and submission, according to the example of
the Lamb of God, thy Saviour, Jesus Christ. And as this meekness of the
blessed Jesus was acceptable to his Heavenly Father, so also is thine,
when by patience thou dost triumph over persecution. So that it is thy
business to submit cheerfully to his will, whensoever he shall be pleased
to lay his afflicting hand upon thee, either more immediately from heaven,
or by any suffering which may fall upon thee by means of any creature. It
must all be borne with patience, as coming from the hand of God; and
assure thyself that the faithful Shepherd is at hand to seek and save the
lost sheep, and bring it home “upon his shoulders, rejoicing.” Luke 15:5.
Thus the patient soul is, by every impetuous wave of affliction, wafted
nearer to God. But if thy blind carnal reason suggest to thee any excuses
or objections against thy submission, hearken not to them; but fix thine
eyes upon the exemplary patience of thy Redeemer; look steadfastly to thy
crucified Saviour, who did no evil, yet suffered all injuries without
thoughts of revenge.

2. Endeavor to acquire more and more the meekness of the Lamb, and, above
all things, preserve the love of God, which cannot abide in a wrathful
soul. And here consider well with thyself what that love is. Do not fancy
it to be that inward joy, that unspeakable pleasure, which sometimes
elevates devout souls; that is not the essence of love, but the brightness
of it, differing from its root and cause as much as the light does from
the fire whence it proceeds. But the true essence of love to God is, to be
resigned to the will of God, to depend entirely upon him, and to submit to
every affliction as coming immediately from his hand. Thus did Job, who,
taking the loss of his children, his goods, his health, and his honor, as
coming from the hand of God, still “blessed the name of the Lord.” Job
1:21. So, too, David humbly submitted to the curses of Shimei, as being
ordered by the Lord. 2 Sam. 16:10. By this means the essence, the root,
and spring of love, are preserved pure and unshaken; and by love we rest
in God, and rejoice in all his dispensations. So that if it should please
God to sink such a man with Christ to hell, he would not open his mouth,
but rest satisfied with the will of God, in which only he finds happiness
and rest. In this love true peace is to be found, when in God, and for
God’s sake, we love everything, crosses and tribulations not excepted.
True love unites us to God, and to all the world: and the happiness of
such a state is inexpressibly great.




