Chapter XXII.


   From The Love Which We Owe To God, Proceeds That Which We Owe To Our
                                Neighbor.


    _This commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love
    his brother also._—1 JOHN 4:21.


As we have already shown above, that our love is entirely due to God, and
that this is the first and chief obligation upon us; hence it follows,
that it would be highly unjust to alienate that love from him, and fix it
upon any other object. As God has appropriated all his love to us, so
ought we entirely to consecrate ours to him. For though the creatures
indeed do us good, yet they are only agents, and, in truth, _God_ does us
good by their means, forasmuch as he supports, enables, and commands them
to minister to our necessities. Whence it follows, that man also, being a
creature of God, appointed to minister to his neighbor, if he does him any
service, ought not to claim any honor or love for himself, which are due
to God alone.

2. But as man is obliged to love God above all things, so he is thereby
bound to unite his will and love with the will and love of God, and to
love all mankind as created in the image of God, as freely and sincerely
as God himself loves them. And he that saith he loves God, and loves not
his brother, created in the image of God, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him; for every one that truly loveth God, will love his brother also.



Chapter XXIII.


                     Man Is Made In The Image Of God.


    _And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
    likeness._—GEN. 1:26.


All the creatures, in their different orders and degrees of subordination,
may be said to imitate their Maker. Those beings that are endued with life
and sense come nearer to him than the vegetable; the rational, than the
irrational. As, then, all the creatures in their order seem respectively
to approach nearer and nearer unto God, and man is the end and perfection
of them all, it follows, that he must be in the highest degree of
conformity and likeness unto God.

2. For as the wax represents the perfect impression of the seal, so God
has fixed a stamp or impression of himself upon all creatures; but to man,
before his fall, he gave his own image and the brightness of that glory,
which the rest of the creatures partake of in lower degrees. Thus it
appears from the orders of created beings, that man was entirely created
after the image of God. And as God is a pure spirit, a holy, just, and
understanding mind, so there is in man a spiritual and understanding soul,
in which the brightness and glory of the divine image shone and manifested
itself.



Chapter XXIV.


           That Man Is Obliged To Love His Neighbor As Himself.


    _He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love._—1 JOHN
    4:8.


As we were all originally created in the image of God, and he is
endeavoring to restore in us this lost image by the Holy Spirit, and to
save us in Jesus Christ, it follows, that we ought to love our neighbors,
and look upon them not as aliens and strangers, but as our kindred and
brethren, having all received from the same God and Father, our life, and
breath, and all things. We ought to regard them with the same affection
that we do ourselves, that so the image of God, renewed in us by Christ,
may not suffer by our fault. Since, then, there is but one image of God in
us all, and we have but one Redeemer and one Holy Spirit, how strong ought
the bond of love and unity to be betwixt those who represent but one great
body, and where all are members one of another? For as our Maker justly
claims the first place in our love, so the second is certainly due to them
that are created in his image. And because this image resides more
particularly in the soul, we are thereby obliged to wish as well to the
souls of our neighbors as to our own; so then every man is bound to love
his neighbor as to love his God, and that is a necessary consequence of
this. For as God has loved man from all eternity, and still continues to
love us, by providing plentifully for all the wants of soul and body; he
designs thereby, as with the cords of love, to draw us to himself, and to
teach us that as he loves us, so ought we also to love one another.

2. Moreover, as religion or the worship of God regards chiefly the good
and benefit of the worshipper, it follows, that the love of our neighbor,
which arises from our love of God, necessarily tends to the same end. Or
shall we say that the image of God in man is profitable to the giver, and
not to the receiver? Lastly, as the love of God and of our neighbor is the
first and chief duty of man, it must of necessity be also his chief and
greatest good; yea, the root and fountain of all the blessings which he
can possibly enjoy; so that nothing can strictly be called good to him,
that proceeds from any other principle. The more, therefore, we increase
and improve in the love of God and of our neighbor, the more do we improve
in blessedness and happiness.



