Chapter L.


Showing How Hope Is Tested In Seasons Of Adversity; It Maketh Not Ashamed.


    _Thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed
    that wait for me._—ISA. 49:23.


As _faith_ is nothing else but a fixed and steady assurance by which the
devout Christian depends perfectly and entirely on the favor and mercy of
God promised in Christ Jesus (Heb. 11:1), so _hope_ is a continued and
patient waiting for the accomplishment of that promise which is the object
of faith, and is nothing else but a patient, constant, and persevering
faith.

2. Of this hope St. Paul says, that it “maketh not ashamed” (Rom. 5:5):
being, as well as faith itself, founded upon a firm, immovable, and
eternal basis. And this is God himself, who never faileth those that wait
for him; and for the same reason, the peace, joy, rest, glory, and
confidence imparted by hope are eternal. On this foundation, he who hopes
stands fixed and secure amidst all the crosses and calamities of life; and
though the rains descend, the floods come, and the boisterous winds blow
upon him, he is fearless and unmoved, knowing that “his house is built
upon a rock.” Matt. 7:25.

3. And as hope is built upon an immovable foundation, and the things of
this world are fleeting and uncertain; therefore its rest, its joy, its
entire dependence, are in God alone, despising the riches, pleasures,
honors, and glories of the world. “They that trust in the Lord, shall be
as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth forever. As the
mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people.” Ps. 125:1, 2.

4. On the other hand, they whose hopes are founded on the transitory
riches, honors, and pleasures of this world, are perpetually exposed to
all the fears, cares, and calamities of life; lie at the mercy of every
blast of inconstant fortune, by which they are tossed to and fro; and
depend upon the uncertain will of the world for every quiet moment they
enjoy.

5. This can never be learned but under the discipline of the cross. For
such is the nature of affliction, that it searches and discovers the
inmost recesses of the soul; and shows us whether the hope that is in us
be true or false. By this touchstone, we often find that our hopes have
not been so much fixed upon God himself, as upon the favors and blessings
he bestows; that we have built upon the sand, and idolized the creature,
instead of worshipping the Creator. For so great is the blindness of our
nature, that we often rest in the creatures, instead of raising our minds
from them to the Creator, as he designed. For with this intent God bestows
on man so many and great blessings, that by the gifts he may be drawn to
the Giver; and learn to know, love, fear, reverence, and hope in God
alone. But so great is the corruption of our nature, that we are not
disposed to serve God for nought; and we worship him not for his own sake,
but for the sake of what he bestows.

6. Upon this account, it is necessary that God should sometimes visit us
with crosses and afflictions, and deprive us of his good things which we
have abused; that so we may learn to praise, and glorify, and depend on
him alone. Nay, we sometimes proceed so far, as to trust in ourselves, and
entirely depend on our own power and abilities; then it is that God in
mere mercy interposes; and, that we may not grow too proud, breaks us in
pieces, humbles, and confounds us, and so empties us of ourselves, that we
may be filled with all the fulness of God. This we cannot be, without
being first emptied of all that arrogance, pride, and self-conceit, which
stand in perfect opposition to the grace of God.

7. Hence hope is a _militant_ virtue, fighting against all that confidence
in ourselves, all that self-exaltation upon the score of our own gifts,
merit, righteousness, prosperity, honors, and riches, in which the natural
man places all his confidence. The business of hope is to oppose and
conquer all these delusions of the devil, and to seek rest and peace in
God alone.

8. Hence it follows, that hope, like faith and charity, has God only for
its object. Whosoever aims at any other mark, or places his hope on any
other being, is destitute of any well-founded hope. As all created beings
when out of God are nothing; it follows that the hope reposed in them is
also nothing. So then, these three virtues, faith, hope, and charity, are
in the highest sense spiritual, admitting of no earthly mixture, but are
fixed entirely on God, who is their eternal and invisible basis. To this
refers that passage of St. Paul, “Hope that is seen, is not hope; for what
a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?” Rom. 8:24. Whosoever, therefore,
places his hope upon anything that is visible, has not the invisible God
for his support, but rests upon a shadow; and when the visible world,
which is his basis, shall sink into nothing, by consequence his hope, that
was built upon it, must sink and perish with it.

9. Consider this, O man, and by carefully comparing time with eternity,
persuade thyself to entertain a true and saving hope, and to be led into a
state of firm and lasting peace. Eternity is unchangeable, ever constant,
always the same; but time is nothing but change and revolution. The
brightest day declines and ends in darkness, weeks are swallowed up in
months, and months in years; the opening spring and fruitful summer sink,
by degrees, into a desolate winter; and not only so, but all the
elementary bodies are in a state of change, always shifting from one
appearance to another; not to mention the continual motions of the
heavens. So that this world cannot be the region of rest. For whatsoever
is subject to time, is continually passing, and vanishing; in a word, “All
is vanity” (Eccles. 1:2), and we shall never rest but in eternity. And
though all men, both good and bad, long for peace and tranquillity; yet
they, and they only, shall find it, who have learned to lose and resign
themselves in Christ, the eternal rest of the soul. And this is not so
much the work of labor and study, as of quietness and hope. Isa. 30:15.

10. Moreover, the Christian’s hope must be tried, not only by the loss of
temporal things, but also by the withholding of the communications of
divine grace and favor (as commonly happens in great temptations); that
seeing ourselves deprived even of those most excellent and spiritual
blessings, on which we depend, our hope may arrive at the highest pitch of
purity and sincerity, and rest on God alone. In such a case “we must hope,
even against hope” (Rom. 4:18), as we read that Abraham did. Here a man
must, with his blessed Redeemer, be deserted and forsaken, not only by
man, but by God himself. And this is properly “to be conformed to the
image of the Son of God.” Rom. 8:29. This is the truest test or probation
of the Christian’s hope.

11. For, whereas, in other afflictions, our patience, humility, devotion,
and charity, are principally exercised; in these spiritual trials of the
conscience, our hope is eminently proved and tried, whether it be sincere
or not. In this probation, though a man be perfectly despoiled of all his
grace, yet shall he at last triumph in that “hope which maketh not
ashamed.” And though the soul that is thus tried, be sometimes ready to
fall into impatience, murmuring, blasphemy, or the like; yet there
remains, as it were, some gentle breath of hope, arising from the ground
of the heart, by the power of the divine Spirit, which contradicts and
opposes those unholy suggestions. When this combat is over, all his
transgressions are forgiven, and his sins are covered and he himself is
like “a brand plucked out of the fire” (Zech. 3:2); “or like a piece of an
ear taken out of the mouth of the lion.” Amos 3:12. Now this impatience
being involuntary, and being opposed with sighs and groans unutterable, is
by no means to be called despair; considering withal, that this is the
sharpest conflict, the severest trial of the Christian’s hope; and these
are the “unutterable groanings” which St. Paul mentions. Rom. 8:26.

12. They that undergo these trials, are the greatest saints, and are
nearer to God than those who repose all their hope and confidence in
themselves. The pride of such men, in vainly arrogating any perfections to
themselves, makes them in the highest degree blasphemers against God;
whereas the disciples of the cross are his dearest children, as we may see
in the examples of Job and David: for by being thus stripped of
themselves, they are purified as gold in the refiner’s fire; and being
thus cleansed from all their dross of pride and vainglory, they shine in
the glory of the divine image, like a beautiful jewel set in the purest
gold; so that nothing remains of which the proud man can boast.

13. By such trials as these, a man is taught to put his trust in nothing
but in God alone. For when affliction has taken everything else from us,
God alone cannot be taken from us. Yea, affliction is so far from
separating us from God, that it rather brings us to God, restoring us to
God, and God to us. It is hope, therefore, that preserves us in
calamities, so that we are not consumed, and, therefore, it “maketh us not
ashamed.” Rom. 5:5. But as the soul came out from God, so must she return
thither again, void of all love of the creatures; and when a man passes
out of himself and all the creatures, whither can he go, or where can he
rest, but in the hands of his God, who comprehendeth and upholdeth the
world, and all that is therein? Isaiah 40:12. Whosoever, therefore, bids
farewell to the world, and is divested of all love of himself and the
creatures, having his heart fixed on no earthly thing, but being perfectly
free and at liberty, resigning himself and all his concerns into the hands
of God, and being content under every dispensation of providence—he may be
truly said to rest in God. But those who are entangled in the love of
themselves and the creatures, being slaves to their own wills, resting in
them, and not submitting to the will of God, must perish in the end.




