Chapter XLII.


      The Reasons For Which We Ought Daily To Offer Praises To God.


    _Praise ye the Lord, O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
    for his mercy endureth forever._ PS. 106:1; 107:1; 118:1.


Thus saith the devout David, “Seven times a day do I praise thee, because
of thy righteous judgments” (Ps. 119:164); that is, many times in a day do
I sing praises in honor of thy holy name. By this he teaches us, that a
man cannot spend his time better than by retiring at least once a day into
his closet, and praising God in secret. Yea, though his hands be employed
in labor and business, yet may he, in the quiet stillness of his heart,
offer up his praises unto God wheresoever he is. For the prayer of a true
Christian is not confined to any certain time or place, since he worships
“in spirit and in truth” (John 4:23); and the Spirit is not circumscribed
by any limits of time or place. To which also relates the admonition of
St. Paul, when he commands us “to sing with grace in our hearts to the
Lord” (Col. 3:16); that being, indeed, the fittest place wherein God may
be praised.

2. But as we are by nature dull and inactive in the discharge of this
duty, therefore God has given us, in his Word, certain helps to quicken
us.

3. The first of these is _his own command_. He made us, his servants and
creatures, for his own glory, as we ourselves appoint servants to manage
business for us. He, therefore, who does not daily praise God, was created
by him in vain, and cannot be his servant. Hence we are commanded, over
and over again, in Holy Scripture, above all things, to praise God. Thus,
“Praise ye the Lord. Praise him, O ye servants of the Lord.” Ps. 113:1. “O
give thanks unto the Lord.” Ps. 118:1. “Thou shalt glorify me.” Ps. 50:15.
This is an argument to us, that the chief part of our religious worship,
our chief service in this world, and our happiness in the next, consist in
the exercise of praise and thanksgiving; upon which account we ought to
esteem it our greatest happiness and most honorable employment. So the
holy Psalmist says, “My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.” Ps. 63:4. And
again, “Delight thyself in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.” Ps. 37:4. O how truly happy, then, and blessed is he who is
come to such perfection of divine worship as to delight in the Lord, and
to be continually offering praises and thanks! “He shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.” Ps. 65:5. If we think
it an honorable thing to be employed in the service of any earthly prince,
how much more ought a man to rejoice when he considers that he may be
admitted to the service of the Lord of lords, and King of kings, being, in
his own nature, no better than dust and ashes, and a poor sinner! This
single consideration ought to be of sufficient weight to encourage him to
praise God daily.

4. Secondly, _the advantages that a man derives from this exercise_, is
another argument. For since God has no need of our praises, and is neither
the better nor the worse for our obedience or neglect; and since the most
acceptable praise which we can offer him is, at best, but the fruit of
“unclean lips” (Isa. 6:5), as the prophet Isaiah speaks, it follows that
the advantage redounds only to ourselves, as being the means of drawing
down upon us the favor and blessings of heaven: a thankful heart being the
proper receptacle of divine grace. This, in short, is that which brings
God down into our souls, and makes us truly the living temples of the Holy
Ghost; and where God is, _there_ is the fulness of divine blessing.
Moreover, by the daily exercise of thanksgiving, we keep up communion with
the blessed choirs of triumphant saints and angels in heaven. They are
incessantly singing the praises of God above; whilst we below, by the same
exercise, are conquering, by degrees, the enemies of our salvation (Ps.
18:29), till at length, by a constant practice of this divine duty, we are
filled with an immovable assurance that we are united to God, and that we
shall be for ever happy with him in heaven, according to the promise of
our blessed Lord, “Where I am, there shall also my servant be.” John
12:26. And now, would to God that wretched man would so lay these
considerations to heart, and so sincerely endeavor to practise them, that
every soul might become, in truth, a house of prayer!

5. Thirdly, we are encouraged to the daily practice of thanksgiving, from
the consideration of _the compassion, the lovingkindness, and everlasting
goodness of God_. This is an argument continually inculcated in the Book
of Psalms, to teach us that the chief and fundamental reason why we ought
continually to bless and praise God, is, because he is good and gracious,
and “his mercy endureth for ever.” No heart of man can conceive, nor
tongue express, the height and depth of that love which disposes the great
and mighty God to show himself thus loving and merciful to wretched
mankind, who are dust and ashes, laden with iniquities, and ungrateful to
God; and that he not only continues his wonted mercies to them,
notwithstanding their repeated provocations; but is also perpetually
dispensing fresh showers of blessings upon the whole rebellious race. And
this is what every man must needs experience in himself. Look into thine
own soul, whosoever thou art; what canst thou find there but misery and
sin? Yet God continues merciful and long-suffering, is slow to anger, and
not willing to punish thee as thy sins have deserved. This is a degree of
mercy which, as thy own heart must confess, no man living does or can
exercise towards his brethren. We cannot so long forbear to punish those
that have offended us; and when we punish, mercy seldom pleads for the
criminal, till we are satiated with vengeance; whereas the rod of God is
often lifted up, but his mercy averts the impending stroke, and rescues
the sinner from punishment. So that every man must confess that the
punishments of heaven are not only less than we deserve, but are always
qualified with a double portion of mercy. Whence it follows, that God is
essentially and truly LOVE, which every man daily experiences in himself.

6. Read the Holy Scriptures and see how tenderly, yea, how affectionately
God vouchsafes to deal with mankind, so that no father or mother upon
earth can be more indulgent to their darling child. Thus, “Is Ephraim my
dear son? is he a pleasant child? For since I spake against him, I do
earnestly remember him still; therefore, my bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.” Jer. 31:20.

7. God not only bestows his favors plentifully both on our souls and
bodies, but also does it with so much tenderness and good will, that, as
he himself says, “He rejoices over us to do us good” (Jer. 32:41); as if
he were glad to find men willing to be happy in the blessed manifestations
of his love; which is, indeed, the truest demonstration that it is
sincere. Were not God thus merciful, our very being would soon be at an
end, which nothing but his infinite mercy can sustain; yea, “His
lovingkindness is better than life itself” (Ps. 63:3), which “compasseth
us about” (Ps. 32:10), as tender mothers embrace their helpless infants.

8. The same goodness of God discovers itself in all his creatures; in
which, as in a glass, we may contemplate the wonderful riches of divine
mercy: “The earth is full of the riches of God.” Ps. 104:24. For whose
sake was all that is good, both in heaven and earth, created? Not for Him
certainly, who is Himself all-sufficient, and stands not in need of any
creature. The sun, moon, and stars serve not to enlighten him; the fire,
the air, the earth, and water do him no service, but us. And when he
“fills our hearts with food and gladness” (Acts 14:17), it is his goodness
that we taste, it is his bounty that feeds and nourishes us. He it is that
gives us healthy and sound bodies, which are more valuable to us than an
empire. If it should please God to turn the water into blood, as he did in
Egypt (Exod. 7:20), we could not, with all our boasted treasure, purchase
one single drop to relieve our greatest necessities. Or should he, as he
did once (Exod. 10:22), cover the earth with thick darkness, no prince
upon earth could, with all his riches, purchase one single gleam of light.
Or what would all the world signify to him that should but for one moment
be deprived of the benefit of the air? All these are very great blessings
of God, but because they are common, few are so sensible of them as to be
thankful for them. Reflect, moreover, on the mercies of redemption and
sanctification, in which the goodness and grace of God so transcendently
appear, that eternity itself would be too short to praise and magnify
these blessings as we ought. To redeem a lost world is much more glorious
than to create it at first; and to regenerate a man by a spiritual new
birth, more wondrous than at first to produce him by a natural birth.
Lastly, whosoever will carefully consider the works and providence of God,
may read the plain characters of his mercy and love in every part of the
creation.

9. Dull, ungrateful creatures that we are, how apt are we to forget our
benefactor, and despise the hand that blesses us! God is thus led in mere
mercy to use the rod of discipline, and to take away our worldly comforts
from us, in order thereby to reduce us to a sober sense of ourselves, and
of our dependence on him, to whom all our thanks are due. Thus God speaks
by the prophet Hosea, “She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine,
and oil, and multiplied her silver and her gold: therefore will I return,
and take them from her.” Hosea 2:8. So that the _cross_ is, as it were,
the light by which we see and discover the true value of divine blessings,
and who it is that bestows them. For ingratitude is the greatest degree of
blindness, and the highest affront against God. And since the whole world
is full of the glory of God, much more ought the heart of man to be full
of it.

10. Indeed the excellency of the divine love discovers itself chiefly in
this, that he bestows his favors even upon rebels and enemies. “For he
maketh his sun to rise, and sendeth his rain on the just and on the
unjust.” Matt. 5:45.

11. The goodness and mercy of God herein appear still more illustrious,
that though we continue ungrateful, and our hearts “cast forth wickedness
as a fountain casteth forth her waters” (Jer. 6:7), yet he still strives
to conquer our ingratitude by his goodness, and does not take his mercy
from us; as the Psalmist says, “His mercy endureth forever.” Ps. 136:1. So
that as the heart of man is, as it were, an abyss of iniquity (Jer. 17:9),
so God is an abyss of mercy, an ever-flowing fountain of goodness, so much
superior in kind, as well as in degree, to that of any created being, that
he doeth nothing but good, and receives nothing in return but evil; which
the uncreated and infinite Good alone could do or suffer. And when,
provoked by our wickedness, he seems sometimes to lay aside his mercy, and
“in anger to shut up his tender mercies” (Ps. 77:10), yet even that is
nothing but paternal resentment, not tending to destruction, but so
tempered with compassion, that mercy triumphs over judgment. So, “If his
children forsake my law, I will visit their transgressions with the rod:
nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him.” Ps.
89:30-33. And, “In wrath remember mercy.” Hab. 3:2. So, too, we read, “He
doth not afflict willingly the children of men.” Lam. 3:33. For punishment
is, as it were, contrary to his nature and essential goodness. For though
the Scriptures often speak of _God’s being angry_, yet such expressions
are used, after the manner of men, only in compliance with the weakness of
human capacities. Yea, God is never angry with his faithful servants; but
only with wicked and obstinate sinners; and when he corrects the former in
mercy, he punishes the latter in his wrath; for “the wrath of God abideth
on them.” John 3:36. Hence David prays, “O Lord, rebuke me not in thine
anger.” Ps. 6:1. As if he had said, “Lord, chasten me with mercy, as a
tender father corrects his beloved child.” Wherefore, it is as impossible
that the mercy and goodness of God should fail or cease towards mankind
(though he sometimes afflicts us), as that the sun should actually be
extinguished by a cloud, or the vast ocean be absorbed by a sponge. “For
his mercy endureth forever.” Ps. 136:1. And this is the reason of God’s
reconciliation and forgiveness, not once or twice, but as often as the
sinner begins to repent and sue for mercy. This mercy does not last for a
few hours, or a few days only, but forever; so that the entire nature and
essence of God, infinite as it is, is nothing else but LOVE. No sooner
does the sinner sincerely pray for pardon, but the merciful God freely
bestows it, yea, he is more willing and ready to pardon, than we to ask
it.

12. Now if God pours his blessings upon us so plentifully in this life,
that we taste and enjoy them by all our senses; how much more fully shall
we be convinced, in the other world, by most blessed experience, that his
mercy endureth forever? If we receive so many mercies from him now in this
vale of sin and misery, as that “in him we live, and move, and have our
being” (Acts 17:28), how much more glorious will his mercy appear
hereafter, when we shall be cleansed from all sin, and rendered capable of
the purest enjoyments?

13. Fourthly, the praises of God have been the special employment of all
holy men. Most of the prophets of the Old Testament composed holy hymns,
to the praise and honor of God. Thus did Moses (Exod. 15; Deut. 32),
Hannah (1 Sam. 2), Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. 20), Hezekiah (Isa. 38), and
Jeremiah (Lam. 3). David was, however, the most eminent, who is so fervent
in the praise of God, as to say, that “His praise shall continually be in
his mouth.” Ps. 34:1. In the New Testament, the Virgin Mary (Luke
1:46-55), and Zacharias (Luke 1:68-79); also St. Paul and St. Peter, in
many places of their Epistles. These examples sufficiently show that they
believed acts of thanksgiving and praise to be the most noble services
which we can possibly perform in this valley of misery. And, therefore, if
we are desirous to be partakers with the saints in glory, it is necessary
that we should imitate their examples in praising and magnifying God.

14. Fifthly, all creatures invite us to praise God. Thus David speaks to
them all, “Bless the Lord, all his works, in all places of his dominion.”
Ps. 103:22. And, indeed, every creature, in its way, gives glory to its
Creator; for he has stamped such illustrious characters of his glory and
goodness on them all, that they cannot conceal them. “The heavens declare
the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.” Ps. 19:1. And
Job says, “Where wast thou, when the morning stars sang together?” Chap.
38:4, 7. For even the sun, the moon, and all the host of heaven, when they
give their light, bear witness at the same time to the majesty and
goodness of Him that made them. The earth praises God when it is fruitful
and flourishing. The herbs and flowers, by their fragrance, beauty, and
variety of colors, show forth the might and wisdom of their Maker. The
birds with their songs; the trees with their fruits; the sea with its
inhabitants (Ps. 104:25); in short, all the creatures in their several
places, praise the God that made them, whilst they fulfil his will, and
answer the end for which they were created. Ps. 148:1, etc. And not only
so, but they call upon mankind, by the virtues and powers which God has
implanted in them, as witnesses of his wisdom and goodness, to praise and
glorify God. Whatever way we turn our eyes, we see so many marks of divine
goodness, that one would think that nature was nothing but one great
history of the glory of its Maker. But forasmuch as God has been more
gracious and bountiful unto man than to any other of his creatures,
mankind are certainly obliged to furnish larger and more frequent returns
of gratitude than they.

15. Sixthly, we must know, that when we have done all that we can to set
forth the greatness and majesty of God, the best and most devout of men
must fall short of the dignity of a subject, which no tongue, either of
men or angels, can worthily express. For “Who can utter the mighty acts of
the Lord? who can show forth all his praise?” Ps. 106:2. The most exalted
praises of holy men are more properly acts of admiration and wonder, than
attempts to express to the full the infinite love and majesty of God. They
have the will, but not the ability, to praise God in adequate terms. Thus
holy David in many Psalms stirs up his soul, and all the powers thereof,
to praise his God with thanksgiving. So Moses, “The Lord is my strength
and song, and he is become my salvation. He is my God, and I will prepare
him a habitation; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.” Exod. 15:2.
Observe, he calls God _his strength_; and were not that strength with us,
in us, and above us, we should quickly be turned into dust, and vanish
like a shadow. Therefore it is said: “Every man at his best state is
altogether vanity.” Ps. 39:5. Moses also calls God _his salvation_; for he
is our righteousness against sin; our strength against infirmities; our
refuge in persecution; our joy in sadness; and lastly our life in death.

16. And now, what is there in heaven or in earth that may be compared unto
our God, with whom is such abundant salvation; who, by his power, sustains
the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein (Isa. 40:12); who is so
holy that all the angels adore him (Isa. 6:3), so “fearful in praises”
(Exod. 15:11) that the heaven, the earth, and all that is under the earth,
bow and tremble? He is so praiseworthy that all his works ought to be had
in honor, and every creature ought to praise his Maker: so wise, so
powerful, as to create all things out of nothing; to bring light out of
darkness; righteousness out of sin; and life out of death. Should we now
pass to the great work of our redemption, who can express it? He suffers
his only Son to become man, that we might become the children of God. He
suffers all pain as man, that we might enjoy everlasting felicity; he took
upon him the form of a servant, that we might be partakers of his heavenly
kingdom; lastly, he underwent death for us, that we, through him, might
have life eternal. Such works, such love, who can worthily celebrate?
Where is he that can explain how the infinite God, “whom the heaven of
heavens cannot contain” (1 Kings 8:27), can yet dwell in us, and we in
him? Or how he made our immortal souls, and will receive them to himself
after their separation from the body? Or how he shall raise our dead
bodies from the dust of the earth unto eternal life? It is, indeed,
wonderful and strange, that that which is “mortal should put on
immortality.” 1 Cor. 15:53. Wherefore, praise the Lord, O my soul.

17. If any man, then, desires to answer the end of his creation, and not
to be thought the only ingrate among all the works of God; if he desires
to walk worthy of his Christian calling, and after death to be partaker
with the saints of light and everlasting glory, let his soul praise the
Lord, and let him beseech God that He would never suffer his soul to be
unmindful or negligent of this duty. And those things which we cannot
sufficiently praise in this world shall be worthily celebrated in the
next, when “that which is in part shall be done away. For now we see
through a glass darkly, but then face to face.” 1 Cor. 13:10, 12. Which
may God grant, for Jesus Christ’s sake.




