Chapter XXXVII.


                     Of The Evil Fruits Of Self-Love.


    _Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: and let your laughter be
    turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness._—JAMES 4:9.


As true and divine joy proceeds from true and divine love, so nothing can
proceed from false love but false joy. For as self-love aims at nothing,
delights in nothing but honors, riches, and sensual and worldly pleasures,
all which are fading, perishing, and subject to a thousand casualties;
therefore the man whose heart is set upon them, cannot but be always
fearful, apprehensive, and jealous of every accident that may deprive him
of his happiness; so that his joys are never solid or lasting, but false
and perishing, mixed with fears and cares, and ending in disappointment
and sorrow. For as the seed is, such is the fruit.

2. Now we have already shown, that self-love is corrupt, impure, unjust,
abominable, and unnatural, the seed and root of all evil, the parent of
weakness, blindness, error, and death. And the fruit or joy arising from
it is of the same sort, unjust, impure, opposed to God, to our neighbor,
and to all righteousness; it rejoices in iniquity, and contempt of God.
And if it be a sin only to love anything which God hateth, how much more
grievous a sin must it be to delight and rejoice in it? Such a joy as
this, which is opposite to the nature of every creature, and contrary to
the nature and express will of God, cannot but end in everlasting sorrow,
death, and darkness.

3. For as divine joy brings us nearer and nearer to God; so carnal joy
carries us farther and farther from him. Divine joy makes us the friends
of God; but worldly joy makes us his enemies. The former confirms and
strengthens the will in the love of God, makes the conscience easy,
cheerful, and happy; the latter disquiets and torments the soul, making it
turbulent, restless, and uneasy. That may be obtained without labor or
charge; this requires both, and all too little to support and secure it.
The one produces, improves, and preserves love, peace, and friendship
among men; the other creates discord, contentions and quarrels, wars,
violence, and bloodshed. From the one all good, from the other all evil
things proceed. The one is a lively, salutary, and sober joy, full of
virtue, full of pleasure, and acceptable to God; the other is fleshly,
vicious, dishonest, base, and hated of God. The one increases our devout
longings after God and goodness; the other inflames our corrupt desires.
That enlightens the understanding, filling it with divine light and
wisdom; this darkens and blinds it, and fills it with ignorance and error.
That is true and substantial; this treacherous, deceitful, and false.



Chapter XXXVIII.


    Everlasting Sorrow And Death, The End Of Self-Love And Carnal Joy.


    _If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die._—ROM. 8:13.


As we have already shown everlasting joy to be the genuine fruit of divine
love; it follows, that without that love, we cannot be partakers of the
joy, but must sit down at the last in eternal anguish and distress. For
when the condemned sinner comes to reflect and consider, that by his own
fault, he has irrecoverably lost all the blessings of a happy eternity,
how great must his sorrow, how bitter must his grief be! Annihilation
itself would be to him a blessing; but alas! he wishes for it in vain, he
must bear his burden, and undergo his punishment to all eternity.

2. This must raise in him an eternal hatred and abhorrence of himself, and
all his adherent impurities and sin; which, whether he will or not, will
forever stare him in the face, revenging, as it were, upon him the past
sacrilege of his self-love.



Chapter XXXIX.


         All That We Have Must Be Offered And Consecrated To God.


    _O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord
    our maker._—PS. 95:6.


As we are assured that God is our Creator, Preserver, and loving Father,
to whom can we more reasonably pay our honor, duty, and service, than to
him? Whom shall we rather implore and pray to, whom shall we rather praise
and glorify, than him that made us? Whom shall we rather trust? In whom
shall we rather hope? Whom shall we rather love? In whom shall we rather
rejoice and be happy? Shall we not love him, who hath created us in his
own image? Shall we not honor him, who has exalted us above all creatures?
Shall we not devote ourselves entirely to him, who has given himself
entirely unto us? Who created us for the end that we might live, abide,
and rejoice with him forever? Shall we not love and honor him, who has
adopted us for his children?

2. Think, therefore, and consider with thyself, O man! that as God has
given thee a rational soul, so thou oughtest to consecrate all the powers
and faculties of it to his honor and service. He has given thee the
faculty of loving: therefore love him; he has given thee understanding:
endeavor to know him; he has given thee fear: therefore fear him; the
power of honoring: therefore honor him; the gift of prayer: therefore pray
to him; of praise and thanksgiving: therefore praise his name. He has
given thee the power of believing, hoping, and trusting: therefore depend,
and trust, and hope in him; of rejoicing: therefore rejoice and be glad in
him. Lastly, as all things are in him, and he has an infinite power of
doing all things, consider this with thyself, that if thou rest and
rejoice in him alone, thou shalt in him possess all things.

3. And hence arises the true and genuine worship of God. He that loves
him, honors him; he that loves him not, affronts him. So likewise he that
fears him, honors him; he that fears not, despises him. And all the other
vices and virtues are of the same nature. By obedience, God is honored,
and he is dishonored by disobedience; the same may be said of faith, hope,
charity, and gratitude.

4. From all this it appears, that there is nothing better, more honorable,
or more profitable for man, than to honor God; and nothing more base and
abominable than to dishonor him.



