Chapter XXII.


         Showing How Our Works May Be Rendered Acceptable To God.


    _Delight thyself in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires
    of thine heart._—PS. 37:4.


As man in his natural state is obnoxious to the wrath of God (Eph. 2:3),
it follows, that all his natural works, how great and good soever they may
appear in the eye of the world, are subject to it likewise. For, without
the grace of God, we can do nothing that is acceptable in his sight; but
if a man be in a state of grace, then all his works are acceptable to God;
because it is the grace of God which works them in him.

2. Whence it appears, that all manner of gifts whatsoever, as St. Paul
assures us, are to be ascribed to the grace of God, not to ourselves (1
Cor. 15:10), and that by our own works we can never be justified or saved.
For though a man should suffer all the pains of martyrdom; though he
should perform all the good actions that were ever done by all the saints
from the beginning of the world, or that ever shall be done; though he
should feed upon nothing but thorns, and suffer death, not once, but every
day; yet could he not thereby, of himself, be able to procure the least
grace. Depend not then upon thine own works, but upon the infinite mercies
of God in Jesus Christ, with a resigned and humble spirit: and then be
confident, that the same Jesus will, of his free love and mercy, give thee
whatever he shall see expedient for thee. This is the meaning of the
saying of our Lord, “When ye shall have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants.” Luke 17:10. O merciful
God! how poor, how worthless in thy sight is our righteousness; it is no
better than “filthy rags.” Isa. 64:6. For all the works of good men would
be of no value for our justification. Enter then into thy purchased
inheritance by the surest gate, even the meritorious work of thy blessed
Saviour. Offer up to God his passion, for the punishments which thou hast
deserved; his holy thoughts, for thy polluted imaginations; his many
divine words, for thy vain speeches; in a word, all his works, his
poverty, his patience, his meekness and charity, for all thy defects and
omissions. Keep thine eyes fixed on the blessed Jesus, and thou shalt
obtain grace and favor with God. With the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:20),
return to thy offended Father, and he will receive and embrace thee. His
mercies are unchangeably the same, ready to be communicated to every
sincere penitent. This he freely offers to all, and nothing is more
agreeable to him, than to show mercy to him that asks it in faith. For
“his hand is not shortened, that it cannot save.” Isa. 59:1. And the more
wretched and miserable thou appearest in his sight, the more welcome shalt
thou be to Him, who is desirous to enrich thee out of his own treasures.
The sins of the whole world, bear no more proportion to his infinite
mercies, than a single drop of water does to the vast ocean. But as soon
as thou art in a state of grace, all thy works wrought hence in thee,
shall be made acceptable to God, through his only begotten Son, by whom
alone we have access to his mercies. In this faith, in this union with the
Son of God, thou shalt live. He is that living fountain that purifies all
our uncleanness, and makes all our works acceptable in his sight. Zech.
13:1.

3. But still take heed to thyself, and remember that thou rest not even in
thy spiritual privileges, which, as a child of God, are bestowed upon
thee, but in God alone, the author and giver of them. Hence we are
commanded, “to delight in the Lord” (Ps. 37:4); not in his gifts, but in
his glory; that his will may be perfected in us. We must then refer all
our gifts and graces to their munificent donor, even God. In order to use
them aright, let this rule be deeply fixed in our minds. If thou hadst all
the gifts and graces which God has bestowed, either in heaven, or on
earth, with the good works of all the saints that have ever lived; as soon
as thou beginnest to take an inordinate pleasure in them, and to delight
in them as a property of thine own, they are immediately defiled with the
stain and guilt of idolatry. For there is nothing either in heaven or
earth, in which we ought to rest, but God alone. And when we do this, then
God himself is our joy, our delight, our rest, our fulness, our treasure,
and our refuge; and in this consists the fulness of blessing; we then
become proper vessels of divine grace. For in proud spirits, which are the
organs of the devil, God cannot operate; but “he giveth grace to the
humble,” as St. Peter tells us (1 Pet. 5:5), and filleth their souls with
his treasures. Inward pride is the fruitful root of all vices. By this the
devil keeps his strongholds in the soul, which God alone has a right to
inhabit. The vine, as to its outward form, seems to be but a useless
plant, fit for nothing but the fire; and yet, under that mean outside,
conceals veins of most generous juice. So it is with all those godly
persons, through whom the Spirit of God operates: they appear in the sight
of men as vile and contemptible persons; their appearance is humble, and
void of external grandeur; but within, they are full of invaluable
treasures, even living streams of blessing flowing incessantly from the
throne and presence of God. But they who are puffed up with their gifts,
who make a show of their alms, who build altars in churches at their own
cost, adorning them with their own names, arms, and titles of honor;
these, by displaying so industriously their good deeds to the world, have
indeed received their reward. In the same unhappy state also are they,
whose mouths are full of their own wants and unworthiness, continually
desiring others to pray for them; not considering that other alms,
proceeding from an humble, sincere, and devout heart, are a more effectual
prayer to God, than are all the intercessions of persons who know that
these alms are given only for display.

4. If, then, thou wouldest have thy works to be sincere and acceptable
before God, observe carefully these four general rules: 1. Think humbly of
all thine actions, not respecting thyself, but God alone. 2. Let this
humility be deeply rooted in thy soul, humbling thyself not only under the
hand of God, but under every man, whether small or great, from a hearty
sense of thine own unworthiness. 3. Look upon all that thou doest as
unprofitable and worthless. 4. Have a profound dread of the secret
judgment of God, not, indeed, as proceeding from any doubts about the
mercies of God; but, regarding him as thy best friend, be careful to avoid
everything that may disoblige or offend him. He that despises these four
rules, renders even his best actions impure in the sight of God. But he
that carefully attends to them as the rules of action, shall be like a
green olive tree in the house of his God, bearing good fruit abundantly.
Ps. 52:8.

5. And we must observe that even the most inconsiderable thing thou doest,
if it promote the good of thy neighbor, is acceptable to God; whilst he
that employs not his talent to that end, shall have a serious account to
give at the last day. This is the only use and end of God’s gifts, that we
should readily and industriously employ them for the benefit of others.
Every action, art, employment, and profession, were given by God for this
only end. And these are the works which, as our Lord tells us, “are
wrought in God” (John 3:21); that is, in faith and charity, directed
solely to the glory of God and the benefit of our neighbor, without any
prospect of honor or advantage to ourselves, of which every man’s own
conscience is the proper judge. Consider then carefully with thyself the
spring and motives of all thy actions, remembering that if thou neglect or
refuse to employ the blessings of God for thy neighbor’s benefit, thou
must have the same punishment with the slothful servant, who was deprived
of his talent which he had hid in the ground, and not employed, and saw it
given to another that better knew how to use it. Matt. 25:26. Thus thou
losest both the gift and the grace. No less foolish are they who pretend
to things above their strength, who talk eloquently and fluently of what
they neither practise nor understand. Though these should confidently
pretend to speak by the authority of the blessed Trinity, yet is all this
nothing but empty boasting, unless they demonstrate that they
experimentally know what they so magisterially inculcate.

6. Remember also, that no actions, how great and glorious soever in
appearance, which proceed only from ostentation and vainglory, can be well
pleasing to God. For as is the principle of our actions, such are also the
actions proceeding from it. Whence it follows, that such as regard
themselves only, are no better than impostors and hypocrites. Their best
works are no better than painted sepulchres, which appear beautiful
without, but within are full of nothing but corruption. There is in them
no pure love of God, no desire to promote his glory; but only a certain
carnal self-love and an insatiable thirst of vainglory.

7. The sum of all is this, that all our works, how specious soever they
may appear, if they be directed to any other end but God, are nothing but
vanity and idolatry. For he is truly an idolater, who proposes to himself
any other end or aim but God. Wherefore, if thou hast any gifts, use them,
but take heed that thy heart rest not in them; if it so rest, thou art
guilty of idolatry.




