Chapter XV.


Showing How The “Old Man” Daily Dies, And The “New Man” Is Daily Renewed,
In A True Christian; Also, Wherein Self-Denial Consists, And What Is Meant
                        By The Christian’s Cross.


    _If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
    his cross daily, and follow me._—LUKE 9:23.


It is the charge of the apostle Paul, “Put off the _old man_, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of
your mind; and put on the _new man_, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.” Eph. 4:22-24. And in another of his
Epistles, he gives us a reason for doing so: “Ye are not your own; for ye
are bought with a price; therefore, glorify God in your body and in your
spirit, which are God’s.” 1 Cor. 6:19, 20.

2. We have already noticed what is meant by _the old man_; namely, pride,
covetousness, lasciviousness, unrighteousness, wrath, enmity, hatred,
etc.; all of which must die in the Christian, if ever the _new man_ arise
in him again, and is day by day renewed.

3. In proportion as the old man dies, the new man is quickened. As pride
loses its influence, humility, by the grace of God the Holy Spirit,
succeeds; as wrath yields, meekness advances; as covetousness is done
away, trust in God is increased; and as the love of the world is removed,
the love of God takes its place in the soul, and becomes more and more
vigorous and ardent. In this consists the renovation of the new man. This
is the fruit of the Spirit; this is practical and living faith (Gal.
5:22); this is Christ in us; this is the new command of Christ and new
obedience; this is the result of the new birth in us, in which thou must
live if thou desirest to be a child of God; for those only who so live
have a right to be so called.

4. This is the reason why a man ought now to deny himself; to renounce his
own honor and will, his own love and pleasure, and all his profit and
interest in the world; and why he ought freely to give up his own right
and life, and consider himself unworthy of everything that Providence
bestows upon him. A real Christian, who is endued with the humility of
Christ, readily owns that no man can lay claim to even the least of those
benefits that descend from above, because they are all gifts, and freely
proceed from the goodness of God. On this account he uses all as being
really the property of God, with fear and trembling; not to promote his
own pleasure and satisfaction, his own profit and praise, but from
necessity alone, and because he cannot otherwise subsist.

5. Let a true Christian who denies himself, and a false Christian who is
filled with inordinate self-love, be compared together. If an affront be
offered to the latter, you may soon behold his anger rising, and visible
marks of passion and discontent; and these are, not unfrequently, followed
up by reproachful language and actions, by a spirit of revenge, and
sometimes by imprecations and curses. All this proceeds from the _old
man_, whose proper character it is to be angry and bitter, and to exhibit
rancor and asperity. On the contrary, he that is a Christian indeed, and
has sincerely begun to practice self-denial, is gentle, patient, and ready
to forgive; free from a revengeful spirit; full of compassion and
tenderness; and esteems himself worthy of all the sufferings which
Providence may be pleased to allot to him. These qualities are all
included in _self-denial_.

6. In the exercise of this patience, meekness, and lowliness of mind, our
Lord Jesus Christ has set us an example by willingly denying himself. “The
Son of man,” he says, “came not to be ministered unto, but to minister”
(Matt. 20:28); and again, “I am among you as he that serveth” (Luke
22:27); and in another place, “The Son of man hath not where to lay his
head.” Luke 9:58. David, when reviled by Shimei, practised the duty of
self-denial, for his words were: “The Lord hath said unto him, Curse
David.” 2 Sam. 16:10. As if he had said: “I am a worm in the sight of God,
and deserve to suffer far worse things.” And thus have all the saints and
prophets of God freely denied their own will, and esteemed themselves
unworthy of every blessing. They bore the burden of their day with
patience (Acts 5:40, 41); they cursed not when they were cursed; they
blessed their persecutors, and prayed for them by whom they were
slaughtered (Acts 7:60); and thus, “through much tribulation, entered into
the kingdom of God.” Acts 14:22.

7. This was true when they acknowledged themselves unworthy of any favor,
but worthy of all the evils that could befall them.

8. Now, this self-denial is the cross of Christ, which he has encouraged
us to bear, saying: “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself
and take up his cross daily, and follow me.” Luke 9:23. This self-denying
life is a severe cross to the flesh; the natural man desires a life free
from restraint and contradiction, and would follow the inclination of his
own will, and seek after his own ease and pleasure, rather than the
humility, patience, and meekness of Christ, with the other graces of his
life and example.

9. But whatever opposition _the old man may_ raise for a time, he has
received the sentence of death, and if thy soul be ever saved, he must
surely die. For never canst thou be clothed with the humility of Christ
unless thy natural pride be first subdued; nor canst thou feel a love of
his poverty unless thy avarice and thy love of the world be first
overcome. Thou wilt not be able to follow Christ in the contempt of
vainglory, nor to endure the reproach of his cross, until thine ambition
be rooted out; nor wilt thou ever express in thy life the meekness and
patience of Jesus until thy revengeful spirit be inwardly mortified.

10. These are the spiritual exercises which the Scriptures mean when they
speak of _denying ourselves_, of _bearing the cross of Christ_, and of
_following him_,—exercises that are submitted to, not with any expectation
of profit, merit, reward, interest, or praise, but from pure love to the
Saviour, and because Christ hath passed through all this before us, and
“hath left us an example that we should follow his steps.” Since the image
of God is the greatest dignity of man, we ought the more earnestly to
practise the duty of self-denial, by which that image, effaced by sin, is
revived within us. And as this is the highest honor of which our nature is
susceptible, so is it the strongest inducement that can possibly be
suggested to endear to us the practice of self-denial.

11. Why, then, should man so eagerly desire the fading honors of this
world, which, however they may raise him in the estimation of his
fellow-mortals, render him in no degree more acceptable in the sight of
God. The great and the wise have bodies composed of flesh and blood as the
meanest and the most despised; so that, in this respect, no man has the
slightest superiority over another. One is born even as the other, and
dies even as the other; for the beginning and end of all men, as to this
world, is alike. What folly then is it to covet worldly honors and the
praise of men! Such desires spring from the root of self-love, that bane
of the soul, that seed of all spiritual diseases, by which the heart of
man is turned from God to the world, and from Christ to _self_. How
incapable and how backward is the lover of himself to obey the words of
the blessed Redeemer, and to lose his life for His sake that he may save
it. This is a paradox hostile to the inclinations of the “old nature,” and
therefore but little considered by the bulk of mankind.

12. Alas! how small is the number of those who have a thorough knowledge
of the depraved life of the old Adam, or who heartily strive against it!
And yet, if ever we would rescue our souls from perdition, we must die to
it and to all its restless workings. Whatever corruptions have been
entailed on us by Adam, must be removed in Christ. In his humility, our
pride and ambition must expire; in beholding his poverty, our thirst after
earthly things must die away. The contemplation of his bitter sufferings
should subdue our sensual lusts; the reproaches which he endured, and the
entire resignation with which he submitted to the contempt of the world,
should restrain us from the pursuit of worldly honors, and from the
indulgence of anger and passion.

13. He who is thus dead to himself, will also readily die to the world,
its pomps, and wealth, and honors, and pleasures, solacing himself with
those higher riches, dignities, and enjoyments, to which he is admitted by
faith in Christ. He becomes, indeed, “a stranger upon the earth” (Ps.
39:12), but he is the friend of Christ, and Christ will comfort his heart
with the light of his countenance here, and with joy everlasting and
unutterable in the world to come.




