Chapter XLV.


         Divine Consolation Produces Patience Under Afflictions.


    _Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is
    tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
    promised to them that love him._—JAMES 1:12.


Even as God has provided healing remedies for the body in external nature;
so has he also for the soul in his holy Word. And as in this valley of
misery and tears, no man can be perfectly free from crosses, afflictions,
and troubles; so nothing can be more seasonable than to collect certain
heads out of the word of God, by a proper application of which we may find
help and comfort in the hour of temptation.

2. The _first_ comfort is the consideration of the divine providence,
which lays the burden upon us. “The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: he
bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.” 1 Sam. 2:6. “The Lord gave,
and the Lord hath taken away.” Job 1:21. “Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your
Father.” Matt. 10:29. “I form the light, and create darkness: I make
peace, and create evil.” Isa. 45:7. “Happy is the man whom God correcteth;
therefore, despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: for he maketh
sore, and bindeth up; he woundeth, and his hands make whole.” Job 5:17,
18. It is, therefore, foolish to be angry with those whom God makes the
instruments of our correction. “Wherefore doth a living man complain, a
man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and
turn again to the Lord.” Lam. 3:39, 40. This is the design of God, that we
should repent and turn from our sins, and not murmur against him that
afflicts us.

3. The _second_ head of comfort is to consider the end and design of our
cross, namely, that God sends it, not out of wrath, but from pure love to
our souls. How dangerous it is to a man’s soul to be always prosperous and
at ease, we may learn not only from the case of “the rich man” (Luke
16:25), but also from the example of our first parents, whose happiness in
paradise being greater than they could bear, they were, by the temptations
of Satan, seduced from their obedience and dependence upon God. Gen. 3.
And every day furnishes us with fresh instances of the danger of such a
state. Now, though God, in strict justice, might have condemned man to
everlasting punishment, yet he chose rather to have pity on him, and
devised means for recovering his lost happiness; and one of these is the
cross, or affliction. For this cause he drove him out of paradise, that in
the “sweat of his face he should eat bread” (Gen. 3:19), to the intent
that, by sufferings, he might be brought to repentance; and this is his
constant method even to this day. Though we offend him by innumerable
sins, yet, in his abundant mercy, he leaves nothing undone, no means
untried, that may lead to our conversion and amendment. And this is the
reason why Providence appoints every particular man his cross, that we may
all be kept in true penitence and the fear of God unto eternal life. Hence
it is that God is said to correct those whom he loves, that they may not
be condemned with the world. Prov. 3:11, 12; 13:24; Heb. 12:6; 1 Cor.
11:32.

4. The _third_ argument is sin itself, by considering whether thou hast
not deserved thy punishments. If thou hast (which thou canst not deny),
then it is agreeable to the divine justice that thou shouldest suffer.
Now, a temporal suffering, attended with the divine mercy and comfort, is
certainly more desirable than an eternal one, without hopes of comfort or
expectation of redemption. Call to mind the rich man, in vain crying out:
“Father Abraham, have mercy on me” (Luke 16:24), and assure thyself that
it will be no small comfort to consider that God has changed the eternal
punishment threatened to our sins into a temporal correction that can be
endured.

5. _Fourthly_, when thou art afflicted, consider how much Christ suffered
for thy sake! Think upon his poverty, “who had not where to lay his head!”
Matt. 8:20. Remember the indignities which he underwent, such as no man
ever did or will endure: being “despised and rejected of men” (Isa. 53:3,
4); yea, “a worm, and no man.” Ps. 22:6. Moreover, as he took upon him the
miseries, pains, and diseases of all the world, hence it was that he
underwent such bitter sufferings, such dreadful torments, that even the
sun and moon were darkened at the sight, the earth quaked, and the rocks
rent; all which, though for the sake of his most cruel enemies, he bore
with a love so inexpressibly pure, with a meekness and patience so
sincere, that “as a lamb, he opened not his mouth.” Moreover, though we
provoke him every day by innumerable transgressions, yet he continues, and
will still continue faithful, and ready to receive us to his favor upon
our repentance (Jer. 3:9); yea, and if the ransom he has already paid were
not sufficient, he would lay down his life again for our sakes. Therefore,
he bears patiently with us, and waits day and night to be gracious. For so
strong, so ardent, is his love towards us, that it cannot be quenched by
any sins, any ingratitude of ours, if we but sincerely repent of them. His
love is higher than heaven, deeper than the sea, and exceeding even our
most exalted thoughts and expressions. But there is one thing necessary on
our part, and that is, _repentance_. Therefore, he calls upon all without
distinction, “Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.” Matt. 11:28. And, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thy children together!” Matt. 23:37. “If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.” John 7:37. By these words of
Holy Scripture, he continually invites every one to come to him that
stands in need of mercy. How then canst thou imagine that He will forsake
thee in the time of trouble, who endured so many and great miseries for
thy sake! It is for this that God calls himself our _Father_. Now we know
that a father is more compassionate and tender than a master: so that he
would not have us dread him, but love him as a dutiful child does an
indulgent father. When, therefore, any affliction befalls thee, receive it
cheerfully, and remember that thy Father sends it to thee for good, and
kiss the rod, and the hand that holds it. Consider the compassion of God
as thy greatest security, the firm foundation of all thy hopes; firmly
believing that thy heavenly Father will lay no more upon thee than he
knows to be absolutely necessary for the salvation of thy soul.

6. _Fifthly_, we must call to mind the consolatory promise of our blessed
Saviour, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament,
but the world shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy.” John 16:20. As a little seed is multiplied into
a number of grains, so one affliction shall produce a large increase of
spiritual joy and glory. “They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He
that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.” Ps. 126:5, 6. If God
should promise to convert every pebble about thy house into a precious
stone, thou wouldest quickly make a large collection, and highly value
them. The case of crosses and afflictions is just the same. Learn to love
them, yea, court them, knowing that God will assuredly convert them into
treasures of blessings, and spiritual joys; according to the words: “I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.” Rom. 8:18.

7. The _sixth_ ground of comfort is found in the examples of the saints,
none of whom were without their cross. Ask them one by one, and they will
answer you, “Through much tribulation we entered into the kingdom of God.”
Acts 14:22. Ask the elders in the Revelation, “Who are these?” and they
will tell you, “These are they which came out of great tribulation.” Rev.
7:14. Inquire of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, David,
Daniel, Elias, Job, and all the Prophets and Apostles; they will tell you
that they drank deep of the bitter cup of affliction, which was to them
“the cup of salvation.” Ps. 116:13. If we consider only the holy martyrs,
whose tortures and sufferings were terrible and affrighting, we shall find
that nothing could seduce them from Christ. And what comparison is there
between their crosses and our light afflictions, who “have not yet
resisted unto blood”! Heb. 12:4. We cannot bear a trivial injury, or an
affronting expression for Christ’s sake, for whom the blessed martyrs
underwent the most ignominious deaths. One was beheaded, another roasted
alive, a third crucified; some were drowned, some stoned, others hanged,
others struck through with darts, others forced to walk barefooted upon
red-hot plates of iron; the love of Christ so swallowing up all sense of
pain, that they cried out that “they were walking upon roses.”

8. The _seventh_ source of comfort is, the presence of God with us under
the cross. God has nowhere declared that he dwells with the merry, but
rather with the afflicted and sorrowful. “I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive
the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.”
Isa. 57:15. “Fear thou not; for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am
thy God; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.—When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be
burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.” Isa. 41:10; 43:2.
“Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I
will set him on high, because he hath known my name.” Ps. 91:14. “The Lord
is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saveth such as be of a
contrite spirit.” Ps. 34:18. It was the comforting presence of God that
enabled the holy martyrs to bear up so boldly under the torments that were
laid upon them, and to disregard their tormentors, as did particularly St.
Laurence and St. Vincent, the latter of whom, walking upon burning coals,
told them, “he was walking upon fragrant roses.” Babylas, the martyr,
desired that the chain with which he was bound might be buried with him,
that he might not be deprived of so great an ornament. Ignatius wished to
be a grain of wheat, and to be ground with the teeth of wild beasts, that
he might become clean bread unto his Saviour. These are such instances of
courage and joyfulness as utterly exceed the powers of nature, and are
only owing to the influences of that heavenly Comforter who supported St.
Stephen, and made his face shine before the council as it had been the
face of an angel. Acts 6:15. And in this sense is that saying of the
Psalmist verified, “Thy comforts delight my soul.” Ps. 94:19.




