Chapter XXV.


         The Love Of Our Neighbor, More Particularly Considered.


    _Of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
    bondage._—2 PETER 2:19.


There is no bondage more hard and grievous, than to be under the yoke of
the passions: but of all these, none is so cruel as _hatred_, which so
weakens and depresses all the powers both of body and mind, as not to
leave to the man one free thought. On the contrary, he who lives in _love_
is _free_. He is no slave to anger, envy, covetousness, pride, lying, or
calumny; and being delivered from these by love, he suffers not himself to
be subdued by evil desires, but continues Christ’s freeman (1 Cor. 7:22)
in the liberty of the Spirit: for “where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty.” 2 Cor. 3:17. Whosoever, therefore, walks in the love of
Christ, is no longer a slave to sin, or a servant to carnal affections;
for the Spirit of God’s love has freed and purified him from carnal
concupiscence. And we see that the love of God extends over all men; of
which we not only find sufficient proofs in Scripture, but the footsteps
of his universal benignity are also everywhere displayed in nature. We are
all equally covered with the heavens, and have all the use of the sun, the
air, the earth, and the water; as well they who are of high degree, as
they who are of the meanest condition. And the very same mind that is in
God towards us, ought also to be in us towards men; God himself having set
us a pattern of universal kindness for our imitation. He regards not one
more than another, but loves all with an equal affection. With him there
is no respect of persons, of dignity, or merit; but he beholds all alike
in Christ. This is for our instruction. Now, as God acts towards us, so
ought we to act towards our neighbor. And truly, after the same manner as
we deal with man, so God will deal with us again. We need not go far to
inquire what favor we have with God Almighty. If we but enter into our own
conscience, it will impartially tell us, what mind and affection we bear
to our neighbor; and as we have done to him, so will God certainly do to
us again, and return our works into our own bosom. And in this sense it is
said of God, that “with the pure he shews himself pure; and with the
froward, shews himself froward” (Ps. 18:26); that is, if thou bearest an
evil mind to thy neighbor, God will be thine adversary also.

2. Since, therefore, God has no need of our service, he has substituted
our neighbor in his place, to receive our charity, and has commanded us to
pay it as to himself. He has made this love of our neighbor the very
_touch-stone_ by which we are to examine the sincerity of our love to God.

3. And it is for this reason that he has enjoined the love of our neighbor
with so great earnestness, requiring us to show constantly the same love
to him which God shows to us. For unless a man be fully reconciled to, and
be in perfect charity with his neighbor, he cannot have the favor or grace
of God. And although all the sins of the world are atoned for by the death
of Christ, and a full pardon obtained, yet all mankind may in some sense
be said to be in the same circumstances with the servant in the parable,
who had not wherewithal to pay; the king freely remitted him all his
debts: but when he afterwards behaved himself cruelly towards his
fellow-servant, the king revoked his pardon, and condemned the servant, on
account of the hard usage with which he treated his neighbor. Matt. 18:23,
etc. This parable Christ concludes with the remarkable expression: “So
likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his brother, their trespasses.” Verse 35. And, “With
the same measure that ye mete withal, it shall be measured to you again.”
Luke 6:38.

4. Hence, it plainly appears, that man was not created for himself alone,
but for his neighbor’s sake also. So strict is the commandment of loving
our neighbor, that when it is broken, the very end of our creation is
destroyed, and the love of God is immediately withdrawn from the soul.
Nothing is left but the severest justice, judging and condemning all that
are void of this charity.

5. If we duly considered these things, we should never be angry with one
another; neither would “the sun ever go down upon our wrath.” Eph. 4:26.
It is true, on the one hand, that Christ by his death on the cross has
offered a full and complete atonement for all our trespasses, and in this
respect, has remitted all our sins at once; yet is it, on the other hand,
an awful consideration, that the whole extent of the merits of Christ will
be of no avail at all to us, if we continue to hate our brother, and will
neither pardon nor love him. We shall be entirely cut off from all the
benefits that flow from the atonement.

6. Hence it appears how important the love of our neighbor must be in the
sight of God, binding us even to such a degree, that God refuses to be
loved by us, unless we love our neighbor also; so that if we fail in our
benevolence toward the latter, we fall at the same time from grace and
divine charity. And for this reason, we were created all equal and of the
same nature, that we might not despise one other; but, like children of
one common parent, live in peace and love, and endeavor to maintain a good
and serene conscience.

7. Now, whoever hates and despises his brother, hates and despises God
also, who has forbidden all such animosities in the severest terms. If
thou contemnest thy brother, God also contemns thee; which hastens thy
judgment and condemnation, and deprives thee of all interest in the merit
and redemption of Christ, by which sin is forgiven.

8. For it cannot be possible that a heart filled with wrath and
bitterness, should in any degree reap a saving fruit from the blood of
Christ, which was shed from a motive of pure love. Yea, the above parable
(Matt. 18:35) plainly convinces us, that God was less offended at the debt
of ten thousand talents, than at the barbarous cruelty of which the
servant was guilty; he can overlook the debt, but he cannot overlook the
want of love. Let us, therefore, ponder the words with which the Lord
concludes the parable: “So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto
you.”




