Chapter XIV.


The True Christian, Who Imitates Christ, Hates His Own Life In This World,
                         And Forsakes The World.


    _If any man come to me, and hate not ... his own life also, he
    cannot be my disciple._-LUKE 14:26. _He that loveth his life shall
    lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it
    unto life eternal._—JOHN 12:25.


In order that a man may hate himself, he must, in the first place, cease
to love himself; secondly, he must daily die to sin; and, thirdly,
maintain a continual warfare with his corrupt nature, or the flesh.

2. There is nothing that more obstructs the everlasting salvation of
mankind than _self-love_. This is not to be understood of that natural
love which excites to a due regard to self-preservation, but of that
carnal and inordinate affection which influences man to be wholly
concerned about himself, without any reference to the Supreme Being, the
great Author of life. In this sense the term is used in the present Book.
Man was created to love God alone; and since God only is to be loved, it
follows that he who loves himself is an idolater, and makes of himself a
god. The heart of man rejoices and rests in the object of his affection;
and, whatever this be, he is brought by it into bondage, and is devoted to
it. Man, in this state, is become a servant, and is deprived of that
genuine liberty in the enjoyment of which he was originally created; and
in this lapsed and divided state he must serve as many masters as there
are objects upon which his affections are placed. But if thy love, O man!
be sincerely and simply fixed on God, then thou art subject to no lord but
Him; and thou preservest thy liberty with all the privileges appertaining
to it. It becometh thee, therefore, to be very circumspect in thy life and
conduct, lest thou shouldst in any degree obstruct the progress of divine
love in thy soul. If ever thou desirest to possess God alone, thou must
make a surrender of thyself solely to him. If thou lovest and pleasest
thyself, instead of loving and pleasing God, then sorrow and fear, sadness
and anxiety, will inevitably attend thee; whereas, if thou wholly yieldest
thyself unto God, cleaving to him and delighting thyself in him alone,
then he will never leave thee nor forsake thee, but remove by his gracious
presence all fear and anxiety from thy mind. He, on the other hand, who
seeks himself in all situations and in every circumstance, and who
incessantly pursues after profit, praise, and lust, can never attain to
serenity and peace of mind; for some circumstance there always will be to
cross his desires and to disturb his rest. Never, therefore, yield to the
belief that an accession of fame, wealth, or honor in this world, is
always good and profitable for thee; when, on the contrary, a righteous
contempt of all such transient objects, nay, an utter extirpation of our
love of them, would be attended with an infinite blessing and advantage.

3. As then, on the one hand, the things of this life, such as praise,
riches, and pleasure, are frail, and pass away with the world that
supplies them, while, on the other, the love of God endureth forever, it
is evident that no satisfaction can be durable that is founded upon the
love of self and of earthly objects. Such peace would be interrupted by
every trivial circumstance that occurred; whereas, when the mind is firmly
set upon God and upon his love, it cannot fail to be preserved in perfect
peace and perpetual serenity amid all the changes of this life. Forsake
thou, therefore, all things, and thou shalt, by faith, recover all things
again; for never can the lover of himself and of the world find the
blessed God.

4. Inordinate self-love is begotten of the world, and not of God; it is
earthly, and the chief enemy to “the wisdom which is from above.” James
3:17. This wisdom does not seek the praise and applause of men; and though
in itself “a pearl of great price” (Matt. 13:46), yet appearing with no
other recommendation than its own native simplicity, it is but little
valued in the world, and, with but few exceptions, is entirely neglected
and forgotten; and though there are many who make a boast of this wisdom,
yet the gem conceals itself from all who do not desire to apply it in
their practice. If, therefore, thou desirest to be possessed of it, O man!
lay aside all that human wisdom which “puffeth up” (1 Cor. 8:1), together
with thy self-love and self-applause, and then shalt thou exchange thy
earthly wisdom, which the world admires, for that which is heavenly and
divine. Then, instead of the wisdom of this world, which in its nature is
elevated and seeks the applause of men, thou shalt be put in possession of
a wisdom which, far from attracting the notice of the world, is despised
and rejected by it, but which is, nevertheless, of a divine origin, and of
everlasting continuance.

5. It is impossible to love God, until thou abhorrest thyself; that is,
until thou art heartily displeased with thyself and with thy sins; until
thy own carnal nature is crucified, together with the evil propensities of
thy self-will. For the more a man strives to love God, the more he labors
to subdue the lusts of the flesh and his sensual appetites; and the more
he departs from self and from self-love, by the power of the Spirit of
God, the more nearly he approaches, by faith, unto God, and to his divine
love. For as inward peace depends on a freedom from desires after the
things of this world; so when this peace is once settled in the soul, and
the heart has disengaged itself from the ties which bound it to the
creature, it returns freely into God, and rests in him alone.

6. Now he who is sincerely disposed to deny himself, must follow, not his
own will, but the will of Christ, who has declared, “I am the way, and the
truth, and the life.” John 14:6. As though he had said: “Without the way,
no man walketh; without the truth, nothing is known; and without life, no
man liveth: therefore, look upon me, who am the way in which it is thy
duty to walk, the truth in which thou art called to believe, and the life
in which thou art bound to live. I am the unerring way, the infallible
truth, and the everlasting life: the way to immortality is through my
merit; the truth itself is in my word; and life is through the efficacy of
my death; and, therefore, if thou continuest in the _way_, the _truth_
will guide thee unto eternal _life_. If thou desirest not to go astray,
follow me; if thou wilt know the truth, believe in me; and if thou wouldst
possess life everlasting, put thy whole trust in me, who for thy sake have
endured the death of the cross.”

7. What, indeed, is the safe way, the infallible truth, and the endless
life? What, the way, truth, and life, that are more excellent than every
other? Surely there is no way, but the holy and precious merits of Christ;
no truth, but his eternal word; no life, but a blissful immortality in
heaven. If, therefore, O Christian! thou desirest to be raised up into
heaven with Christ Jesus, believe in him here, and tread in the footsteps
of his humility; this is the safe Way to everlasting glory. If thou
wouldst escape the snares of the world, take hold of his Word by faith,
and follow the example which he has left for thy imitation; because this
is the infallible Truth. And if it be thy wish to live with Christ, then
die thou with him and in him unto sin, and become a new creature; for this
is Life. Thus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; and he is so,
both by his example and by his merit.

8. “Be ye followers of God as dear children.” Eph. 5:1. Let us labor and
strive after this one thing; that our lives may resemble the life of
Christ. Were there nothing else to confound the false Christian, the
example of Christ might effectually and abundantly do it. When we consider
that Christ our Lord passed his life in grief and pain, we ought to be
ashamed to spend our lives in ease and pleasures. If the soldier forgets
his own ease and comfort when he beholds his captain fighting unto death,
shalt thou pursue after worldly pleasures and honors, when thy Prince was
so ignominiously treated, and, for thy sake, nailed to the cross? Is it
not a sign that then thou dost not, in fact, fight under his banner?

9. It is true that, in our day, every one desires to be considered a
Christian; but how few are they who imitate the life and deportment of
Christ! Had it been the character of a follower of Christ, to aim at the
acquisition of honors and possessions, our Lord would never have taught
that these are not worthy to be compared with heavenly treasures.
Contemplate the life and doctrine of the blessed Jesus, and thou shalt own
that nothing can be more opposed than he and the world. Behold that manger
and that stable! do they not forcibly evidence a contempt of worldly
things? And will the example of Christ lead thee to err from the right
way? No! he is the way, and he is the truth; and his life, compared with
his doctrine, is the only means to preserve thee from mistake, and to
guard thee from the delusions and errors of the world. Since then the Lord
hath chosen to enter into his glory by the way of suffering and reproach,
why shouldst thou labor to make thy way to hell, through the pomps and
vanities of the world? Return, then, O deluded soul! escape from the broad
way that leadeth unto death, and in which thy only enjoyment is “the
pleasures of sin for a season” (Heb. 11:25); enter into this safe Way, in
which the wayfaring man shall not stray: cordially embrace that Truth
which never can deceive: and live in Him who is Life itself. This way is
the truth, and this truth is the way. Awful blindness! a worm of the earth
would make himself great in the world, when the Lord of glory abased
himself to the very dust. O faithful soul! when thy bridegroom moves to
meet thee, clothed with humility, come down from the elevation of thy
pride and ambition, and descend into the vale of humiliation to meet him,
and he will embrace and receive thee with joy.

10. As Abraham quitted his father’s house, to go into a land which the
Lord was to show him (Gen. 12:1), so quit thou, as a true child of
Abraham, the pleasure-house of self-will and self-love, that thou mayest
obtain the divine blessing. Self-love biases the judgment, blinds the
understanding, disturbs the reason, seduces the will, corrupts the
conscience, closes the gates of life, and acknowledges neither God nor
neighbor. It banishes virtue; seeks after honors, riches, and pleasures;
and, in a word, prefers earth to heaven. He, therefore, who thus “loveth
his life, shall lose it; but he that hateth his life” (that is, resists
this principle of self-love), “shall keep it unto life eternal.” John
12:25. Self-love is the root of impenitence, and the cause of damnation.
They who are controlled by self-love and self-honor are destitute of
humility and a knowledge of sin; consequently, they never can obtain the
remission of sin, though they seek it with tears; their tears not being
shed because they have offended God, but merely on account of the personal
loss which they have sustained.

11. The kingdom of heaven is compared in Scripture to “a pearl of great
price;” in order to obtain which, a man sold _all_ that he had. Matt.
13:45, 46. This pearl is God himself, and that eternal life which he has
promised, and for the attainment of which every other object must be
forsaken. We have an example of this in our Lord Jesus Christ, who
descended from heaven not for his own sake, but for thy sake; not for his
own profit and advantage, but for thine. Luke 19:10. And wilt thou yet
delay to love him who gave himself up unto death for thee?

12. It doubtless is the part of a faithful spouse, to please her husband
alone: and art thou desirous of pleasing the world, when thou mayest be
espoused unto Christ, the great lover of souls? Forsake therefore and
sincerely despise all that is in the world, in order that thou mayest
become worthy of the eminent dignity of this spiritual marriage: for if
thy love cleave not solely to Christ, it is a corrupt and adulterous love,
and not that which a Christian should bear to the Redeemer. For the
Christian’s love to the Redeemer must possess virgin purity.

13. The law of Moses required that the priest should marry a virgin
(Levit. 21:13, 14); and Christ, our High Priest, will espouse only a
_virgin-soul_; one that is attached to nothing that the world can offer,
but solely to himself; nay, one that loves not even herself, in comparison
with Christ. “If any man come to me,” he says, “and hate not his _own
life_, he cannot be my disciple.” Luke 14:26.

14. In order to understand what is meant by hating ourselves, we are to
remember that we carry about with us “the old man,” and are indeed the old
man himself; whose nature is to hasten from one sin to another, to love
himself, to pursue his own profit and honor, and to indulge his own will
and carnal appetite. For the flesh is at all times the same; always
considering itself, easily grieved, envious, bitter, covetous, and
revengeful. This, O Man! is what thou doest: these sinful motions proceed
from thy heart; this is thy very life, even the life of the old man in
thee: and therefore thou must of necessity hate thyself, and thine own
natural life, if ever thou desirest to be a disciple of Christ. Whoever
loves himself, must love his own pride and avarice, his own wrath and
hatred, envy and lying, perfidiousness and unrighteousness; and, in short,
he must love all the progeny of unholy desires, and a corrupt heart. But
if thou desirest to be a Christian indeed, thou must not love, nor excuse,
nor palliate thy sins, but thou must hate them, forsake them, and subdue
them.




