Chapter XI.


 Showing That The Fruit Of Conversion Is The New Creature; Also, That The
 Christian Is, By Faith, A Lord Over All, And, By Love, A Servant Of All;
             And, That The Life Of Christ Is A Mirror For Us.


    _If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature._—2 COR. 5:17.


All that are in Christ by faith, are “new creatures;” that is, they are
the children of God, are righteous before God, have forgiveness of sin,
and the Holy Ghost; they are partakers of the divine nature (2 Peter 1:4),
are heirs of everlasting life, and are liberated in their consciences from
the law, the curse, death, the devil, hell, and damnation. All, whatever
appertains to their salvation, is in them begotten of Christ by grace, and
is conceived by them through faith; hence, neither time nor place, neither
law, nor commandment, nor ceremonies, nor anything whatsoever, can be any
hindrance to them. They are made perfect in Christ, who is now become a
vital principle in them, and they have in him the accomplishment of the
law through faith. Rom. 10:4.

2. Thence the name of a _Christian_ is a higher and more excellent name
than all the names in the world. It is a greater name than is to be found
in palaces and courts, a name above all posts of greatness, above the
whole world, with all that it contains. But, on the other hand, the name
of a Christian is also the lowest name of all the names in the world,
without exception. Thus, in the same degree, faith exalts a Christian
_above all_; love brings down a Christian _under all_. This thou wilt then
best understand, when thou seriously considerest the holy life of Christ;
which is the brightest mirror both of love, and of all other virtues. See
Phil. 2:5-8.

3. Behold how Christ made himself the servant of all! how humble was he in
heart! how meek in spirit! how kind and gracious in words! how benevolent
in his behavior! how merciful towards the poor! how compassionate towards
the distressed! how patient towards his slanderers! how calm in his
answers! how merciful towards sinners! Whom did he ever despise? whom did
he ever revile, being reviled? How condescending was he to the very
meanest! how ready to show acts of grace to all, without distinction! how
heartily did he seek the salvation of all men, praying for his very
enemies and murderers! Luke 23:34. How did he bear our sickness, sorrows,
reproaches, stripes, wounds, and punishments! And indeed, what else is the
life of Christ, but a most accomplished pattern of love, humility,
patience, and all other virtues whatsoever! This we ought to look into,
and to reflect upon it in our hearts; but especially when we are alone.
This is better than all the high boasts of knowledge, and all the art and
wisdom of the world. This life of Christ is like a seal (Cant. 8:6) to be
stamped upon our hearts, and leave there the impression of his image,
life, love, humility, patience, cross, reproach, and death. This would
prove a true celestial light to our hearts, and a powerful means both to
renew us in the inner man, and to transform us more and more into the
divine image. Now as Christ was _under all_ men, yea, under all creatures,
in his state of _humiliation_ in this world; but is now in his state of
_exaltation_, a Lord _over all_: so a Christian is, with reference to his
_faith_, a lord _over all_, nothing being excepted but God; but with
regard to his _life_ and conduct, a servant of servants, being _under all_
persons and things.




Chapter XII.


 Showing That Christ Is The Only Way And End Of True Godliness; And That
         Man Goes Astray, When God Does Not Guide And Direct Him.


    Teach me thy way, O Lord: I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart
    to fear thy name.—PS. 86:11.


This way is Christ. He says, “I am the way.” John 14:6. But thou wilt here
ask, How am I to come to him? The answer is: By _faith_. For _faith_
unites us with Christ; _love_ binds us fast; and _hope_ upholds and
sustains us while we walk in this way; that is, in the life of Christ. Yet
at the same time, faith, hope, and love, all proceed from Christ himself,
and are his work in us. All these graces flow from him, and return to him.
This way goes out from him, and leads back to him again.

2. Faith apprehends the Person of Christ, and his office; Love follows
Christ in his life and conversation; Hope seizes on the glory that is
hereafter to be revealed in Christ. _Faith_ must have no other Christ, no
other Redeemer, no other Saviour, no other Mediator and Way to life, but
JESUS CHRIST only. _Love_ sets before itself the one only life of Christ,
as the most perfect and shining pattern to which to conform itself. _Hope_
looks up steadfastly to Christ, as the glorious Captain of our salvation,
keeping its eye fixed upon his everlasting kingdom above. This, _this_ is
the right _way_; this is the unerring truth, wherein we are to walk; and
this is what is meant by _having the heart united, to fear the Lord’s
name_.

3. These three chief virtues are allied again to three other virtues. The
alliance of faith, is with humility; of love, with patience; and of hope,
with prayer. For he that believeth, humbleth himself; he that loveth, is
patient; and he that hopeth, learns to pray, and boldly to approach the
throne of grace. O how goodly and beautiful is this way! This is the way
of God, the way of salvation, the path to glory, even our great Master’s
way! And may He himself teach us this way of truth, and inspire us with
courage to walk in it! Where this frame of mind is, there the soul is
firmly united to the fear of the Lord; and this is that _one thing_ which
David desired. Ps. 27:4. Such a one is resolved heartily to follow Christ
in his humility and love, meekness and patience, expelling, through the
lowliness of Christ, the venom of pride that lurks within. Consider how
Christ thy Lord was made for thee a despicable worm (Ps. 22:6), and
trampled upon by the basest of men! and by looking to him, learn to
restrain thy haughty temper. In a word, let his humility slay thy _pride_;
and do thou suppress the assaults of _covetousness_, by meditating on the
poverty of Christ. Behold, he had not so much as even where to lay his
head (Matt. 8:20), and how eager art thou to grasp in possession whatever
thy unbounded desires fix themselves upon! Let the spirit of _envy_ die,
by the consideration of the overflowing love of Christ. He hath given thee
life itself, and thou grudgest thy neighbor even a morsel of bread. Let
the thirst for _revenge_ be overcome in thy breast by the meekness of
Christ. Behold! he prayed for his enemies (Luke 23:34); and thou dost not
even pray for thy friends. His face being buffeted and spit upon by
sinners, he quietly endured it; and thou canst hardly endure a severe
look, or an unkind word from thy neighbor! Let the enticements to _lust_
and voluptuousness be beaten down, by the agony and pains which thy Lord
suffered in his holy body. Behold, and see, whether the sorrows of any man
were ever like unto his sorrows! Lam. 1:12. This consideration will prove
a check to the wanton lusts of thy flesh, and a curb to thy thirst after
worldly pleasure. He wore a crown of thorns; and wouldest thou wear one of
gold? He wept for the sins of others; and refusest thou to weep for thine
own? He was a man of sorrows; and shouldest thou wish to be a man of
pleasure?




