The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Hive
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Hive

Author: Will Levington Comfort


        
Release date: November 17, 2013 [eBook #44208]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/44208

Credits: E-text prepared by Robert Cicconetti, Sue Fleming, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries (https://archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      https://archive.org/details/hivewill00comfiala





THE HIVE


      *      *      *      *      *      *

BY WILL LEVINGTON COMFORT


         THE HIVE
         THE LAST DITCH
         CHILD AND COUNTRY
         LOT & COMPANY
         RED FLEECE
         MIDSTREAM
         DOWN AMONG MEN
         FATHERLAND


           NEW YORK

   GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

      *      *      *      *      *      *


THE HIVE

by

WILL LEVINGTON COMFORT

Author of "Midstream," "Child and Country,"
"The Last Ditch," "Down Among Men," etc.







[Illustration]

New York
George H. Doran Company

Copyright, 1918,
By George H. Doran Company

Printed in the United States of America




                                TO MARY


                         ... soft gold and deep
                     fragrance and pomegranate red.




FOREWORD


There is much to say. Many have a part in this story of our days.
Their work is on the table. Yet no manuscript, no chapter, is a real
beginning. One must start a book this way--with a fresh sheet in the
machine and tell what he is going to tell about.... First of all, it
has to do with the unfolding of the child mind; all the Stonestudy work
has been for that, but the brimming wonder of it all is that we have
chiefly been employed unfolding ourselves.

No one can begin upon the sweet and sacred story of life to a child
without taking a stride nearer into the centre of things, and living
it. That's what all telling is about--presently to stop talking and to
catch up on conduct. The fairest culture of all is to become artists in
life.... Thinking of this, thinking much upon this one thing, we have
been lured out of the heaviness of work into the dimension of Play. We
tell here about this particular passage.

Also something about the story of Man and Woman, hinting at what is
contained in pages of the Book of Life not opened heretofore for the
eyes of the many, but preparing now for the eyes of the children of
the New Race--a beautiful story, be sure of that, but one that requires
art in the telling. No one could bring this story to the lovers and the
children of the New Race who had not found out that Beauty belongs to
the divine trinity with Goodness and Truth.

Many seers have not held that well in mind, many sages have forgotten
it, many saints have not learned it adequately at all. We have to build
our own heavens here before we can have them anywhere else. The more of
an artist a man is, the more reverent he becomes about perfecting his
thought-forms. Just a mention now--that we rejoice to make much of the
Beauty side of things in this book; that a thing cannot be beautiful
and bad; that Beauty is the next quest of the many, as they escape one
by one from the bondage of Gold.

We try to express the Soul of things rather than to delineate
boundaries of matter, but a very strong point is made upon the fact
that one cannot deal in the spirit until he has mastered to a good
degree the coarser stuff that bodies and worlds are made of. We do not
care how the young minds aspire mystically, so long as their abutments
hold fast in the bottom-lands. A man must not drag his anchor as he
climbs the hill; he must unfold line all the way--a line made of
strands of himself, woven of his own wisdom, love and power.

Much is made in this book of the fact that we are given _pounds_ for a
purpose--that all here below is symbol and intimation of a globe and
perfection elsewhere--that we cannot look upon the archetype of gold
until we have mastered the imitation in clay.... We come even closer
to this precious subject: For instance, we know that it is only from
the soul of things that one can see materials--that no one can get a
glimpse of the meaning of materials so long as he is lost in the ruck
of them. At the same time we do not believe that we have access, even
to the lesser grades of mysticism, until we have all the power and
force of the material-minded. We believe we must do well that which the
world is doing, even the tasks of the average man, that nothing can be
missed.

We do not encourage that mystic or poet who requires endowment. If we
are to be artists, we believe in supporting our own groups; we have a
suspicion that we are not through with conditions, any conditions no
matter how hateful, so long as they have us whipped.

We aspire to be writers and politicians and painters and heroes; we
aspire to be masters in all the superb productions of life, but we are
content to begin with the ground. We are content with poverty, yet we
believe that very early as workmen, we are entitled to a fastidious
poverty, which is expensive. No possessions--but all possessions. As
writers we are convinced that it is necessary to do--and inimitably
well--the things that the public wants and pays ten cents the word for,
quite as well as to reveal the deeper folds of our growth for which we
have to finance publication. We are not sure yet which is the worthier
achievement.

Perhaps we speak much of Soul in this book, but we mean nothing more
formidable than the better part of every man. This is the Big Fellow
who takes us over when we do that which is worth while--in billiards
or diplomacy, in art or love or trade. I think it is the Big Comrade
which we are really unfolding--the Workman and Player. Much of Soul, we
write, because it is the point of our educational drive--to set It free
in the child or the young workman, to make It speak or write or play,
and not mere brain and hand.

We speak much of love--not as an emotion, not as a sentiment, but as a
cosmic force. You will see much more what we mean by this as you turn
the pages. It is the most challenging thing in the world. It is the
inner white-hot core of the Fatherland that is to be--the great white
Democracy of the future....

_Democracy_--that's the point of inception of it all; that word is
the seed. The more you dwell upon it--you know what the Seamless Robe
of the Christ means--the more you realise that the Master Jesus was
the first Big Democrat.... We have them speak the word softly and
thoughtfully here each day--we like to hear the young ones say it. They
are apt to know as much about it as you do--for the word doesn't mean
exactly what they mean, who have used it most heretofore. It isn't
the name of a political party--yet.... It is government of the people
by the people, but only to those who see the sons of God in the eyes
of passing men. We only ask its magic, not its presence upon these
pages.... They're fighting for it gloriously--every hour. The boys here
thrill with the boys there. We hold our hands high to them. Some of our
boys are there. They are all our boys! Some are waiting the call to
go--but there or here, we are pulling together for the real Fatherland,
for the adequite fraternity, under the endless and thrilling magic of
the word _Equality_.

... I can say no more splendid word to you than My Equal: I know of
no greater adventure than to become one of the Many. It is true that
you and I--the best of us, the Immortal within us each, are of one
house--that this is but a far outpost of the journey, Egypt if you
like, the husks if you like--but that we have arisen and are on our way
home to the Father's House.


  Canyon, Santa Monica, California.




CONTENTS


                            PAGE

  NORTH AMERICANS             17

  QUICKENINGS                 24

  CONQUEST OF FEARS           36

  THE STUFF OF COMRADES       45

  JOHN'S THINGS               56

  VALUES OF LETTER WRITING    70

  THE NEW DANCING             79

  OLD PICTURES IN RED         91

  STEVE                      101

  HEJIRA                     111

  THE SPECTATOR              118

  TOM AND THE LITTLE GIRL    129

  THE ABBOT                  139

  THE ARTIST UNLEASHED       155

  WORK IN SHORT STORIES      164

  VALLEY ROAD GIRL           172

  BEAUTY                     183

  SHUK                       192

  IMAGINATION                205

  BOYS AND DOGS              211

  THE MAN WHO FOUND PEACE    219

  THE MATING MYSTERY         241

  CHAPTER OF LETTERS         252

  ROMANCE                    267

  THE COSMIC PEASANT         277

  RÉSUMÉ                     315




                                THE HIVE




1

NORTH AMERICANS


The thing called the New Race--the passion of poets, the phantom
running ahead and forever calling the dreamer and revolutionist
and occultist, is far from a reality as yet among the commonplaces
of the world. It is the spirit of everything worth while, but that
means nothing to one who has not a breath of it in his own body.... A
story went forth from this shop recently in which certain ideals and
presences of the new social order were carried through to a cheerful
ending. The publisher wrote, "Yes, but what is the New Race?"

It's a fair question, but remember one cannot adequately describe a
spiritual thing in terms of matter. It is only possible of portrayal
where it has broken through into terms of three-space. First you are
apt to get the nearest and most striking picture of the New Race at
your own supper-table--the presence of one of your own children,
especially if the young one is hard to understand.

Parents and children of all times have found confusion and alarm in
each other's ways. But there are rare periods of human history when
the difference between two generations has been not a normal and
superficial crack, but an abyss. It is so now. The Old has reached
its climacteric point of destructivity. All self-passions destroy
themselves in time. Fear, greed, sensuality--all are self-destructive.
Great human numbers and decadent principles have been recently
broken down in the world with a swiftness and abandonment heretofore
unrecorded, except in the traditions of planetary flood and flame....

You may watch closely the child under seven who plays in the Unseen,
whose companions are not in the room for older eyes; watch the one of
fancies and fairies and fragrances which others cannot quite discern.
Many a child has been driven with a soul-wound into corroding silence
by parents who thought they were punishing falsehood, when they were in
reality repressing the imagination--the faculty which master-artists
denote as the first and loveliest possession of the creative mind. Too
coarse and unlit to see what the child saw, the parents again and again
have looked gravely at each other, saying:

"This is a crisis. Our child has begun to lie. We must forget her own
feelings and punish her----"

So often it is _her_--but not always. The boys who are to do the
great tasks of song and prophecy and architecture--they, too, dream
dreams and see visions and have the rapt eyes of Joan in the forests
of Domremy; they, too, are severely questioned by the pharisees; none
escape this scourging; they, too, in many cases shall be put to death.

The new ideals of the parenthood, education, romance, are now being
introduced and promulgated by pioneers long since emerged from the old
litter and humus. Education will mean first of all a turning for power
to the Unseen. The quest of the Swan and the Star and the Beloved, are
never carried along on the levels and inequalities of the earth--always
the uplifted face for the saint and the sage and the seer. Great
parents kneel beside their children and beg to be delivered from the
heaviness which holds them to the dim shadows, where the child sees
face to face. Education will mean finding his intrinsic task for the
child--the intensive cultivation of the human spirit from the Soul
outward, not alone from the brain inward.

The quest of the passing age was for Gold. The real meaning and
symbol and glory of gold, as the highest, smoothest and most finished
of minerals, has been lost in the bulkier products and possessions
it meant to measure and signify. More and more has gold itself hid
away from vulgar hands and been represented by objects intrinsically
inferior. We now behold a civilisation destroying itself for
commodities and destroying the commodities for which the destruction
began.

Gold itself will serve Beauty in the coming age; commerce will serve
æsthetics. The lovers of Beauty begin with the sand, with the clay.
They love nature from the ground up; they are fervent for light and
air, for sun and sky and water, for fruits and grains and bees, for
stars and rains and romances. They say such things are holy. Words are
inadequate for their loves and appreciations. They find the ways to
love God infinite. They see Him in stone and stream; they see Him in
the eyes of the deep down men; they see Him risen and inevitable in the
eyes of their lovers....

Straight goodness will not do for the New Race, nor straight
intellectuality. Artists, singers, painters and idealists will be the
heroes of the generations to come, for they will add the quest of
Beauty to the unwashed goodness of the saints and pilgrims.

These are but flaring points; one is embarrassed in short space because
of a myriad things to say. Free verse is a sign of the New, also the
dream of a free world and the planetary patriotism. The immanence of
the _spirit_ of all things, is a sign; the sense of the underlying
oneness of humanity; not alone the Fatherland, but the Kinterland,
where new Fountains are established and sages and masters come for
inspiration--all these, like a passing train of wonder, a glimpse of
many cars....

I think I can bring the picture in closer by using a few pages of work
from one of the young men with me. His name is Steve. I called him The
Dakotan,[1] in the book, _Child and Country_. We've romped and ridden
together for three years, and I've known Steve better every day--still
far from the end. The rest of the chapter is Steve's writing:

    [1] H.A. Sturtzel.


NORTH AMERICANS

Out of the centuries of moil and mix and fuse of Europe, the orient and
the north countries, a gleaming archetype has emerged here which may
be called the real North Americans. They are scattered here and there
among the younger generation--young people new in name only; in soul
they are as old as Zeus. Often they are strangers in their father's
house. They blend the mind of the occidental with the soul of the east;
splendid firstlings of an untried future. They betray themselves by
their genius. Heredity is the first fetich overthrown by them.

From the first they are a law unto themselves. They cast off churches,
codes, creeds, schools and parents as preliminary steps in their
teens. In the twenties they are prodigies, leaders in the arts or the
revolutions. It is their aim to over-reach themselves, not to further a
type. Very early they conjourn together in secret and obscure places,
revolting against life as it is lived, like a handful of white dwellers
in a foreign city.

There is always an alien, intangible something about these people. One
senses the double life they lead, their own, and others. Conditions
are not yet adjusted for them. They are super-nationalists, the first
mark of the new. They are dreamers who make their dreams come true in
matter, and first among their dreams is of the planet in one piece.
They are naturally intolerant of barriers and partitions. They see
ahead a new social order vast and shining as a devachanic vision--the
real democracy of the future. They see that the new has come in not to
kill, but to build. Theirs will be the spiritual heroics. Yet all this,
of the greater patriotism, must not yet be spoken. It only alienates
them the more from those they must live with. Their arch enemy is
Ignorance, personified so often in their elders.

It is noticeable that these young people are healthier, stronger,
swifter, sharper, tougher, bolder and at the same time lighter and
finer than the passing generation. They have the _new healthiness_.
They belong to the open and are practically immune to disease.
Theirs is the health of sun and wind and spirit--vitality instead of
constitution, something the old can never understand. Constitution
is weight, solid, ungiving. Vitality is volatile, springy, electric,
constantly being given, constantly being acquired, self-refining.
Constitution does not change; it accumulates all it can, then begins to
die....

The young women of this new Race are open, strong, eye-to-eye, free
spoken. They are capable of friendships; they are not adverse to being
wholly understood by males. They are not popular with ordinary women,
who surmise their superiority but comprehend it not. Deceit, jealousy
and such common disturbances evident in the sex are unknown to them.
They have character and are lovely rather than beautiful. They are apt
to go half way in their love-making, for who should know better when
the chosen father of their children arrives.

All of these people are bringers of true love. Love is their philosophy
and religion. They listen to the heart as well as the brain. Others
think them cruel in their discrimination in mating. They take all or
nothing--prodigious riskers, great sufferers, throwing even love's
dream on the board to be played for, and laughing as they play. The
slightest blight on the loved one is deepest agony.

Perhaps the surest way of discovering these young giants is to search
about for the most sorely harassed children. Invariably they are put
to it, to break into this day and generation. They fight their way up
through all the banked-up ignorance and antagonism of unlit humanity.
Often they are solitaires, coming and going with the secrecy of kings
and eagles.

       *       *       *       *       *




2

QUICKENINGS


A few pages of drift first of all with the younger boys.... There
is a lane of Lombardy poplars from the Lake to the interurban
car-line--a half mile. It is a lifting walk at any time, but summer
evenings are wonderful with all the sounds and scents of a true
pastorale--lake-breath and meadow-lands, the whole sky to look at, and
the murmuring dissonance of the poplars. Often we walk to the car with
passing guests. One evening a guest went away whom we loved very much.
A lad of seven, named John, and I walked back from the car alone.

He was ignited. I felt this at last through his hand. I had been
thinking about my own things all too long, missing the beginnings of
his talk.... He hurried forward in the dusk, speaking in a hushed rapt
voice. Because I had missed the first part, I said: "John, I want you
to write that--either to-night or to-morrow."

And this is what came in:


THE MAGIC LANE:

It was at dusk. Two people left their tracks in Nature's dust road.

Love is found on that road. It is the road of the mystics.

They leave their love in it; Nature kisses their feet.

Many horses' feet have been kissed on that mystic road.

That mystic road will last forever.

I long to walk upon that road of love.

Love on that road will last forever.

It is all true love.

Our friends have been met on that road of love.

It leads to the Hills of God.

Certain spelling matters have been corrected. We pay little attention
to spelling in the work here. The young ones learn by reading and get
the proper look of a word altogether too soon in many cases. There was
another high moment from John at the same time. The following three
lines have stood out from the period with memorable magic:


WONDER

The soft breath of the Mother came in through the window of vines.

The stars were shining like the face of the New Generation.

My spirit was away in the Hills. A noise at the door brought me back----

John then fell into a psychological tangle which we found little
profit in following. By the "Mother" he referred to Nature.... The
verse period has passed for the time. Around the age of seven, boys
change. Often, as in this case, they are not so interesting for a while
afterward. John is coming nine now and is writing "action" stories with
all the worn and regulation props and settings. The early tendency will
return with a dimension added. All transitions are times of disorder,
but they are followed by larger areas and truer fulfilments of order. A
cloud falls upon the sanctuary, but when it is dispelled, one perceives
a lifted dome, bright with its new cloth of gold.

I am struck every day in dealing with young boys how wisdom and beauty
and truth can be inculcated in their lives, without pain and strain to
them, and with great profit to the teacher. The young mind is quick to
change. It has not grown its pharisaical ivory....

The sanction of a boy must be won on a physical basis. A man must know
what the boy knows and go him one better. The man must understand boy
points of view, but never expect the boy to be puerile. Parents of the
past generations have had the steady effrontery to expect very little
from children. "Why, they are only children!" has done more to make
for vacuousness and drivel than any other visionless point of view,
none of which has been missed. There is a difference in ages, to be
sure. The child's mind has not massed for use the external impacts
of twenty or thirty years of life in the world, but there is also an
Immortal within--a singer, hero, builder, or a teacher possibly, eager
to manifest through the child's fresh mind, fervid to bring the mind of
the child to its subjection, for the expression of its own revelations.
Indeed, the parents themselves are enjoined to become as little
children. In arriving at this wisdom and humility, they may suddenly
find masters in their own children.

There is also a lad here of seven named Tom. Yesterday I found him
beside me on the sand, down by the water's edge. I began to tell him
about the Inner Light that we all carry. You can talk over a child's
head, if your words are choked with mental complications (which is apt
to be second-rate talk, anyway), but you seldom are out of reach of a
fine child's grasp when you speak of spiritual things. He was sitting
cross-legged, folded hands between his knees--a little six pointed
star--head and shoulders the three upper points, knees with folded
hands between, the three lower. He was bare from the waist up and
thighs down, and brown as the honey of buckwheat.... I told him that
the seventh and perfect point of his star was within; that if he shut
his eyes and kept very still, putting away for the present all his
thoughts about himself, his feelings, his wants and his rights--looking
into himself as one would look ahead for a lamp in the night, listening
deep within, as one would listen for the voice of a loved friend,--I
promised that at last he would see what the three wise men saw--the
Star in the East. He need only follow that Star and be true to its
guidance to come at last to the Cave and the Solar Babe.... After that
I hinted that I would come to _his_ feet and listen.

Tom felt that it was worth trying for at once--shut his eyes, turning
all thoughts and gaze within. He held the posture long.... I have
marvelled again and again at the quickness with which the child-mind
attains to concentration so essential for all original production.
The little ones have no mad emotional lists to sort out and subdue;
their wants are simple "yes" and "no" in so many cases. Indeed, they
are spared the struggle of becoming as little children.... Tom held
the posture, until I was actually tense from the strain of waiting and
keeping my thoughts from calling his.

It was a picture--sun-whitened hair, long yellow lashes, brown body
with a bit of babe's softness left to it, and glorious sunlight. He
opened his eyes at last saying that he had the door, where the light
was, almost opened, when a fly bit him.

I thought of the perfection of the instance of the mind's
waywardness--the coming of the Master spoiled by a fly bite.... Tom
will search for his Star every day. It is strange that he is closer
to the hill-pastures around Bethlehem, under seven, than for years
afterward.

To learn concentration in mid-life after the world "has been put
through a man," is an ordeal at best; and yet we are by no means
masters of ourselves, nor capable of significant achievement until the
brain can be stilled at will of its petty affairs (the first aim of
concentration) and becomes the glad servant of the "giant" within.

A little later I saw Tom on the back of a huge black walk-trot
saddle-horse of show quality--passing up the Lane at a fast clip, his
feet half way to the stirrups, holding on to the saddle with one hand,
the bridle-rein in the other. A year or two ago I should have been
afraid to permit that, but we manage now to relieve the young ones of
a large part of our fears for their welfare. Children have enough to
overcome from their parents. Frequently the New Age young people have
to master their heredity before they begin upon themselves.

Life is a big horse to ride, so often a black horse. It is well to
start children free and unafraid. We do not let them dwell in thought
of pain. We do not permit tears. We inform them early that to be sick
is a confession of uncleanness, that lying is for the use of cowards
only, and that to be cruel marks the idiot.

We are occasionally serious over repeated failures, but we laugh over
things done well. Tennis has unfolded marvellous possibilities in the
training of will force. Children are shown that there is a mystic
quality to all the perfect games--that the great billiardists and
tennis and baseball players perform feats in higher space, whether they
know it or not. There is the essential ideal first in the making of the
athlete as in the making of the poet. The great moments of play require
faculties swifter and more unerring than the human eye or hand or mind.
Ask the master of any game if he had time to think in pulling off the
stroke that won. It is inspiration that he uses quite the same as the
poet in his high moments.

Education is the preparation of the mind to receive and answer to
inspiration from a plane above. The more you develop merely the brain
of a child, the more he is detached from the great principles of being,
the more also is he closed to the real, and subjected to the danger of
actual lesion and sickness. The more you develop the spirit of a child,
or rather give the significant One within an opportunity to come forth
and _be_ the child, the more you make for beauty, health, goodness and
glory of bodily life.... A lucky day when you start really to associate
with your children, luckier still when you undertake the work of
teaching them incidental to your own work. Then and there, you begin to
realise that children are close to a source of things that you cannot
touch. Presently you realise that they are teaching you....

Day after day I have studied and practised the development of the
child from within outward. I have seen the capacity to synthesise and
assimilate mere mental matters developed in a year, by training the
mind from the centre of origins outward, that mental training alone
could never accomplish. The mind itself becomes vigorous and avid and
capacious and majestically swift. It is trained to express its true
self. That is power--that is king-play. This sentence covers the whole
matter:

_The perfect way to develop the mind of the child is to teach him to
sit and listen at the feet of his own master, the Soul._

The right to live and to bring the laughter of power to the days must
be won afresh each morning. No two days alike. We make ourselves
impossible to children of the New Age by trying to confine them in the
laws and rules of yesterday. The young people whom I serve live in
a different intensity. Their interest flags if I repeat, if I fall
into familiar rhythms. Continually they spur me on. I think, after
all, great teaching is the capacity to feel what the younger minds are
thinking. If we are too coarse to catch the first warning of their
resistance, they slip farther and farther from our grasp.

It would not seem possible to hold American young people with spiritual
affairs; yet this is done daily. We call the Unseen--the great gamble.
I have shown how all else betrays--how all matter is a mockery at the
last--that even love and friendship fail for those who are called to
weep and worship wholly at the tomb of the body.... The truth is out:
The beginnings of real teaching is in making the Unseen interesting and
dramatic.

We dwell upon the mystic white lines which connect all things--the
sources of daring and beauty and creativeness. I ask my young people
where they were--when they did any rare and improved bit of work, when
they felt like great comrades, met some magnanimous impulse, arose to
superb instants of play, or when in Chapel the big animation touched
us all and set us free. They always answer that they were _out of
themselves_.

That's a secret of the new teaching again--to lift the students out
of themselves. Men take to drink or drugs for this same reason: men
and women set out on the great adventures, pleasures and quests for
this. We hunger and toil for this freedom; we suffer and adore--to get
out of ourselves. Mental teachings tie us in more firmly. The teaching
here--and no two days alike--is to startle and encourage the young
minds to arise and live and breathe in that lovelier and more spacious
dimension which at least borders upon the Unseen. The doors open and
shut so softly. One does not know he has been out--until he is back
with strange light in his eyes and in his hands a gift from the gods.

The essential spirituality of the new teaching must not be confused
with religious affairs as they are known and exploited in the world.
You cannot teach the New Age religion of the world's kind. It has
its own. No dry as dust sage will do. A snort will answer your
sanctimoniousness; flexible science will reply to the abysses of your
logic.... You must be the consummate artist if never before in your
life, to teach the beauty of the soul to youth. The young workers of
the new social order will never bring forth their great harvests from
your _reflected_ light. You must be spontaneous--you must flood them
with pure solar gold; you must show them by your life and your work,
how you come and go into the Unseen.

There is no rest.... One commands his disciples to go forth at last.
The teacher strides forward faster when they cling. He tells them
one day they must race the gamut to follow him; and the next day he
puts another in his place and begs to be allowed a cushion in the
midst of the children.... We hold them by setting them free--the first
law of love. All unions of the future--in trade and friendship and
matrimony--will be founded upon the principle of freedom; and this is
the essence of the new teaching--to liberate the children into their
larger and God-quickened selves.

No rest and no two days alike.

A Bob White called me this morning across the uncut hayfields at the
edge of the lake-bluff.... His two smooth and patient notes seemed
to contain the secret of putting off all fret and fear and unrest.
He seemed to ask if I had not done this already--had not yet put all
boyish and merely temporal things away? "Not yet?... Not yet?" he
called the question.

I answered that I would try again, and I set out straightway to be
honest once more with the world, with the soil and with myself. I would
begin with the clay again to be clean--to rise and think and dwell in
cleanliness, to think no thought, to perform no action second-rate--to
begin with the Laugh again--the warm laugh of conquest that always
opens some inner door to fresh powers--to arise afresh in the glory
and gamble of the Unseen.... I returned and saw the young ones one by
one--from Tom and John up to the men and women--doing their work. I set
about mine with a laugh and called the day good. The teacher knows best
who is taught.




3

CONQUEST OF FEARS


An interesting boy of ten and I have been much together in the open
weather. We have learned many things, but nothing more important than
what a sham Fear is. I do not mean that we take chances or that it is
wise to risk life or limb. Fine discrimination is back of all training
in the arts of life; still we certainly have found that Fear is a
waster and diminisher of beauty and power--and that it can be mastered.

About the most fascinating thing that life has shown me is the way in
which fine examples of the younger generation learn the deeper matters
of life--matters of self-mastery which make the very presence of a
lad significant to a stranger, and which formerly were supposed to be
secrets for the sons of kings alone.

"Do you fear anything?" I ask. "Look deep. Listen deep--do you fear
anything?... It's like the pain that tells you of a weakness or
disease. Fear is an unerring reminder of a task of conquest ahead for
you. That which you fear most is the thing to conquer first."

There had been much of this talk of Fear before a laughable personal
experience showed me how much I asked.

I crossed a mesa and came to an abrupt drop-off--two hundred feet
sheer. It astonished me. I hadn't experienced anything like this quiver
of horror for years. All members and muscles bolted at the thought of
advancing closer to the edge. I sat down to think it out. It never had
occurred before that I _wasn't_ my nervous system, and must not let it
get me down.

The more I thought, the more I perceived that I must do the thing I
dreaded so. In fact, I had told trusting young people that they were
not their bodies, not their emotions, not even their minds--that these
must be made to obey. Here I had a chance to prove if I were less in
action than talk. I forced my fluttering young self to the edge....
Dizziness--wobbly limbs, fancied shoves from behind, the call of the
huge shadowed space below, a queer sense of parting in mid-air, the
body thumping down, another and liberated self gladly spurning the
ground--all these symptoms of panic followed swiftly.

I held until calm came, and I then could study this little coil of
forgotten fears--a civilised mess.... The weakness was absurdly easy to
overcome after the will was once aroused. There's no end or limitation
to will force when awakened. The greater the man, the more awe he has
for this subject. There's a glow that follows conquest of any kind; the
mere call of the will to action brings a sense of power in the heart.
There is no way more speedily to dispel pain, anger, passion, fear, or
any of these tentacles of personality--than to summon the power of will
to instant action. The particular matter of this precipice showed me a
trick about calling up the force--priceless to me afterward in bigger
tests, and for opening the way of self-conquest to boys.

One must decide what one wants to do--then carry it out to the death.
Discrimination, art, all culture and knowledge may be brought to bear
in making the decision--but after that, it must be carried out--just
that.

Fears belong to the abdomen. You can feel them there. They are quicker
than thought. Perhaps you had a twinge of nerves over some sight or
sound or odour, before your mind could tell you what you were afraid
of.... I have often told the young ones here--listening a bit to my own
voice--that there isn't anything living or dead, phantom, shell, or
living soul, that has got the authority to make the spirit of man quail.

Courage is spirit.

Most people don't care to try to deal with it; they let it have its
way.... Do you recall the fears of the dark room as a child--fear
always stealing behind--upstairs alone, the rush to the light, almost
screaming tension?... I heard a patter of steps the other evening and
knew the whole story--a boy of seven. He had been sent upstairs without
a light. I sent him back, told him to stay there until he got himself
in hand--to stay in the dark and think the bogie down. He was well
afterward.

I have known some under-fire work. A man soon gets himself in hand
to look straight at a white-fringed trench. Fear of sharks furnished
another test. From a child the deep-sea devourers had an exquisite
fascination for me--to be cut in two under brine, white belly,
backward mouth, black-rimmed, hairy pig eyes, the double-rows of
teeth.... Pacific Islanders swim in the same harbour with fourteen-foot
scavengers, careless of whole schools of monsters, yet scurry to their
boats at the sight of one solitary, _different_ fin. I had seen the
so-called, man-eating brutes, "grey nurses," dim grey horrors with dull
black spots. A well-fed imagination also came into play.

I went swimming in the surf with a splendid Australian chap--a doctor
home from the trenches.... He left me back in the surf lines and
started out to sea. I finished my swim decently in toward North
America, and lay on the strand. From time to time off in the sunset I
saw my friend's head.... I was glad to grab the beach-comber when he
came in.

"It's all perfectly sane and splendid," I said, "and I'm glad to have
you back for supper with us, and the billows out yonder are doubtless
all that you say, for an afternoon's lie-up, only I venture to
ask--what if a grey nurse should happen in from the lower islands?"

"You don't think about them," he said.

That's about all there is to the fear subject. You don't let it get
you. There is nothing worth fearing in or above or under the plane of
manifestation.... So I tried that out in deep water. The old horrors
succumbed like the fear of the precipice, but not so readily, quite.
One can imagine keenly in the dim deep; the touch of sea-weed quickens
all the monsters of the mind....

There's nothing fit to be afraid of, unless it is the _self_. When we
get the ape and the tiger, the peacock and the porpoise, the lizard
and the shark and the carcajou of our own natures mastered, there
isn't anything left to do but to tally them off outside, a friendly
finish with them all. No menagerie is complete as man's, and each of us
favours some species from time to time.

I have thought much about fear. In another place I told how we have
overcome inertia; how we developed senses through the hard administry
of fear and hunger, anger and the rest. Now, however, these must be
overcome.... One of the last physical fears to let go in my case is
that for the hangman's rope. I think Roger Casement really wanted the
axe in preference to the hemp. Steadily facing a repulsion, it surely
vanishes.

The point of it all is that you can teach self-command to the
children.... I took a girl of fourteen to my precipice--left her there
standing on the very edge. After a few minutes I called. Her face was
calm as if she had gazed from a porch....

"Did you feel any fear?" I asked.

"Only yours for me," she answered.

It was very true. I had the thing whipped for myself, but it had been
hard to leave her there.

Finally I took the smaller boys out for a test. They didn't know I was
testing them. Children haven't the fear of height such as we put on. I
recalled a score of episodes of my own boy-days, in which I startled
the elders by Sam Patch imitations. Also I have put the young ones
through some deep water affairs....

You may not be able to get it quite--but all fear is illusion. Every
inner beast mastered makes us stronger. These animals within are our
cosmos to rule. We do not know how beautiful they are until we lose
our fear for them. Boys and girls here are learning these things and
putting them in action.

The kingdom of heaven is also within. Fear, passion, anger, poverty,
and the like--all represent areas of our own kingdom not yet brought
under perfect cultivation.... After the emotional and physical
conquests come the psychic ones--hard matters of mastery pertaining to
the heart and mind--to know, to do, to dare, to keep silent--then the
finding of the hidden treasures of the subconscious, mystic fleets that
sail those dim seas, as yet uncharted for most of us.... After that,
the Soul. At last we must be potent enough to stand eye to eye in the
presence of the King Himself.

From looking steadily over an escarpment of two or three hundred feet
drop, to gazing at the world from the forward cockpit of an airplane
at two or three thousand feet, isn't such a long step as you would
imagine. The fact is, I was in no way terrified in my first flight, and
fear certainly crawled me full length as I stood that time at the edge
of the mesa. Our young people have the call to test the new dimension
of wings. This zeal corresponds in a unique way with the new education.
Intellect stays upon the ground. Intuition is the lifting of the wings
of the mind.

I had already begun to make friendly visits to an aerodrome at the edge
of the Pacific when the following letter came from the Abbot,[2] who
is now seventeen and in New York:

... Perhaps Steve told you that I had a ride in an airplane about three
weeks ago. Man! 'Tis the place for me! Next summer, soon as school
dissipates, I attach my name to the Royal Flying Corps. The psychic
effect of a flight is wonderful--like travelling over a very tall
bridge. The Atlantic coast for many miles lay in profile as a map, the
roads stretched as thin mathematical lines; forests as darker shadows
of the earth; New York as a blotch of smoke and curious patchwork.
For twenty minutes we sailed around and around, just as you've seen a
gull pinion, then we came to earth; waited until it got dark, then up
again.... Lights of the aerodrome lay like jewels upon the earth, but
up, up we went, faster and higher, the roar of the propeller providing
a steady nervous outlet. I could shout my lungs out--I had to relieve
myself of the excess thrill.

Then what should happen? Red, a tiny rim, like the disc of a golden
dollar, the sun began to lift up from the horizon again. The higher
we went, the higher it lifted, until there it hung, as a golden bulb,
a swollen orange off in the mighty stretches,--pure, golden,--while
below twinkled the town's lights. 'Twas the fullest, richest, most
brimming moment I've ever had. The awe of the cosmos overtakes the
heart and lays down its stupendous laws. The distance between sun and
'plane seemed a golden pathway that ever could absorb your flight. I
was aware only of worshipping God, and that roar of the machine made
one think of the roar of the planets, comets, meteors, all the suns,
roa-oa-ring. What a romance! Finding the sun!

... No discussion of the fear element whatsoever in the letter....

    [2] Fred Jasperson.

The old thrills won't do for the new race. I took a pair of
screen-trained young ones to a circus recently and became absorbed at
their mild boredom. Alcohol is too slow and coarse for the wastrel
tendencies of the modern hour. The sad ones of the new generation
use high potency drugs to forget the drag of time and space. A new
dimension is required in all things. The young men of the new race make
light of our old dreads and are learning winged ways to heaven and to
hell.




4

THE STUFF OF COMRADES


I wonder if I can make clearer, by turning a few different facets in
this chapter, what we mean by friends, comrades, the spirit of things,
and love not as an emotion but as a cosmic force. Many days I have
faced a Chapel, as I face this day's work, longing to bring in closer
the dream of the new social order, yet dismayed by the limitations
of words and my own mind, trained so long in the life of the old....
I would begin to talk, drawing the young minds to mine through an
intimate revelation of the heart, then presently lose the sense of
effort, even the sense of thought--and an hour would pass in the joy of
communal blessedness, because we were one.

Man is not getting larger, though he is continually holding more.
The human brain, after it reaches a certain age and size, may gain
thereafter a conception of the universe without altering the size of
the hat-band. There is a continual condensation at work within us
mentally and physically. We take the cream of the thing, and throw the
rest away. The wiser and the more inclusive we become, the more we take
just the spirit of a thing, and leave the bulk and weight behind.

This is true in our every refinement, in the clothes we wear, the food
we eat, the books we read and the friends we gather together. We become
harder and harder to suit, because bulk and weight are common, but the
spiritual extract of anything is slow to appear for us. The wiser the
man, the more fastidious he is, and this does not mean that he is a
crank. The excellence of fastidiousness is not in eccentricity but in
inclusiveness. In the spirit of the thing, he sees all. From the spirit
of the thing, he expresses in his own way any part. He can array whole
hierarchies of facts from the spirit of the whole, but mainly he leaves
the facts in reference-libraries, where they belong and are quickly
available, and stores away in his working faculties just a drop of the
_oil_ of a subject or a breath from its essence.

There are those who believe that the soul of man is made up of essences
of experiences of thousands of lives--yet the refinement of the soul
is so spiritualised that the best surgeon cannot find the little
organ. He knows the brain, which is made up of the stored experiences
of but one life, but because the soul is so small or so diffused,
the surgeon is very apt to say that there is no such organ. And yet,
we all know there is knowledge and power behind us, which drives us,
in our greater moments, to utterances and action entirely without the
scope of the brain. We may call this the soul, or the nth power, or the
fourth dimension--the name doesn't matter.... Listen, if I write well
to-day--I mean well for me--if I rise to the opportunity at all, it
will be because I am writing things which my brain doesn't know.

I yearn to make this still clearer.... The rose, which is the highest
evolved of flowers, includes all the evolution of plant-life of its
line beneath; the same with gold among the minerals. The fact that each
is the highest necessitates that. In the same way, man includes Nature
and the lower creatures, in that he is the highest. This is easily
proven to you when you recall that a child in the womb passes through
all states of creature evolution. That period is, in a wonderful way, a
review of the evolution of the world.

The mere fact that the higher one climbs, the farther one can see,
proves it again. This is a law. The scent of a rose is the sublimate
of all plant odours; and the spirit of man is the refinement of all
knowledge and experience beneath.

The higher man ascends, the more inclusive. To heal another, the
physician must be able to include the other. Evolution is continual
refinement--the drawing unto ourselves of the spirit of bulks of
matter. I stood upon a bluff overlooking the ocean recently, and a
breath of the south wind awakened in my mind the story of one whole
summer; others have listened to forest trees or the humming roar of
a distant city, or the rush of a great river, and found in them the
aggregate of all Nature's sounds in one tone. This is the magic of the
spirit of things.

In all philosophy, there is no difference of opinion as to one fact,
that man is unfolding a microcosm within himself, including in his
consciousness more and more the Idea of the Universe. The cosmic
consciousness, which a few have attained, is the actual perception of
the externals of the Plan.

The cream of anything includes all the parts. The cosmic mind must
include the essence of all arts and experiences and facts. Just as the
rose and the man and the grain of dust are potential with all beneath,
the highest man, the cosmic intelligence, is potentially the cosmos in
containing the Idea of it.

This idea may be contained in and expressed outwardly by some great
single, all-including, all-mastering emotion--such as love. And now we
are in a region where there can be no difference of opinion; at least
I have never heard disputed what is the greatest thing in the world.

There are all kinds of love. The simple man loves simply--himself,
his woman, his children and his animals. The love of the cosmic
consciousness breaks forth in a deluge upon the race, because it
comprehends and includes all beneath. This great outpouring is formed
of earth, air, water, fire, sunlight and all winds, all facts, all
experiences, all arts, light of the moon and stars and all glowing
things under the sun, all sounds and scents and pictures, all ardours,
and sympathies and tolerances. Its outpouring is action, and is of
itself creative. This is the _OM_. Such a love leavens and impregnates
all things, because it understands and includes all things. It unifies
all separateness; it enfolds all intelligence with intuition; it unites
all parts.

This brings us to that ancient and unassailable premise of all
religions--that God includes every part of the universe in being the
spirit of it; that His idea of creativeness is expressed in one great
single, all-mastering and including emotion,--which is love. We hear
the little children saying it, "God is love."

       *       *       *       *       *

... We awaken the Ideal in ourselves first by imitating the virtues of
others. In the earlier days when to me courage meant physical action,
men passed in different fields, leaving an imperishable remembrance.
I have often seen the expressions of those I loved and idealised as a
boy, live again in the faces of my own children. John T. McCutcheon in
Luzon, filling a reel of films, under a volley of fire at Binan, on his
knees, working the camera with a whole brigade sprawled behind--gave
me one of the finest early building blocks for the courage among men.
He also gave me an ideal of cleanliness: One evening, after a vicious
day's march, and we were all ravenous, John T. left camp to find a
river. There he bathed with government bouquet,--made himself right
with himself, even to shaving, before meat and drink. His constraint
looked like mastery to me then. Grant Wallace was a big star of that
service--ideal in performance of friendship.... Young men at hand now
are different. Not one of them lack in grip and grit. They reveal the
new thing in courage, the courage that begins where the courage of
the soldier ends. These have gone far into the mystery of their own
kingdoms--rapidly becoming kings of themselves.

The world doesn't understand them. The Abbot[3] is a sensation in
literary matters at Columbia, but unplaced. The Dakotan[3] was said
to be unfit for a soldier because he was twenty pounds under weight
for his height. He can leap five feet six, run or hike indefinitely,
exhaust a cement-mixer, say "stick" in all tongues and "quit" in none.
He has the will and wisdom to make himself a new man over night--and
yet his Government wants him served up just so, in pounds. There isn't
any one loves America more than the Dakotan, whom we now call Steve.
Even the young military surgeons will know before long that endurance
is a matter of spiritual culture, that courage is spirit--that a man
is well because of cleanliness of body and thought and organised
will; that he doesn't fail in a pinch because he is evolved; that all
the higher forms of life call for speed rather than strength, the
levitating force of spirit rather than the gravitating force of flesh,
for brain rather than brute.... Comrade stuff is the stuff of souls....
I've studied them long and devotedly. I build my days upon the things
these boys show me. Less and less are we different from those who call
to our hearts.

    [3] These appear in _Child and Country_.

These young men do not think themselves out; they are not troubled by
misses or personal discrepancies. They simply are themselves. I have
perceived that men of dreams and genius and action are in the larger
sense free from themselves. The main part of their day's performance
is a lifting out of the tangle of emotion and desire, into a large,
unrestricted area full of calm daylight, where events and movements
are seen in their relation to one another, not in separateness and
one at a time, an area also where inspiration is momentarily expected
to strike. They do not analyse themselves. They do not hear their own
voices. They are not dismayed if they falter or drop from the key. The
things that most men do with care, and that occupy so much of the days
these young men perform automatically.

My own path was upward through an intense self-consciousness--the
American, not the oriental way. I lived with myself all the route. I
observed outward conditions and events, domestic, civic and cosmic; but
at the same time observed their effects upon myself. I did not know
until I was adult that there is a big receptivity of consciousness
above this--where intuitions play and weave causes and effects
together--where the mind is more like a child's than a man's, or more
like a giant's, perhaps--where the big faith comes, and the warm laugh
comes, and man surpasses himself, but does not know until afterward, if
at all.

Warmth flooded into me as I touched this larger consciousness. It
became clear as daylight--that a man is at his best only when out of
himself. I saw much of my misery and depression was the result of
self-analysis. I was a better man when I let myself go utterly. And
this was exactly the thing that happened in moments of danger, moments
of romance and friendship, moments of the self hurling itself outward.
Capacity for these moments makes the Comrade, and indicates that love
which is not a sentiment, but a cosmic force.

Again, you cannot describe a spiritual thing with these little tools
and materials in black and white--just intimations.... If we are
sweet enough inside, something of the song will come to us.... Two
words suggest it best. The first is _Comrade_, which has become a
silliness in a military sense, yet has a high and holy meaning to
all reconstructionists.... I remember when the word first came to me
with a thrill, as a young lad going off to Cuban wars. It was burned
out of me a few days afterward in a Sibley tent full of regular army
soldiers.... I remember the scorn with which I used the word all the
years--or avoided using it--until slowly, smilingly, its new dimension
opened, hard as a diamond, and as clear--its meaning in work and world
and women, its new meaning to Russia and India and China and America.

It seems to say _Equality_. It's a kind of deep drink of spirit
together, a word spoken at the last moment between men--an
inner-shrine word, spoken with a smile, and a glimpse into the eternal
indestructibility of the human heart. It expresses the love of the
world, not as it is felt in the brain, but in the breast of the soul.
The New Race has already washed it clean. It goes with a Cause fit to
die for. It belongs to men and women who can look at each other with a
kind of prayer in their eyes and face death alone and laugh at it.

There's a fury, too, in the word--fury against the world, against
things as they are. It stands against the world-darkness now, and for
the day that is to be. It means love for the poor, a love for the
peasants, a passion to serve and be tender to them, not to drive them
into the pits of death--a readiness to die for them without _cant_, a
readiness also to dare to live for them.

_Comrade_--there's vision in it to strip off the masks of decadent
nations, to open wide the sepulchres where the priests are still
plotting to crucify the King; its strong magic will uncover the
monotonous crimes of commerce.... It signifies the spirit of the young
men and women who have already begun with gladness and fire to clear
the débris for the building of the New Age.

They will begin with the soil; they will know and love their own hard
part. They will begin with the grass, with the rice, with the millet
and the wheat, the clean things, the simple and holy things that the
peasants love, with the songs that the peasants sing, the songs of the
soil and the rivers and snows--to build upon them the new heaven and
the new earth.... Above all, there's a laugh in the word--the laugh of
youth and power.

The other word is _Democracy_.

       *       *       *       *       *




5

JOHN'S THINGS


Here are some of John's things, mainly letters to the Old Man.
California called hard for the recent winter, and I went out a few
weeks ahead of the Stonestudy outfit. John intended to follow within
three weeks, but overturned a kettle of boiling water in his lap, and
was unable to leave his quarters for three times that period. We all
learned better the hard lesson--to wait. The quoted word "Play" in his
first letter refers to a little slip of paper which I had pasted upon
my typewriter. There has been a big tendency in recent months, in my
case, to let down all tension in relation to literary production--the
idea being that when one has learned all the laws he is capable of, the
time is at hand when it is well to forget them. I have written several
times throughout this book of an ideal emergence of Workman into
Player. We learn many laws, to learn at last that there are none. We
come up through many slaveries to freedom.... I have not corrected all
the spelling in John's documents. The point most interesting is how the
real voice breaks through the mind of a child of nine from time to time.

    DEAR YOUNERVERS[4] PAL:

    We got your letter but it was not like you for it was not
    type-written. Your old machine here is going grand. I am using it
    now. It seems that I am with you all the time. _Comrad_ has meant a
    lot the last four days to me. Comrad is everything in the New Race.
    Masters will be comrads with every one.

    That "Play" has it all, on your machine. "Play" is in all
    somewhere. It is all like a big page and everything is woven on it.
    There is a time when Comrads hafto go apart for a little while, but
    not long. Their thoughts never go apart. They are always pulling
    together, always weaving in thoughts and things that are the same.
    It is wounderful--a parting. No sadness over it. It is the best
    that could come, or it would not. We are held together. The pull of
    the world is nothing to us.

    It is hard to keep high, but we will. Fred[5] and I take a swim
    every day. I go a hundred and fifty feet. Then we come up and rub
    each other.

    True Comrads have it all. Love from Comrad to Comrad.

    [4] Universe.

    [5] The Abbot.



    PAL:

    I woke up this morning kind of blurred, and got Irving and Steve to
    come out and clean up the barn. They came and we worked there all
    morning, and then went in for a swim. It was wounderful, the feel I
    had when I got some clean clothes on and had the old dog[6] feeling
    good. He is meditating over what a wounderful world it is now. The
    stall smells sweet as a hay-stack.

    Fred just got here and is working at your desk.

    How was your morning? I never had a better one, and its the weary
    old Sabbath, too.

    Send for me soon now. It seems that it was a year since we have
    been together. We can not do without each other. Send for me
    _Soon_. I hold my hand high to you.

    [6] The saddle horse.


    DEAR OLD MAGIC FATH:

    I am at Steve's desk in the guest room. It is the first time that
    I have touched the keys of a type writer since the night I was
    berned. It sure does feel good.

    It has been much more wonderful to hafto have Patience for the
    Meeting. It will be twice as great for both. I have needed you so
    since I have been in bed. In pane and sicknes there is nothing that
    you need so much as your Comrad.

    I felt palms up to everything. It is all good. We love it all. It
    all was something for us to get. It puts us higher after something
    comes to us like that.

    I have all the pores poring out love to you. We are always together.

    YOUR SIDE KIKER.


    DEAR OLD PAL:

    Fred and I slept again in the Study. It looked like a storm last
    night, but it did not come. Fred is a real Comrad. I got to his
    heart last night. I do not know how. The roses have been wounderful
    the last few days.

    How is wounderful Mary? We are all sending Thoughts to you. We have
    had wounderful full days lately, all heat. The town is howling
    for rain now; they are never satisfied. We are always ready for
    anything. It is the best. Our wounderful old mailtrain just crossed
    the magic lane. I love trains more and more. They have a pull to my
    heart. We love everything.

    I do not feel on erth. I feel in space. Out of the draw of the
    erth--_Free_.

    Love always in my heart for you. I hold hard for the time that
    Comrads pull together again for the road, us two. Jane is at my
    hump all the time--so I will quit.


    DEAR OLD COMRAD:

    We are close this morning. I can feel your warm wounderful hand in
    mine this morning. We are one. There is the holy breath--such a
    great pull of thoughts and work to California. It seems as if all
    the Comrads were calling me there. Then I hafto think of the one
    thing--_Patience_. When you have mastered Patience, you are free.
    All well here. My sores are getting better fast. I have wanted to
    work lots lately, since I was in bed, but I could not. I lost so
    many ideas in bed. Beds are a curse. I love you, Comrad. We need to
    be together.

    YOUR OLD PAL.


    SUNLIGHT PAL:

    A wounderful sun. A little late in getting up. The sun was out
    full--a wounderful breakfast and a wounderful bowl of roses.

    Every morning gets greater. The coming together again gets closer.
    Separation is a great thing! You find that when it comes. It will
    be so big and wounderful to come together on the shores of the sea.
    The trains on the Pere Marquette line have a draw to my heart; the
    whistle is so wounderful.... To have a bath in the salt water and
    not in old Lake Erie.... It was another wounderful night with
    Fred. He has done so much for me this time that we have been away
    from each other.

    He is so wounderful if you can get to him. I think I have got right
    to him to the heart. I am awful lonesome for you and the sea.

    I walked to the train track with Fred this morning. It was like the
    day you were going away. I felt it was nearing the last walk up the
    old Lane. Fred has the same feel. It swept over us--a free feel; it
    was almost too much.

    How is your Sisity-list coming? Mine is great. It is hard to get
    along without you here. Old Abe was drafted, and we don't know when
    we will see him. The sea and sunlight sweeping in the open door of
    your work room! We will sure have some grand times. We will get
    horses and have some more of them Moonlight rides. It will be great
    to hit the old _Tie path_ Itself--with the[7] Welcome Mulligan
    and the[8] Onerbel Chas. Lipton under our arms. The smell of the
    burning bark and a caben in the Rockies! Oh, the open road. Life is
    Life on the old Road.

    That canyon must be a wounder, and the sea and the misty mountains
    and the brown hills. You have it all. Oh man, that is the country
    for everything.

    I keep high for our meeting, Comrad of the Road.

    [7] Frying Pan.

    [8] Teapot.


PROSE SETTINGS


I

THE RED SUNSET.

The red sunset Died away like the close of a forest fire.

The Dusk ran through the mountains like a scarf of blue.

The Moon and old Jupiter took the Open Road together.

The others came out of the everlasting Blue Deeps.


