LETTER XI


 Concerning the game which we should call “Locusts,” and the
 deeper significance of its acts. The solicitous warning of
 one passing inwards and the complication occasioned by his
 ill-chosen words. Concerning that victory already dimly
 foreshadowed.


Venerated Sire,--This barbarian game of agile grass-hoppers is not
conducted in the best spirit of a really well-balanced display, and
although the one now inscribing his emotions certainly achieved a wide
popularity, and wore his fig leaves with becoming modesty, he has never
since been quite free from an overhanging doubt that the compliments and
genial remarks with which he was assailed owed their modulation to an
unsubstantial atmosphere of two-edged significance which for a period
enveloped all whom he approached; as in the faces of maidens concealed
behind fans when he passed, the down-drawn lips and up-raised eyes
of those of fuller maturity, the practice in most of his own kind
of turning aside, pressing their hands about their middle parts, and
bending forward into a swollen attitude devoid of grace, on the spur of
a sudden remembrance, and in the auspicious but undeniably embarrassing
manner in which all the unfledged ones of the village clustered about
his retiring footsteps, saluting him continually as one “James,” upon
whom had been conferred the gratifying title of “Sunny.” Thus may the
outline of the combat be recounted.

From each opposing group eleven were chosen as a band, and we of our
company putting on a robe of distinctive green (while they elected to
be regarded as an assemblage of brown crickets), we presently came to a
suitable spot where the trial was to be decided. So far this person
had reasonably assumed that at a preconcerted signal the contest would
begin, all rising into the air together, uttering cries of menace,
bounding unceasingly and in every way displaying the dexterity of our
proportions. Indeed, in the reasonableness of this expectation it cannot
be a matter for reproach to one of the green grass-hoppers--who need not
be further indicated--that he had already begun a well-simulated note
of challenge to those around clad in brown, and to leap upwards in
a preparatory essay, when the ever-alert Sir Philip took him
affectionately by the arm, on the plea that the seclusion of a
neighbouring pavilion afforded a desirable shade.

Beyond that point it is difficult to convey an accurately grouped and
fully spread-out design of the encounter. In itself the scheme and
intention of counterfeiting the domestic life and rivalries of two
opposing bands of insects was pleasantly conceived, and might have been
carried out with harmonious precision, but, after the manner of these
remote tribes, the original project had been overshadowed and the purity
of the imagination lost beneath a mass of inconsistent detail. To
this imperfection must it be laid that when at length this person was
recalled from the obscurity of the pagoda and the alluring society of
a maiden of the village, to whom he was endeavouring to expound the
strategy of the game, and called upon to engage actively in it, he
courteously admitted to those who led him forth that he had not the most
shadowy-outlined idea of what was required of him.

Nevertheless they bound about his legs a frilled armour, ingeniously
fashioned to represent the ribbed leanness of the insect’s shank,
encased his hands and feet in covers to a like purpose, and pressing
upon him a wooden club indicated that the time had come for him to
prove his merit by venturing alone into the midst of the eleven brown
adversaries who stood at a distance in poised and expectant attitudes.

Assuredly, benignant one, this sport of contending locusts began, as one
approached nearer to it, to wear no more pacific a face than if it had
been a carnage of the hurl-headlong or the curved-hook varieties. In
such a competition, it occurred to him, how little deference would be
paid to this one’s title of “Established Genius,” or how inadequately
would he be protected by his undoubted capacity of leaping upwards,
and even in a sideway direction, for no matter how vigorously he
might propel himself, or how successfully he might endeavour to remain
self-sustained in the air, the ill-destined moment could not be long
deferred when he must come down again into the midst of the eleven--all
doubtless concealing weapons as massive and fatally-destructive as his
own. This prospect, to a person of quiescent taste, whose chief
delight lay in contemplating the philosophical subtleties of the higher
Classics, was in itself devoid of glamour, but with what funereal
pigments shall he describe his sinking emotions when one of his own
band, approaching him as he went, whispered in his ear, “Look out at
this end; they kick up like the very devil. And their man behind the
wicket is really smart; if you give him half a chance he’ll have
your stumps down before you can say ‘knife.’” Shorn of its uncouth
familiarity, this was a charitable warning that they into whose
stronghold I was turning my footsteps--perhaps first deceiving my
alertness with a proffered friendship--would kick with the ferocity of
untamed demons, and that one in particular, whose description, to my
added despair, I was unable to retain, was known to possess a formidable
knife, with which it was his intention to cut off this person’s legs at
the first opportunity, before he could be accused of the act. Truly, “To
one whom he would utterly destroy Buddha sends a lucky dream.”

Behind lay the pagoda (though the fact that this one did admittedly turn
round for a period need not be too critically dwelt upon), with three
tiers of maidens, some already waving their hands as an encouraging
token; on each side a barrier of prickly growth inopportunely presented
itself, while in front the eleven kicking crickets stood waiting, and
among them lurked the one grasping a doubly-edged blade of a highly
proficient keenness.

There are occasional moments in the life of a person when he has the
inward perception of retiring for a few paces and looking back in order
to consider his general appearance and to judge how he is situated
with regard to himself, to review his past life in a spirit of judicial
severity, to arrange definitely upon a future composed entirely of acts
of benevolence, and to examine the working of destiny at large. In such
a scrutiny I now began to understand that it would perhaps have been
more harmonious to my love of contemplative repose if I had considered
the disadvantages closer before venturing into this barbarian region,
or, at least, if I had used the occasion profitably to advance an
argument tending towards a somewhat fuller allowance of taels from your
benevolent sleeve. Our own virtuous and flower-strewn land, it is true,
does not possess an immunity from every trifling drawback. The Hoang
Ho--to concede specifically the existence of some of these--frequently
bursts through its restraining barriers and indiscriminately sweeps
away all those who are so ill-advised as to dwell within reach of its
malignant influence. From time to time wars and insurrections are found
to be necessary, and no matter how morally-intentioned and humanely
conducted, they necessarily result in the violation, dismemberment or
extirpation of many thousand polite and dispassionate persons who have
no concern with either side. Towns are repeatedly consumed by fire,
districts scourged by leprosy, and provinces swept by famine. The storms
are admittedly more fatal than elsewhere, the thunderbolts larger, more
numerous, and all unerringly directed, while the extremities of heat and
cold render life really uncongenial for the greater part of each year.
The poor, having no money to secure justice, are evilly used, whereas
the wealthy, having too much, are assailed legally by the gross
and powerful for the purpose of extorting their riches. Robbers and
assassins lurk in every cave; vast hoards of pirates blacken the surface
of every river; and mandarins of the nine degrees must make a livelihood
by some means or other. By day, therefore, it is inadvisable to go forth
and encounter human beings, while none but the shallow-headed would risk
a meeting with the countless demons and vampires which move by night. To
one who has spent many moons among these foreign apparitions the absence
of drains, roads, illustrated message-parchments, maidens whose voices
may be heard protesting upon ringing a wire, loaves of conflicting
dimensions, persons who strive to put their faces upon every
advertisement, pens which emit fountains when carried in the pocket,
a profusion of make-strong foods, and an Encyclopaedia Mongolia, may
undoubtedly be mentioned as constituting a material deficiency. Affairs
are not being altogether reputably conducted during the crisis; it can
never be quite definitely asserted what the next action of the versatile
and high-spirited Dowager Empress will be; and here it is freely
contended that the Pure and Immortal Empire is incapable of remaining
in one piece for much longer. These, and other inconveniences of a like
nature, which the fastidious might distort into actual hardships, have
never been denied, yet at no period of the nine thousand years of our
civilisation has it been the custom to lure out the unwary, on the plea
of an agreeable entertainment, and then to abandon him into the society
of eleven club-bearing adversaries, one of whom may be depicted as in
the act of imparting an unnecessary polish to the edge of his already
preternaturally acute weapon, while those of his own band offer no
protection, and three tiers of very richly-dressed maidens encourage him
to his fate by refined gestures of approval.

Doubtless this person had unconsciously allowed his inner meditations
to carry him away, as it may be expressed, for when he emerged from this
strain of reverie it was to discover himself in the chariot-road and--so
incongruously may be the actions when the controlling intelligence is
withdrawn--even proceeding at a somewhat undignified pace in a direction
immediately opposed to an encounter with the brown locusts. From
this mortifying position he was happily saved by emerging from these
thought-dreams before it was too late to return, and, also, if the
detail is not too insignificant to be related, by the fact that certain
chosen runners from his own company had reached a point in the road
before him, and now stood joining their outstretched arms across the
passage and raising gravity-dispelling cries. Smiling acquiescently,
therefore, this person returned in their midst, and receiving a new
weapon, his own club having been absent-mindedly mislaid, he again set
forth warily to the encounter.

Yet in this he did not altogether neglect a discreet prudence. The
sympathetic person to whom he was indebted for the pointed allusion had
specifically declared that they who used their feet with the desperate
savagery of baffled spectres guarded the nearer limits of their
position, the intention of his timely hint assuredly being that I should
seek to approach from the opposite end, where, doubtless, the more
humane and conciliatory grass-hoppers were assembled. Thus guided I now
set forth in a widely-circuitous direction, having the point where I
meant to open an attack clearly before my eyes, yet seeking to deliver
a more effective onslaught by reaching it to some extent unperceived and
to this end creeping forward in the protecting shadow of the long grass
and untrimmed herbage.

Whether the one already referred to had incapably failed to express his
real meaning, or whether he was tremulous by nature and inordinately
self-deficient, concerns the narration less than the fact that he had
admittedly produced a state of things largely in excess of the actual.
There is no longer any serviceable pretext for maintaining that
those guarding any point of their position were other than mild and
benevolent, while the only edged weapon displayed was one courteously
produced to aid this person’s ineffectual struggles to extricate himself
when, by some obscure movement, he had most ignobly entangled his
pigtail about the claws of his sandal.

Ignorant of this, the true state of things, I was still advancing subtly
when one wearing the emblems of our band appeared from among the brown
insects and came towards me. “Courage!” I exclaimed in a guarded tone,
raising my head cautiously and rejoiced to find that I should not be
alone. “Here is one clad in green bearing succour, who will, moreover,
obstinately defend his stumps to the last extremity.”

“That’s right,” replied the opportune person agreeably; “we need a few
like that. But do get up on your hind legs and come along, there’s a
good fellow. You can play at bears in the nursery when we get back, if
you want.”

Certainly one can simulate the movements of wild animals in a
market-garden if the impersonation is thought to be desirable, yet
the reasonable analogy of the saying is elusive in the extreme, and
I followed the ally who had thus betrayed my presence with a deep-set
misgiving although in the absence of a more trustworthy guide, and in
the suspicion that some point of my every ordinary strategy had been
inept, I was compelled to mould myself identically into his advice.

Scarcely had he left me, and I was endeavouring to dispel any idea of
treachery towards those about by actions of graceful courtesy, when
one--unworthy of burial--standing a score of paces distant, (to whom,
indeed, this person was at the moment bowing with almost passionate
vehemence, inspired by the conviction that he, for his part, was
engaged in a like attention,) suddenly cast a missile--which, somewhat
double-facedly, he had hitherto held concealed in his closed hand--with
undeviating force and accuracy. So unexpected was the movement,
so painfully-impressed the vindictive contact, that I should have
instinctively seized the offensively-directed object and contemptuously
hurled it back again, if the consequence of the blow had not deprived
my mind of all retaliatory ambitions. In this emergency was manifested
a magnanimous act worthy of the incense of a poem, for a person standing
immediately by, seeing how this one was balanced in his emotions, picked
up the missile, and although one of the foremost of the opposing band,
very obligingly flung it back at the assailant. Even an outcast would
not have passed this without a suitable tribute, and turning to him,
I was remarking appreciatively that men were not divided by seas and
wooden barriers, but by the unchecked and conflicting lusts of the mind,
when the unclean and weed-nurtured traitor twenty paces distant, taking
a degraded advantage from this person’s attitude, again propelled his
weapon with an even more concentrated perfidy than before. At this new
outrage every brown cricket shrank from the attitude of alert vigour
which hitherto he had maintained, and as though to disassociate
themselves from the stain of complicity all crossed over and took up new
positions.

Up to this point, majestic head, in order to represent the adventure
in its proper sequence, it has been advisable to present the details as
they arose before the eyes of a reliable and dispassionate gazer. Now,
however, it is no less seemly to declare that this barbarian sport
of leaping insects is not so discreditably shallow as it had at first
appeared, while in every action there may be found an apt but hidden
symbol. Thus the presence of the two green locusts in the midst of
others of a dissimilar nature represents the unending strife by which
even the most pacific are ever surrounded. The fragile erection of
sticks (behind which this person at first sought to defend himself
until led into a more exposed position by one garbed in white,) may be
regarded as the home and altar, and adequately depicts the hollowness
of the protection it affords and the necessity of reliantly emerging to
defy an invader rather than lurking discreditably among its recesses.
The missile is the equivalent of a precise and immediate danger, the
wooden club the natural instinct for defence with which all living
creatures are endowed, so that when the peril is for the time driven
away the opportunity is at hand for the display of virtuous amusements,
the exchanging of hospitality, and the beating of professional drums as
we would say. Thus, at the next attack the one sharing the enterprise
with me struck the missile so proficiently that its recovery engaged the
attention of all our adversaries, and then began to exhibit his powers
by running and leaping towards me. Recognising that the actual moment of
the display had arrived, this person at once emitted a penetrating cry
of concentrated challenge, and also began to leap upwards and about,
and with so much energy that the highly achieved limits of his flight
surprised even himself.

As for the bystanders, esteemed, those who opposed us, and the members
of our own band, although this leaping sportiveness is a competition
more regarded and practised among all orders than the pursuit of
commercial eminence, or even than the allurements of the sublimest
Classics, it may be truly imagined that never before had they witnessed
so remarkable a game cricket. From the pagoda a loud cry of wonder
acclaimed the dexterity of this person’s efforts; the three tiers of
maidens climbed one upon another in their anxiety to lose no detail of
the adventure, and outstanders from distant points began to assemble.
The brown enemy at once abandoned themselves to a panic, and for the
most part cast themselves incapably to the ground, rolling from side to
side in an access of emotion; the two arbiters clad in white conferred
together, doubtless on the uselessness of further contest, while the
ally who had summoned me to take a part instead of being encouraged to
display his agility in a like manner continued to run slavishly from
point to point, while I overcame the distances in a series of inspired
bounds.

In the meanwhile the sounds of encouragement from the ever-increasing
multitude grew like the falling of a sudden coast storm among the ripe
leaves of a tea-plantation, and with them the voices of many calling
upon my name and inciting me to further and even higher achievements
reached my ears. Not to grow small in the eyes of these estimable
persons I continued in my flight, and abandoning all set movements and
limits, I began to traverse the field in every direction, becoming more
proficient with each effort, imparting to myself a sideway and even
backward motion while yet in the upper spaces, remaining poised for an
appreciable period, and lightly, yet with graceful ease, avoiding the
embraces of those who would have detained me. Undoubtedly I could have
maintained this supremacy until our band might justly have claimed the
reward, had not the flattering cries of approval caused an indiscreet
mistake, for the alarm being spread in the village that a conflagration
of imposing ferocity was raging, an ornamental chariot conveying a band
of warriors clad in brass armour presently entered into the strife, and
discovering no fire to occupy their charitable energies they misguidedly
honoured this offensive person by propelling a solid column of the
purest and most refreshing water against his ignoble body when at the
point of his highest flight. This introduction of a thunderbolt into the
everyday life of an insect must be of questionable authenticity, yet
not feeling sufficiently instructed in the lesser details of the
sportiveness to challenge the device, I suffered myself to be led
towards the pavilion with no more struggling than enough to remove the
ignominy of an unresisting surrender, pleasantly remarking to those
who bore me along that to a person of philosophical poise the written
destiny was as apparent in the falling leaf as in the rising sun,
pointing the saying thus: “Although the Desert of Shan-tz is boundless,
and mankind number a million million, yet in it Li-hing encountered his
mother-in-law.” Changing to meet another of our company setting forth
with a club to make the venture, I was permitted for a moment to
engage him; whereupon thrusting into his hand a leather charm against
ill-directed efforts, and instructing him to bind it about his head, I
encouraged him with the imperishable watch-word of the Emperor Tsin Su,
“The stars are indeed small, but their light carries as far as that of
the full moon.”

At the steps of the pagoda so great was the throng of those who would
have overwhelmed me with their gracious attention, that had not this
person’s neck become practically automatic by ceaseless use of late, he
would have been utterly unequal to the emergency. As it was, he could
only bestow a superficial hand-wave upon a company of gold-embroidered
musicians who greeted his return with appropriate melody, and a glance
of well-indicated regret that he had no fuller means of conveying his
complicated emotions, in the direction of the uppermost tier of maidens.
Then the awaiting Sir Philip took him firmly towards the inner part of
the pavilion, and announced, so adroitly and with such high-spirited
vigour had this one maintained the conflict, that it had been resolutely
agreed on all sides not to make a test of his competence any further.

Thereupon a band of very sumptuously arrayed nymphs drew near with
offerings of liquid fat and a variety of crimson fruit, which it is
customary to grind together on the platter--unapproachable in the
result, certainly, yet incredibly elusive to the unwary in the manner of
bruising, and practically ineradicable upon the more delicate shades
of silk garment. In such a situation the one who is now relating the
various incidents of the day may be imagined by a broad-minded and
affectionate sire: partaking of this native fruit and oil, and from time
to time expressing his insatiable anguish that he continually fails
to become more proficient in controlling the oblique movements of the
viands, while the less successful crickets are constrained to persevere
in the combat, and the ever-present note of evasive purport is raised
by a voice from behind a screen exclaiming, “Out afore? That he may have
been, but do he think we was a-going to give he out afore? No, maaster,
us doant a-have a circus every day hereabouts.”

Thus may this imagination of competitive locusts be set forth to
the end. If a fuller proof of what an unostentatious self-effacement
hesitates to enlarge upon were required, it might be found in the
barbarian printed leaf, for the next day this person saw a public record
of the strife, in which his own name was followed by a numerical emblem
signifying that he had not stumbled or proved incompetent in any one
particular. Sir Philip, I beheld with pained surprise, had obtusely
suffered himself to be caught out in the committal of fifty-nine set
offences.

With a not unnatural anticipation that, as a result of this painstaking
description, this person will find two well-equipped camps of contending
locusts in Yuen-ping on his return.

                                     KONG HO.




