LETTER XII


 Concerning the obvious misunderstanding which has entwined
 itself about a revered parent’s faculties of passionless
 discrimination. The all-water disportment and the two, of
 different sexes, who after regarding me conflictingly from
 the beginning, ended in a like but inverted manner.


Venerated Sire,--Your gem-adorned letter containing a thousand burnished
words of profuse reproach has entered my diminished soul in the form
of an equal number of rusty barbs. Can it be that the incapable
person whom, as you truly say, you sent, “to observe the philosophical
subtleties of the barbarians, to study their dynastical records and to
associate liberally with the venerable and dignified,” has, in your
own unapproachable felicity of ceremonial expression, “according to
a discreet whisper from many sources, chiefly affected the society of
tea-house maidens, the immature of both sexes, doubtful characters of
all classes, and criminals awaiting trial; has evinced an unswerving
affinity towards light amusement and entertainments of a no-class kind;
and in place of a wise aloofness, befitting a wearer of the third Gold
Button and the Horn Belt-clasp, in situations of critical perplexity,
seems by his own ingenuous showing to have maintained an unparalleled
aptitude for behaving either with the crystalline simplicity of a
Kan-su earth-tiller, or the misplaced buffoonery of a seventh-grade
body-writher taking the least significant part in an ill-equipped Swatow
one-cash Hall of Varied Melodies.” Assuredly, if your striking and
well-chosen metaphors were not more unbalanced than the ungainly
attitude of a one-legged hunchback crossing a raging torrent by means
of a slippery plank on a stormy night, they would cause the very acutest
bitterness to the throat of a dutiful and always high-stepping son.
There is an apt saying, however, “A quarrel between two soldiers in the
market-place becomes a rebellion in the outskirts,” and when this person
remembers that many thousand li of mixed elements flow between him and
his usually correct and dispassionate sire, he is impelled to take a
mild and tolerant attitude towards the momentary injustice brought about
by the weakness of approaching old age, the vile-intentioned mendacity
of outcasts envious of the House of Kong, and, perchance, the irritation
brought on by a too lavish indulgence in your favourite dish of stewed
mouse.

Having thus re-established himself in the clear-sighted affection of an
ever mild and perfect father, and cleansed the ground of all possible
misunderstandings in the future, this person will concede the fact that,
not to stand beneath the faintest shadow of an implied blemish in your
sympathetic eyes, he had no sooner understood the attitude in which he
had been presented than he at once plunged into the virtuous society of
a band of the sombre and benevolent.

These, so far as his intelligence enables him to grasp the position,
may be reasonably accepted as the barbarian equivalent of those very
high-minded persons who in our land devote their whole lives secretly
to killing others whom they consider the chief deities do not really
approve of; for although they are not permitted here, either by written
law or by accepted custom, to perform these meritorious actions, they
are so intimately initiated into the minds and councils of the Upper
Ones that they are able to pronounce very severe judgments of torture--a
much heavier penalty than merely being assassinated--upon all who remain
outside their league. As some of the most objurgatory of these alliances
do not number more than a score of persons, it is inevitable that the
ultimate condition of the whole barbarian people must be hazardous in
the extreme.

Having associated myself with this class sufficiently to escape their
vindictive pronouncements, and freely professed an unswerving adherence
to their rites, I next sought out the priests of other altars, intending
by a seemly avowal to each in turn to safeguard my future existence
effectually. This I soon discovered to be beyond the capacity of an
ordinary lifetime, for whereas we, with four hundred million subjects
find three religions to be sufficient to meet every emergency, these
irresolute island children, although numbering us only as one to ten,
vacillate among three hundred; and even amid this profusion it is
asserted that most of the barbarians are unable to find any temple
exactly conforming to their requirements, and after writing to the paper
to announce the fact, abandon the search in despair.

It was while I was becoming proficient in the inner subtleties of one
of these orders--they who drink water on all occasions and wear a
badge--that a maiden of some authority among them besought my aid for
the purpose of amusing a band which she was desirous of propitiating
into the adoption of this badge. It is possible that in the immature
confidence of former letters this person may already have alluded to
certain maidens with words of courteous esteem, but it is now necessary
to admit finally that in the presence of this same Helena they would
all appear as an uninviting growth of stunted and deformed poppies
surrounding a luxuriant chrysanthemum. At the presumptuous thought of
describing her illimitable excellences my fingers become claw-like in
their confessed inadequacy to hold a sufficiently upright brush; yet
without undue confidence it may be set down that her hands resembled the
two wings of a mandarin drake in their symmetrical and changing motion,
her hair as light and radiant-pointed as the translucent incense cloud
floating before the golden Buddha of Shan-Si, thin white satin stretched
tightly upon polished agate only faintly comparable to her jade cheeks,
while her eyes were more unfathomable than the crystal waters of the
Keng-kiang, and within their depths her pure and magnanimous thoughts
could be dimly seen to glide like the gold and silver carp beneath the
sacred river.

When this insurpassable being approached me with the flattering
petition already alluded to, my gratified emotions clashed together
uncontrollably with the internal feeling of many volcanoes in movement,
and my organs of expression became so entangled at the condescension of
her melodious voice being directly addressed to one so degraded, that
for several minutes I was incapable of further acquiescence than that
conveyed by an adoring silence and an unchanging smile. No formality
appeared worthy to greet her by, no expression of self-contempt
sufficiently offensive to convey to her enlightenment my own sense of
a manifold inferiority, and doubtless I should have remained in a
transfixed attitude until she had at length turned aside, had not your
seasonable reference to a Swatow limb-contorter struck me heavily and
abruptly turned off the source of my agreement. Might not this all-water
entertainment, it occurred to this one, consist in enticing him to drink
a potion made unsuspectedly hot, in projecting him backwards into a vat
of the same liquid, or some similar device for the pleasurable amusement
of those around, which would come within the boundaries of your refined
disapproval? As one by himself there was no indignity that this person
would not cheerfully have submitted to, but the inexorable cords of an
ingrained filial regard suddenly pulled him sideways and into another
direction.

“But, Mr. Kong,” exclaimed the bee-lipped maiden, when I had explained
(as being less involved to her imagination,) that I was under a vow,
“we have been relying upon you. Could you not”--and here she dropped her
eyes and picked them up again with a fluttering motion which our lesser
ones are, to an all-wise end, quite unacquainted with--“could you not
unvow yourself for one night, just to please ME?”

At these words, the illuminated proficiency of her glance, and her
honourable resolution to implicate me in the display by head or feet,
the ever-revered image of a just and obedience-loving father ceased to
have any further tangible influence. Let it be remembered that there
is a deep saying, “A virtuous woman will cause more evil than ten river
pirates.” As for the person who is recording his incompetence, the room
and all those about began to engulf him in an ever-increasing circular
motion, his knees vibrated together with unrestrained pliancy, and
concentrating his voice to indicate by the allegory some faint measure
of his emotion, he replied passionately, “Let the amusement referred to
take the form of sitting in a boiling cauldron exposed to the derision
of all beholders, this one will now enter it wearing yellow silk
trousers.”


It is characteristic of these illogical out-countries that the all-water
diversion did not, as a matter to record, concern itself with that
liquid in any detail, beyond the contents of a glass vessel from which a
venerable person, who occupied a raised chair, continually partook. This
discriminating individual spoke so confidently of the beneficial action
of the fluid, and so unswervingly described my own feelings at the
moment--as of head giddiness, an inexactitude of speech, and no clear
definition of where the next step would be arrived at--as the common
lot of all who did not consume regularly, that when that same Helena
had passed on to speak to another, I left the hall unobserved and drank
successive portions, in each case, as the night was cold, prudently
adding a measure of the native rice spirit. His advice had been
well-directed, for with the fourth portion I suddenly found all
doubtful and oppressive visions withdrawn, and a new and exhilarating
self-confidence raised in their place. In this agreeable temper I
returned to the place of meeting to find a priest of one of the lesser
orders relating a circumstance whereby he had encountered a wild maiden
in the woods, who had steadfastly persisted that she was one of a
band of seven (this being the luckiest protective number among the
superstitious). Though unable to cause their appearance, she had gone
through a most precise examination at his hands without deviating in the
slightest particular, whereupon distrusting the outcome of the strife,
the person who was relating the adventure had withdrawn breathless.

When this versatile lesser priest had finished the narration, and
the applause, which clearly showed that those present approved of the
solitary maiden’s discreet stratagem, had ceased, the one who occupied
the central platform, rising, exclaimed loudly, “Mr. Kong will next
favour us with a contribution, which will consist, I am informed, of a
Chinese tale.”

Now there chanced to be present a certain one who had already become
offensive to me by the systematic dexterity with which he had planted
his inopportune shadow between the sublime-souled Helena and any other
who made a movement to approach her heaven-dowered outline. When this
presumptuous and ill-nurtured outcast, who was, indeed, then seated
by the side of the enchanting maiden last referred to, heard the
announcement he said in a voice feigned to reach her peach-skin ear
alone, yet intentionally so modulated as to penetrate the furthest limit
of the room, “A Chinese tale! Why, assuredly, that must be a pig-tail.”
 At this unseemly shaft many of those present allowed themselves to
become immoderately amused, and even the goat-like sage who had
called upon my name concealed his face behind an open hand, but the
amiably-disposed Helena, after looking at the undiscriminating youth
coldly for a moment, deliberately rose and moved to a vacant spot at a
distance. Encouraged by this fragrant act of sympathy I replied with a
polite bow to indicate the position, “On the contrary, the story which
it is now my presumptuous intention to relate will contain no reference
whatever to the carefully-got-up one occupying two empty seats in the
front row,” and without further introduction began the history of Kao
and his three brothers, to which I had added the title, “The Three
Gifts.”

At the conclusion of this classical example of the snares ever lying
around the footsteps of the impious, I perceived that the jocular
stripling, whom I had so delicately reproved, was no longer present.
Doubtless he had been unable to remain in the same room with the
commanding Helena’s high-spirited indignation, and anticipating that in
consequence there would now be no obstacle to her full-faced benignity,
I drew near with an appropriate smile.

It is somewhere officially recorded, “There is only one man who knew
with accurate certainty what a maiden’s next attitude would be, and he
died young of surprise.” As I approached I had the sensation of passing
into so severe an atmosphere of rigid disfavour, that the ingratiating
lines upon my face became frozen in its intensity, despite the ineptness
of their expression. Unable to penetrate the cause of my offence, I
made a variety of agreeable remarks, until finding that nothing tended
towards a becoming reconciliation, I gradually withdrew in despair, and
again turned my face in the direction of that same accommodation which I
had already found beneath the sign of an Encompassed Goat. Here, by the
sarcasm of destiny, I encountered the person who had drawn the slighting
analogy between this one’s pig-tail and his ability as a story-teller.
For a brief space of time the ultimate development of the venture
was doubtfully poised, but recognising in each other’s features the
overhanging cloud of an allied pang, the one before me expressed a
becoming contrition for the jest, together with a proffered cup. Not to
appear out-classed I replied in a suitable vein, involving the supply
of more vessels; whereupon there succeeded many more vessels, called for
both singly and in harmonious unison, and the reappearance of numerous
bright images, accompanied by a universal scintillation of meteor-like
iridescence. In this genial and greatly-enlarged spirit we returned
affably together to the hall, and entered unperceived at the moment when
the one who made the announcements was crying aloud, “According to the
programme the next item should have been a Chinese poem, but as Mr. Kong
Ho appears to have left the building, we shall pass him over--”

“What Ho?” exclaimed the somewhat impetuous one by my side, stepping
forward indignantly and mounting the platform in his affectionate zeal.
“No one shall pass over my old and valued friend--this Ho--while I have
a paw to raise. Step forward, Mandarin, and let them behold the inventor
and sole user of the justly far-famed G. R. Ko-Ho hair restorer--sent in
five guinea bottles to any address on receipt of four penny stamps--as
he appeared in his celebrated impersonation of the human-faced Swan at
Doll and Edgar’s. Come on, oh, Ho!”

“Assuredly,” I replied, striving to follow him, “yet with the wary
greeting, ‘Slowly, slowly; walk slowly,’ engraved upon my mind, for the
barrier of these convoluted stairs--” but at this word a band of maidens
passed out hastily, and in the tumult I reached the dais and began
Weng Chi’s immortal verses, entitled “The Meandering Flight,” which had
occupied me three complete days and nights in the detail of rendering
the allusions into well-balanced similitudes and at the same time
preserving the skilful evasion of all conventional rules which raises
the original to so sublime a height.

   The voice of one singing at the dawn;
   The seven harmonious colours in the sky;
   The meeting by the fountain;
   The exchange of gifts, and the sound of the processional drum;
   The emotion of satisfaction in each created being;
   This is the all-prominent indication of the Spring.
   
   The general disinclination to engage in laborious tasks;
   The general readiness to consume voluminous potions on any pretext.
   The deserted appearance of the city and the absence of the come-in motion at every door;
   The sportiveness of maidens, and even those of maturer age, ethereally clad, upon the shore.
   The avowed willingness of merchants to dispose of their wares for half the original sum.
   This undoubtedly is the Summer.
   
   The yellow tea leaf circling as it falls;
   The futile wheeling of the storm-tossed swan;
   The note of the marble lute at evening by the pool;
   The immobile cypress seen against the sun.
   The unnecessarily difficult examination paper.
   All these things are suggestive of the Autumn.
   
   The growing attraction of a well-lined couch.
   The obsequious demeanour of message-bearers, charioteers, and the club-armed keepers of peace.
   The explosion of innumerable fire-crackers round the convivial shrines,
   The gathering together of relations who at all other times shun each other markedly.
   The obtrusive recollection of a great many things contrary to a spoken vow, and the inflexible purpose to be more resolute in future.
   These in turn invariably attend each Winter.

It certainly had not presented itself to me before that the words
“invariably attend” are ill-chosen, but as I would have uttered them
their inelegance became plain, and this person made eight conscientious
attempts to soften down their harsh modulation by various interchanges.
He was still persevering hopefully when he of chief authority approached
and requested that the one who was thus employed and that same other
would leave the hall tranquilly, as the all-water entertainment was
at an end, and an attending slave was in readiness to extinguish the
lanterns.

“Yet,” I protested unassumingly, “that which has so far been expressed
is only in the semblance of an introductory ode. There follow--”

“You must not argue with the Chair,” exclaimed another interposing his
voice. “Whatever the Chair rules must be accepted.”

“The innuendo is flat-witted,” I replied with imperturbable dignity, but
still retaining my hold upon the rail. “When this person so far loses
his sense of proportion as to contend with an irrational object, devoid
of faculties, let the barb be cast. After that introduction dealing with
the four seasons, the twelve gong-strokes of the day are reviewed in a
like fashion. These in turn give place to the days of the month, then
the moons of the year, and finally the years of the cycle.”

“That’s fair,” exclaimed the perverse though well-meaning youth, whom I
was beginning to recognise as the cause of some misunderstanding among
us. “If you don’t want any more of his poem--and I don’t blame you--my
pal Ho, who is one of the popular Flip-Flap Troupe, offers to do some
trick cycle-riding on his ears. What more can you expect?”

“We expect a policeman very soon,” replied another severely. “He has
already been sent for.”

“In that case,” said the one who had so persistently claimed me as
an ally, “perhaps I can do you a service by directing him here”; and
leaving this person to extricate himself by means of a reassuring
silence and some of the larger silver pieces of the Island, he vanished
hastily.

With some doubt whether or not this deviation into the society of the
professedly virtuous, ending as it admittedly does in an involvement,
may not be deemed ill-starred; yet hopeful.

                                     KONG HO.




 THE THREE GIFTS


 Related by Kong Ho on the occasion of the all-water
 disportment, under the circumstances previously set forth.

BEYOND the limits of the township of Yang-chow there dwelt a rich
astrologer named Wei. Reading by his skilful interpretation of the
planets that he would shortly Pass Above, he called his sons Chu, Shan,
and Hing to his side and distributed his wealth impartially among them.
To Chu he gave his house containing a gold couch; to Shan a river with
a boat; to Hing a field in which grew a prolific orange-tree. “Thus
provided for,” he continued, “you will be able to live together in
comfort, the resources of each supplying the wants of the others in
addition to his own requirements. Therefore when I have departed let it
be your first care to sacrifice everything else I leave, so that I also,
in the Upper Air, may not be left destitute.”

Now in addition to these three sons Wei also had another, the youngest,
but one of so docile, respectful, and self-effacing a disposition that
he was frequently overlooked to the advantage of his subtle, ambitious,
and ingratiating brothers. This youth, Kao, thinking that the occasion
certainly called for a momentary relaxation of his usual diffidence,
now approached his father modestly, and begged that he also might be
included to some trivial degree in his bounty.

This reasonable petition involved Wei in an embarrassing perplexity.
Although he had forgotten Kao completely in the division, he had now
definitely concluded the arrangement; nor, to his failing powers, did it
appear possible to make a just allotment on any other lines. “How can a
person profitably cut up an orange-tree, a boat, an inlaid couch, or
a house?” he demanded. “Who can divide a flowing river, or what but
unending strife can arise from regarding an open field in anything
but its entirety? Assuredly six cohesive objects cannot be apportioned
between four persons.” Yet he could not evade the justice of Kao’s
implied rebuke, so drawing to his side a jade cabinet he opened it, and
from among the contents he selected an ebony staff, a paper umbrella,
and a fan inscribed with a mystical sentence. These three objects he
placed in Kao’s hands, and with his last breath signified that he should
use them discreetly as the necessity arose.

When the funeral ceremonies were over, Chu, Shan, and Hing came
together, and soon moulded their covetous thoughts into an agreed
conspiracy. “Of what avail would be a boat or a river if this person
sacrificed the nets and appliances by which the fish are ensnared?”
 asked Shan. “How little profit would lie in an orange-tree and a field
without cattle and the implements of husbandry!” cried Hing. “One cannot
occupy a gold couch in an empty house both by day and night,” remarked
Chu stubbornly. “How inadequate, therefore, would such a provision be
for three.”

When Kao understood that his three brothers had resolved to act in this
outrageous manner he did not hesitate to reproach them; but not being
able to contend against him honourably, they met him with ridicule.
“Do not attempt to rule us with your wooden staff,” they cried
contemptuously. “Sacrifice IT if your inside is really sincere. And,
in the meanwhile, go and sit under your paper umbrella and wield
your inscribed fan, while we attend to our couch, our boat, and our
orange-tree.”

“Truly,” thought Kao to himself when they had departed, “their words
were irrationally offensive, but among them there may stand out a
pointed edge. Our magnanimous father is now bereft of both comforts
and necessities, and although an ebony rod is certainly not much in the
circumstances, if this person is really humanely-intentioned he will not
withhold it.” With this charitable design Kao build a fire before the
couch (being desirous, out of his forgiving nature, to associate his
eldest brother in the offering), and without hesitation sacrificed the
most substantial of his three possessions.

It here becomes necessary to explain that in addition to being an expert
astrologer, Wei was a far-seeing magician. The rod of unimpressionable
solidity was in reality a charm against decay, and its hidden virtues
being thus destroyed, a contrary state of things naturally arose, so
that the next morning it was found that during the night the gold couch
had crumbled away into a worthless dust.

Even this manifestation did not move the three brothers, although the
geniality of Shan and Hing’s countenances froze somewhat towards Chu.
Nevertheless Chu still possessed a house, and by pointing out that they
could live as luxuriantly as before on the resources of the river and
the field and the tree, he succeeded in maintaining his position among
them.

After seven days Kao reflected again. “This avaricious person still has
two objects, both of which he owes to his revered father’s imperishable
influence,” he admitted conscience-stricken, “while the being in
question has only one.” Without delay he took the paper umbrella and
ceremoniously burned it, scattering the ashes this time upon Shan’s
river. Like the rod the umbrella also possessed secret virtues, its
particular excellence being a curse against clouds, wind demons,
thunderbolts and the like, so that during the night a great storm raged,
and by the morning Shan’s boat had been washed away.

This new calamity found the three brothers more obstinately perverse
than ever. It cannot be denied that Hing would have withdrawn from the
guilty confederacy, but they were as two to one, and prevailed, pointing
out that the house still afforded shelter, the river yielded some of the
simpler and inferior fish which could be captured from the banks, and
the fruitfulness of the orange-tree was undiminished.

At the end of seven more days Kao became afflicted with doubt. “There is
no such thing as a fixed proportion or a set reckoning between a dutiful
son and an embarrassed sire,” he confessed penitently. “How incredibly
profane has been this person’s behaviour in not seeing the obligation in
its unswerving necessity before.” With this scrupulous resolve Kao took
his last possession, and carrying it into the field he consumed it
with fire beneath Hing’s orange-tree. The fan, in turn, also had hidden
properties, its written sentence being a spell against drought, hot
winds, and the demons which suck the nourishment from all crops. In
consequence of the act these forces were called into action, and before
another day Hing’s tree had withered away.

It is said with reason, “During the earthquake men speak the truth.” At
this last disaster the impious fortitude of the three brothers suddenly
gave way, and cheerfully admitting their mistake, each committed
suicide, Chu disembowelling himself among the ashes of his couch, Shan
sinking beneath the waters of his river, and Hing hanging by a rope
among the branches of his own effete orange-tree.

When they had thus fittingly atoned for their faults the imprecation was
lifted from off their possessions. The couch was restored by magic
art to its former condition, the boat was returned by a justice-loving
person into whose hands it had fallen lower down the river, and
the orange-tree put out new branches. Kao therefore passed into an
undiminished inheritance. He married three wives, to commemorate the
number of his brothers, and had three sons, whom he called Chu, Shan,
and Hing, for a like purpose. These three all attained to high office in
the State, and by their enlightened morals succeeded in wiping all the
discreditable references to others bearing the same names from off the
domestic tablets.

From this story it will be seen that by acting virtuously, yet with an
observing discretion, on all occasions, it is generally possible not
only to rise to an assured position, but at the same time unsuspectedly
to involve those who stand in our way in a just destruction.




