
                                      THE
                                 LIFE OF JESUS
                              CRITICALLY EXAMINED

                                       BY
                          DR. DAVID FRIEDRICH STRAUSS

                   Translated from the Fourth German Edition
                                By GEORGE ELIOT


                         FOURTH EDITION. IN ONE VOLUME.


                                     London
                          SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO. Lim.
                                      1902









INTRODUCTION TO THE PRESENT EDITION,

BY PROFESSOR OTTO PFLEIDERER, D.D.


The Leben Jesu of David Friedrich Strauss, which was published in the
year 1835, marked an epoch in the history of theology. On the one hand,
this book represents the crisis in theology at which the doubts and
critical objections of centuries as to the credibility of the Bible
narratives had accumulated in such overwhelming volume as to break
through and sweep away all the defences of orthodox apologetics. On the
other hand, in the very completeness of the destructive criticism of
past tradition lay the germs of a new science of constructive critical
inquiry, the work of which was to bring to light the truth of history.
It is quite true that the Life of Jesus of 1835 was far from perfect,
as judged by the present standard of scientific criticism, and Biblical
science has long since advanced beyond it. Nevertheless, it cannot be
disputed that it takes rank amongst the standard works which are secure
of a permanent place in literature for all time, for the reason that
they give final expression to the spirit of their age, and represent
typically one of its characteristic tendencies. The liberating and
purifying influence which such works exert on their own time, as well
as the service they render in opening out new lines of thought, lends
to them, for all coming generations, a peculiar value as admirable
weapons in the great fight for truth and freedom. Indeed, if our
scientists are to be believed, when they tell us that the development
of the individual is only an abbreviated repetition of the similar but
much slower phases of the development of the species, it is hardly too
much to maintain, that in the present and in the future every
individual who determines to make his way from the bondage of a naïve
trust in authority and tradition into the freedom and light of mature
thought must pass through precisely that stage of thorough-going
logical negative criticism which is represented by Strauss’s work in a
unique manner. As, according to Christian ethics, the formation of a
pure moral character is possible only by the death of the old Adam, the
rise of true religious convictions is by a similar Stirb und werde, die
and come to life. The imaginary lights of mythological tradition must
be put out, that the eye may distinguish the false from the true in the
twilight of the Biblical origins of our religion. The ancient
structures of belief, which the childish fancy of men had constructed
of truth and poetry, Wahrheit und Dichtung, must be taken down and
cleared away, in order that a new erection of more durable materials
may be raised. To all earnest seekers after truth, the Leben Jesu of
Strauss may be helpful, not as supplying the truth ready to hand, but
as stripping the bandages of prejudice from the eyes, and so enabling
them clearly to see and rightly to seek it.

For these reasons it is obvious that the publication of a new edition
of the English translation of this work needs no justification. It is
only those who consider the first appearance of the book inexcusable
and unfortunate that can call in question the desirability of its
republication. But no one can hold such an opinion who is able to
follow the course of the history of the religious thought of
Protestantism. The critical process which reached its conclusion in
Strauss’s book, with its negative or revolutionary results, was latent
from the beginning in the life-blood of Protestantism. The theologians
of the Reformed Churches of the sixteenth century subjected the
traditions of Catholic Church history to keen historical criticism; and
if they did not then think of extending its operations to Biblical
tradition, we are justified in recognising in the well-known
declarations of Luther, as to the inferior value of certain books of
the Bible, and as to the unimportance of physical in comparison with
spiritual miracles, plain predictions of the line of development which
Protestant theology was destined ultimately to take.

It is intelligible enough that the criticism of the Bible could not
arise amongst the orthodox theologians of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. They were restrained by a rigid doctrine of inspiration from
an unprejudiced treatment of the Bible, and were moreover too much
absorbed in dogmatic controversies and the defence of their confessions
of faith, to feel the need of more searching Biblical studies. It was
amongst English Free-thinkers and Deists that the credibility of the
Biblical narratives was first seriously assailed, and with so much
temper as to greatly detract from the scientific value of the result.
Thomas Woolston’s Discourses on the Miracles of our Saviour (six in
number, 1727–1729) are specially noteworthy. They attack the literal
interpretation of the miracles as ludicrous and offensive, and advocate
the allegorical interpretation of them as figures and parables of
spiritual truths. It is possible to find in Woolston’s theory an
anticipation of the mythical principle of interpretation which Strauss
opposes to the rationalistic one. Reimarus, the author of the
Wolfenbüttel Fragments, by the publication of which Lessing threw
German theology into a ferment, occupies the same position as the
English Deists, and indeed owed much to their influence. But at the
same time a noteworthy difference is observable from the very first
between the way in which Lessing treated these questions and their
treatment by the earlier Free-thinkers; and the difference is
characteristic of the two schools. German rationalism bears the marks
of its origin in the idealistic optimism of the philosophy of Leibnitz
and Wolff, and remains in sympathy with the ethical spirit of Biblical
religion; whilst the but faintly religious naturalism of the English
Deists leads them, with their rejection of the Biblical miracles, to
attack the religion of the Bible, and drag down into the mire its
representatives and heroes. With this the German Rationalists have no
sympathy. They were unable to treat the Biblical narratives of miracles
as historical occurrences, but they were not prepared on that account
to regard them as deceit and delusion on the part of Biblical heroes,
or as the invention of Biblical narrators: their reverence for the
Bible and its religion kept them from both of these inferences. They
tried to get over the difficulty in two ways,—either they looked upon
the narratives of miracles, particularly those of the Old Testament, as
popular religious legends, traditions, or “myths,” of the same kind as
the myths to be met with in all heathen religions; or, on the other
hand, regarding them as containing the actual history of perfectly
natural events, they ascribed the miraculous appearance and form which
they bear simply to the mistaken judgment of the narrators, or, in
other cases, to the erroneous view of the interpreters. The latter
method was employed especially by Dr. Paulus in his commentary on the
Gospels, in which he seeks, with a great display of learning and
ingenuity, to explain all the miracles of the New Testament. The
theologian Schleiermacher also made frequent use of it in his Lectures
on the Life of Jesus; and traces of it are to be met with even in the
commentaries of theologians of the supernaturalist school—as, for
instance, Olshausen’s. The inexcusable violence which was thereby done
to the Biblical narratives, by which they are forced to say something
quite different from what the unsophisticated narrators intended them
to say, according to the plain sense of their words, was not felt; nor
were these interpreters conscious of how much the Gospels are deprived
of their choicest treasures of ideal truth and poetic beauty by this
method of treatment, and this only for the sake of securing instead
miserable common-place stories as the final outcome of critical
examination.

The favour with which this radically false rationalistic interpretation
of the Gospels was received by very many German theologians at the
beginning of this century finds its sole explanation and excuse in the
prevailing view of the time—that our Gospels were written very soon
after the death of Jesus, during the first generation of Christians,
and two of them by eye-witnesses—the apostles Matthew and John. On this
supposition, the occurrence in the Gospels of unhistorical elements, of
religious legends, such as might be without hesitation allowed in the
Old Testament, could not be thought of. Or if the admissibility of this
point of view was granted in the case of the birth-stories of the
opening chapters of Matthew and Luke (as by De Wette), objection was
felt against its application to the miracles of the public life of
Jesus. Thus, on the question of the historicity of the gospel
narratives, theologians held views which were confused, undecided,
contradictory, and lacking thoroughness. This state of things could not
last; simple faith had at every point lost its security; doubt attached
to the miraculous narratives of the New no less than to those of the
Old Testament. But before Strauss no one had had the courage to explain
all these narratives of both Testaments alike by the logical
application of one and the same principle; and mainly for the reason,
that the critics were all under the bondage of the supposition of the
apostolic authorship of the Gospels of Matthew and John. Yet even this
supposition had received various shocks prior to Strauss. Critics had
been unable to close their eyes to the fact that there are differences
between these two Gospels particularly, of such a fundamental nature as
to preclude the possibility of both being right, and therefore of both
having been written by eye-witnesses and apostles. Under the influence
of dogmatic and sentimental motives, Schleiermacher and his disciples
accepted it as an a priori certainty that John is to be preferred to
Matthew; and from this secure position, as was imagined, these
theologians assailed the narrative of Matthew at all points, and
undermined the tradition of its apostolic authority. But suppose the
same arguments with which they assailed Matthew might be used against
their favourite evangelist John? What if it could be shown that his
narrative is in no respect more probable, but, on the contrary, more
improbable, than that of Matthew? In that case, must not the critical
verdict which those theologians had given against Matthew so
triumphantly and without regard to its consequences, apply equally to
John, and thereby overthrow the only remaining pillar of apostolic
authority for the gospel tradition?

This logical consequence, which was at the time deemed an unheard-of
innovation, notwithstanding the opinions of a few individual critics
(Vogel, Bretschneider), Strauss had the courage to draw. By that act he
cast off the fetters by which the examination of the Gospels had till
then been bound, and secured a free field for a thorough-going
criticism of them. Since the external evidence of the authorship of the
Gospels is not of a kind or a date such as to compel us to consider the
tradition of their apostolic origin established, and as the matter of
all the Gospels alike is not free from historical improbability, there
is nothing, Strauss argued, to prevent our complete abandonment of the
historicity of their miraculous narratives, though the Rationalists
continue to maintain it, or our treating them as religious legends or
myths, similar to those which, as was admitted, the Old Testament
contained. The novelty in the work of Strauss was not the application
of the principle of “myth” to Biblical narratives; others had already
made use of it in the case of the Old and to some extent in the case of
the New Testament; the originality lay in the uncompromising
thoroughness with which the principle was applied to every section of
the gospel story; the originality lay in the merciless acumen and
clearness with which the discrepancies between the Gospels and the
difficulties presented to the critical understanding by their
narratives were laid bare, and with which all the subterfuges of
supernaturalist apologists, as well as all the forced and artificial
interpretations of semi-critical Rationalists, were exposed, thereby
cutting off all ways of escape from the final consequences of
criticism.

The merciless thoroughness and unreserved honesty with which criticism
did its negative work in this book, by exposing the baselessness of the
supposed knowledge of the gospel history, produced a profound shock
amongst theologians and laymen. It was not merely the untaught
multitude who believed that the foundations of Christianity must perish
with the miraculous stories of the Bible; learned theologians were
distressed as the daring critic so rudely, and without any regard to
consequences, roused them from the illusions of their sentimental or
speculative dogmatism and their precipitate treaty of peace between
faith and knowledge. “Strauss was hated,” as Baur truly said, “because
the spirit of the time was unable to look upon its own portrait, which
he held up before it in faithful, clearly drawn lines. The spirit of
this age resists with all its power the proof of its ignorance on a
matter about which it has long thought itself certain. Instead of
acknowledging what had to be acknowledged, if any progress was to be
made, all possible attempts were instituted to create fresh illusions
as to the true state of the case, by reviving obsolete hypotheses and
by theological charlatanism. But a higher certainty as to the truth of
the gospel history can be attained in no other way than by
acknowledging, on the basis of Strauss’s criticism, that our previous
knowledge is no knowledge at all.” But here we come upon the limits of
the criticism of Strauss: it brought home to men the fact of their want
of knowledge, but it did not conduct to the required new and positive
knowledge. This Strauss was unable to do, because he offered a critique
of the gospel history only, without a critique of the documents which
form the sources of this history.

In these words Baur has accurately described the main defect of
Strauss’s book. When Strauss drew from the discrepancies and
contradictions of the various narratives of the Gospels the conclusion
that they have all alike little credibility, the conclusion was
intelligible enough in reply to the ingenious artifices of the
traditional harmonists, who maintained that in spite of the
contradictions the evangelists were all alike worthy of credit; but
really this line of procedure on the part of Strauss conformed as
little as that of the harmonists to the principles of strict historical
inquiry. These principles require us to examine the relative value of
the various sources with reference to their age, to the situation, the
character, the interests, and aims of their author; to assign
accordingly to one account a higher measure of credibility than to
another; and so, by distinguishing between what is better and what is
not so well attested, to make out what is probable and reach the
original matter of fact. It is true Strauss made some advance towards
such a differentiation of the relative value of the gospel narratives;
and particularly with reference to the inferior historical value of the
Johannine in comparison with the Synoptic narrative, he has made acute
observations, the worth of which ought to be estimated the higher as
they boldly opposed the then dominant preference for the Gospel of
John, and effectively prepared the way for the criticism of Baur. But
it was not Strauss’s forte to prepare, as the foundation of the
material critique of the gospel history, a thorough critique of the
literary sources, nor, in the state of the general science of criticism
at the time, could this be very well expected. When all deductions have
been made, to Strauss belongs the honour of having given, by his
criticism of the gospel narratives, the most effective impulse to a
more penetrating examination of the sources of the gospel story, and of
having prepared the way for this to no small extent, particularly as
regards the Fourth Gospel. Baur’s classical critique of this Gospel
completed in this direction the criticism of Strauss, and laid its
foundations deeper. As regards the Synoptic Gospels, Weisse and Ewald,
Holtzmann and Volkmar, did good work towards clearing up the relations
of the Gospels to each other, especially in establishing the priority
of Mark, by which a firmer basis was laid for the positive decision of
the question as to the historical foundations of the gospel tradition.
The fruit of this critique of the sources, carried on from various
sides with painstaking industry, was the new literature dealing with
the life of Jesus, which, just a generation after the first Leben Jesu
of Strauss, took up again the problems it had raised, but in a new
fashion, and with improved critical apparatus. We shall have further on
to refer to Strauss’s new life of Jesus.

The same scholar, Weisse, who was the first to point out the want in
Strauss’s book of a more satisfactory critique of the sources, and who
had sought to supply this defect in his Evangelische Geschichte (1838),
called attention at the same time to a defect in the mythical theory of
Strauss. Weisse was fully agreed with Strauss so far, that we must
acknowledge the presence of religious myths in miraculous narratives of
the Bible, but he was not satisfied with the way in which Strauss had
explained their origin. According to Strauss, the early Christians had
simply transferred to Jesus as the actual Messiah the miraculous
legends of the Old Testament, out of which the Jews were supposed to
have composed the miraculous portrait of their expected Messiah; and he
was right in thinking that the miraculous stories of the Old Testament
do undoubtedly supply the motives and models of no few narratives in
the New Testament, but not, surely, of all. Precisely the chief
miracles—the birth of Jesus, his baptism, transfiguration,
resurrection, the change of water into wine at Cana, the stilling of
the storm, and walking on the sea—violence must be used to explain
these miracles by reference to Old Testament types, and the Jewish idea
of the Messiah offers no lines corresponding to these. At this point
therefore, at all events, we must look about us for another method of
explanation. And Weisse was undoubtedly right in pointing to the
spontaneous productivity of the Christian spirit in the primitive
Church as the source of the miraculous narratives, in which it gave
expression in symbolic and allegorical forms to its ideal truth and the
new inspired life of which it was conscious. Not that these narratives
were intended by the narrators themselves to be merely allegories, or
symbolical illustrations of spiritual truths; but the religious
imagination gave birth to these illustrations after the manner of
unconscious poetry, that is, without distinguishing between the poetic
form and the essential truth of the idea; believing, as the religious
imagination did, in the ideal content of the narratives, and being at
the same time unable to give vivid and sensible expression to it in any
other than the material form of outward miracles, it involuntarily came
to believe also in the reality of the symbolical form of the narrative
to which it had itself given rise; it conceived idea and history both
together in such inseparable combination as to confer on each equal
truth and certainty.

In the production of such ideal narratives the same process is
observable to-day in the experience of simple religious believers:
feeling the ideal truth of the content of the stories, they come to
believe also in the reality of the outward history in which the idea
has for them been incorporated. But the critical understanding of the
historical inquirer is permitted, and indeed is bound, to distinguish
clearly and definitely, as the simple-minded believer cannot do,
between the spiritual idea and the outward form of its representation,
and to find in the former both the productive power and the permanent
kernel within the outward husk. This explanation of the miraculous
legends of the Bible is not only more correct and profound than
Strauss’s from the point of view of historical science, but for the
religious consciousness it is far less objectionable, as Weisse
observes with truth; inasmuch as in this case the legends do not appear
as the worthless product of the idle play of the imagination, but as
the normal expression, rationally and psychologically intelligible, of
a creative religious spirit, which displays its treasures of ideal
truth in this legendary and mythical poetry for the benefit of the
originators and the wider world. Nor should it be left unnoticed that
Strauss himself had already indicated in a few cases this more profound
explanation of myths by means of the religious idea. At the close of
his interpretation of the story of the Transfiguration (§ 107), for
instance, he says, we may see from this example very plainly how the
natural system of explanation, by insisting on the historical certainty
of the narratives, lets go their ideal truth, sacrificing the content
to the form of the story, whereas the mythical interpretation, by
resigning the historical material body of such narratives, really
rescues and preserves their idea, their soul and spirit. He might,
however, have unfolded the idea of the Transfiguration with greater
definiteness and fulness if he had not merely alluded to the dogmatic
discussion of Paul in 2 Cor. iii. 7 sq., but had recognised it as the
real theme of the gospel story, and had interpreted the latter
accordingly. In the same way, in the case of the story of the birth of
Jesus (Luke i. and ii.), Strauss laid great emphasis on the analogies
and figures of the Old Testament, which, after all, could only
contribute as secondary motives in the formation of this birth-story,
while its real origin is to be sought in the Pauline Messianic idea of
“the Son of God, according to the spirit of holiness” (Rom. i. 4; 1
Cor. xv. 45 sq.), a fact Strauss overlooked. This defect takes a really
surprising form when he comes to explain the miracles of the Fourth
Gospel, which, in complete independence of any suggestion from the Old
Testament, are entirely based upon the dogmatic ideas of the
Alexandrian theology, and simply supply their transparent symbolic
vestment. How much more truthfully and profoundly can the miracle at
Cana, or the raising of Lazarus, or the cure of the man born blind, be
interpreted from this point of view than from that of Strauss! In this
respect Baur’s interpretation of the Fourth Gospel was an immense
advance beyond Strauss, as the latter himself acknowledged
subsequently.

With the above defects of Strauss’s method of interpretation is
connected, in the last place, the fact that the outcome of his book in
reference to the decisive question,—What, then, is the historical
kernel of the evangelical tradition, what the real character of Jesus
and of his work?—is meagre and unsatisfactory. In the closing essay at
the end of his work, it is true, he endeavoured to restore dogmatically
what he had destroyed critically, but he effected this in a way which
amounted to the transformation of religious faith in Christ into a
metaphysical allegory. The predications of faith with regard to Christ
are to be regarded as containing predications as to the relations of
the human race to the Absolute, as to the self-abasement of the
Infinite to the Finite, and the return of the Infinite to itself, as to
mind and its power over nature, and its dependence on it, and the like.
In all this Strauss was led astray by the influence of the Hegelian
philosophy, which looked for the truth of religion in logical and
metaphysical categories instead of in the facts and experiences of
moral feeling and volition. But as there is no essential relation
between these metaphysical ideas and the person of Jesus, he is made
arbitrarily, as any one else might have been, an illustration and
example of absolute ideas to which he stands in no more intimate
relation than the rest of the human race; whereby the special
historical importance of the originator of the Christian community, and
of the first model of its religious and moral life, is not only left
without explanation, but is lost altogether, a result which does
violence not merely to the religious consciousness, but is
unsatisfactory to historical science, which is concerned to understand
Jesus as the originating source of Christianity. It is quite true that
we can go with Strauss in his answer to the alternative of Ullmann
whether the church created the Christ of the Gospels or he the church,
by declaring the alternative false, and the two things in so far both
tenable as the Christ of the Gospels is a creation of the faith of the
church, but this faith an effect of the person of the historical Jesus.
We find this answer to Ullmann just, but cannot free Strauss from the
charge of having worked out in his book the first only of these two
positions, and of having passed over the second. He has shown no more
than that the church formed the mythical traditions about Jesus out of
its faith in him as the Messiah. But how did the church come by the
faith that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah? To this question—which is
the main question of a Life of Jesus—Strauss gave his readers no
answer. Undoubtedly it can be urged in his defence that the criticism
of the sources was at that time still in a condition of too great
confusion and uncertainty to permit any successful answer to that
problem of the historical kernel of the life of Jesus. Nevertheless the
difficulty of the matter could not relieve the historian of the duty of
at least making an attempt to trace from the materials left to him, as
the residue of his critical analysis of the deeds and words of Jesus,
the main outlines of his character, to bring out the peculiarity and
originality of his religious genius, and in this way to discover in the
original personality and reforming activity of Jesus the originating
cause of the rise of the community of his disciples and their faith in
him as the Messiah and his divine mission. If in his closing essay
Strauss had presented a religious and moral description of Jesus of
this nature, instead of a metaphysical allegory as a substitute for the
shattered mythological conception of tradition, though the objection of
the church to his work would not have been wanting, it would then
undoubtedly have taken a less passionately denunciatory form than was
the case, in consequence of the purely negative character of the
result, unrelieved by any modifying conclusion.

In proportion to the strength of the feeling of these defects, shared
by readers of all parties, was the urgency of the duty laid upon
scientific theologians of preparing, by a renewed and more thorough
examination of the Gospels, the stones of a new edifice to be reared
upon the site laid bare by Strauss’s critical labours. “In the darkness
which criticism produces, by putting out all the lights hitherto
thought to be historical, the eye has first to learn by gradual habit
to again distinguish a few single objects,” as Strauss himself remarked
in his third edition. But this difficult task was not accomplished by
those apologists who endeavoured to make good the damage by the
antiquated arts of the harmonists, with their petty concessions,
mystifications, and evasions, but by those courageous inquirers who,
undeterred by dogmatic considerations, sought by a strictly historical
method to set in the true light the exact composition and the mutual
relations of the evangelical documents. We have already remarked that
Baur and his disciples, the so-called Tübingen school, took a leading
part in this work, while other independent students co-operated with
them, supplementing and correcting their labours. This, however, is not
the place to follow these inquiries in detail; but we must glance at
their result as regards the historical treatment of the life of Jesus.

For an entire generation the examination of the literary details of the
Gospels had occupied theologians so exclusively that the interest in
the supreme problems of the evangelical history seemed to have been
almost lost sight of. But this interest was newly awakened, and made
itself felt far beyond learned theological circles, by the nearly
simultaneous publication of Renan’s Vie de Jésus and Strauss’s second
Leben Jesu für das deutsche Volk (1864). These two works, with all
their dissimilarity, resemble each other in this, that they were both
written by scholars of the highest eminence, not for the learned world,
but for educated people generally, both throwing overboard, therefore,
the ballast of learned detailed criticism, and presenting the results
of their inquiries in a language intelligible to everybody, and
attractive from its literary excellence. They are alike also in this,
that both subordinate the criticism of the gospel traditions to a
positive description of the personality of Jesus, of his essential
religious tendency and genius, of his relation to the Messianic idea of
his nation, to the law and the temple, to the hierarchy and religious
and political parties of his time, both seeking an explanation of the
reformatory success of the commencement, and also of the tragical issue
of his labours in these factors. But inasmuch as Strauss confines
himself to what he can deem the ascertained or probable facts, after a
strict critique of the sources, the portrait delineated by him turns
out naturally somewhat indistinct and defective in its outlines; the
meagreness of the result answers to the caution of his historical
conscience. Renan, on the other hand, feels no such scruples; in his
criticism of the sources he goes to work with a much lighter heart, and
claims for the biographer the right to help himself over the lacunæ and
obscurities or contradictions of his authorities by calling in the aid
of the creative imagination, with its powers of combination and
inference. By this means he has succeeded in presenting a life of Jesus
distinguished for its epic vividness and dramatic development, but its
æsthetic charm has been purchased at the price of its historical
solidity. This novelistic feature becomes most questionable when it
wanders into the vagaries of the naturalistic explanation of the
miracles (e.g. the raising of Lazarus), and in such cases casts
reflections on the moral character of Jesus. On the other hand, for
Renan must be claimed the merit of having emphasised the social aspects
of the Messianic mission of Jesus, and of having attempted to sketch
the development of his inner life, a change in the phases of his
reformatory labours. As to Strauss’s second Life of Jesus, its strength
lies, as in the first, not so much in the first part, which deals with
the positive side of the history, as in the second part, where it comes
to treat of the mythical side of the history. But in the second work,
in the place of the analysis of the traditions given in the first, we
get a synthetic presentation of the rise and gradual growth and
elaboration, in more and more exalted forms, of the idea of the Christ
of mythical tradition; the successive stages of the development of the
Christian consciousness are set forth by reference to the genesis of
the ideas of Christ’s person, power, and supernatural exaltation. Thus
this genetic method of treatment, followed in the later work, supplants
and confirms the result of the former one; while the latter had shown
that the miraculous narratives in the Gospels are myth and not history,
the new Life shows how in these myths, after all, history is reflected,
namely, the history of the religious consciousness of the Christian
community. The great advance of this new treatment upon that of the
previous work was the fruit of the intervening studies of Baur and his
disciples, to which Renan, to the detriment of the critical and
historical value of his work, had not paid sufficient attention.

The two works of Renan and Strauss were followed by a deluge of
literature on the life of Jesus, the historical value of which is very
various. To give an account of all these books would require more space
than is at my disposal. I must confine myself to the work of Theodor
Keim, an English translation of which has been published under the
“Theological Translation Fund.” The work is so distinguished by the
richness of its learned material, and the ability with which it is
handled, as to constitute it the best representation of the present
condition of our knowledge of the life of Jesus. Keim’s standpoint
differs from that of Strauss by the warmth of religious feeling and
enthusiasm which pervades his entire work, while at the same time no
fetters are laid upon the critical reason; freedom and piety join
hands, in order to be just to the double claim which the truth of
history on the one hand, and the church on the other, are justified in
presenting. The most brilliant part of Keim’s work is his delineation
of the religious personality of Jesus,—how in it were combined, in a
unique degree, strength and harmony, complete openness towards the
world, with perfect inwardness towards God, so as to become the source
of a new religion, in which self-surrender and liberty, humility and
energy, enthusiasm and lucidity, are blended, and the chasm of previous
ages between God and man filled up. His description of the
psychological development of the Messianic consciousness of Jesus out
of inward experiences and outward impressions and impulses, is also
drawn with great delicacy of touch; at all events, it is an able and
suggestive effort to penetrate, as far as the state of the sources
admits, by means of sympathetic and reproductive divination, to the
personal experiences and mental states of the religious genius from
whom a new epoch in the world’s religious history proceeded. Still, as
in the kindred efforts of Renan, Weizsäcker, Beyschlag and Weiss, we
may never forget how much, with the poverty of the ascertained
historical materials, is left to the uncontrolled power of combination
and divination; in other words, to the imagination, which at best can
do no more than roughly and approximately arrive at the truth, while it
may no less easily go far astray. It is certainly to be deemed an
advance that in the more recent works on the life of Jesus the subject
of main interest is not so much the external miracles as the internal,
the problems of the peculiar nature and development of his religious
consciousness and character, his view of his vocation, his attitude
towards the Messianic idea, and the like. Yet this advance is
manifestly attended by the temptation to sacrifice the caution of
historical criticism to the production of a biography as rich in detail
and as dramatic in movement as possible, and to represent things as the
ascertained results of critical examination, which are really nothing
more than subjective combinations of the writers, to which a certain
degree of probability may be attached, though the possibility will
always remain, that the actual facts were something quite different.
The subtle examination of the question, whether Jesus himself ever
declared himself to be the Messiah, or spoke of his return in celestial
glory, by Martineau, in his Seat of Authority in Religion, is in this
respect deserving of all attention, and is of great value, as at least
supplying a needed lesson in caution in view of the excessive
confidence with which questions such as these have been treated by
Renan, Keim, and later writers. In any case, the reserve and caution of
Strauss are quite justified as a corrective and counterpoise to the
extravagances committed in the opposite direction.

With regard to the miraculous narratives of the Gospels, the advance of
more recent criticism beyond the first book of Strauss has been in two
directions. First, these questions no longer constitute the central
point of historical interest, but are subordinated in importance to the
problems of the religious consciousness of Jesus. Secondly, we do not
now seek to interpret these narratives so exclusively and without
distinction from the one motive of the transference to Jesus of the
types of the Old Testament; but the great difference between the
various narratives of miracles is clearly recognised, and various clues
are accordingly used in their explanation; whilst in one narrative we
observe merely symbols of religious and dogmatic ideas, in others we
discover, behind the glorifying tendency to idealism, some background
of historical fact, for instance, in the miracles of healing, as is now
very generally acknowledged. It cannot be denied, it is true, that with
this perfectly legitimate endeavour is connected the peril of falling
back into the old abuses of rationalistic artifice. Even Keim has not
quite escaped this danger, inasmuch as he abandons the basis of strict
history in the case of the story of the resurrection of Jesus, and
makes concessions to supernaturalistic dogma; as the sequel of which
the old doctrine of miracles may be readmitted into Lives of Jesus, as
is really the case in the works of Beyschlag and Weiss.

In this danger appears the necessity for the continued prosecution of
the negative work of criticism, a duty as yet by no means
supererogatory. The inclination to sink into the slumber of dogma is so
natural to every generation that the most uncompromising critical
intellect must without intermission stand upon the watch against it.
And as this task was performed by Strauss in his first Life of Jesus in
a manner that may serve as a model for all time, the book, like every
truly classical work, must ever retain its value. Strauss’s criticism
broke down the ramparts of dogmatism, new and old, and opened to the
inquiring mind the breach through which the conquest of historical
truth might be won.


    Otto Pfleiderer.







Certior factus ex Britannia, librum meum, quem de vita Jesu XI abhinc
annis composui, virorum ejusmodi studiis faventium cura in linguam
Britannicam translatum, brevi illic in publicum proditurum esse,
lælitia anxietate temperata commoveor.

Nam ut gratulari sibi æquum est auctorem, cujus operi contigit, patriæ
terræ ac linguæ fines transgredi, ita sollicitudo eundem subeat necesse
est, ne, qui domi placuit liber, foris displiceat, aut cujus inter
populares vel adversariorum numero creverat auctoritas, apud exteros
neglectus in obscuro maneat. Solum enim cœlumque vix minore libri quam
plantæ periculo mutant. Et facilius quidem transtuleris opera in illis
rebus versantia, de quibus inter diversas gentes communis quidam aut
certe parum discrepans sensus obtinet: ut, quæ poetæ aut disciplinarum
quas exactas dicunt periti proferunt, inter politiores hujus seculi
nationes fere solent esse communia. Neque tamen vel hoc in librorum
genere plane æquum Germano cum Britannis aut Gallis certamen. Peregrina
enim cum facilius nostra quam illorum et lingua et indoles recipiat,
longe frequentius poetæ quoque illorum in nostram quam nostri in
illorum linguas transferuntur. At Germanicum opus in theologiæ et
philosophiæ quasi confinio versans, si trajicere in Britanniam parat,
ne illa quidem inter utramque gentem sensus et studiorum communione
adjuvatur. Tam diversa enim utrimque via istæ disciplinæ processerunt,
ut in theologia impii, in philosophia superstitiosi Britannis Germani
iidem videamur. Cum iis, qui in Britannia ausi sunt, historias,
Judæorum et Christianorum religione sacratas, examini ut ajunt critico
subjicere, nihil agendum esset, nisi ut Lockii sui atque Humii
principia philosophica, sicut ad reliquas omnes historias, ita ad illas
etiam, quas legibus istis hucusque superstitio subtraxerat, adhiberent:
in Germania ad hoc monstri res degeneraverat, ut superstitioni a
theologorum potissima parte derelictæ philosophia succurreret, critico
ergo non simplex sanæ philosophiæ contra theologorum superstitionem,
sed duplex et contra philosophorum ex sanioribus principiis deductas
ineptas conclusiones, et contra theologorum propter philosophica ista
auxilia ornamentaque inflatam atque induratam superstitionem, certamen
ineundum esset. Ex hoc rei statu proprie Germanico natum opus meum,
nominibus insuper atque opinionibus theologorum ac philosophorum
nostratium refertum, nec scholarum etiam vocabula, quibus nostræ tantum
aures assuevere, satis evitans, a Britannorum usu ingenioque non posse
non abhorrere, tam probe scio, ut de translato in eorum linguam, licet
interpretatio, quantum quidem ejus inspicere potuerim, et accurata et
perspicua sit et librum, quantum in ipsa est, popularibus commendet,
num gaudendum mihi magnopere sit, mehercule nesciam.

Accedit, quod a primo libri mei ortu duo lustra, et a recentissima
etiam editione unum jam lustrum intercessit. Ut tum, quum opus
inchoabam, via incedebam, quam pauci ingressi, totam emensus nemo erat,
ita per primum illud lustrum nullæ fere nisi adversariorum voces
audiebantur, principia mea negantium et historiam in Evangeliis vel
meram, vel levissima tantum erroris rumorisve adspersione tinctam
contineri affirmantium, cum quibus non modo non disputandum, sed a
quibus ne discendum quidem quidquam erat, quod ad rem et ad librum vere
emendandum pertineret. Proximo demum lustro viri vestigia mea non
refugientes neque evitantes, sed persequentes, ubi ego substiteram
longius progressi, rem revera juverunt atque promoverunt. Narrationes
in Evangeliis traditas, quas rerum vere gestarum esse persuadere mihi
non potueram, mythorum in modum, qui inter antiquas gentes inveniuntur,
aut in ore populi a minutis initiis coaluisse et eundo crevisse, aut a
singulis, sed qui vere ita evenisse superstitiose in animum induxerant,
fictas esse existimaveram. Quod ut sufficit explicandis plerisque
eorum, quæ dubitationem moventia tribus prioribus Evangeliis
continentur: ita quarti Evangelii auctorem ad tuendas et illustrandas
sententias suas haud raro meras fabulas scientem confinxisse, a Baurio,
theologo Tubingensi doctissimo, nuper ita demonstratum est, ut critici
me judicii rigori religiosius quam verius temperasse intelligam. Dumque
prima a Christo secula accuratius perscrutantur, partes partiumque
certamina, quibus nova ecclesia commovebatur, in apricum proferunt,
narrationum haud paucarum, quas fabulas esse ego bene quidem
perspexeram, sed unde ortæ essent demonstrare non valueram, veram in
illis primæ ecclesiæ motibus originem detegere theologis Tubingensibus
contigit.

Imperfectum igitur opus meum, ut solent rerum initia, non ob hoc tamen,
quod sententiæ deest, timerem, ne a Britannis sperneretur, nisi formæ
etiam illud quod supra dixi peregrinum atque inusitatum accederet. Qui
si suum Hennellium non audiverunt, de iisdem rebus cum Britannis
Britannice agentem, quomodo audient, si quis Germanus surget, cujus
liber cum sua lingua non potuerit cogitandi quoque disputandique morem
prorsus Germanicum exuere? Sed absit omen verbis meis, atque ut pridem
in Germania, ita mox in Britannia jaceat liber hic εἰς πτῶσιν καὶ
ἀνάστασιν πολλῶν καὶ εἰς σημεῖον ἀντιλεγόμενον ὂπως ἂν ἀποκαλυφθῶσιν ἐκ
πολλῶν καρδιῶν διαλογισμοί.

    STRAUSS.

    Scribebam Heilbronnæ. Med. mens. April a. 1846.







PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION.


It appeared to the author of the work, the first half of which is
herewith submitted to the public, that it was time to substitute a new
mode of considering the life of Jesus, in the place of the antiquated
systems of supranaturalism and naturalism. This application of the term
antiquated will in the present day be more readily admitted in relation
to the latter system than to the former. For while the interest excited
by the explanations of the miracles and the conjectural facts of the
rationalists has long ago cooled, the commentaries now most read are
those which aim to adapt the supernatural interpretation of the sacred
history to modern taste. Nevertheless, in point of fact, the orthodox
view of this history became superannuated earlier than the
rationalistic, since it was only because the former had ceased to
satisfy an advanced state of culture, that the latter was developed,
while the recent attempts to recover, by the aid of a mystical
philosophy, the supernatural point of view held by our forefathers,
betray themselves, by the exaggerating spirit in which they are
conceived, to be final, desperate efforts to render the past present,
the inconceivable conceivable.

The new point of view, which must take the place of the above, is the
mythical. This theory is not brought to bear on the evangelical history
for the first time in the present work: it has long been applied to
particular parts of that history, and is here only extended to its
entire tenor. It is not by any means meant that the whole history of
Jesus is to be represented as mythical, but only that every part of it
is to be subjected to a critical examination, to ascertain whether it
have not some admixture of the mythical. The exegesis of the ancient
church set out from the double presupposition: first, that the gospels
contained a history, and secondly, that this history was a supernatural
one. Rationalism rejected the latter of these presuppositions, but only
to cling the more tenaciously to the former, maintaining that these
books present unadulterated, though only natural, history. Science
cannot rest satisfied with this half-measure: the other presupposition
also must be relinquished, and the inquiry must first be made whether
in fact, and to what extent, the ground on which we stand in the
gospels is historical. This is the natural course of things, and thus
far the appearance of a work like the present is not only justifiable,
but even necessary.

It is certainly not therefore evident that the author is precisely the
individual whose vocation it is to appear in this position. He has a
very vivid consciousness that many others would have been able to
execute such a work with incomparably superior erudition. Yet on the
other hand he believes himself to be at least possessed of one
qualification which especially fitted him to undertake this task. The
majority of the most learned and acute theologians of the present day
fail in the main requirement for such a work, a requirement without
which no amount of learning will suffice to achieve anything in the
domain of criticism—namely, the internal liberation of the feelings and
intellect from certain religious and dogmatical presuppositions; and
this the author early attained by means of philosophical studies. If
theologians regard this absence of presupposition from his work, as
unchristian: he regards the believing presuppositions of theirs as
unscientific. Widely as in this respect the tone of the present work
may be contrasted with the edifying devoutness and enthusiastic
mysticism of recent books on similar subjects; still it will nowhere
depart from the seriousness of science, or sink into frivolity; and it
seems a just demand in return, that the judgments which are passed upon
it should also confine themselves to the domain of science, and keep
aloof from bigotry and fanaticism.

The author is aware that the essence of the Christian faith is
perfectly independent of his criticism. The supernatural birth of
Christ, his miracles, his resurrection and ascension, remain eternal
truths, whatever doubts may be cast on their reality as historical
facts. The certainty of this can alone give calmness and dignity to our
criticism, and distinguish it from the naturalistic criticism of the
last century, the design of which was, with the historical fact, to
subvert also the religious truth, and which thus necessarily became
frivolous. A dissertation at the close of the work will show that the
dogmatic significance of the life of Jesus remains inviolate: in the
meantime let the calmness and insensibility with which, in the course
of it, criticism undertakes apparently dangerous operations, be
explained solely by the security of the author’s conviction that no
injury is threatened to the Christian faith. Investigations of this
kind may, however, inflict a wound on the faith of individuals. Should
this be the case with theologians, they have in their science the means
of healing such wounds, from which, if they would not remain behind the
development of their age, they cannot possibly be exempt. For the laity
the subject is certainly not adequately prepared; and for this reason
the present work is so framed, that at least the unlearned among them
will quickly and often perceive that the book is not destined for them.
If from curiosity or excessive zeal against heresy they persist in
their perusal, they will then have, as Schleiermacher says on a similar
occasion, to bear the punishment in their conscience, since their
feelings directly urge on them the conviction that they understand not
that of which they are ambitious to speak.

A new opinion, which aims to fill the place of an older one, ought
fully to adjust its position with respect to the latter. Hence the way
to the mythical view is here taken in each particular point through the
supranaturalistic and rationalistic opinions and their respective
refutations; but, as becomes a valid refutation, with an acknowledgment
of what is true in the opinions combated, and an adoption of this truth
into the new theory. This method also brings with it the extrinsic
advantage, that the work may now serve as a repertory of the principal
opinions and treatises concerning all parts of the evangelical history.
The author has not, however, aimed to give a complete bibliographical
view of this department of theological literature, but, where it was
possible, has adhered to the chief works in each separate class of
opinions. For the rationalistic system the works of Paulus remain
classical, and are therefore pre-eminently referred to; for the
orthodox opinions, the commentary of Olshausen is especially important,
as the most recent and approved attempt to render the supranatural
interpretation philosophical and modern; while as a preliminary to a
critical investigation of the life of Jesus, the commentaries of
Fritzsche are excellently adapted, since they exhibit, together with
uncommon philological learning, that freedom from prejudice and
scientific indifference to results and consequences, which form the
first condition of progress in this region of inquiry.

The second volume, which will open with a detailed examination of the
miracles of Jesus, and which will conclude the whole work, is already
prepared and will be in the press immediately on the completion of the
first.


    THE AUTHOR.

    Tübingen, 24th May, 1835.







PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION.


As this new edition of my critical examination of the life of Jesus
appears simultaneously with the first volume of my Dogmatik, it will
not be expected to contain any essential alterations. Indeed, even in
the absence of other labours, I should scarcely have been inclined to
undertake such on the present occasion. The critical researches
prompted by the appearance of my work have, after the stormy reaction
of the first few years, at length entered on that quiet course, which
promises the most valuable assistance towards the confirmation and more
precise determination of the negative results at which I have arrived.
But these fruits still require some years for their maturing; and it
must therefore be deferred to a future opportunity to enrich this work
by the use of them. I could not persuade myself to do so, at least in
the present instance, by prosecuting a polemic against opposite
opinions. Already in the last edition there was more of a polemical
character than accorded with the unity and calmness proper to such a
work; hence I was in this respect admonished rather to abridge than to
amplify. But that edition also contained too much of compliance. The
intermingling voices of opponents, critics, and fellow labourers, to
which I held it a duty attentively to listen, had confused the idea of
the work in my mind; in the diligent comparison of divergent opinions I
had lost sight of the subject itself. Hence on coming with a more
collected mind to this last revision, I found alterations at which I
could not but wonder, and by which I had evidently done myself
injustice. In all these passages the earlier readings are now restored,
and thus my labour in this new edition has chiefly consisted in
whetting, as it were, my good sword, to free it from the notches made
in it rather by my own grinding, than by the blows of my enemies.


    THE AUTHOR.

    Stuttgard, 17th October, 1840.







CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE MYTHICAL POINT OF VIEW IN RELATION TO THE GOSPEL
HISTORIES.

                                                                   PAGE

  § 1. Inevitable rise of different modes of explaining sacred
       histories                                                     39
    2. Different explanations of sacred legends among the Greeks     40
    3. Allegorical interpretations among the Hebrews. Philo          41
    4. Allegorical interpretations among the Christians. Origen      41
    5. Transition to more modern times. Deists and Naturalists of
       the 17th and 18th centuries. The Wolfenbüttel Fragmentist     44
    6. Natural mode of explanation adopted by the Rationalists.
       Eichhorn. Paulus                                              46
    7. Moral interpretation of Kant                                  50
    8. Rise of the mythical mode of interpreting the sacred
       history, in reference first to the Old Testament              52
    9. The mythical mode of interpretation in reference to the
       New Testament                                                 57
   10. The notion of the mythus in its application to sacred
       histories not clearly apprehended by theologians              59
   11. The application of the notion of the mythus too
       circumscribed                                                 63
   12. Opposition to the mythical view of the Gospel history         65
   13. The possibility of the existence of mythi in the New
       Testament considered in reference to external evidences       69
   14. The possibility of mythi in the New Testament considered
       on internal grounds                                           75
   15. Definition of the evangelical mythus, and its distinctive
       characteristics                                               86
   16. Criteria by which to distinguish the unhistorical in the
       Gospel narrative                                              87


FIRST PART.

HISTORY OF THE BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD OF JESUS.

CHAPTER I.

ANNUNCIATION AND BIRTH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

 § 17. Account given by Luke. Immediate supernatural character
       of the representation                                         95
   18. Natural explanation of the narrative                         100
   19. Mythical view of the narrative in its different stages       104

