CHAPTER V.

THE ASCENSION.

§ 141.

THE LAST COMMANDS AND PROMISES OF JESUS.

In the last interview of Jesus with his disciples, which according to
Mark and Luke closed with the ascension, the three first Evangelists
(the fourth has something similar on the very first interview)
represent Jesus as delivering testamentary commands and promises, which
referred to the establishment and propagation of the messianic kingdom
on earth.

With regard to the commands, Jesus in Luke (xxiv. 47 f.; Acts i. 8) in
parting from his disciples appoints them to be witnesses of his
messiahship, and charges them to preach repentance and remission of
sins in his name from Jerusalem to the uttermost parts of the earth. In
Mark (xvi. 15 f.) he enjoins them to go into all the world and bring to
every creature the glad tidings of the messianic kingdom founded by
him; he who believes and is baptized will be saved, he who believeth
not, will (in the future messianic judgment) be condemned. In Matthew
(xxviii. 19 f.) the disciples are also commissioned to make disciples
of all nations πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, and here baptism is not mentioned
incidentally merely, as in Mark, but is made the subject of an express
command by Jesus, and is besides more precisely described as a baptism
in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, ἐις τὸ
ὄνομα τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος.

The impediments to the supposition that Jesus delivered to his
disciples the express command to carry the announcement of the gospel
to the Gentiles, have been already pointed out in an earlier connexion.
[2162] But that this more definite form of baptism proceeded from
Jesus, is also opposed by the fact, that such an allocation of Father,
Son, and Spirit does not elsewhere appear, except as a form of
salutation in apostolic epistles (2 Cor. xiii. 14: the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc.); while as a more definite form of baptism it
is not to be met with throughout the whole New Testament save in the
above passage of the first gospel: for in the apostolic epistles and
even in the Acts, baptism is designated as a βαπτίζειν εἰς Χριστὸν
Ἰησοῦν, or εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ Κυρίου Ἰησοῦ baptising in Christ Jesus, or
in the name of the Lord Jesus, or their equivalent (Rom. vi. 3; Gal.
iii. 27; Acts ii. 38, viii. 16, x. 48, xix. 5), and the same threefold
reference to God, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit is only found in
ecclesiastical writers, as, for example, Justin. [2163] Indeed the
formula in Matthew sounds so exactly as if it had been borrowed from
the ecclesiastical ritual, that there is no slight probability in the
supposition that it was transferred from thence into the mouth of
Jesus. But this does not authorize us to throw the passage out of the
text as an interpolation, [2164] since, if everything in the gospels
which cannot have happened to Jesus, or which cannot have been done or
spoken by him in the manner there described, were to be pronounced
foreign to the original text, the interpolations would soon become too
numerous. So far it is with justice that others have defended the
genuineness of the baptismal formula; [2165] but their grounds for the
assertion that it was delivered in this manner by Jesus himself are
insufficient: the two opinions then resolve themselves into a third,
namely, that this more definite form of baptism does indeed belong to
the original context of the first gospel, but without having been so
delivered by Jesus. [2166] Jesus had, during his life, predicted in
divers ways the propagation of his kingdom beyond the limits of the
Jewish nation, perhaps also had intimated the introduction of baptism
to be his will; and—whether it be the fact that, as we learn in the
fourth gospel, the disciples already practised baptism in the lifetime
of Jesus, or that they first made this rite a sign of reception into
the new messianic society after his death,—in any case it was entirely
in the manner of the legend to place the injunction to baptize, as well
as to go out into all the world, in the mouth of the departing Christ
as a last declaration of his will.

The promises which Jesus gives to his adherents in parting from them,
are in Matthew, where they are directed exclusively to the eleven,
limited simply to the assurance that he, to whom as the exalted Messiah
all power was delivered both in heaven and on earth, would be invisibly
with them during the present age, αἰὼν, until at the consummation
συντέλεια of this term, he should enter into permanent visible
communion with them: precisely the expression of the belief which was
formed in the first Christian community, when the equilibrium was
recovered after the oscillations caused by the death of Jesus.—In Mark,
the last promises of Jesus seem to be gathered from the popular opinion
concerning the gifts of the Christians, which was current at the period
of the composition of this gospel. Of the signs, σημεία, which are here
promised to believers in general, the speaking with (new) tongues,
λαλεῖν γλώσσαις (καιναῖς) in the sense intended 1 Cor. xiv., not in the
manner described in Acts ii. which is a mythical modification, [2167]
actually appeared in the primitive church; as also the casting out of
devils δαιμόνια ἐκβάλλειν; and it may even be conceived that sick
persons were cured in a natural manner by faith in the laying on of
hands, ἐπίθεσις χειρων by a Christian: on the contrary the taking up of
serpents ὄφεις αἴρειν (comp. Luke x. 19) and the power of drinking
poisons with impunity, have never had any existence except in the
superstitious belief of the vulgar, and such signs of discipleship
would have been the last to which Jesus would have attached any
value.—In Luke, the object of the last promise of Jesus is the power
from on high δύναμις ἐξ ὕψους, which according to the promise of the
Father, ἐπαγγελία τοῦ πατρὸς, he would send on the apostles, and the
impartation of which they were to await in Jerusalem (xxiv. 49); and in
Acts i. 5 ff. Jesus more precisely designates this impartation of power
as a baptism with the Holy Spirit, πνεῦμα ἅγιον, which in a few days
would be granted to the disciples in order to qualify them for the
announcement of the gospel. These passages of Luke, which place the
impartation of the Holy Spirit in the days after the ascension, seem to
be in contradiction with the statement of the fourth gospel, that Jesus
communicated the Holy Spirit to his disciples in the days of his
resurrection, nay, on his very first appearance in the circle of the
eleven. In John xx. 22 f. we read, that Jesus, appearing among the
disciples when the doors were closed, breathed on them and said:
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, λάβετε πνεῦμα ἅγιον, wherewith he connected
the authority to remit and retain sins.

If this were the only passage relating to the impartation of the
Spirit, every one would believe that the disciples had it communicated
to them by Jesus when he was personally present among them, and not
first after his exaltation to heaven. But in accordance with the
harmonizing interest, it has been concluded, first by Theodore of
Mopsuestia, and recently by Tholuck, [2168] that the word λάβετε,
receive, in John, must be taken in the sense of λήψεσθε, ye shall
receive, because according to Luke the Holy Spirit was not imparted to
the disciples until later, at Pentecost. But as if he wished to
preclude such a wresting of his words, the Jesus of John adds to them
the symbolical action of breathing on the disciples, which unmistakably
represents the receiving of the Holy Spirit as a present fact. [2169]
It is true that expositors have found out a way of eluding even this
act of breathing, by attributing to it the following signification: as
certainly as Jesus now breathes upon them, so certainly will they at a
future time receive the Holy Ghost. [2170] But the act of breathing
upon a person is as decided a symbol of a present impartation as the
laying on of hands, and as those on whom the apostles laid their hands
were immediately filled with the Spirit (Acts viii. 17, xix. 6), so,
according to the above narrative, the author of the fourth gospel must
have thought that the Apostles on that occasion received the Spirit
from Jesus. In order to avoid the necessity of denying, in opposition
to the clear meaning of John, that an impartation of the Spirit
actually took place immediately after the resurrection, or of coming
into contradiction with Luke, who assigns the outpouring of the Spirit
to a later period, expositors now ordinarily suppose that the Spirit
was granted to the Apostles both at the earlier and the later period,
the impartation at Pentecost being only an increasing and perfecting of
the former. [2171] Or more correctly, since Matthew x. 20 speaks of the
Spirit of the Father as already sustaining the disciples in their first
mission: it is supposed that they were first endowed with some
extraordinary power before that mission, in the lifetime of Jesus; that
on the occasion in question, shortly after his resurrection, he
heightened this power; but that all the fulness of the Spirit was not
poured out upon them until Pentecost. [2172] What constitutes the
distinction between these steps, and especially in what the increase of
the gifts of the Spirit consisted in the present instance, is, however,
as Michaelis has already remarked, not easy to discern. If in the first
instance the apostles were endowed with the power of working miracles
(Matt. x. 1, 8) together with the gift of speaking freely (par)r(êsi/a)
before tribunals (v. 20), it could only be a more correct insight into
the spirituality of his kingdom that Jesus communicated to them by
breathing on them; but of this they were still destitute immediately
before the ascension, when, according to Acts i. 6, they asked whether,
with the impartation of the Spirit, within the next few days, would be
associated the restoration of the kingdom to Israel. If however it be
supposed that each successive impartation of the Spirit conferred no
new powers on the disciples, but was merely an addition in measure to
that which was already present in all its diversified powers: [2173] it
must still be held surprising that no Evangelist mentions, together
with an earlier impartation, a later amplification; but instead of
this, besides an incidental mention of the Spirit as enabling the
disciples to defend themselves before tribunals, in Luke (xii.
12),—which, since it is not here, as in Matthew, connected with a
mission, may be regarded merely as a reference to the time after the
later outpouring of the Spirit,—each of the Evangelists mentions only
one impartation, and represents this as the first and last. This is,
indeed, a clear proof that, to place in juxtaposition three
impartations and to regard them as so many different degrees, is only
an effort to harmonize the gospels by introducing into them what is
foreign to the text.

Thus there are in the New Testament three distinct opinions concerning
the impartation of the Spirit to the disciples of Jesus; and in two
respects they form a climax. As regards the time, Matthew places the
impartation the earliest—within the period of the natural life of
Jesus; Luke, the latest—in the time after his complete departure from
the earth; John in an intermediate position—in the days of the
resurrection. As regards the conception of the fact, it is the simplest
in Matthew, the least perceptible to the senses, for he has no special
and external act of impartation; John already has such a feature, in
the act of breathing on the disciples; while with Luke, in the Acts,
the gentle breathing has become a violent storm, which shakes the
house, and with which other miraculous appearances are united. These
two series of gradations stand in opposite relations to historical
probability. That the Spirit πνεῦμα, which, whether it be regarded as
natural or as supernatural, is in either case the animating power of
the messianic idea in its Christian modification, was communicated to
the adherents of Jesus so early as Matthew narrates, is contradicted by
his own representation, for according to him, that Christian
modification—the introduction of the characteristics of suffering and
death into the idea of the Messiah,—was not comprehended by the
disciples long after the mission described in Matt. x.; and as the
discourse of instructions there given contains other particulars also,
which will only suit later times and circumstances: it is easy to
imagine that the promise in question may have been erroneously referred
to that earlier period. Only after the death and resurrection of Jesus
can we conceive what the New Testament calls the πνεῦμα ἅγιον to have
been developed in the disciples, and in so far the representation of
John stands nearer to reality than that of Matthew; but, as certainly
the revolution in the sentiments of the disciples described in the
foregoing section, had not taken place so early as two days after the
crucifixion: the account of John does not approach so near to the truth
as that of Luke, who allows an interval of at least fifty days for the
formation of the new opinions in the disciples. The position of the
narratives with respect to historical truth is reversed by the other
climax. For in proportion as a narrative represents the impartation of
a spiritual power as perceptible to the senses, the formation of a
sentiment which might spring from natural causes as miraculous, the
origin of a faculty which can only have been developed gradually, as
instantaneous: in the same proportion does such a narrative diverge
from the truth; and in this respect, Matthew would stand at the least
distance from the truth, Luke at the greatest. If we therefore
recognise in the representation of the latter the most mature product
of tradition, it may be wondered how tradition can have wrought in two
opposite ways: receding from the truth in relation to the determination
of the manner and form of the impartation, approaching the truth in
relation to the determination of the time. But this is explained as
soon as it is considered, that in the changes in the determination of
the time, tradition was not guided by critical inquiry after truth—this
might well have caused surprise,—but by the same tendency that led to
the other alteration, namely, to present the impartation of the Spirit
as a single miraculous act. If Jesus was said to have shed the Spirit
on his disciples by a special act: it must seem appropriate to assign
this act to his state of glorification, and thus either with John to
place it after the resurrection, or with Luke after the ascension;
indeed the fourth Evangelist expressly remarks that in the lifetime of
Jesus, the Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet
glorified (vii. 39).

This interpretation of the opinion of the fourth Evangelist concerning
the impartation of the Spirit to the disciples, is attested as the
correct one by the fact, that it throws unexpected light on an
obscurity in his gospel with respect to which we were previously unable
to come to a decision. In relation to the farewell discourses of Jesus,
it was not possible to settle the dispute, whether what Jesus there
says of his return is to be referred to the days of his resurrection,
or to the outpouring of the Spirit, because the description of that
return as a seeing again seemed to speak as decidedly for the former,
as the observation that in that time they would no longer ask him
anything, and would understand him fully, for the latter: a dispute
which is decided in the most welcome manner, if it can be shown to be
the opinion of the narrator that the impartation of the Spirit fell in
the days of the resurrection. [2174] At first indeed it might be
thought, that this impartation, especially as in John it is connected
with the formal appointment of his disciples as his envoys, and the
communication of the authority to remit and retain sins (comp. Matt.
xviii. 18), would have been more appropriate at the close than the
commencement of the appearances of the risen Jesus, and in a full
assembly of the Apostles than in one from which Thomas was absent; but
on this account to suppose with Olshausen that the Evangelist for the
sake of brevity merely appends the impartation of the Spirit to the
first appearance, though it really belonged to a later interview, is an
inadmissible violence; and we must rather allow, that the author of the
fourth gospel regarded this first appearance of Jesus as the principal
one, and the one eight days later as merely supernumerary in favour of
Thomas. The appearance chap. xxi. is also a supplement, which the
author, when he wrote his gospel, either had not known, or at least did
not recollect.




§ 142.

THE SO-CALLED ASCENSION CONSIDERED AS A SUPERNATURAL AND AS A NATURAL
EVENT.

The ascension of Jesus is reported to us in the New Testament in three
different narratives, which in point of fulness of detail and
picturesqueness of description form a progressive series. Mark, who in
the last portion of his gospel is in general very brief and abrupt,
only says, that after Jesus had spoken to the disciples for the last
time, he was received up (ἀνελήφθη) into heaven and sat on the right
hand of God (xvi. 19). With scarcely more definiteness it is said in
the gospel of Luke that Jesus led his disciples out as far as Bethany,
ἐξω ἕως εἰς Βηθανίαν, and while he here with uplifted hands gave them
his blessing, he was parted from them (διέστη), and carried up into
heaven (ἐνεφέρετο); whereupon the disciples fell down and worshipped
him, and forthwith returned to Jerusalem with great joy (xxiv. 50 ff.).
In the introduction to the Acts, Luke gives more ample details
concerning this scene. On the mount of Olives, where Jesus delivered to
his disciples his last commands and promises, he was taken up before
their eyes (ἐπήρθη), and a cloud received him out of their sight. While
the disciples were watching him, as he went up into heaven on the
cloud, there suddenly stood by them two men in white apparel, who
induced them to desist from thus gazing after him by the assurance,
that the Jesus now taken from them would come again from heaven in the
same manner as he had just ascended into heaven; on which they were
satisfied, and returned to Jerusalem (i. 1–12).

The first impression from this narrative is clearly this: that it is
intended as a description of a miraculous event, an actual exaltation
of Jesus into heaven, as the dwelling-place of God, and an attestation
of this by angels; as orthodox theologians, both ancient and modern,
correctly maintain. The only question is, whether they can also help us
to surmount the difficulties which stand in our way when we attempt to
form a conception of such an event? One main difficulty is this: how
can a palpable body, which has still flesh and bones, and eats material
food, be qualified for a celestial abode? how can it so far liberate
itself from the laws of gravity, as to be capable of an ascent through
the air? and how can it be conceived that God gave so preternatural a
capability to Jesus by a miracle? [2175] The only possible reply to
these questions is, that the grosser elements which the body of Jesus
still retained after the resurrection, were removed before the
ascension, and only the finest essence of his corporeality, as the
integument of the soul, was taken by him into heaven. [2176] But as the
disciples who were present at the ascension observed no residuum of his
body which he had left behind, this leads either to the above mentioned
absurdity of an evaporation of the body of Jesus, or to Olshausen’s
process of subtilization which, still incomplete even after the
resurrection, was not perfected until the moment of the ascension; a
process which must have been conducted with singularly rapid retrograde
transitions in these last days, if the body of Jesus, when penetrating
into the closed room where the disciples were assembled, is to be
supposed immaterial; immediately after when Thomas touched him,
material; and lastly, in the ascension, again immaterial. The other
difficulty lies in the consideration, that according to a just idea of
the world, the seat of God and of the blessed, to which Jesus is
supposed to have been exalted, is not to be sought for in the upper
regions of the air, nor, in general, in any determinate place;—such a
locality could only be assigned to it in the childish, limited
conceptions of antiquity. We are well aware that he who would attain to
God and the circle of the blessed would make a superfluous circuit, if
he thought it necessary for this purpose to soar aloft into the higher
regions of the firmament; and the more intimately Jesus was acquainted
with God and divine things, the farther certainly would he be from
making such a circuit, or from being caused to make it by God. [2177]
Thus there would be no other resource than to suppose a divine
accommodation to the idea of the world in that age, and to say: God in
order to convince the disciples of the return of Jesus into the higher
world, although this world is in reality by no means to be sought for
in the upper air, nevertheless prepared the spectacle of such an
exaltation. [2178] But this is to represent God as theatrically
arranging an illusion.

As an attempt to set us free from such difficulties and absurdities,
the natural explanation of this narrative must needs be welcome. [2179]
This distinguishes in the evangelical accounts of the ascension, what
was actually beheld, and what was inferred by reasoning. Certainly,
when it is said in the Acts: while they beheld, he was taken up,
βλεπόντων αὐτῶν ἐπήρθη: the exaltation to heaven seems here to be
represented as a fact actually witnessed. But the Rationalists tell us
that we are not to understand ἐπήρθη, as signifying an elevation above
the earth, but only that Jesus, in order to bless the disciples, drew
up his form and thus appeared more elevated to them. They then bring
forward the word διέστη, he was parted from them, in the conclusion of
Luke’s gospel, and interpret it to mean that Jesus in taking leave of
his disciples removed himself farther from them. Hereupon, they
continue, in the same way as on the mount of Transfiguration, a cloud
was interposed between Jesus and the disciples, and together with the
numerous olive-trees on the mount, concealed him from their sight; a
result which, on the assurance of two unknown men, they regarded as a
reception of Jesus into heaven. But, when Luke in the Acts immediately
connects ἐπήρθη with the statement, and a cloud received him, καὶ
νεφέλη ὑπέλαβεν αὐτὸν: he implies that the taking up was an
introduction to the being received by the cloud; which it would not be
if it were a mere drawing up of the body, but only if it were an
exaltation of Jesus above the earth, since only in this case could a
cloud float under, carry, and envelop him, which is the idea expressed
by ὑπέλαβεν. Again, in the Gospel of Luke, the fact that he was parted
from them is represented as something which took place while he blessed
them, ἐν τῷ εὐλογεῖν αὐτον αὐτοὺς; now no one when pronouncing a
benediction on another, will remove from him: whereas it appears very
suitable, that Jesus while communicating his blessing to the disciples
should be carried upward, and thus, while rising, have continued to
extend over them his outstretched hand as a symbol of his blessing.
Thus the natural explanation of the disappearance in the cloud falls to
the ground of itself; while in the supposition that the two individuals
clothed in white apparel were natural men, Paulus only disguises a
final and strongly marked essay of the opinion espoused by Bahrdt and
Venturini, that several epochs in the life of Jesus, especially after
his crucifixion, were brought about by the agency of secret colleagues.
And Jesus himself—what, according to this opinion, must we suppose to
have become of him after this last separation from his disciples? Shall
we, with Bahrdt, dream of an Essene lodge, into which he retired after
the completion of his work? and with Brennecke appeal, in proof that
Jesus long continued silently to work for the welfare of mankind, to
his appearance for the purpose of the conversion of Paul? But, taking
the narrative of the Acts as historical, this was connected with
circumstances and effects which could be produced by no natural man,
even though a member of a secret order. Or shall we with Paulus
suppose, that shortly after the last interview the body of Jesus sank
beneath the injuries it had received? This could not well have happened
in the very next moments after he had appeared still active among his
disciples, so that the two men who joined them might have been
witnesses of his decease,—who, even admitting this, would not have
spoken in accordance with the truth; but if he continued to live for
any length of time he must have had the intention to remain for that
period in the concealment of a secret society; and to this must then be
supposed to belong the two men clothed in white, who, doubtless with
his previous sanction, persuaded the disciples that he had ascended
into heaven. [2180] But this is a mode of representation, from which in
this instance as in every other, a sound judgment must turn away with
aversion.




§ 143.

INSUFFICIENCY OF THE NARRATIVES OF THE ASCENSION. MYTHICAL CONCEPTION
OF THOSE NARRATIVES.

Among all the New Testament histories of miracles, the ascension least
demanded such an expenditure of perverted acumen, since the
attestations to its historical validity are peculiarly weak,—not only
to us who, having no risen Jesus, can consequently have no ascended
one, but apart from all prior conclusions and in every point of view.
Matthew and John, who according to the common idea were the two
eyewitnesses among the Evangelists, do not mention it; it is narrated
by Mark and Luke alone, while in the rest of the New Testament writings
decided allusions to it are wanting. But this absence of allusions to
the ascension in the rest of the New Testament is denied by orthodox
expositors. When, say they, Jesus in Matthew (xxvi. 64), declares
before the high priest, that hereafter the Son of Man will be seen
sitting at the right hand of God: this presupposes an exaltation
thither, consequently an ascension; when in John (iii. 13), he says, no
one hath ascended into heaven but the Son of Man who came from heaven,
and at another time (vi. 62) tells the disciples that they will
hereafter see him ascend where he was before; further, when on the
morning of the resurrection he declares that he is not yet ascended to
his Father, implying that he is about to do so (xx. 17): there could
hardly be more explicit allusions to the ascension; again, when the
apostles in the Acts so often speak of an exaltation of Jesus to the
right hand of God (ii. 33, v. 31, comp. vii. 56), and Paul represents
him as ascended up far above all heavens ἀναβὰς ὑπεράνω πάντων τῶν
οὐρανῶν (Ephes. iv. 10), Peter, as gone into heaven πορευθεὶς εἰς
οὐρανὸν (1 Pet. iii. 22): there can be no doubt that they all knew of
his ascension. [2181] All these passages, however, with the exception
perhaps of John vi. 62, where a SEEING the Son of Man ascend, θεωρεῖν
ἀναβαίνοντα τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, is spoken of, contain only in
general his exaltation to heaven, without intimating that it was an
external, visible fact, that took place in the presence of the
disciples. Rather, when we find Paul in 1 Cor. xv. 5 ff. ranking the
appearance of Jesus to himself, which occurred long after the alleged
ascension, with the Christophanies before this epoch, so entirely
without any pause or indication of a distinction: we must doubt, not
merely that all the appearances which he enumerates besides his own can
have occurred before the ascension, [2182] but whether the Apostle can
have had any knowledge at all of an ascension as an external fact which
closed the earthly life of Jesus. As to the author of the fourth
gospel,—in his metaphorical language, we are not compelled by the word
θεωρῆτε, any more than by the ὄψεσθε in relation to the angels
ascending and descending upon Jesus, i. 52, to ascribe to him a
knowledge of the visible ascension of Jesus, of which he gives no
intimation at the conclusion of his gospel.

Commentators have, it is true, taken all possible pains to explain the
want of a narrative of the ascension in the first and fourth gospels,
in a way which may not prove inimical either to the authority of the
writings, or to the historical value of the fact. They maintain that
the Evangelists who are silent on the subject, held it either
unnecessary, or impossible, to narrate the ascension. They held it
unnecessary, say these expositors, either intrinsically, from the minor
importance of the event; [2183] or extrinsically, on the consideration
that it was generally known as a part of the evangelical tradition;
[2184] John in particular supposed it to be known from Mark and Luke;
[2185] or lastly, both Matthew and John omitted it as not belonging to
the earthly life of Jesus, to the description of which their writings
were exclusively devoted. [2186] But we must contend, on the contrary,
that the life of Jesus, especially that enigmatical life which he led
after his return from the grave, absolutely required such a close as
the ascension. Whether it were generally known or not, whether it were
important or unimportant,—the simple æsthetic interest which dictates
even to an uncultivated author, that a narrative should be wound up
with a conclusion, must have led every evangelical writer who knew of
the ascension to mention it, though it were but summarily at the end of
his history, in order to avoid the strange impression left by the first
gospel and still more by the fourth, as narratives losing themselves in
vague obscurity. Hence our apologists resort to the supposition that
the first and fourth Evangelists held it impossible to give an account
of the ascension of Jesus, because the eyewitnesses, however long they
might gaze after him, could still only see him hovering in the air and
encircled by the cloud, not entering heaven and taking his place on the
right hand of God. [2187] But in the ideas of the ancient world, to
which heaven was nearer than to us, an entrance into the clouds was in
itself a real ascent into heaven, as we see from the stories of Romulus
and Elijah.

Thus it is undeniable that the above Evangelists were ignorant of the
ascension: but the conclusion of the most recent criticism, that this
ignorance is a reproach to the first Evangelist as a sign of his
unapostolic character, [2188] is the less in place here, because the
event in question is rendered suspicious not merely by the silence of
two Evangelists, but also by the want of agreement between those who
narrate it. Mark is at variance with Luke, nay, Luke is at variance
with himself. In the account of the former, it appears as if Jesus had
ascended into heaven immediately from the meal in which he appeared to
the eleven, consequently from out of a house in Jerusalem; for the
phrases: he appeared with the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided
them—and he said—So then after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received up into heaven, etc., ἀνακειμένοις—ἐφανερώθη· καὶ ὠνείδισε—καὶ
ἐ͂ιπεν—Ὁ μὲν οὖν κύριος, μετὰ τὸ λαλῆσαι αὐτοῖς, ἀνελήφθη κ.τ.λ. have an
immediate dependence on each other, and it is only by violence that a
change of place or a distinction of time can be introduced. [2189] Now
an ascent into heaven directly out of a room is certainly not easy to
imagine; hence Luke represents it as taking place in the open air. In
his gospel he makes Jesus immediately before his ascension, lead out
his disciples as far as Bethany ἕως εἰς Βηθανίαν, but in the Acts he
places the scene on the mount called Olivet ὄρος τὸ καλούμενον ἐλαιῶνα;
this, however, cannot be imputed to him as a contradiction, since
Bethany lay in the neighbourhood of the mount of Olives. [2190] But
there is a more important divergency in his statement of time; for in
his gospel, as in Mark, we are left to infer that the ascension took
place on the same day with the resurrection: whereas in the Acts it is
expressly remarked, that the two events were separated by an interval
of forty days. It has already been remarked that the latter
determination of time must have come to the knowledge of Luke in the
interim between the composition of the gospel and that of the Acts. The
more numerous the narratives of appearances of the risen Jesus, and the
more various the places to which they were assigned: the less would the
short space of a day suffice for his life on earth after the
resurrection; while the determination of the lengthened period which
had become necessary to forty days precisely, had its foundation in the
part which this number is known to have played in the Jewish, and
already in the Christian legend. The people of Israel were forty years
in the wilderness; Moses was forty days on mount Sinai; he and Elias
fasted forty days; and Jesus himself previous to the temptation
remained the same length of time without nourishment in the wilderness.
As, then, all these mysterious intermediate states and periods of
transition were determined by the number forty: this number presented
itself as especially appropriate for the determination of the
mysterious interval between the resurrection and ascension of Jesus.
[2191]

As regards the description of the event itself, it might be thought
admissible to ascribe the silence of Mark, and of Luke in his gospel,
concerning the cloud and the angels, purely to the brevity of their
narratives; but since Luke at the close of his gospel narrates
circumstantially enough the conduct of the disciples—how they fell down
and worshipped the ascended Jesus, and returned to the city with great
joy: so he would doubtless have pointed out the information
communicated to them by angels as the immediate source of their joy,
had he known anything of such a particular at the time when he composed
his first writing. Hence this feature seems rather to have been
gradually formed in tradition, in order to render due honour to this
last point also in the life of Jesus, and to present a confirmation of
the insufficient testimony of men as to his exaltation into heaven by
the mouth of two heavenly witnesses.

As, according to this, those who knew of an ascension of Jesus, had by
no means the same idea of its particular circumstances: there must have
been in general two different modes of conceiving the close of the life
of Jesus; some regarding it as a visible ascension, others not so.
[2192] When Matthew makes Jesus before the tribunal of the high priest
predict his exaltation to the right hand of the divine power (xxvi.
64), and after his resurrection declare that now all power is given to
him in heaven and earth (xxviii. 18); and nevertheless has nothing of a
visible ascension, but on the contrary puts into the mouth of Jesus the
assurance: I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world, ἐγὼ
μεθ’ ὑμῶν εἰμι πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας ἕως τῆς συντελείας τοῦ αἰῶνος (v. 20):
it is evident that the latent idea, on which his representation is
founded, is that Jesus, doubtless immediately on his resurrection,
ascended invisibly to the Father, though at the same time remaining
invisibly with his followers; and that out of this concealment he, as
often as he found it expedient, revealed himself in Christophanies. The
same view is to be discerned in the Apostle Paul, when in 1 Cor. xv. he
undistinguishingly places the appearance to himself of the Christ
already ascended into heaven, in one series with the earlier
Christophanies; and also the author of the fourth gospel and the rest
of the New Testament writers only presuppose what must necessarily be
presupposed according to the messianic passage: Sit thou at my right
hand, Ps. cx. 1: that Jesus was exalted to the right hand of God;
without deciding anything as to the manner of the exaltation, or
representing to themselves the ascension as a visible one. The
imagination of the primitive Christians must however have felt a strong
temptation to depict this exaltation as a brilliant spectacle. When it
was once concluded that the Messiah Jesus had arrived at so exalted a
position, it would appear desirable to gaze after him, as it were, on
his way thither. If it was expected, in accordance with the prophecy of
Daniel, that his future return from heaven would be a visible descent
in the clouds: this would naturally suggest that his departure to
heaven should be represented as a visible ascent on a cloud; and when
Luke makes the two white-apparelled angels, who joined the disciples
after the removal of Jesus, say: this same Jesus, who is taken up from
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven (Acts i. 11): we need only take the converse of this
declaration in order to have before us the genesis of the conception of
the ascension of Jesus; for the mode of conclusion was this: as Jesus
will at some future time return from heaven in the clouds, so he must
surely have departed thither [2193] in the same manner.

Compared with these primary incentives, the Old Testament precedents
which the ascension of Jesus has in the translation of Enoch (Gen. v.
24; comp. Wis. xliv. 16, xlix. 16; Heb. xi. 5), and especially in the
ascension of Elijah (2 Kings ii. 11; comp. Wis. xlviii. 9; 1 Macc. ii.
58), together with the Grecian and Roman apotheoses of Hercules and
Romulus, recede into the background. Apart from the question whether
the latter were known to the second and third Evangelists; the
statement relative to Enoch is too vague; while the chariot and horses
of fire that transported Elijah were not adapted to the milder spirit
of Christ. Instead of this the enveloping cloud and the removal while
holding a farewell conversation, may appear to have been borrowed from
the later representation of the removal of Moses, which however in
other particulars has considerable divergencies from that of Jesus.
[2194] Perhaps also one trait in the narrative of the Acts may be
explained out of the history of Elijah. When this prophet, before his
translation, is entreated by his servant Elisha that he will bequeath
him a double measure of his spirit: Elijah attaches to the concession
of this boon the condition: if thou see me when I am taken from thee,
it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so; whence we
might perhaps gather the reason why Luke (Acts i. 9) lays stress on the
fact that the disciples beheld Jesus as he went up (βλεπόντων αὐτῶν
ἐπήρθη): namely, because, according to the narrative concerning Elijah,
this was necessary, if the disciples were to receive the spirit of
their master.









CONCLUDING DISSERTATION.

THE DOGMATIC IMPORT OF THE LIFE OF JESUS.

§ 144.

NECESSARY TRANSITION FROM CRITICISM TO DOGMA.

The results of the inquiry which we have now brought to a close, have
apparently annihilated the greatest and most valuable part of that
which the Christian has been wont to believe concerning his Saviour
Jesus, have uprooted all the animating motives which he has gathered
from his faith, and withered all his consolations. The boundless store
of truth and life which for eighteen centuries has been the aliment of
humanity, seems irretrievably dissipated; the most sublime levelled
with the dust, God divested of his grace, man of his dignity, and the
tie between heaven and earth broken. Piety turns away with horror from
so fearful an act of desecration, and strong in the impregnable
self-evidence of its faith, pronounces that, let an audacious criticism
attempt what it will, all which the Scriptures declare, and the Church
believes of Christ, will still subsist as eternal truth, nor needs one
iota of it to be renounced. Thus at the conclusion of the criticism of
the history of Jesus, there presents itself this problem: to
re-establish dogmatically that which has been destroyed critically.

At the first glance, this problem appears to exist merely as a
challenge addressed by the believer to the critic, not as a result of
the moral requirements of either. The believer would appear to need no
re-establishment of the faith, since for him it cannot be subverted by
criticism. The critic seems to require no such re-establishment, since
he is able to endure the annihilation resulting from his own labours.
Hence it might be supposed that the critic, when he seeks to rescue the
dogma from the flames which his criticism has kindled, acts falsely in
relation to his own point of view, since, to satisfy the believer, he
treats what is valueless for himself as if he esteemed it to be a
jewel; while in relation to the believer, he is undertaking a
superfluous task, in labouring to defend that which the latter
considers in no way endangered.

But on a nearer view the case appears otherwise. To all belief, not
built on demonstration, doubt is inherent, though it may not be
developed; the most firmly believing Christian has within him the
elements of criticism as a latent deposit of unbelief, or rather as a
negative germ of knowledge, and only by its constant repression can he
maintain the predominance of his faith, which is thus essentially a
re-established faith. And just as the believer is intrinsically a
sceptic or critic, so, on the other hand, the critic is intrinsically a
believer. In proportion as he is distinguished from the naturalistic
theologian, and the free-thinker,—in proportion as his criticism is
conceived in the spirit of the nineteenth century,—he is filled with
veneration for every religion, and especially for the substance of the
sublimest of all religions, the Christian, which he perceives to be
identical with the deepest philosophical truth; and hence, after having
in the course of his criticism exhibited only the differences between
his conviction and the historical belief of the Christian, he will feel
urged to place that identity in a just light.

Further, our criticism, though in its progress it treats of details,
yet on becoming part of our internal conviction, resolves itself into
the simple element of doubt, which the believer neutralizes by an
equally simple veto, and then spreads anew in undiminished luxuriance
all the fulness of his creed. But hereby the decisions of criticism are
only dismissed, not vanquished, and that which is believed is supported
by no intermediate proof, but rests absolutely on its own evidence.
Criticism cannot but direct itself against this absence of intermediate
proof, and thus the controversy which seemed ended is renewed, and we
are thrown back to the beginning of our inquiry; yet with a difference
which constitutes a step forward in the discussion. Hitherto our
criticism had for its object the data of Christianity, as historically
presented in the evangelical records; now, these data having been
called in question in their historical form, assume that of a mental
product, and find a refuge in the soul of the believer; where they
exist, not as a simple history, but as a reflected history, that is, a
confession of faith, a received dogma. Against this dogma, presenting
itself totally unsupported by evidence, criticism must indeed awake, as
it does against all deficiency of proof, in the character of a
negativing power, and a contender for intermediate proof: it will,
however, no longer be occupied with history, but with doctrines. Thus
our historical criticism is followed up by dogmatical criticism, and it
is only after the faith has passed through both these trials, that it
is thoroughly tested and constituted science.

This second process through which the faith has to pass, ought, like
the first, to be made the subject of a distinct work: I shall here
merely give a sketch of its most important features, that I may not
terminate an historical criticism without pointing out its ultimate
object, which can only be arrived at by dogmatical criticism as a
sequel.




§ 145.

THE CHRISTOLOGY OF THE ORTHODOX SYSTEM.

The dogmatic import of the life of Jesus implicitly received, and
developed on this basis, constitutes the orthodox doctrine of the
Christ.

Its fundamental principles are found in the New Testament. The root of
faith in Jesus was the conviction of his resurrection. He who had been
put to death, however great during his life, could not, it was thought,
be the Messiah: his miraculous restoration to life proved so much the
more strongly that he was the Messiah. Freed by his resurrection from
the kingdom of shades, and at the same time elevated above the sphere
of earthly humanity, he was now translated to the heavenly regions, and
had taken his place at the right hand of God (Acts ii. 32 ff., iii. 15
ff., v. 30 ff.; and elsewhere). Now, his death appeared to be the chief
article in his messianic destination; according to Isa. liii., he had
suffered for the sins of his people and of mankind (Acts viii. 32 ff.;
comp. Matt. xx. 28; John i. 29, 36; 1 John ii. 2); his blood poured out
on the cross, operated like that which on the great day of atonement
the high priest sprinkled on the mercy-seat (Rom. iii. 25); he was the
pure lamb by whose blood the believing are redeemed (1 Pet. i. 18 f.);
the eternal, sinless high priest, who by the offering of his own body,
at once effected that, which the Jewish high priests were unable to
effect, by their perpetually repeated sacrifices of animals (Heb. x. 10
ff., etc.). But, thenceforth, the Messiah who was exalted to the right
hand of God, could not have been a common man: not only was he anointed
with the divine spirit in a greater measure than any prophet (Acts iv.
27, x. 38); not only did he prove himself to be a divine messenger by
miracles and signs (Acts ii. 22); but also, according as the one idea
or the other was most readily formed, either he was supernaturally
engendered by the Holy Spirit (Matt. and Luke i.), or he had descended
as the Word and Wisdom of God into an earthly body (John i.). As,
before his appearance on the earth, he was in the bosom of the Father,
in divine majesty (John xvii. 5); so his descent into the world of
mortals, and still more his submission to an ignominious death, was a
voluntary humiliation, to which he was moved by his love to mankind
(Phil. ii. 5 ff.). The risen and ascended Jesus will one day return to
wake the dead and judge the world (Acts i. 11, xvii. 31); he even now
takes charge of his church (Rom. viii. 34; 1 John ii. 1), participating
in the government of the world, as he originally did in its creation
(Matt. xxviii. 18; John i. 3, 10; Col. i. 16 f.). In addition to all
this, every trait in the image of the Messiah as sketched by the
popular expectation, was attributed with necessary or gratuitous
modifications to Jesus; nay, the imagination, once stimulated, invented
new characteristics.

How richly fraught with blessing and elevation, with encouragement and
consolation, were the thoughts which the early Church derived from this
view of the Christ! By the mission of the Son of God into the world, by
his delivery of himself to death for the sake of the world, heaven and
earth are reconciled (2 Cor. v. 18 ff.; Eph. i. 10; Col. i. 20); by
this most stupendous sacrifice, the love of God is securely guaranteed
to man (Rom. v. 8 ff., viii. 31 ff.; 1 John iv. 9), and the brightest
hopes are revealed to him. Did the Son of God become man? Then are men
his brethren, and as such the children of God, and heirs with Christ to
the treasure of divine bliss (Rom. viii. 16 f., 29). The servile
relation of man to God, as it existed under the law, has ceased; love
has taken the place of the fear of the punishment threatened by the law
(Rom. viii. 15; Gal. iv. 1 ff.). Believers are redeemed from the curse
of the law by Christ’s sacrifice of himself, inasmuch as he suffered a
death on which the law had laid a curse (Gal. iii. 13). Now, there is
no longer imposed on us the impossible task of satisfying all the
demands of the law (Gal. iii. 10 f.)—a task which, as experience shows,
no man fulfils (Rom. i. 18-iii. 20), which, by reason of his sinful
nature, no man can fulfil (Rom. v. 12 ff.), and which only involves him
who strives to fulfil it, more and more deeply in the most miserable
conflict with himself (Rom. vii. 7 ff.): whereas he who believes in
Christ, and confides in the atoning efficacy of his death, possesses
the favour of God; not by works and qualifications of his own, but by
the free mercy of God, is the man who throws himself on that mercy just
before God, by which all self-exaltation is excluded (Rom. iii. 31
ff.). As the Mosaic law is no longer binding on the believer, he being
dead to it with Christ (Rom. vii. 1 ff.); as, moreover, by the eternal
and all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ, the Jewish sacrificial and
priestly service is abolished (Heb.); therefore the partition wall
which separated the Jews and Gentiles is broken down: the latter, who
before were aliens and strangers to the theocracy, without God and
without hope in the world, are now invited to participate in the new
covenant, and free access is opened to them to the paternal God; so
that the two portions of mankind, formerly separated by hostile
opinions, are now at peace with each other, members in common of the
body of Christ—stones in the spiritual building of his Church (Eph. ii.
11 ff.). But to have justifying faith in the death of Christ, is,
virtually, to die with him spiritually—that is, to die to sin; and as
Christ arose from the dead to a new and immortal life, so must the
believer in him arise from the death of sin to a new life of
righteousness and holiness, put off the old man and put on the new
(Rom. vi. 1 ff.). In this, Christ himself aids him by his Spirit, who
fills those whom he inspires with spiritual strivings, and makes them
ever more and more free from the slavery of sin (Rom. viii. 1 ff.). Nor
alone spiritually, will the Spirit of Christ animate those in whom he
dwells, but corporeally also, for at the end of their earthly course,
God, through Christ, will resuscitate their bodies, as he did the body
of Christ (Rom. viii. 11). Christ, whom the bonds of death and the
nether world could not hold, has vanquished both for us, and has
delivered the believer from the fear of these dread powers which rule
over mortality (Rom. viii. 38 f.; 1 Cor. xv. 55 ff.; Heb. ii. 14 f.).
His resurrection not only confers atoning efficacy on his death (Rom.
iv. 25), but at the same time is the pledge of our own future
resurrection, of our share in Christ in a future life, in his messianic
kingdom, to the blessedness of which he will, at his second advent,
lead all his people. Meanwhile, we may console ourselves that we have
in him an Intercessor, who from his own experience of the weakness and
frailty of our nature, which he himself assumed, and in which he was in
all points tempted as we are, but without sin, knows how much
indulgence and aid we need (Heb. ii. 17 f., iv. 15 f.).

The expediency of describing in compendious forms the riches of their
faith in Christ, was early felt by his followers. They celebrated him
as Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at
the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us, Χριστὸς ὁ
ἀποθανών, μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ ἐγερθεὶς, ὃς καὶ ἔστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ θεοῦ, ὅς
καὶ ἐντυνχάνει ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν (Rom. viii. 34); or with more particularity as
Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to
the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to
the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Ἰ. Χ. ὁ
Κύριος, γενόμενος ἐκ σπέρματος Δαβὶδ κατὰ σάρκα, ὁρισθεὶς υἱὸς θεοῦ ἐν
δυνάμει κατὰ πνεῦμα ἁγιωσύνης, ἐξ ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν (Rom. i. 3 f.); and
as confessedly the great mystery of godliness, ὁμολογουμένως μέγα τῆς
εὐσεβείας μυστήριον, the following propositions were presented: God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory, θεὸς ἐφανερώθη ἐν σαρκὶ, ἐδικαιώθη ἐν πνεύματι, ὤφθη ἀγγέλοις,
ἐκηρυχθη ἐν ἔθνεσιν, ἐπιστεύθη ἐν κόσμῳ, ἀνελήφθη ἐν δόξῃ (1 Tim. iii.
16).

The baptismal formula (Matt. xxviii. 19), by its allocation of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, presented a sort of framework in which to arrange
the materials of the new faith. On this basis was constructed in the
first centuries what was called the rule of faith, regula fidei, which
in divers forms, some more concise, others more diffuse, some more
popular, others more subtle, is found in the different fathers. [2195]
The more popular form at length settled into what is called the creed
of the apostles. This symbol, in that edition of it which is received
in the evangelical church, has in its second and most elaborate article
on the Son, the following points of belief: et (credo) in Jesum
Christum, filium ejus (Dei patris) unicum, Dominum nostrum; qui
conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, natus ex Maria virgine; passus sub
Pontio Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus et sepultus, descendit ad inferna;
tertia die resurrexit a mortuis, ascendit ad cœlos, sedet ad dextram
Dei patris omnipotentis; inde venturus est, judicare vivos et mortuos.

Together with this popular form of the confession of faith in relation
to Christ, there was also framed a more rigorous and minute theological
digest, occasioned by the differences and controversies which early
arose on certain points. The fundamental thesis of the Christian faith,
that the Word was made flesh, ὁ λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο, or, God was
manifested in the flesh, θεὸς ἐφανερώθη ἐν σαρκὶ, was endangered on all
sides, one questioning the Godhead, another the manhood, and a third
the veritable union of the two natures.

It is true that those who, like the Ebionites, denied the Godhead, or
like that sect of the Gnostics called Docetæ, the manhood of Christ,
separated themselves too decidedly from the Christian community, which
on her part maintained that it was necessary that the mediator of God
and man should unite both in friendship and harmony by means of a
proper relationship to each, and that while he represented man to God,
he should reveal God to man, ἔδει τὸν μεσίτην θεοῦ τε καὶ ἀνθρώπων διὰ
ἰδίας πρὸς ἑκατέρους οἰκειότητος εἰς φιλίαν καὶ ὁμόνοιαν τοὺς
ἀμφοτέρους συναγαγεῖν, καὶ θεῷ μὲν παραστῆσαι τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἀνθρώποις
δὲ γνωρίσαι τὸν θεόν. [2196] But when it was merely the plenitude of
the one nature or the other, which was contested,—as when Arius
maintained that the being who became man in Christ was indeed divine,
but created, and subordinate to the supreme God; when, while ascribing
to Christ a human body, he held that the place of the soul was occupied
by that superior being; when Apollinaris maintained that not only the
body of Jesus was truly human, but his soul also, and that the divine
being only served in the stead of the third principle in man, the νοῦς
(understanding);—these were opinions to which it was easier to give a
Christian guise. Nevertheless the Church rejected the Arian idea of a
subordinate God become man in Jesus, for this reason among others less
essential, that on this theory the image of the Godhead would not have
been manifested in Christ; [2197] and she condemned the idea of Arius
and Apollinaris, that the human nature of Christ had not the human ψυχὴ
(soul), or the human νοῦς (understanding), for this reason chiefly,
that only by the union of the divine, with an entire human nature,
could the human race be redeemed. [2198]

Not only might the one or the other aspect of the nature of Christ be
defaced or put out of sight, but in relation also to the union of the
two, there might be error, and again in two opposite directions. The
devout enthusiasm of many led them to believe, that they could not draw
too closely the newly-entwined bond between heaven and earth; hence
they no longer wished to distinguish between the Godhead and manhood in
Christ, and since he had appeared in one person, they acknowledged in
him only one nature, that of the Son of God made flesh. Others, more
scrupulous, could not reconcile themselves to such a confusion of the
divine and the human: it seemed to them blasphemous to say that a human
mother had given birth to God: hence they maintained that she had only
borne the man whom the Son of God selected as his temple; and that in
Christ there were two natures, united indeed so far as the adoration of
his followers was concerned, but distinct as regarded their essence. To
the Church, both these views appeared to encroach on the mystery of the
incarnation: if the two natures were held to be permanently distinct,
then was the union of the divine and human, the vital point of
Christianity, destroyed; if a mixture of the two were admitted, then
neither nature in its individual quality was capable of a union with
the other, and thus again no true unity would be attained. Hence both
these opinions were condemned, the latter in the person of Eutyches,
the former, not with equal justice, in that of Nestorius; and as the
Nicene creed established the true Godhead of Christ, so that of
Chalcedon established his true and perfect manhood, and the union of
the two natures in one undivided person. [2199] When subsequently there
arose a controversy concerning the will of Christ, analogous to that
concerning his nature, the Church, in accordance with its previous
decisions, pronounced that in Christ, as the God-man, there were two
wills, distinct but not discordant, the human will being subordinate to
the divine. [2200]

In comparison with the controversies on the being and essence of
Christ, the other branch of the faith, the doctrine of his work, was
developed in tranquillity. The most comprehensive view of it was this:
the Son of God, by assuming the human nature, gave it a holy and divine
character [2201]—above all he endowed it with immortality; [2202] while
in a moral view, the mission of the Son of God into the world being the
highest proof of the love of God, was the most efficacious means of
awakening a return of love in the human breast. [2203] To this one
great effect of the appearance of Christ, were annexed collateral
benefits: his salutary teaching, his sublime example, were held up to
view, [2204] but especial importance was attached to the violent death
which he suffered. The idea of substitution, already given in the New
Testament, was more fully developed: the death of Jesus was regarded,
now as a ransom paid by him to the devil for the liberation of mankind,
who had fallen into the power of the evil one through sin; now as a
means devised by God for removing guilt, and enabling him to remit the
punishment threatened to the sins of man, without detriment to his
truthfulness, Christ having taken that punishment on himself. [2205]
The latter idea was worked up by Anselm, in his book entitled Cur Deus
homo, into the well known theory of satisfaction, by which the doctrine
of Christ’s work of redemption is placed in the closest connexion with
that of his person. Man owes to God perfect obedience; but the
sinner—and such, are all men—withholds from God the service and honour
which are His due. Now God, by reason of his justice, cannot suffer an
offence against his honour: therefore, either man must voluntarily
restore to God that which is God’s, nay, must, for complete
satisfaction, render to him more than he has hitherto withheld; or, God
must as a punishment take from man that which is man’s, namely, the
happiness for which he was originally created. Man is not able to do
the former; for as he owes to God all the duties that he can perform,
in order not to fall into sin, he can have no overplus of merit,
wherewith to cover past sins. On the other hand, that God should obtain
satisfaction by the infliction of eternal punishment, is opposed to his
unchangeable goodness, which moves him actually to lead man to that
bliss for which he was originally destined. This, however, cannot
happen consistently with divine justice, unless satisfaction be made
for man, and according to the measure of that which has been taken from
God, something be rendered to him, greater than all else except God.
But this can be none other than God himself; and as, on the other hand,
man alone can satisfy for man: it must therefore be a God-man who gives
satisfaction. Moreover this cannot consist in active obedience, in a
sinless life, because every reasonable being owes this to God on his
own behalf; but to suffer death, the wages of sin, a sinless being is
not bound, and thus the satisfaction for the sins of man consists in
the death of the God-man, whose reward, since he himself, as one with
God, cannot be rewarded, is put to the account of man.

This doctrinal system of the ancient church concerning the person and
work of Christ, passed also into the confessions of the Lutheran
churches, and was still more elaborately developed by their
theologians. [2206] With regard to the person of Christ, they adhered
to the union of the divine and human natures in one person: according
to them, in the act of this union, unitio personalis, which was
simultaneous with the conception, it was the divine nature of the Son
of God which adopted the human into the unity of its personality; the
state of union, the unio personalis, was neither essential, nor yet
merely accidental, neither mystical nor moral, still less merely
verbal, but a real and supernatural union, and eternal in its duration.
From this union with the divine nature, there result to the human
nature in Christ certain pre-eminent advantages: namely, what at first
appears a deficiency, that of being in itself impersonal, and of having
personality only by its union with the divine nature; further,
impeccability, and the possibility of not dying. Besides these special
advantages, the human nature of Christ obtains others also from its
union with the divine. The relation of the two natures is not a dead,
external one, but a reciprocal penetration, a περιχώρησις; an union not
like that of two boards glued together, but like that of fire and metal
in glowing iron, or of the body and soul in man. This communion of
natures, communio naturarum, is manifested by a communication of
properties, communicatio idiomatum, in virtue of which the human nature
participates in the advantages of the divine, and the divine in the
redeeming work of the human. This relation is expressed in the
propositions concerning the person, propositionibus personalibus, and
those concerning the properties, idiomaticis; the former are
propositions in which the concrete of the one nature, i.e. the one
nature as conceived in the person of Christ, is predicated of the
other, as in 1 Cor. xv. 47: the second man is the Lord from heaven; the
latter are propositions in which determinations of one or the other
nature, are referred to the entire person (genus idiomaticum), or in
which acts of the entire person are referred to one or the other nature
(genus apotelesmaticum), or lastly, in which attributes of the one
nature are transferred to the other, which however is only possible
from the divine to the human, not from the human to the divine (genus
auchematicum).

In passing through the successive stages of the work of redemption,
Christ with his person endowed with two natures, experienced, according
to the expression of the dogmatical theologians, founded on Phil. ii. 6
ff., two states, statum exinanitionis, and statum exaltationis. His
human nature in its union with the divine, participated from the moment
of conception in divine properties: but as during his earthly life
Jesus made no continuous use of them, that life to the time of his
death and burial, is regarded as a state of humiliation: whereas, with
the resurrection, or even with the descent into hell, commenced the
state of exaltation which was consummated by the sessio ad dextram
patris.

As to the work of Christ, the doctrine of our Church attributes to him
a triple office. As prophet, he has revealed to man the highest truth,
the divine decree of redemption, confirming his testimony by miracles;
and he still unceasingly controls the announcement of this truth. As
high priest, he has, on the one hand, by his irreproachable life,
fulfilled the law in our stead (obedientia activa); on the other, he
has borne, in his sufferings and death, the punishment which impended
over us (obedientia passiva), and now perpetually intercedes for us
with the Father. Lastly, as king, he governs the world, and more
particularly the Church, which he will lead from the conflicts of earth
to the glory of heaven, completing its destiny by the general
resurrection and the last judgment.




§ 146.

OBJECTIONS TO THE CHRISTOLOGY OF THE CHURCH.

The Reformed Church did not go thus far with the Lutherans in their
doctrine of the person of Christ, for they did not admit the last and
boldest consequence drawn by the latter from the union of the manhood
and Godhead—the communicatio idiomatum, or communication of properties.
The Lutherans themselves did not hold that the properties of the human
nature were communicated to the divine, nor that all the properties of
the divine nature, eternity for example, could be communicated to the
human; [2207] and this gave occasion on the part of the Reformed
Church, to the following objection: the communication of properties
must be reciprocal and complete, or it is none at all; moreover, by the
communication of the properties of an infinite nature to a finite one,
the latter is not less annihilated as to its essence than an infinite
nature would be, were it to receive the properties of a finite one.
[2208] When the Lutherans sought shelter in the position, that the
properties of the one nature were only so far shared by the other, as
according to its character is possible, uti per suam indolem potest,
[2209] they in fact did away altogether with the communicatio
idiomatum; and indeed this doctrine has been explicitly given up even
by orthodox theologians since Reinhard.

But the simple root of this complicated exchange of properties, the
union of the divine and human natures in one person, has also met with
contradiction.

The Socinians denied it on the ground that two natures, each of which
alone constitutes a person, cannot be united to form a single person,
especially when they possess properties so opposite, as where the one
is immortal, the other mortal, the one uncreated, the other created;
[2210] and the Rationalists agree with them, insisting more
particularly that the formulæ of the Church, in which the above union
is defined, are almost entirely negative, thus presenting no conception
to the mind, and that in a Christ, who by the aid of a divine nature
dwelling within him, withstood evil and kept himself from sin, the man
who is destitute of such aid can have no true example. [2211]

The essential and tenable points of the rationalistic objections to
this doctrine, have been the most acutely perceived and arranged by
Schleiermacher, who, on this subject as on many others, has brought the
negative criticism of the dogmas of the Church to completeness. [2212]
Before all else he finds it a difficulty, that by the expression,
divine nature and human nature, divinity and humanity are placed under
one category, and what is more, under the category of nature, which
essentially denotes only a limited being, conceived by means of its
opposite. Further, while ordinarily one nature is common to many
individuals or persons, here one person is supposed to partake of two
different natures. Now if by person be meant the permanent conscious
unity of a living being, and by nature, the sum of the laws which
govern the conditions of life in that being: it is not to be conceived,
how two opposite systems of conditions can have but one centre. The
absurdity of this doctrine becomes, according to Schleiermacher,
especially evident in the supposition of two wills in Christ, since,
for consistency, two wills must be associated with two understandings,
and as the understanding and will constitute the personality, Christ
would on this supposition be inevitably divided into two persons. It is
true that the two wills are supposed always to will in unison: but, on
the one hand, there results from this only a moral, not a personal
unity; on the other hand, this unison of wills is not possible in
relation to the divine and the human will, since the latter, which from
its very essence can only exercise itself on particulars as they
present themselves in succession, can as little will the same with the
former, whose object is the whole in its development, as the human
understanding, which acts by reasoning, can think the same with the
divine understanding, which acts intuitively. Hence it evidently
follows also that a communication of properties between the two natures
is not to be admitted.

The doctrine of the work of Christ did not escape a similar criticism.
Passing over what has been objected in point of form to the division of
this work into three offices, the ideas of revelation and miracles,
under the head of the prophetic office, were chiefly called in
question. It was argued that these ideas agreed neither objectively
with just conceptions of God and the world in their reciprocal
relation, nor subjectively with the laws of the human intellect; that
the perfect God could not have created a world which from time to time
needed the extraordinary interposition of the Creator, nor more
particularly a human nature which was incapable of attaining its
destination by the development of its innate faculties; that the
immutable Being could not operate on the world first in this manner,
then in that, at one time mediately, at another immediately, but that
he must always have operated on it in the same manner, namely, in
himself and on the whole immediately, but for us and on individuals
mediately; that to admit an interruption of the order of nature, and of
the development of humanity, would be to renounce all rational thought,
while, in the particular case in question, a revelation or miracle is
not confidently to be recognized as such, since, in order to be sure
that certain results have not proceeded from the powers of nature and
the faculties of the human mind, a perfect knowledge of the resources
of both would be requisite, and of such a knowledge man is not
possessed. [2213]

But the main difficulty lay in the office of high priest, attributed to
Jesus—in the doctrine of the atonement. That which especially drew
forth objections was the human aspect which in Anselm’s system was
given to the relation of God to the Son of man. As it well becomes man
to forgive offences without exacting vengeance, so, thought Socinus,
might God forgive the offences committed against him by men, without
satisfaction. [2214] To meet this objection Hugo Grotius argued, that
not as in consequence of personal injuries, but to maintain the order
of the moral world inviolable, or in virtue of his justitia rectoria,
God cannot forgive sins without satisfaction. [2215] Nevertheless,
granting the necessity for satisfaction, it did not appear to be met by
the death of Jesus. While Anselm, and still more decidedly Thomas
Aquinas, [2216] spoke of a satisfactio superabundans, Socinus denied
that Christ had even borne as much punishment as men have deserved; for
every individual man having deserved eternal death, consequently, as
many substitutes as sinners ought to have suffered eternal death;
whereas in this case, the single Christ has suffered merely temporal
death, and that as an introduction to the highest glory; nor did this
death attach to his divine nature, so that it might be said to have
infinite value, but only to his human nature. On the other hand, Duns
Scotus, [2217] in opposition to Thomas, and subsequently Grotius and
the Arminians (equi-distant from orthodoxy and Socinianism), adopted
the expedient of maintaining, that the merit of Christ was indeed in
itself finite like its subject, his human nature, and hence was
inadequate as a satisfaction for the sins of the world; but that God
accepted it as adequate out of his free grace. But from the admission
that God can content himself with an inadequate satisfaction, and thus
can forgive a part of the guilt without satisfaction, it follows
necessarily, that he must also be able thus to forgive the whole.
Besides these more precise definitions, however, the fundamental idea
of the whole fabric, namely, that one individual can take upon himself
the punishment due to the sins of another, has been attacked as an
ignorant transference of the conditions of a lower order of relation to
a higher. Moral transgressions, it has been said, are not transmissible
obligations; it is not with them as with debts of money, which it is
immaterial to the creditor who pays, provided they are paid; rather it
is essential to the punishment of sin, that it should fall on the
guilty only. [2218] If, according to this, the so-called passive
obedience of Christ cannot have been vicarious, still less can his
active obedience have been so, since as man he was bound to render this
on his own behalf. [2219]

In relation to the kingly office of Christ, the hope of his second
advent to judge the world lost ground in the sentiment of the Church,
in proportion as the opinion obtained, that every individual enters on
a state of complete retribution immediately after death, for this
opinion made the general judgment appear superfluous. [2220]




§ 147.

THE CHRISTOLOGY OF RATIONALISM.

The Rationalists, rejecting the doctrine of the Church concerning
Christ, his person, and his work, as self-contradictory, useless, nay,
even hurtful to the true morality of the religious sentiment,
propounded in its stead a system which, while it avoided all
contradictions, yet in a certain sense retained for Jesus the character
of a divine manifestation, which even, rightly considered, placed him
far higher, and moreover embodied the strongest motives to practical
piety. [2221]

According to them, Jesus was still a divine messenger, a special
favourite and charge of the Deity, inasmuch as, furnished by the
disposition of Providence with an extraordinary measure of spiritual
endowment, he was born in an age and nation, and guided in a career,
the most favourable to his development into that for which he was
destined; and, especially, inasmuch as he was subjected to a species of
death that rendered possible his apparent resurrection, on which
depended the success of his entire work, and was encompassed by a
series of circumstances which actually brought that resurrection to
pass. The Rationalists hold that their idea of the Christ is not
essentially below the orthodox one, as regards his natural endowments
and his external destiny, for in their view also he is the greatest man
that ever trod the earth—a hero, in whose fate Providence is in the
highest degree glorified: while, as regards the internal development
and free agency of Jesus, they believe their doctrine essentially to
surpass that of the Church. The Christ of the Church, they contend, is
a mere automaton, whose manhood lies under the control of his Godhead
like a lifeless instrument, which acts with moral perfection because it
has no power to sin, and for this reason can neither have moral merit,
nor be the object of affection and reverence: according to the
rationalistic view, on the contrary, Jesus had implanted in him by God
the natural conditions only of that which he was ultimately to become,
and his realization of this destiny was the result of his own
spontaneity. His admirable wisdom he acquired by the judicious
application of his intellectual powers, and the conscientious use of
all the aids within his reach; his moral greatness, by the zealous
culture of his moral dispositions, the restraint of his sensual
inclinations and passions, and a scrupulous obedience to the voice of
his conscience: and on these alone rested all that was exalted in his
personality, all that was encouraging in his example.

As regards the work of Jesus, the rationalistic view is, that he has
endeared himself to mankind by this above all else, that he has taught
them a religion to which for its purity and excellence is justly
ascribed a certain divine power and dignity; and that he has
illustrated and enforced this religion by the brilliant example of his
own life. This prophetic office of Christ is with Socinians and
Rationalists the essence of his work, and to this they refer all the
rest, especially what the doctrine of the Church comprehends under the
office of high priest. With them the so-called active obedience has
value solely as an example; and the death of Jesus conduces to the
forgiveness of sins, solely by furthering the reformation of the sinner
in one of these two ways: either, as a confirmation of his doctrine,
and a type of the devoted fulfilment of duty, it serves to kindle a
zeal for virtue; or, as a proof of the love of God to man, of his
inclination to pardon the converted sinner, it invigorates moral
courage. [2222]

If Christ was no more, and did no more, than this rationalistic
doctrine supposes, it is not easy to see how piety has come to make him
her special object, or dogmatism to lay down special propositions
concerning him. Consistent Rationalists have in fact admitted, that
what the orthodox dogma calls Christology, forms no integral part of
the rationalistic system, since this system consists indeed of a
religion which Christ taught, but not of a religion of which he is the
object; that, viewing Christology as the doctrine of the Messiah, it is
merely an accommodation to the Jewish mind,—that even taken in a more
noble sense, as the doctrine of the life, the actions, and the fate of
Jesus as a divine messenger, it does not belong to a system of faith,
for the universal truths of religion are as little connected with our
ideas concerning the person of him who first enunciated them, as are
the philosophical propositions in the systems of Leibnitz and Wolf, of
Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, with the opinions we may happen to form of
the persons of their authors; that what relates to the person and work
of Jesus belongs, not to religion itself, but to the history of
religion, and must either be prefixed to a system of religious doctrine
as an historical introduction, or appended to it as an elucidatory
sequel. [2223] Accordingly Henke, in his Lineaments, has removed
Christology from its wonted position as an integral part of systematic
theology, and has placed it as a subdivision under the head of
anthropology.

Thus, however, Rationalism enters into open war with the Christian
faith, for it seeks to thrust into the background, nay, to banish from
the province of theology, that which is its essential point, and
corner-stone. But this very opposition is decisive of the insufficiency
of the rationalistic system, proving that it does not perform what is
demanded from every system of religious doctrine: namely, first, to
give adequate expression to the faith which is the object of the
doctrine; and secondly, to place this expression in a relation, whether
positive or negative, to science. Now the Rationalists, in the effort
to bring the faith into harmony with science, restrict its expression;
for a Christ who is only a distinguished man, creates indeed no
difficulty to the understanding, but is not the Christ in whom the
Church believes.




§ 148.

THE ECLECTIC CHRISTOLOGY OF SCHLEIERMACHER.

It is the effort of this theologian to avoid both these ungrateful
results, and without prejudice to the faith, to form such a conception
of the doctrine of the Christ as may be proof against the attacks of
science. [2224] On the one hand, he has adopted in its fullest extent
the negative criticism directed by Rationalism against the doctrine of
the Church, nay, he has rendered it even more searching; on the other
hand, he has sought to retain what Rationalism had lost, the essential
part of positive Christianity: and thus he has saved many in these days
from the narrowness of Supranaturalism, and the emptiness of
Rationalism. This simplification of the faith Schleiermacher effects in
the following manner: he does not set out, with the Protestant, from
the doctrine of Scripture, nor with the Catholic from the decision of
the church, for in both these ways he would have to deal with a
precise, developed system, which, having originated in remote
centuries, must come into collision with the science of the present
day; but he sets out from the consciousness of the Christian, from that
internal experience resulting to the individual from his connexion with
the Christian community, and he thus obtains a material which, as its
basis is feeling, is more flexible, and to which it is easier to give
dialectically a form that satisfies science.

As a member of the Christian church—this is the point of departure in
the Christology of Schleiermacher [2225]—I am conscious of the removal
of my sinfulness, and the impartation of absolute perfection: in other
words, in communion with the church, I feel operating upon me the
influence of a sinless and perfect principle. This influence cannot
proceed from the Christian community as an effect of the reciprocal
action of its members on each other; for to every one of these sin and
imperfection are inherent, and the co-operation of impure beings can
never produce anything pure as its result. It must be the influence of
one who possessed that sinlessness and perfection as personal
qualities, and who moreover stands in such a relation to the Christian
community, that he can impart these qualities to its members: that is,
since the Christian church could not exist prior to this impartation,
it must be the influence of its founder. As Christians, we find
something operated within us; hence, as from every effect we argue to
its cause, we infer the influence of Christ, and from this again, the
nature of his person, which must have had the powers necessary to the
exertion of this influence.

To speak more closely, that which we experience as members of the
Christian church, is a strengthening of our consciousness of God, in
its relation to our sensuous existence; that is, it is rendered easier
to us to deprive the senses of their ascendancy within us, to make all
our impressions the servants of the religious sentiment, and all our
actions its offspring. According to what has been stated above, this is
the effect wrought in us by Christ, who imparts to us the strength of
his consciousness of God, frees us from the bondage of sensuality and
sin, and is thus the Redeemer. In the feeling of the strengthened
consciousness of God which the Christian possesses by his communion
with the Redeemer, the obstructions of his natural and social life are
not felt as obstructions to his consciousness of God; they do not
interrupt the blessedness which he enjoys in his inmost religious life;
what has been called evil, and divine chastisement, is not such for
him: and as it is Christ who by receiving him into the communion of his
blessedness, frees him therefrom, the office of expiation is united to
that of redemption.

In this sense alone is the doctrine of the church concerning the
threefold office of Christ to be interpreted. He is a prophet, in that
by the word—by the setting forth of himself, and not otherwise,—he
could draw mankind towards himself, and therefore the chief object of
his doctrine was his own person; he is at once a high priest and a
sacrifice, in that he, the sinless one, from whose existence,
therefore, no evil could be evolved, entered into communion with the
life of sinful humanity, and endured the evils which adhere to it, that
he might take us into communion with his sinless and blessed life: in
other words, deliver us from the power and consequences of sin and
evil, and present us pure before God; lastly, he is a king, in that he
brings these blessings to mankind in the form of an organized society,
of which he is the head.

From this which Christ effects, we gather what he is. If we owe to him
the continual strengthening of the consciousness of God within us, this
consciousness must have existed in him in absolute strength, so that
it, or God in the form of the consciousness, was the only operative
force within him, and this is the sense of the expression of the
church—God became man in Christ. If, further, Christ works in us a more
and more complete conquest over sensuality, in himself there must have
been an absolute conquest over it; in no moment of his life can the
sensual consciousness have disputed the victory with his consciousness
of God; never can a vacillation or struggle have had place within him:
in other words, the human nature in him was sinless, and in the
stricter sense, that, in virtue of the essential predominance within
him of the higher powers over the lower, it was impossible for him to
sin. By this peculiarity of his nature he is the Archetype, the
actualization of the ideal of humanity, which his church can only
approach, never surpass; yet must he,—for otherwise there could be no
true fellowship between him and us,—have been developed under the
ordinary conditions of human life: the ideal must in him have been
perfectly historical, each phasis of his actual life must have borne
the impress of the ideal; and this is the proper sense of the church
formula, that the divine and human nature were in him united into one
person.

Only thus far can the doctrine of the Christ be deduced from the
experience of the Christian, and thus far, according to Schleiermacher,
it is not opposed to science: whatever in the dogma of the church goes
beyond this,—as, for example, the supernatural conception of Jesus, and
his miracles, also the facts of the resurrection and ascension, and the
prophecies of his second coming to judge the world,—ought not to be
brought forward as integral parts of the doctrine of the Christ For he
from whose influence upon us comes all the strengthening of our
consciousness of God, may have been the Christ, though he should not
have risen bodily from the dead, and ascended into heaven, etc.: so
that we believe these facts, not because they are involved in our
internal experience, but only because they are stated in Scripture; not
so much, therefore, in a religious and dogmatical, as in an historical
manner.

This Christology is undeniably a beautiful effort of thought, and as we
shall presently see, does the utmost towards rendering the union of the
divine and the human in Christ conceivable; but if its author supposed
that he kept the faith unmutilated and science unoffended, we are
compelled to pronounce that he was in both points deceived. [2226]

Science opens its attack on the proposition, that the ideal man was
historically manifested in the person of Christ. It did not escape
Schleiermacher himself that this was a dangerous point. No sooner has
he put forth the above proposition, than he reflects on the difficulty
of supposing that the ideal should be realized in one historical
individual; since, in other cases, we never find the ideal realized in
a single appearance, but only in an entire cycle of appearances, which
reciprocally complete each other. It is true that this theologian does
not hold the character of Christ, as the ideal man, to extend to the
manifold relations of human life, so as to be the archetype for all the
science, art, and policy, that are developed in human society; he
confines it to the domain of the consciousness of God. But, as Schmid
has justly observed, this does not alter the case, for the
consciousness of God also, being, in its development and manifestation,
subject to the conditions of finiteness and imperfection; the
supposition that even in this department exclusively, the ideal was
manifested in a single historical individual, involves a violation of
the laws of nature by a miracle. This, however, is far from alarming
Schleiermacher; on the contrary, he maintains that this is the place,
and the only place, in which the Christian doctrine must necessarily
admit a miracle, since the originating of the person of Christ can only
be conceived as the result of a special divine act of creation. It is
true, he limits the miraculous to the first introduction of Christ into
the series of existences, and allows the whole of his further
development to have been subject to all the conditions of finite
existence: but this concession cannot repair the breach, which the
supposition only of one miracle makes in the scientific theory of the
world. Still less can any help be derived from vague analogies like the
following: as it is still possible that matter should begin to
agglomerate and thence to revolve in infinite space; so science must
admit, that there may be in the domain of spiritual life an appearance,
which in like manner we can only explain as the commencement, the first
point, in a higher process of development. [2227]

This comparison suggests the observation made by Braniss, namely, that
it would be contrary to the laws of all development to regard the
initial member of a series as the greatest—to suppose that in Christ,
the founder of that community, the object of which is the strengthening
of the consciousness of God, the strength of this consciousness was
absolute, a perfection which is rather the infinitely distant goal of
the progressive development of the community founded by him.
Schleiermacher does indeed attribute to Christianity perfectibility in
a certain sense: not as a capability of surpassing Christ in his
nature, but solely in the conditions of its manifestation. His view is
this: the limitation, the imperfection of the relations of Christ, the
language in which he expressed himself, the nationality within which he
was placed, modified his thoughts and actions, but in their form alone;
their essence remained nevertheless the perfect ideal. Now if
Christianity in its progressive advancement in doctrine and practice,
rejects more and more of those temporal and national limitations by
which the actions and teaching of Jesus were circumscribed; this is not
to surpass Christ, it is rather to give a more perfect expression of
his inner life. But, as Schmid has satisfactorily shown, an historical
individual is that which appears of him, and no more; his internal
nature is known by his words and actions, the condition of his age and
nation are a part of his individuality, and what lies beneath this
phenomenal existence as the essence, is not the nature of this
individual, but the human nature in general, which in particular beings
operates only under the limitations of their individuality, of time,
and of circumstances. Thus to surpass the historical appearance of
Christ, is to rise nearer, not to his nature, but to the idea of
humanity in general; and if we are to suppose that it is still Christ
whose nature is more truly expressed, when with the rejection of the
temporal and national, the essential elements of his doctrine and life
are further developed: it would not be difficult, by a similar
abstraction, to represent Socrates, as the one who in this manner
cannot be surpassed.

As neither an individual in general, nor, in particular, the commencing
point in an historical series, can present the perfect ideal: so, if
Christ be regarded decidedly as man, the archetypal nature and
development which Schleiermacher ascribes to him, cannot be brought to
accord with the laws of human existence. Impeccability, in the sense of
the impossibility of sinning, as it is supposed to exist in Christ, is
a quality totally incompatible with the human nature; for to man, in
consequence of his agency being liable to guidance by the motives of
the senses as well as of the reason, the possibility of sinning is
essential. And if Christ was entirely free from inward conflict, from
all vacillation of the spiritual life between good and evil, he could
not be a man of like nature with us; for the action and re-action
between the spiritual nature in general and the external world, and, in
particular, between the superior religious and moral powers, and the
operations of the mind in subordination to the senses, necessarily
manifests itself as a conflict. [2228]

If, on the one side, the Christology in question is far from satisfying
science, it is equally far, on the other side, from satisfying the
faith. We will not enter into those points in which, instead of the
decisions of the church, it at least offers acceptable substitutes
(concerning which, however, it may be doubted whether they are a full
compensation). [2229] Its disagreement with the faith is the most
conspicuous in the position, that the facts of the resurrection and
ascension do not form essential parts of the Christian faith. For the
belief in the resurrection of Christ is the foundation stone, without
which the Christian church could not have been built; nor could the
cycle of Christian festivals, which are the external representation of
the Christian faith, now suffer a more fatal mutilation than by the
removal of the festival of Easter: the Christ who died could not be
what he is in the belief of the church, if he were not also the Christ
who rose again.

Thus the doctrine of Schleiermacher concerning the person and
conditions of Christ, betrays a twofold inadequacy, not meeting the
requirements either of the faith of the church, or of science. It is
clear, however, from his doctrine of the work of Christ, that in order
to satisfy the former so far as is here done, such a contradiction of
the latter was quite unnecessary, and an easier course might have been
pursued. For resting merely on a backward inference from the inward
experience of the Christian as the effect, to the person of Christ as
the cause, the Christology of Schleiermacher has but a frail support,
since it cannot be proved that that inward experience is not to be
explained without the actual existence of such a Christ. Schleiermacher
himself did not overlook the probable objection that the church,
induced merely by the relative excellence of Jesus, conceived an ideal
of absolute perfection, and transferred this to the historical Christ,
from which combination she continually strengthens and vivifies her
consciousness of God: but he held this objection to be precluded by the
observation, that sinful humanity, by reason of the mutual dependence
of the will and the understanding, is incapable of conceiving an
immaculate ideal. But, as it has been aptly remarked, if Schleiermacher
claims a miracle for the origination of his real Christ, we have an
equal right to claim one for the origination of the ideal of a Christ
in the human soul. [2230] Meanwhile, it is not true that sinful human
nature is incapable of conceiving a sinless ideal. If by this ideal be
understood merely a general conception, then the conception of the
perfect and the sinless is as necessarily co-existent with the
consciousness of imperfection and sinfulness as the conception of
infinity with that of finiteness; since the two ideas conditionate one
another, and the one is not possible without the other. If, on the
other hand, by this ideal be meant a concrete image, the conception of
a character in which all the individual features are portrayed, it may
be admitted that a sinful individual or age cannot depict such an image
without blemish; but of this inability the age or individual itself is
not conscious, not having any superior standard, and if the image be
but slightly drawn, if it leave room for the modifications of increased
enlightenment, it may continue to be regarded as immaculate even by a
later and more clear-sighted age, so long as this age is inclined to
view it under the most favourable light.

We may now estimate the truth of the reproach, which made
Schleiermacher so indignant, namely, that his was not an historical,
but an ideal Christ. It is unjust in relation to the opinion of
Schleiermacher, for he firmly believed that the Christ, as construed by
him, really lived; but it is just in relation to the historical state
of the facts, because such a Christ never existed but in idea; and in
this sense, indeed, the reproach has even a stronger bearing on the
system of the church, because the Christ therein presented can still
less have existed. Lastly, it is just in relation to the consequence of
Schleiermacher’s system, since to effect what Schleiermacher makes him
effect, no other Christ is necessary, and, according to the principles
of Schleiermacher respecting the relation of God to the world, of the
supernatural to the natural, no other Christ is possible, than an ideal
one:—and in this sense the reproach attaches specifically to
Schleiermacher’s doctrine, for according to the premises of the
orthodox doctrine, an historical Christ is both possible and necessary.




§ 149.

CHRISTOLOGY INTERPRETED SYMBOLICALLY. KANT. DE WETTE.

The attempt to retain in combination the ideal in Christ with the
historical, having failed, these two elements separate themselves: the
latter falls as a natural residuum to the ground, and the former rises
as a pure sublimate into the ethereal world of ideas. Historically,
Jesus can have been nothing more than a person, highly distinguished
indeed, but subject to the limitations inevitable to all that is
mortal: by means of his exalted character, however, he exerted so
powerful an influence over the religious sentiment, that it constituted
him the ideal of piety; in accordance with the general rule, that an
historical fact or person cannot become the basis of a positive
religion until it is elevated into the sphere of the ideal. [2231]

Spinoza made this distinction when maintaining, that to know the
historical Christ is not necessary to felicity, but only to know the
ideal Christ, namely, the eternal wisdom of God, which is manifested in
all things, in the human mind particularly, and in a pre-eminent degree
in Jesus Christ—that wisdom which alone teaches man what is true and
false, good and bad. [2232]

According to Kant, also, it ought not to be made a condition of
salvation to believe, that there was once a man who by his holiness and
merit gave satisfaction for himself and for all others; for of this the
reason tells us nothing; but it is the duty of men universally to
elevate themselves to the ideal of moral perfection deposited in the
reason, and to obtain moral strength by the contemplation of this
ideal. Such moral faith alone man is bound to exercise, and not
historical faith. [2233]

Taking his stand on this principle, Kant proceeds to interpret the
doctrines of the Bible and the church as symbols of the ideal. It is
humanity, or the rational part of this system of things, in its entire
moral perfection, that could alone make a world the object of divine
Providence, and the end of creation. This idea of a humanity
well-pleasing to God, has existed in God from all eternity; it proceeds
from his essence, and is therefore no created thing, but his eternal
Son, the Word, through whom, that is, for whose sake, all things were
created, and in whom God loved the world. As this idea of moral
perfection has not man for its author, as it has been introduced into
him even without his being able to conceive how his nature can have
been susceptible of such an idea, it may be said to have come down to
us from heaven, and to have assumed the human nature, and this union
with us may be regarded as an abasement of the Son of God. This ideal
of moral perfection, so far as it is compatible with the condition of a
being dependent on necessities and inclinations, can only be conceived
by us under the form of a man. Now just as we can obtain no idea of the
amount of a force, but by calculating the degree of resistance which it
can overcome, so we can form no estimate of the strength of the moral
disposition, but by imagining hard conflicts in which it can triumph:
hence the man who embodies the perfect ideal must be one who would
voluntarily undertake, not only to perform every duty of man on his own
behalf, and by precept and example to disseminate the good and the true
around him as extensively as possible; but also, though tempted by the
strongest allurements, to submit to all sufferings, even to the most
ignominious death, for the welfare of mankind.

In a practical relation this idea has its reality completely within
itself, and it needed no exemplification in experience in order to
become a model binding on us, since it is enshrined as such in our
reason. Nay, this ideal remains essentially confined to the reason,
because it cannot be adequately represented by any example in outward
experience, since such an example would not fully disclose the inward
disposition, but would only admit of our forming dubious inferences
thereon. Nevertheless, as all men ought to be conformed to this ideal,
and consequently must be capable of such conformity, it is always
possible in experience that a man may appear, who in his teaching,
course of life, and sufferings, may present an example of a man
well-pleasing to God: but even in this manifestation of the God-man, it
would not properly be that which is obvious to the senses, or can be
known by experience, which would be the object of saving faith; but the
ideal lying in the reason, which we should attribute to this
manifestation of the God-man, because he appeared to us to be conformed
to it—that is, indeed, so far only as this can be concluded from
outward experience. Inasmuch as all of us, though naturally generated
men, feel bound, and consequently able, ourselves to present such an
example, we have no reason to regard that exemplification of the ideal
man as supernaturally generated, nor does he need the attestation of
miracles; for besides the moral faith in the idea, nothing further is
requisite than the historical conviction that his life was conformed to
that idea, in order to accredit him as its personification.

He who is conscious of such a moral disposition, as to have a
well-founded confidence, that under temptations and sufferings similar
to those which are attributed to the ideal man, as a touchstone of his
moral disposition, he would adhere unalterably to this exemplar, and
faithfully follow his steps, such a man alone is entitled to consider
himself an object of the divine complacency. To elevate himself to such
a state of mind, man must depart from evil, cast off the old man,
crucify the flesh; a change which is essentially connected with a
series of sorrows and sufferings. These the former man has deserved as
a punishment, but they fall on the new: for the regenerated man, who
takes them on himself, though physically and in his empirical
character, as a being determined by the senses, he remains the former
man; is morally, as an intellectual being, with his changed
disposition, become a new man. Having by this change taken upon him the
disposition of the Son of God, that which is strictly a substitution of
the new man for the old, may be represented, by a personification of
the idea, as a substitution of the Son of God, and it may be said, that
the latter himself, as a substitute, bears for man, for all who
practically believe in him, the guilt of sin; as a redeemer, satisfies
supreme justice by suffering and death; and as an intercessor, imparts
the hope of appearing justified before the judge: the suffering which
the new man, in dying to the old, must perpetually incur through life,
being conceived in the representative of mankind, as a death suffered
once for all. [2234]

Kant, like Schleiermacher (whose Christology in many respects recalls
that of Kant), [2235] carries his appropriation of the Christology of
the church no further than the death of Christ: of his resurrection and
ascension, he says, that they cannot be available to religion within
the limits of pure reason, because they would involve the materiality
of all existences. Still, in another light, he employs these facts as
symbols of the ideas of the reason; as images of the entrance into the
abode of blessedness, that is, into communion with all the good: while
Tieftrunk has yet more decidedly given it as his opinion, that without
the resurrection, the history of Jesus would terminate in a revolting
catastrophe; that the eye would turn away with melancholy and
dissatisfaction from an event, in which the pattern of humanity fell a
victim to impious rage, and in which the scene closed with a death as
unmerited as sorrowful; that the history requires to be crowned with
the fulfilment of the expectation towards which the moral
contemplations of every one are irresistibly drawn—with the passage
into a compensating immortality. [2236]

In the same manner, De Wette ascribed to the evangelical history, as to
every history, and particularly to the history of religion, a
symbolical, ideal character, in virtue of which it is the expression
and image of the human mind and its various operations. The history of
the miraculous conception of Jesus represents the divine origin of
religion; the narratives of his miracles, the independent force of the
human mind, and the sublime doctrine of spiritual self-reliance; his
resurrection is the image of the victory of truth, a fore-shadowing of
the future triumph of good over evil; his ascension, the symbol of the
eternal majesty of religion. The fundamental religious ideas which
Jesus enunciated in his teaching, are expressed with equal clearness in
his history. This history is an expression of devoted enthusiasm, in
the courageous ministry of Jesus, and in the victorious power of his
appearance; of resignation, in his contest with the wickedness of men,
in the melancholy of his premonitory discourses, and above all in his
death. Christ on the cross is the image of humanity purified by
self-sacrifice; we ought all to crucify ourselves with him, that we may
rise with him to new life. Lastly, the idea of devotion was the
key-note in the history of Jesus, every moment of his life being
dedicated to the thought of his heavenly Father. [2237]

At an earlier period, Horst presented this symbolical view of the
history of Jesus with singular clearness. Whether, he says, all that is
narrated of Christ happened precisely so, historically, is a question
indifferent to us, nor can it now be settled. Nay, if we would be
candid with ourselves, that which was once sacred history for the
Christian believer, is, for the enlightened portion of our
cotemporaries, only fable: the narratives of the supernatural birth of
Christ, of his miracles, of his resurrection and ascension, must be
rejected by us as at variance with the inductions of our intellect. Let
them however only be no longer interpreted merely by the understanding
as history, but by the feelings and imagination, as poetry; and it will
be found that in these narratives nothing is invented arbitrarily, but
all springs from the depths and divine impulses of the human mind.
Considered from this point of view, we may annex to the history of
Christ all that is important to religious trust, animating to the pure
dispositions, attractive to the tender feelings. That history is a
beautiful, sacred poem of the human race—a poem in which are embodied
all the wants of our religious instinct; and this is the highest honour
of Christianity, and the strongest proof of its universal
applicability. The history of the gospel is in fact the history of
human nature conceived ideally, and exhibits to us in the life of an
individual, what man ought to be, and, united with him by following his
doctrine and example, can actually become. It is not denied that what
to us can appear only sacred poetry, was to Paul, John, Matthew and
Luke, fact and certain history. But it was the very same internal cause
which made the narratives of the gospel sacred fact and history to
them, which makes those narratives to us a sacred mythus and poetry.
The points of view only are different: human nature, and in it the
religious impulse, remains ever the same. Those first Christians needed
in their world, for the animating of the religious and moral
dispositions in the men of their time, history and fact, of which,
however, the inmost kernel consisted of ideas: to us, the facts are
become superannuated and doubtful, and only for the sake of the
fundamental ideas, are the narratives of those facts an object of
reverence. [2238]

This view was met immediately on the part of the church by the
reproach, that instead of the riches of divine reality which faith
discovers in the history of Christ, it palmed upon us a collection of
empty ideas and ideals; instead of a consolatory work effected, an
overwhelming obligation. For the certainty, that God once actually
united himself with human nature, the admonition that man ought to
obtain divine dispositions, offers a poor compensation: for the peace
which the redemption completed by Christ brings to the believer, it is
no equivalent to put before him the duty of freeing himself from sin.
By this system, man is thrust out of the reconciled world in which
Christianity places him, into an unreconciled world, out of a world of
happiness into a world of misery; for where reconciliation has yet to
be effected, where happiness has yet to be attained, there is at
present enmity and unhappiness. And, in truth, the hope of entire
deliverance from these conditions, is, according to the principles of
this system, which only admits an infinite approximation towards the
idea, a deceptive one; for that which is only to be reached in an
endless progression, is in fact unattainable.

But not the faith alone, science also in its newest development, has
found this system unsatisfactory. Science has perceived that to convert
ideas simply into an obligatory possibility, to which no reality
corresponds, is in fact to annihilate them; just as it would be to
render the infinite finite, to represent it as that which lies beyond
the finite. Science has conceived that the infinite has its existence
in the alternate production and extinction of the finite; that the idea
is realised only in the entire series of its manifestations; that
nothing can come into existence which does not already essentially
exist; and, therefore, that it is not to be required of man, that he
should reconcile himself with God, and assimilate his sentiments to the
divine, unless this reconciliation and this assimilation are already
virtually effected.




§ 150.

THE SPECULATIVE CHRISTOLOGY.

Kant had already said that the good principle did not descend from
heaven merely at a particular time, but had descended on mankind
invisibly from the commencement of the human race; and Schelling laid
down the proposition: the incarnation of God is an incarnation from
eternity. [2239] But while the former understood under that expression
only the moral instinct, which, with its ideal of good, and its sense
of duty, has been from the beginning implanted in man; the latter
understood under the incarnate Son of God the finite itself, in the
form of the human consciousness, which in its contradistinction to the
infinite, wherewith it is nevertheless one, appears as a suffering God,
subjected to the conditions of time.

In the most recent philosophy this idea has been further developed in
the following manner. [2240] When it is said of God that he is a
Spirit, and of man that he also is a Spirit, it follows that the two
are not essentially distinct. To speak more particularly, it is the
essential property of a spirit, in the distribution of itself into
distinct personalities, to remain identical with itself, to possess
itself in another than itself. Hence the recognition of God as a spirit
implies, that God does not remain as a fixed and immutable Infinite
encompassing the Finite, but enters into it, produces the Finite,
Nature, and the human mind, merely as a limited manifestation of
himself, from which he eternally returns into unity. As man, considered
as a finite spirit, limited to his finite nature, has not truth; so
God, considered exclusively as an infinite spirit, shut up in his
infinitude, has not reality. The infinite spirit is real only when it
discloses itself in finite spirits; as the finite spirit is true only
when it merges itself in the infinite. The true and real existence of
spirit, therefore, is neither in God by himself, nor in man by himself,
but in the God-man; neither in the infinite alone, nor in the finite
alone, but in the interchange of impartation and withdrawal between the
two, which on the part of God is revelation, on the part of man
religion.

If God and man are in themselves one, and if religion is the human side
of this unity: then must this unity be made evident to man in religion,
and become in him consciousness and reality. Certainly, so long as man
knows not that he is a spirit, he cannot know that God is man: while he
is under the guidance of nature only, he will deify nature; when he has
learned to submit himself to law, and thus to regulate his natural
tendencies by external means, he will set God before him as a lawgiver.
But when, in the vicissitudes of the world’s history, the natural state
discloses its corruptions, the legal its misery; the former will
experience the need of a God who elevates it above itself, the latter,
of a God who descends to its level. Man being once mature enough to
receive as his religion the truth that God is man, and man of a divine
race; it necessarily follows, since religion is the form in which the
truth presents itself to the popular mind, that this truth must appear,
in a guise intelligible to all, as a fact obvious to the senses: in
other words, there must appear a human individual who is recognised as
the visible God. This God-man uniting in a single being the divine
essence and the human personality, it may be said of him that he had
the Divine Spirit for a father and a woman for his mother. His
personality reflecting itself not in himself, but in the absolute
substance, having the will to exist only for God, and not at all for
itself, he is sinless and perfect. As a man of Divine essence, he is
the power that subdues nature, a worker of miracles; but as God in a
human manifestation, he is dependent on nature, subject to its
necessities and sufferings—is in a state of abasement. Must he even pay
the last tribute to nature? does not the fact that the human nature is
subject to death preclude the idea that that nature is one with the
divine? No: the God-man dies, and thus proves that the incarnation of
God is real, that the infinite spirit does not scorn to descend into
the lowest depths of the finite, because he knows how to find a way of
return into himself, because in the most entire alienation of himself,
he can retain his identity. Further, the God-man, in so far as he is a
spirit reflected in his infinity, stands contrasted with men, in so far
as they are limited to their finiteness: hence opposition and contest
result, and the death of the God-Man becomes a violent one, inflicted
by the hands of sinners; so that to physical degradation is added the
moral degradation of ignominy and accusation of crime. If God then
finds a passage from heaven to the grave, so must a way be discoverable
for man from the grave to heaven: the death of the prince of life is
the life of mortals. By his entrance into the world as God-man, God
showed himself reconciled to man; by his dying, in which act he cast
off the limitations of mortality, he showed moreover the way in which
he perpetually effects that reconciliation: namely, by remaining,
throughout his manifestation of himself under the limitations of a
natural existence, and his suppression of that existence, identical
with himself. Inasmuch as the death of the God-man is merely the
cessation of his state of alienation from the infinite, it is in fact
an exaltation and return to God, and thus the death is necessarily
followed by the resurrection and ascension.

The God-man, who during his life stood before his cotemporaries as an
individual distinct from themselves, and perceptible by the senses, is
by death taken out of their sight; he enters into their imagination and
memory: the unity of the divine and human in him, becomes a part of the
general consciousness; and the church must repeat spiritually, in the
souls of its members, those events of his life which he experienced
externally. The believer, finding himself environed with the conditions
of nature, must, like Christ, die to nature—but only inwardly, as
Christ did outwardly,—must spiritually crucify himself and be buried
with Christ, that by the virtual suppression of his own sensible
existence, he may become, in so far as he is a spirit, identical with
himself, and participate in the bliss and glory of Christ.




§ 151.

LAST DILEMMA.

Thus by a higher mode of argumentation, from the idea of God and man in
their reciprocal relation, the truth of the conception which the church
forms of Christ appears to be confirmed, and we seem to be reconducted
to the orthodox point of view, though by an inverted path: for while
there, the truth of the conceptions of the church concerning Christ is
deduced from the correctness of the evangelical history; here, the
veracity of the history is deduced from the truth of those conceptions.
That which is rational is also real; the idea is not merely the moral
imperative of Kant, but also an actuality. Proved to be an idea of the
reason, the unity of the divine and human nature must also have an
historical existence. The unity of God with man, says Marheineke,
[2241] was really and visibly manifested in the person of Jesus Christ;
in him, according to Rosenkranz, [2242] the divine power over nature
was concentrated, he could not act otherwise than miraculously, and the
working of miracles, which surprises us, was to him natural. His
resurrection, says Conradi, [2243] is the necessary sequel of the
completion of his personality, and so little ought it to surprise us,
that, on the contrary, we must rather have been surprised if it had not
happened.

But do these deductions remove the contradictions which have exhibited
themselves in the doctrine of the church, concerning the person and
work of Christ? We need only to compare the structures, which
Rosenkranz in his Review has passed on Schleiermacher’s criticism of
the Christology of the church, with what the same author proposes as a
substitute in his Encyclopædia, in order to perceive, that the general
propositions on the unity of the divine and human natures, do not in
the least serve to explain the appearance of a person, in whom this
unity existed individually, in an exclusive manner. Though I may
conceive that the divine spirit in a state of renunciation and
abasement becomes the human, and that the human nature in its return
into and above itself becomes the divine; this does not help me to
conceive more easily, how the divine and human natures can have
constituted the distinct and yet united portions of an historical
person. Though I may see the human mind in its unity with the divine,
in the course of the world’s history, more and more completely
establish itself as the power which subdues nature; this is quite
another thing, than to conceive a single man endowed with such power,
for individual, voluntary acts. Lastly, from the truth, that the
suppression of the natural existence is the resurrection of the spirit,
can never be deduced the bodily resurrection of an individual.

We should thus have fallen back again to Kant’s point of view, which we
have ourselves found unsatisfactory: for if the idea have no
corresponding reality, it is an empty obligation and ideal. But do we
then deprive the idea of all reality? By no means: we reject only that
which does not follow from the premises. [2244] If reality is ascribed
to the idea of the unity of the divine and human natures, is this
equivalent to the admission that this unity must actually have been
once manifested, as it never had been, and never more will be, in one
individual? This is indeed not the mode in which Idea realizes itself;
it is not wont to lavish all its fulness on one exemplar, and be
niggardly towards all others [2245]—to express itself perfectly in that
one individual, and imperfectly in all the rest: it rather loves to
distribute its riches among a multiplicity of exemplars which
reciprocally complete each other—in the alternate appearance and
suppression of a series of individuals. And is this no true realization
of the idea? is not the idea of the unity of the divine and human
natures a real one in a far higher sense, when I regard the whole race
of mankind as its realization, than when I single out one man as such a
realization? is not an incarnation of God from eternity, a truer one
than an incarnation limited to a particular point of time.

This is the key to the whole of Christology, that, as subject of the
predicate which the church assigns to Christ, we place, instead of an
individual, an idea; but an idea which has an existence in reality, not
in the mind only, like that of Kant. In an individual, a God-man, the
properties and functions which the church ascribes to Christ contradict
themselves; in the idea of the race, they perfectly agree. Humanity is
the union of the two natures—God become man, the infinite manifesting
itself in the finite, and the finite spirit remembering its infinitude;
it is the child of the visible Mother and the invisible Father, Nature
and Spirit; it is the worker of miracles, in so far as in the course of
human history the spirit more and more completely subjugates nature,
both within and around man, until it lies before him as the inert
matter on which he exercises his active power; [2246] it is the sinless
existence, for the course of its development is a blameless one,
pollution cleaves to the individual only, and does not touch the race
or its history. It is Humanity that dies, rises, and ascends to heaven,
for from the negation of its phenomenal life there ever proceeds a
higher spiritual life; from the suppression of its mortality as a
personal, national, and terrestrial spirit, arises its union with the
infinite spirit of the heavens. By faith in this Christ, especially in
his death and resurrection, man is justified before God; that is, by
the kindling within him of the idea of Humanity, the individual man
participates in the divinely human life of the species. Now the main
element of that idea is, that the negation of the merely natural and
sensual life, which is itself the negation of the spirit (the negation
of negation, therefore), is the sole way to true spiritual life. [2247]

This alone is the absolute sense of Christology: that it is annexed to
the person and history of one individual, is a necessary result of the
historical form which Christology has taken. Schleiermacher was quite
right when he foreboded, that the speculative view would not leave much
more of the historical person of the Saviour than was retained by the
Ebionites. The phenomenal history of the individual, says Hegel, is
only a starting point for the mind. Faith, in her early stages, is
governed by the senses, and therefore contemplates a temporal history;
what she holds to be true is the external, ordinary event, the evidence
for which is of the historical, forensic kind—a fact to be proved by
the testimony of the senses, and the moral confidence inspired by the
witnesses. But mind having once taken occasion by this external fact,
to bring under its consciousness the idea of humanity as one with God,
sees in the history only the presentation of that idea; the object of
faith is completely changed; instead of a sensible, empirical fact, it
has become a spiritual and divine idea, which has its confirmation no
longer in history but in philosophy. When the mind has thus gone beyond
the sensible history, and entered into the domain of the absolute, the
former ceases to be essential; it takes a subordinate place, above
which the spiritual truths suggested by the history stand
self-supported; it becomes as the faint image of a dream which belongs
only to the past, and does not, like the idea, share the permanence of
the spirit which is absolutely present to itself. [2248] Even Luther
subordinated the physical miracles to the spiritual, as the truly great
miracles. And shall we interest ourselves more in the cure of some sick
people in Galilee, than in the miracles of intellectual and moral life
belonging to the history of the world—in the increasing, the almost
incredible dominion of man over nature—in the irresistible force of
ideas, to which no unintelligent matter, whatever its magnitude, can
oppose any enduring resistance? Shall isolated incidents, in themselves
trivial, be more to us than the universal order of events, simply
because in the latter we presuppose, if we do not perceive, a natural
cause, in the former the contrary? This would be a direct contravention
of the more enlightened sentiments of our own day, justly and
conclusively expressed by Schleiermacher. The interests of pity, says
this theologian, can no longer require us so to conceive a fact, that
by its dependence on God it is divested of the conditions which would
belong to it as a link in the chain of nature; for we have outgrown the
notion, that the divine omnipotence is more completely manifested in
the interruption of the order of nature, than in its preservation.
[2249] Thus if we know the incarnation, death and resurrection, the
duplex negatio affirmat, as the eternal circulation, the infinitely
repeated pulsation of the divine life; what special importance can
attach to a single fact, which is but a mere sensible image of this
unending process? Our age demands to be led in Christology to the idea
in the fact, to the race in the individual: a theology which, in its
doctrines on the Christ, stops short at him as an individual, is not
properly a theology, but a homily.

In what relation, then, must the pulpit stand to theology,—nay, how is
the continuance of a ministry in the church possible when theology has
reached this stage? This is the difficult question which presents
itself to us in conclusion.




§ 152.

RELATION OF THE CRITICAL AND SPECULATIVE THEOLOGY TO THE CHURCH.

Schleiermacher has said, that when he reflected on the approaching
crisis in theology, and imagined himself obliged to choose one of two
alternatives, either to surrender the Christian history, like every
common history, as a spoil to criticism, or to hold his faith in fee to
the speculative system; his decision was, that for himself, considered
singly, he would embrace the latter, but that, regarding himself as a
member of the church, and especially as one of its teachers, he should
be induced rather to take the opposite course. For the idea of God and
of man on which, according to the speculative system, the truth of the
Christian faith rests, is indeed a precious jewel, but it can be
possessed only by a few, and he would not wish to be that privileged
individual in the church, who alone among thousands held the faith on
its true grounds. As a member of the church, he could have no
satisfaction but in perfect equality, in the consciousness that all
receive alike, both in kind and manner, from the same source. And as a
teacher and spokesman to the church, he could not possibly attempt the
task of elevating old and young, without distinction, to the idea of
God and of man: he must rather attack their faith as a groundless one,
or else endeavour to strengthen and confirm it while knowing it to be
groundless. As thus in the matter of religion an impassable gulf would
be fixed between two parties in the church, the speculative theology
threatens us with the distinction of an esoteric and exoteric doctrine,
which ill accords with the declaration of Christ, that all shall be
taught of God. The scientific alone have the foundation of the faith:
the unscientific have only the faith, and receive it only by means of
tradition. If the Ebionitish view, on the contrary, leave but little of
Christ, yet this little is equally attainable by all, and we are
thereby secured from the hierarchy of speculation, which ever tends to
merge itself in the hierarchy of Rome. [2250]

Here we see presented, under the form of thought belonging to a
cultivated mind, the same opinion which is now expressed by many in a
less cultivated fashion: namely, that the theologian who is at once
critical and speculative, must in relation to the church be a
hypocrite. The real state of the case is this. The church refers her
Christology to an individual who existed historically at a certain
period: the speculative theologian to an idea which only attains
existence in the totality of individuals; by the church the evangelical
narratives are received as history: by the critical theologian, they
are regarded for the most part as mere mythi. If he would continue to
impart instruction to the church, four ways are open to him:



First, the attempt already excluded by the above observations of
Schleiermacher, namely, to elevate the church to his own point of view,
and for it, also, to resolve the historical into the ideal:—an attempt
which must necessarily fail, because to the Church all those premises
are wanting on which the theologian rests his speculative conclusions;
and upon which, therefore, only an enthusiast for interpretation would
venture.



The second and opposite measure would be, to transport himself to the
point of view of the church, and for the sake of imparting edification
ecclesiastically, to descend from the sphere of the ideal into the
region of the popular conception. This expedient is commonly understood
and judged too narrowly. The difference between the theologian and the
church is regarded as a total one; it is thought, that in answer to the
question, whether he believes in the history of Christ, he ought to say
exactly, no; whereas he says, yes: and this is a falsehood. It is true,
that if in the discourses and instructions of the spiritual teacher,
the main interest were an historical one, this would be a correct
representation of the case: but, in fact, the interest is a religious
one,—it is essential religion which is here communicated under the form
of a history; hence he who does not believe in the history as such, may
yet appreciate the religious truths therein contained, equally with one
who does also receive the history as such: the distinction is one of
form merely, and does not affect the substance. Hence it is an evidence
of an uncultivated mind, to denounce as a hypocrite a theologian who
preaches, for example, on the resurrection of Christ, since, though he
may not believe in the reality of that event as a single sensible fact,
he may, nevertheless, hold to be true the representation of the process
of spiritual life, which the resurrection of Christ affords. Strictly
considered, however, this identity of the substantial truth, exists
only in the apprehension of him who knows how to distinguish the
substance from the form of religion, i.e., of the theologian, not of
the church, to whom he speaks. The latter can conceive no faith in the
dogmatical truth of the resurrection of Christ, for example, apart from
a conviction of its historical reality: and if it come to discover that
the theologian has not this conviction, and yet preaches on the
resurrection, he must appear in the eyes of the church a hypocrite, and
thus the entire relation between the theologian and the church would be
virtually cancelled.



In this case, the theologian, though in himself no hypocrite, would
appear such to the church, and would be conscious of this
misconstruction. If notwithstanding this, he should continue to
instruct the church under the form of its own conceptions, he would
ultimately appear a hypocrite to himself also, and would be driven to
the third, desperate course, of forsaking the ministerial office. It
avails nothing to say, he has only to descend from the pulpit, and
mount the professor’s chair, where he will not be under the necessity
of withholding his scientific opinions from such as are destined to
science; for if he, whom the course of his own intellectual culture has
obliged to renounce the ministerial office, should by his instructions
lead many to the same point, and thus render them also incapable of
that office, the original evil would only be multiplied. On the other
hand, it could not be held good for the church, that all those who
pursue criticism and speculation to the results above presented, should
depart from their position as teachers. For no clergyman would any
longer meddle with such inquiries, if he thus ran the risk of being led
to results which would oblige him to abandon the ministerial office;
criticism and philosophy would fall into the hands of those who are not
professed theologians, and to the theologian nothing would remain but
the faith, which then could not possibly long resist the attacks of the
critical and speculative laity. But where truth is concerned, the
possible consequences have no weight; hence the above remark ought not
to be made. Thus much, however, may be maintained in relation to the
real question: he whom his theological studies have led to an
intellectual position, respecting which he must believe, that he has
attained the truth, that he has penetrated into the deepest mysteries
of theology, cannot feel either inclined or bound just at this point in
his career to abandon theology: on the contrary, such a step would be
unnatural, nay, impossible.



He will therefore seek another expedient; and as such there presents
itself a fourth, which is not, like the two first, one-sided, nor like
the third, merely negative, but which offers a positive mode of
reconciling the two extremes—the consciousness of the theologian, and
that of the church. In his discourses to the church, he will indeed
adhere to the forms of the popular conception, but on every opportunity
he will exhibit their spiritual significance, which to him constitutes
their sole truth, and thus prepare—though such a result is only to be
thought of as an unending progress—the resolution of those forms into
their original ideas in the consciousness of the church also. Thus, to
abide by the example already chosen, at the festival of Easter, he will
indeed set out from the sensible fact of the resurrection of Christ,
but he will dwell chiefly on the being buried and rising again with
Christ, which the Apostle himself has strenuously inculcated. This very
course every preacher, even the most orthodox, strictly takes, as often
as he draws a moral from the evangelical text on which he preaches: for
this is nothing else than the transition from the externally historical
to the inward and spiritual. It is true, we must not overlook the
distinction, that the orthodox preacher builds his moral on the text in
such a way, that the latter remains as an historical foundation;
whereas, with the speculative preacher, the transition from the
biblical history or the church doctrine, to the truth which he thence
derives, has the negative effect of annihilating the former. Viewed
more closely, however, the transition of the orthodox preacher from the
evangelical text to the moral application, is not free from this
negative tendency; in proceeding from the history to the doctrine he
implies at least thus much: the history is not enough, it is not the
whole truth, it must be transmuted from a past fact into a present one,
from an event external to you, it must become your own intimate
experience: so that with this transition, the case is the same as with
the proof of the existence of God, in which the cosmical existence,
which is the point of departure, apparently remains as a foundation,
but is in fact negatived as a true existence, and merged in the
absolute. Nevertheless, there remains a marked distinction between
these two propositions: since, and in so far as, this has happened, so
and so is your duty and your consolation—and: this is indeed related as
having happened once, but the truth is, that it always so happens, and
both in and by you ought to happen. At least, the community will not
receive both as identical; and thus, here again, in every excess or
diminution which the more or less spontaneous relation of the teacher
to critical theology, together with the variety in the degrees of
culture of the community, introduces,—the danger is incurred that the
community may discover this difference, and the preacher appear to it,
and consequently to himself, a hypocrite.



In this difficulty, the theologian may find himself driven either
directly to state his opinions, and attempt to elevate the people to
his ideas: or, since this attempt must necessarily fail, carefully to
adapt himself to the conception of the community; or, lastly, since,
even on this plan, he may easily betray himself, in the end to leave
the ministerial profession.



We have thus admitted the difficulty with which the critical and
speculative views are burthened, with reference to the relation of the
clergyman to the church; we have exhibited the collision into which the
theologian falls, when it is asked, what course remains for him in so
far as he has adopted such views? and we have shown that our age has
not arrived at a certain decision on this subject. But this collision
is not the effect of the curiosity of an individual; it is necessarily
introduced by the progress of time and the development of Christian
theology; it surprises and masters the individual, without his being
able to guard himself from it. Or rather he can do this with slight
labour, if he abstain from study and thought, or, if not from these,
from freedom of speech and writing. Of such there are already enough in
our day, and there was no need to make continual additions to their
number through the calumniation of those who have expressed themselves
in the spirit of advanced science. But there are also a few, who,
notwithstanding such attacks, freely declare what can no longer be
concealed—and time will show whether by the one party or the other, the
Church, Mankind, and Truth are best served.


                                    THE END.







NOTES


[1] [This passage varies slightly from the original, a subsequent
amplification by Dr. Strauss being incorporated with it.—Tr.]

[2] Plato, de Republ. ii. p. 377. Steph.; Pindar, Nem. vii. 31.

[3] Diog. Laërt. L. ii. c. iii. No. 7.

[4] Cic. de Nat. Deor. i. 10. 15. Comp. Athenag. Legat. 22. Tatian, c.
Græc. Orat. 21. Clement. homil. 6, 1 f.

[5] Diodor. Sic. Bibl. Fragm. L. vi. Cic. de Nat. Deor. i. 42.

[6] Hist. vi. 56.

[7] Döpke, die Hermeneutik der neutestamentlichen Schriftsteller, s.
123. ff.

[8] Gfrörer. Dähne.

[9] Homil. 5. in Levit. § 5.

[10] Homil. 2. in Exod. iii.: Nolite putare, ut sæpe jam diximus,
veterum vobis fabulas recitari, sed doceri vos per hæc, ut agnoscatis
ordinem vitæ.

[11] Homil. 5. in Levit. i.: Hæc omnia, nisi alio sensu accipiamus quam
literæ textus ostendit, obstaculum magis et subversionem Christianæ
religioni, quam hortationem ædificationemque præstabunt.

[12] Contra Cels. vi. 70.

[13] De principp. L. iv. § 20: πᾶσα μὲν (γραφὴ) ἔχει τὸ πνευματικὸν, οὐ
πᾶσα δὲ τὸ σωματικόν.

[14] Comm. in Joann., Tom. x. § 4:—σωζομένου πολλάκις τοῦ ἀλπθοῦς
πνευματικοῦ ἐν τῷ σωματικῷ, ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις, ψεύδει.

[15] De principp. iv. 15: συνύφηνεν ἡ γραφὴ τῇ ἱστορίᾳ τὸ μὴ γενόμενον,
πὴ μὲν μὴ δυνατὸν γενέσθαι, πὴ δὲ δυνατὸν μὲν γενέσθαι, οὐ μὴν
γεγενημένον. De principp. iv. 16: καὶ τί δεῖ πλείω λέγειν· τῶν μὴ πάνυ
ἀμβλέων μυρία ὅσα τοιαῦτα δυναμένων συναγαγεῖν, γεγραμμένα μὲν ὡς
γεγονότα, οὐ γεγενημένα δὲ κατὰ τὴν λέξιν.

[16] De principp. iv. 16.

[17] Homil. 6, in Gen. iii.: Quæ nobis ædificatio erit, legentibus,
Abraham, tantam patriarcham, non solum mentitum esse Abimelech regi,
sed et pudicitiam conjugis prodidisse? Quid nos ædificat tanti
patriarchæ uxor, si putetur contaminationibus exposita per conniventiam
maritalem? Hæc Judæi putent et si qui cum eis sunt literæ amici, non
spiritus.

[18] De principp. iv. 16: οὐ μόνον δὲ περὶ τῶν πρὸ τῆς παρουσίας ταῦτα
τὸ πνεῦμα ᾠκονόμησεν, ἀλλ’, ἅτε τὸ αὐτὸ τυνχάνον καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἑνὸς θεοῦ,
τὸ ὅμοιον καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν εὐαγγελίων πεποίηκε καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀποστόλων, οὐδὲ
τούτων πάντῃ ἄκρατον τὴν ἱστορίαν τῶν προσυφασμένων κατὰ τὸ σωματικὸν
ἐχόντων μὴ γεγενημένων.

[19] Contra Celsum, i. 40.

[20] Comm. in Matth., Tom. xvi. 26.

[21] Comm. in Joann., Tom. x. 17.

[22] De principp. iv. 19. After Origen, that kind of allegory only
which left the historical sense unimpaired was retained in the church;
and where, subsequently, a giving up of the verbal meaning is spoken
of, this refers merely to a trope or a simile.

[23] In his Amyntor, 1698. See Leland’s View of the Deistical Writers.

[24] See Leland.

[25] In his work entitled The Moral Philosopher.

[26] Posthumous Works, 1748.

[27] Chubb, Posthumous Works, i. 102.

[28] Ibid., ii. 269.

[29] The Resurrection of Jesus Considered, by a Moral Philosopher,
1744.

[30] Six Discourses on the Miracles of our Saviour. Published singly,
from 1727–1729.

[31] Schröckh, Kirschengesch, seit der Reform. 6 Th. s. 191.

[32] Fragmente des Wolfenbüttelschen Ungenannten von G. E. Lessing
herausgegeben.

[33] Recension der übrigen, noch ungedruckten Werke des Wolfenbütteler
Fragmentisten, in Eichhorns allgemeiner Bibliothek, erster Band 1tes u.
2tes Stück.

[34] Paulus’s Commentar über das neue Testament.

[35] Eichhorn’s Urgeschichte, herausgegeben von Gabler, 3 Thl. s. 98.
ff.

[36] Allgem. Biblioth. 1 Bd. s. 989, and Einleitung in das A. T. 3 Thl.
s. 82.

[37] Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft, drittes
Stück. No. VI.: Der Kirchenglaube hat zu seinem höchsten Ausleger den
reinen Religionsglauben.

[38] Ad. Apollod. Athen. Biblioth. notæ, p. 3 f.

[39] Hebraische Mythologie des alten und neuen Testaments. G. L. Bauer,
1802.

[40] Institutiones Theol. Chr. Dogm. § 42.

[41] Ammon, Progr. quo inquiritur in narrationum de vitæ Jesu Christi
primordiis fontes, etc., in Pott’s and Ruperti’s Sylloge Comm. theol.
No. 5, und Gabler’s n. theol. Journal, 5 Bd. s. 83 und 397.

[42] Ueber Mythen, historische Sagen und Philosopheme der ältesten
Welt. In Paulus Memorabilien, 5 stuck. 1793.

[43] Vid. die Abhandlung über Moses und die Verfasser des Pentateuchs,
im 3ten. Band des Comm. über den Pent. s. 660.

[44] Kritik der Mosaischen Geschichte. Einl. s. 10. ff.

[45] Einleit. in das N. T. 1, s. 408. ff.

[46] Antiquit. xix. viii. 2.

[47] Die verschiedenen Rücksichten, in welchen und für welche der
Biograph Jesu arbeiten kann. In Bertholdt’s krit. Journal, 5 Bd. s.
235. ff.

[48] Recens-von Paulus Commentar, im neuesten theol. Journal 7, 4, s.
395 ff. (1801).

[49] Hebräische Mythologie. 1 Thl. Einl. § 5.

[50] Ist es erlaubt, in der Bibel, und sogar im N.T., Mythen
anzunehmen? Im Journal für auserlesene theol. Literatur, 2, 1, s. 49
ff.

[51] Ueber den Täufer Johannes, die Taufe und Versuchung Christi, in
Ullmann’s u. Umbreit’s theol. Studien u. Kritiken, 2, 3, s. 456 ff.

[52] Beitrag zur Erklärung der Versuchungsgeschichte, in ders.
Zeitschrift, 1832, 4. Heft.

[53] Einleitung in das N. T. 1, s. 422 ff. 453 ff.

[54] Besonders durch Gieseler, über die Entstehung und die frühsten
Schicksale der schriftlichen Evangelien.

[55] Vid. den Anhang der Schulz’schen Schrift über das Abendmahl, und
die Schriften von Sieffert und Schneckenburger über den Ursprung des
ersten kanonischen Evangeliums.

[56] In den Probabilien.

[57] Geschichte der hebräischen Nation, Theil. i. s. 123.

[58] In Henke’s Magazin, 5ten Bdes. 1tes Stück. s. 163.

[59] Versuch über die genetische oder formelle Erklärungsart der
Wunder. In Henke’s Museum, i. 3. 1803.

[60] Kaiser’s biblische Theologie, 1 Thl.

[61] Gabler’s Journal für auserlesene theol. Literatur. ii. 1. s. 46.

[62] Gabler’s neuestes theolog. Journal, 7 Bd.

[63] Bertholdt’s Krit. Journal, v. s. 235.

[64] Ullmann, Recens. meines L. J., in den Theol. Studien u. Kritiken
1836. 3.

[65] George, Mythus und Sage; Versuch einer wissenschaftlichen
Entwicklung dieser Begriffe und ihres Verhältnisses zum christlichen
Glauben, s. 11. ff. 108. ff.

[66] Work cited, § 8, note 4. Hase, Leben Jesu, § 32. Tholuck, s. 208.
ff. Kern, die Hauptsachen der evangelischen Geschichte, 1st Article,
Tübinger Zeitschrift für Theologie, 1836, ii. s. 39.

[67] Comp. Kuinöl, Prolegom. in Matthæum, § 3; in Lucam, § 6.

[68] e.g. Ammon, in der Diss.: Ascensus J. C. in cœlum historia
biblica, in seinen Opusc. nov.

[69] In Bertholdt’s Krit. Journ. v. Bd. s. 248.

[70] Gabler’s neuestes theol. Journal, Bd. vii. s. 395.

[71] Encyclopädie der theol. Wissenschaften, s. 161.

[72] In Gabler’s neuestem theolog. Journal, Bd. vi. 4tes Stück. s. 350.

[73] Gränzbestimmung dessen, was in der Bibel Mythus, u. s. f., und was
wirkliche Geschichte ist. In seiner Bibliothek der heiligen Geschichte,
ii. Bd. s. 155. ff.

[74] Meyer, Apologie der geschichtlichen Auffassung der historischen
Bucher des A. T., besonders des Pentateuchs, im Gegensatz gegen die
blos mythische Deutung des letztern. Fritzsche. Kelle.

[75] Exegetisches Handbuch, i. a. s. 1, 71.

[76] Greiling in Henke’s Museum, i. 4. s. 621. ff.

[77] See the quotations given by De Wette in his “Einleitung in d. N.
T.” § 76.

[78] Euseb. H. E., iii. 39.

[79] Ullman, Credner, Lücke, De Wette.

[80] Hieron. de vir. illustr. 3.

[81] Contra Celsum, ii. 16. v. 56.

[82] Euseb. H. E. iii. 39.

[83] This is clearly demonstrated by Griesbach in his “Commentatio, quâ
Marci Evangelium totum e Matthæi et Lucæ commentariis decerptum esse
demonstratur.”

[84] Chap. xvi. 10–17; xx. 5–15; xxi. 1–17; xxvii. 1–28; xxviii. 10–16.

[85] Euseb. H. E. v. 20, 24.

[86] De Wette, Gieseler.

[87] Ad. Autol. ii., 22.

[88] See Schleiermacher.

[89] This same want of distinction has led the Alexandrians to
allegorize, the Deists to scoff, and the Supernaturalists to strain the
meaning of words; as was done lately by Hoffmann in describing David’s
behaviour to the conquered Ammonites. (Christoterpe auf 1838, s. 184.)

[90] Heydenreich, über die Unzulässigkeit, u. s. f. 1 stück. Compare
Storr, doctr. christ. § 35. ff.

[91] If the Supranatural view contains a theological contradiction, so
the new evangelical theology, which esteems itself raised so far above
the old supranatural view, contains a logical contradiction. To say
that God acts only mediately upon the world as the general rule, but
sometimes, by way of exception, immediately,—has some meaning, though
perhaps not a wise one. But to say that God acts always immediately on
the world, but in some cases more particularly immediately,—is a flat
contradiction in itself. On the principle of the immanence or immediate
agency of God in the world, to which the new evangelical theology lays
claim, the idea of the miraculous is impossible. Comp. my
Streitschriften, i. 3, s. 46 f.

[92] In this view essentially coincide Wegscheider, instit. theol.
dogm. § 12; De Wette, bibl. Dogm., Vorbereitung; Schleiermacher,
Glaubensl. § 46 f.; Marheineke, Dogm. § 269 ff. Comp. George, s. 78 f.

[93] To a freedom from this presupposition we lay claim in the
following work; in the same sense as a state might be called free from
presupposition where the privileges of station, etc., were of no
account. Such a state indeed has one presupposition, that of the
natural equality of its citizens; and similarly do we take for granted
the equal amenability to law of all events; but this is merely an
affirmative form of expression for our former negation. But to claim
for the biblical history especial laws of its own, is an affirmative
proposition, which, according to the established rule, is that which
requires proof, and not our denial of it, which is merely negative. And
if the proof cannot be given, or be found insufficient, it is the
former and not the latter, which is to be considered a presupposition.
See my Streitschriften i. 3. s. 36 ff.

[94] Prolegomena zu einer wissenschaftlichen Mythologie, s. 110 ff.
With this Ullmann, and J. Müller in their reviews of this work,
Hoffmann, s. 113 f., and others are agreed as far as relates to the
heathen mythi. Especially compare George, Mythus und Sage, s. 15 ff.
103.

[95] The words of Baur in his review of Müller’s Prolegomena, in Jahn’s
Jahrbüchern f. Philol. u. Pädag. 1828. 1 Heft, s. 7.

[96] I. 19.

[97] Midrasch Koheleth f. 73, 3 (in Schöttgen, horæ hebraicæ et
talmudicæ, 2, S. 251 f.). R. Berechias nomine R. Isaaci dixit:
Quemadmodum Goël primus (Moses), sic etiam postremus (Messias)
comparatus est. De Goële primo quidnam scriptura dicit? Exod. iv. 20:
et sumsit Moses uxorem et filios, eosque asino imposuit. Sic Goël
postremus, Zachar. ix. 9: pauper et insidens asino. Quidnam de Goële
primo nosti? Is descendere fecit Man, q. d. Exod. xvi. 14: ecce ego
pluere faciam vobis panem de cælo. Sic etiam Goël postremus Manna
descendere faciet, q. d. Ps. lxxii. 16: erit multitudo frumenti in
terra. Quomodo Goël primus comparatus fuit? Is ascendere fecit puteum:
sic quoque Goël postremus ascendere faciet aquas, q. d. Joel iv. 18: et
fons e domo Domini egredietur, et torrentem Sittim irrigabit.

[98] Tanchuma f. 54, 4. (in Schöttgen, p. 74): R. Acha nomine R.
Samuelis bar Nachmani dixit: Quæcumque Deus S. B. facturus est ‏לעתיך
לבא‎ (tempore Messiano) ea jam ante fecit per manus justorum ‏בעולם
הזה‎ (seculo ante Messiam elapso). Deus S. B. suscitabit mortuos, id
quod jam ante fecit per Eliam, Elisam et Ezechielem. Mare exsiccabit,
prout per Mosen factum est. Oculos cæcorum aperiet, id quod per Elisam
fecit. Deus S. B. futuro tempore visitabit steriles, quemadmodum in
Abrahamo et Sarâ fecit.

[99] The Old Testament legends have undergone many changes and
amplifications, even without any reference to the Messiah, so that the
partial discrepancy between the narratives concerning Jesus with those
relating to Moses and the prophets, is not a decisive proof that the
former were not derived from the latter. Compare Acts vii. 22, 53, and
the corresponding part of Josephus Antiq. ii. & iii. with the account
of Moses given in Exodus. Also the biblical account of Abraham with
Antiq. i. 8, 2; of Jacob with i. 19, 6; of Joseph with ii. 5, 4.

[100] George, s. 125: If we consider the firm conviction of the
disciples, that all which had been prophesied in the Old Testament of
the Messiah must necessarily have been fulfilled in the person of their
master; and moreover that there were many blank spaces in the history
of Christ; we shall see that it was impossible to have happened
otherwise than that these ideas should have embodied themselves, and
thus the mythi have arisen which we find. Even if a more correct
representation of the life of Jesus had been possible by means of
tradition, this conviction of the disciples must have been strong
enough to triumph over it.

[101] Compare O. Müller, Prolegomena, s. 7, on a similar conclusion of
Grecian poets.

[102] The comparison of the first chapter of this book with the history
of Joseph in Genesis, gives an instructive view of the tendency of the
later Hebrew legend and poetry to form new relations upon the pattern
of the old. As Joseph was carried captive to Egypt, so was Daniel to
Babylon (i. 2); like Joseph he must change his name (7). God makes the
‏שַׂר הַסָּרִיסִים‎ favourable to him, as the ‏סָרִים שַׂר הַטַבָּחִים‎ to Joseph (9);
he abstains from polluting himself with partaking of the king’s meats
and drinks, which are pressed upon him (8); a self-denial held as
meritorious in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, as that of Joseph with
regard to Potiphar’s wife; like Joseph he gains eminence by the
interpretation of a dream of the king, which his ‏חַרְטֻמִּים‎ were unable
to explain to him (ii.); whilst the additional circumstance that Daniel
is enabled to give not only the interpretation, but the dream itself,
which had escaped the memory of the king, appears to be a romantic
exaggeration of that which was attributed to Joseph. In the account of
Josephus, the history of Daniel has reacted in a singular manner upon
that of Joseph; for as Nebuchadnezzar forgets his dream, and the
interpretation according to Josephus revealed to him at the same time,
so does he make Pharaoh forget the interpretation shown to him with the
dream. Antiq. ii. 5, 4.

[103] Thus J. Müller, theol. Studien u. Kritiken, 1836, iii. s. 839 ff.

[104] It may here be observed, once for all, that whenever in the
following inquiry the names “Matthew,” “Luke,” etc., are used, it is
the author of the several Gospels who is thus briefly indicated, quite
irrespective of the question whether either of the Gospels was written
by an apostle or disciple of that name, or by a later unknown author.

[105] See Kuinöl Comm. in Luc., Proleg., p. 247.

[106] Paulus, exeget. Handbuch, 1 a. s. 78 f. 96. Bauer, hebr. Mythol.,
2 Bd. s. 218 f.

[107] Here Michael is called one of the chief princes.

[108] Here Raphael is represented as one of the seven angels which go
in and out before the glory of the holy One; (Tobit, xii. 15), almost
the same as Gabriel in Luke i. 19, excepting the mention of the number.
This number is in imitation of the Persian Amschaspands. Vid. De Wette,
bibl. Dogmatik, § 171 b.

[109] Hieros. rosch haschanah f. lvi. 4. (Lightfoot, horæ hebr. et
talmud. in IV. Evangg., p. 723): R. Simeon ben Lachisch dicit: nomina
angelorum ascenderunt in manu Israëlis ex Babylone. Nam antea dictum
est: advolavit ad me unus τῶν Seraphim, Seraphim steterunt ante eum,
Jes. vi.; at post: vir Gabriel, Dan. ix. 21, Michaël princeps vester,
Dan. x. 21.

[110] Olshausen, biblischer Commentar zum N.T., 1 Thl. s. 29 (2te
Auflage). Comp. Hoffmann, s. 124 f.

[111] Olshausen, ut sup. Hoffmann, s. 135.

[112] Ut sup. s. 77.

[113] Geschichte der drei letzten Lebensjahre Jesu, sammt dessen
Jugendgeschichte. Tübingen, 1779. 1 Bd. s. 12.

[114] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 115.

[115] Hebr. Mythol. ii. s. 218.

[116] Bauer, ut sup. i. s. 129. Paulus, exeget. Handbuch, i. a, 74.

[117] Paulus, Commentar, i. s. 12.

[118] Bauer, ut sup.

[119] Glaubenslehre, 1 Thl. § 42 und 43 (2te Ausgabe).

[120] Binder, Studien der evang. Geistlichkeit Würtembergs, ix. 2, 5.
11 ff.

[121] Compare my Dogmatik, i. § 49.

[122] Bibl. Comm., 1. Thl. s. 119.

[123] Ut sup. s. 92.

[124] Hess, Geschichte der drei letzten Lebensjahre Jesu u. s. w., 1.
Thl. s. 13, 33.

[125] Horst in Henke’s Museum, i. 4. s. 733 f. Gabler in seinem neuest.
theol. Journal, vii. 1. s. 403.

[126] Briefe über die Bibel im Volkstone (Ausg. Frankfurt und Leipzig,
1800), 1tes Bändchen, 6ter Brief, s. 51 f.

[127] Bahrdt, ut sup. s. 52.

[128] Exeget. Handb. 1, a. s. 74 ff.

[129] Bahrdt, ut sup. 7ter Brief, s. 60.—E. F. über die beiden ersten
Kapitel des Matthäus und Lukas, in Henke’s Magazin, v. 1. s. 163.
Bauer, hebr. Mythol. 2, s. 220.

[130] Exeget. Handb. 1, a. s. 77–80.

[131] Ut sup. s. 73.

[132] Comp. Schleiermacher über die Schriften des Lukas, s. 25.

[133] Horæ hebr. et talmud., ed. Carpzov. p. 722.

[134] Ut sup. s. 26.

[135] Examples borrowed from Aulus Gellius, v. 9, and from Valerius
Maximus, i. 8, are cited.

[136] Ut sup. s. 26.

[137] Ut sup. s. 72 f.

[138] Ut sup. s. 69.

[139] In Schmidt’s Bibliothek für Kritik und Exegese, iii. 1, s. 119.

[140] Paulus, ut sup.

[141] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1. 2, s. 9.

[142] Über die Schriften des Lukas, s. 23.

[143] Paulus und Olshausen z. d. St., Heydenreich a. a. O. 1, s. 87.

[144] Comp. Horst, in Henke’s Museum, i. 4, s. 705; Vater, Commentar
zum Pentateuch, 3, s. 597 ff.; Hase L. J., § 35; auch George, s. 33 f.
91.

[145] E. F. über die zwei ersten Kapitel u. s. w. in Henke’s Magazin,
v. 1, s. 162 ff., und Bauer hebr. Mythol., ii. 220 f.

[146] The adoption of this opinion is best explained by a passage—with
respect to this matter classical—in the Evangelium de nativitate Mariæ,
in Fabricius codex apocryphus N. Ti. 1, p. 22 f., and in Thilo 1, p.
322, “Deus”—it is here said,—cum alicujus uterum claudit, ad hoc facit,
ut mirabilius denuo aperiat, et non libidinis esse, quod nascitur, sed
divini muneris cognoscatur. Prima enim gentis vestræ Sara mater nonne
usque ad octogesimum annum infecunda fuit? et tamen in ultimâ
senectutis ætate genuit Isaac, cui repromissa erat benedictio omnium
gentium. Rachel quoque, tantum Domino grata tantumque a sancto Jacob
amata diu sterilis fuit, et tamen Joseph genuit, non solum dominum
Ægypti, sed plurimarum gentium fame periturarum liberatorem. Quis in
ducibus vel fortior Sampsone, vel sanctior Samuele? et tamen hi ambo
steriles matres habuere.—ergo—crede—dilatos diu conceptus et steriles
partus mirabiliores esse solere.

[147] Neuestes theol. Journal, vii. 1, s. 402 f.

[148] In Henke’s Museum, i. 4, s. 702 ff.

[149] Hase in his Leben Jesu makes the same admission; compare § 52
with § 32.

[150] Wetstein zu Luke i. 11, s. 647 f. adduces passages from Josephus
and from the Rabbins recording apparitions seen by the high priests.
How readily it was presumed that the same thing happened to ordinary
priests is apparent from the narrative before us.

[151]

Judges xiii. 14 (LXX.):              Luc. i. 15.:

καὶ οἶνον καὶ σίκερα (al. μέθυσμα,   καὶ οἶνον καὶ σίκερα οὐ μὲ
hebr. ‏שֵׁכָר‎) μὴ πιέτω.                 πίῃ.

[152]

Judg. xiii. 5:                           Luc. i. 15.:

ὅτι ἡγιασμένον ἔσται τῷ θεῷ (al. Ναζὶρ   καὶ πνεύματος ἁγίου
θεοῦ ἔσται) τὸ παιδάριον οὐκ τῆς         πλησθήσεται ἔτι ἐκ κοιλίας
γαστρός (al. ἀπὸ τῆς κοιλίας).           μητρός αὐτοῦ.

[153]

Judg. xiii. 24 f.:                      Luc. i. 80:

καὶ ηὐλόγησεν αὐτὸν Κύριος, καὶ η       τὸ δὲ παιδίον ηὔξανε καὶ
’ξήθη (al. ἡδρύνθη) τὸ παιδάριον· καὶ   ἐκραταιοῦτο πνεύματι, κὰι ἦν ἐν
ἤρξατο πνεῦμα Κυρίου συμπορεύεσθαι      ταῖς ἐρήμοις, ἕως ἡμέρας
αὐτῷ ἐν παρεμβολῇ Δὰν, ἀναμὲσον Σαρὰ    ἁναδείξεως αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὸν
καὶ ἀναμέσον Ἐσθαόλ.                    Ἰσραήλ.

Comp. Gen. xxi. 20.

[154]

Gen. xvi. 11. (LXX.):                 Luc. i. 13:

καὶ καλέσεις τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ Ἰσμαήλ.   καὶ καλέσεις τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ
                                      Ἰωάννην.

xvii. 19: — — Ἰσαάκ.

[155] Olshausen, bibl. Commentar, 1. s. 116. Hoffmann, s. 146.

[156] With this view of the passage compare De Wette, Exeg. Handbuch
zum N. T., 1, 2, s. 12.

[157] Kuinöl, Comm. in Matth. Proleg., p. xxvii. f.

[158] Paulus, p. 292.

[159] Hieron. in Daniel. init.

[160] See Wetstein.

[161] e.g. Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth., p. 13.

[162] Exegt. Handbuch, i. 1, s. 12 f.

[163] The expedient of Kuinöl, Comm. in Matth. p. 3, to distinguish the
Rahab here mentioned from the celebrated one, becomes hence
superfluous, besides that it is perfectly arbitrary.

[164] Hoffmann, s. 154, according to Hug, Einl., ii. s. 271.

[165] Compare Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth., p. 19; Paulus, exeget.
Handbuch, i. s. 289; De Wette, exeg. Handb. in loco.

[166] Fritzsche in Matth., p. 11.

[167] Paulus, s. 292.

[168] Bibl. Comm., p. 46, note.

[169] See Schneckenburger, Beiträge zur Einleitung in das N. T., s. 41
f., and the passage cited from Josephus, B. j. vi. 8. Also may be
compared the passage cited by Schöttgen, horæ hebr. et talm. zu Matth.
i. from Synopsis Sohar, p. 132, n. 18. Ab Abrahamo usque ad Salomonem
XV. sunt generationes; atque tunc luna fuit in plenilunio. A Salomone
usque ad Zedekiam iterum sunt XV. generationes, et tunc luna defecit,
et Zedekiæ effossi sunt oculi.

[170] De Wette has already called attention to the analogy between
these Old Testament genealogies and those of the Gospels, with regard
to the intentional equality of numbers. Kritik der mos. Geschichte, s.
69. Comp. s. 48.

[171] See Chrysostom and Luther, in Credner, Einleitung in d. N. T., 1,
s. 143 f. Winer, bibl. Realwörterbuch, 1., s. 659.

[172] Orig. homil. in Lucam 28.

[173] Luther, Werke, Bd. 14. Walch. Ausg. s. 8 ff.

[174] De consensu Evangelistarum, ii. 3, u. c. Faust., iii. 3; amongst
the moderns, for example, E. F. in Henke’s Magazin 5, 1, 180 f. After
Augustine had subsequently become acquainted with the writing of
Africanus, he gave up his own opinion for that of the latter. Retract,
ii. 7.

[175] Eusebius, H. E. i. 7, and lately e.g. Schleiermacher on Luke, p.
53.

[176] S. 53. Comp. Winer, bibl. Realwörterbuch, 1 Bd. s. 660.

[177] Comp. Michaelis, Mos. Recht. ii. s. 200. Winer, bibl.
Realwörterb. ii. s. 22 f.

[178] Thus e.g. Spanheim, dubia evang. p. 1. s. 13 ff. Lightfoot,
Michaelis, Paulus, Kuinöl, Olshausen, lately Hoffmann and others.

[179] Epiphanius, Grotius. Olshausen, s. 43.

[180] Testament XII. Patriarch., Test. Simeon c. 71. In Fabric. Codex
pseudepigr. V. T. p. 542: ἐξ αὐτῶν (the races of Levi and Juda)
άνατελεῖ ὑμῖν τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ θεοῦ. Ἀνασήσει γὰρ Κύριος ἐκ τοῦ Αευῒ ὡς
ἀρχιερέα, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ Ἰουδα ὡς βασιλέα κ.τ.λ.

[181] Comp. Thilo, cod. apocr. N.T. 1, s. 374 ff.

[182] Thus e.g. the Manichæan Faustus in Augustin. contra Faust. L.
xxiii. 4.

[183] Protevangel. Jacobi c. 1 f. u. 10. and evangel. de nativitate
Mariæ c. 1. Joachim and Anna, of the race of David, are here mentioned
as the parents of Mary. Faustus on the contrary, in the above cited
passage, gives Joachim the title of Sacerdos.

[184] Dial. c. Tryph. 43. 100. (Paris, 1742.)

[185] Paulus. The Jews also in their representation of a Mary, the
daughter of Heli, tormented in the lower world (see Lightfoot), appear
to have taken the genealogy of Luke, which sets out from Heli, for that
of Mary.

[186] e.g. Lightfoot, horæ, p. 750; Osiander, s. 86.

[187] Juchasin f. 55, 2. in Lightfoot s. 183, and Bava bathra, f. 110,
2. in Wetstein s. 230 f. Comp. Joseph. Vita, 1.

[188] Thus Eichhorn, Einl. in das N. T. 1 Dd s. 425. Kaiser, bibl.
Theol. 1, s. 232. Wegscheider, Institut. § 123, not. d. de Wette, bibl.
Dogm. § 279, and exeget. Handbuch 1, 2, s. 32. Winer, bibl.
Realwörterb. 1, s. 660 f. Hase, Leben Jesu, § 33. Fritzsche, Comm. in
Matt, p. 35. Ammon, Fortbildung des Christenthums zur Weltreligion 1,
s. 196 ff.

[189] See De Wette, bibl. Dogm. and exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 14; Hase, L.
J. Eusebius gives a not improbable explanation of this disagreement
(ad. Steph. quæst. iii., pointed out by Credner, 1, p. 68 f.) that
besides the notion amongst the Jews, that the Messiah must spring from
the royal line of David, another had arisen, that this line having
become polluted and declared unworthy of continuing on the throne of
David (Jerem. xxii. 30), by the wickedness of its later reigning
members, a line more pure though less famed was to be preferred to it.

[190] The farther considerations on the origin and import of these
genealogies, which arise from their connexion with the account of the
miraculous birth of Jesus, must be reserved till after the examination
of the latter point.

[191] Fabricius, Codex apocryphus N. T. 1, p. 19 ff. 66 ff.; Thilo, 1,
p. 161 ff. 319 ff.

[192] Gregory of Nyssa or his interpolator is reminded of this mother
of Samuel by the apocryphal Anna when he says of her: Μιμεῖται τοίνυν
καὶ αὕτη τὰ περὶ τῆς μετρὸς τοῦ Σαμουὴλ διηγήματα κ.τ.λ. Fabricius, 1,
p. 6.

[193] Evang. de nativ. Mar. c. 7: cunctos de domo et familia David
nuptui habiles, non conjugatos.

[194] Protev. Jac c. 8: τοὺς χηρεύοντας τοῦ λαοῦ.

[195] It is thus in the Evang. de nativ. Mariae vii. and viii.; but
rather different in the Protev. Jac. c. ix.

[196] Protev. c. 9: πρεσβύτης. Evang. de nativ. Mar. 8.: grandaevus.
Epiphan. adv. haeres. 78, 8: λαμβάνει τὴν Μαρίαν χῆρος, κατάγων ἡλικίαν
περί που ὀγδοήκοντα ἐτῶν καὶ πρόσω ὁ ἀνήρ.

[197] Παράλαβε αὐτὴν εἰς τήρησιν σεαυτῷ. c. ix. Compare with Evang. de
nativ. Mar. viii. and x.

[198] See the variations in Thilo, p. 227, and the quotations from the
Fathers at p. 365 not.

[199] Numb. v. 18.

[200] Protev. Jac. x.–xvi. The account in the Evang. de nativ. Mar. is
less characteristic.

[201] “Die natürliche Geschichte des grossen Propheten von Nazaret,”
1ter Band, s. 119 ff.

[202] Augustin, de consens. evangelist. ii. 5.

[203] Paulus, Olshausen, Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth. p. 56.

[204] Comp. de Wette’s exeg. Handbuch, i. 1, s. 18. Schleiermacher,
Ueber die Schriften des Lukas, s. 42 ff.

[205] Protev. Jac. c. 12: Μαριὰμ δέ ἐπελάθετο τῶν μυστηρίων ὧν εἶπε
πρὸς αὐτὴν Γαβριήλ. When questioned by Joseph she assures him with
tears: οὐ γινώσκω, πόθεν ἐστὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἐν τῇ γαστρί μου. c. 13.

[206] Geschichte der drei letzten Lebensjahre Jesu u. s. w. 1. Thl. s.
36. Comp. Hoffmann, s. 176 f.

[207] Ch. viii.–x.

[208] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1 a, s. 121. 145.

[209] To this opinion Neander inclines, L. J. Ch. s. 18.

[210]

Gen. xvii. 19; LXX. (Annunciation of   Matt. i. 21.
Isaac):
                                       (μὴ φοβηθῆς παραλαβεῖν Μαριὰμ
ἰδοὺ Σάῤῥα ἡ γυνή σου τέξεται σοι      τὴν γυναῖκα σου—) τέξεται δὲ
υἱὸν, καὶ καλέσεις τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ      υἱὸν, καὶ καλέσεις τὸ ὄνομα
Ἰσαάκ.                                 αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦν· αὐτὸς γὰρ σώσει
                                       τὸν λαὸν αὑτοῦ ἀπὸ· τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν
Judg. xiii. 5. (Annunciation of        αὐτῶν.
Samson):
                                       Luke i. 30 ff.
καὶ αὐτὸς ἄρξεται σῶσαι τὸν Ἰσραὴλ
ἐκ χειρὸς φυλιστιΐμ.                   καὶ εἶπεν ὁ ἄγγελος αὐτῇ—ἰδοὺ
                                       συλλήψῃ ἐν γαστρὶ, καὶ τέξῃ
Gen. xvi. 11 ff. (Annunciation of      υἱὸν, καὶ καλέσεις τὸ ὄνομα
Ishmael):                              αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦν. Οὗτος ἔσται.——.

καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῆ ὁ ἄγγελος Κυρίου·
ἰδοὺ σὺ ἐν γαστρὶ ἔχεις, καὶ τέξη
υἱὸν καὶ καλέσεις τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ
Ἰσμαήλ. Οὗτος ἔσται — —.

[211] Comp. de Wette, Kritik der mos. Geschichte, s. 86 ff.

[212] The vision which, according to Matthew, Joseph had in his sleep,
had besides a kind of type in the vision by which, according to the
Jewish tradition related by Josephus, the father of Moses was comforted
under similar circumstances, when suffering anxiety concerning the
pregnancy of his wife, although for a different reason. Joseph. Antiq.
II. ix. 3. “A man whose name was Amram, one of the nobler sort of
Hebrews, was afraid for his whole nation, lest it should fail, by the
want of young men to be brought up hereafter, and was very uneasy at
it, his wife being then with child, and he knew not what to do.
Hereupon he betook himself to prayer to God.... Accordingly God had
mercy on him, and was moved by his supplication. He stood by him in his
sleep, and exhorted him not to despair of his future favours.... For
this child of thine shall deliver the Hebrew nation from the distress
they are under from the Egyptians. His memory shall be famous while the
world lasts.”

[213] Comp. Ammon, Fortbildung des Christenthums, i. s. 208 f.

[214] Ueber die Schriften des Lukas, s. 23.

[215] Compare Gesenius and Hitzig. Commentaren zum Jesaia; Umbreit,
Ueber die Geburt des Immanuel durch eine Jungfrau, in den theol.
Studien u. Krit., 1830, 3. Heft, s. 541 ff.

[216] This explanation does away with the importance of the controversy
respecting the word ‏עָלְמָה‎. Moreover it ought to be decided by the fact
that the word does not signify an immaculate, but a marriageable young
woman (see Gesenius). So early as the time of Justin the Jews
maintained that the word ‏עָלְמָה‎ ought not to be rendered by παρθένος
but by νεᾶνις. Dial c. Tryph. no. 43. p. 130 E. Comp. Iren. adv. haer.
iii. 21.

[217] Christologie des A. T. s. 1, b, s. 47.

[218] See Winer, Grammatik des neutest. Sprachidioms, 3te Aufl. s. 382
ff. Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth. p. 49. 317 und Excurs. 1, p. 836 ff.

[219] See the Introduction, § 14.

[220] See Bleek in den theol. Studien u. Kritiken, 1835, 2, s. 441 ff.

[221] The whole rationalistic interpretation of Scripture rests upon a
sufficiently palpable paralogism, by which it stands or falls:

The New Testament authors are not to be interpreted as if they said
something irrational (certainly not something contrary to their own
modes of thinking).

Now according to a particular interpretation their assertions are
irrational (that is contrary to our modes of thinking).

Consequently the interpretation cannot give the original sense, and a
different interpretation must be given.

Who does not here perceive the quaternio terminorum and the fatal
inconsequence, when Rationalism takes its stand upon the same ground
with supernaturalism; that, namely, whilst with regard to all other men
the first point to be examined is whether they speak or write what is
just and true, to the New Testament writers the prerogative is granted
of this being, in their case, already presupposed?

[222] Conjugial. præcept. Opp. ed. Hutton, Vol. 7. s. 428.

[223] Irenäus, adv. haer. 1, 26: Cerinthus, Jesum subjecit non ex
virgine natum, impossibile enim hoc ei visum est.

[224] In Henke’s neuem Magazin, iii. 3, s. 369.

[225] Homil. in Lucam xiv. Comp. my Streitschriften, i. 2, s. 72 f.

[226] Olshausen, Bibl. Comm. s. 49. Neander, L. J. Ch. s. 16 f.

[227] e.g. by Eichhorn, Einleitung in das N. T. 1. Bd. s. 407.

[228] Glaubenslehre, 2 Thl. § 97. s. 73 f. der zweiten Auflage.

[229] This side is particularly considered in der Skiagraphie des
Dogma’s von Jesu übernatürlicher Geburt, in Schmidt’s Bibliothek, i. 3,
s. 400 ff.; in den Bemerkungen über den Glaubenspunkt: Christus ist
empfangen vom heil. Geist, in Henke’s neuem Magazin, iii. 3, 365 ff.;
in Kaiser’s bibl. Theol. 1, s. 231 f.; De Wette’s bibl. Dogmatik, §
281; Schleiermacher’s Glaubenslehre, 2 Thl. § 97.

[230] Brought to bear upon this point by Neander, L. J. Ch. s. 12.

[231] Augustinus contra Faustum Manichaeum, L. 23. 3. 4. 8.

[232] See Schmidt, Schleiermacher, and Wegscheider, Instit. § 123 (not.
d).

[233] Eichhorn thinks this probable, Einl. in das N. T. i. s. 425, De
Wette possible, exeg. Handb. i. 1, s. 7.

[234] Justin Mart. Dial. cum Tryphone, 48; Origines contra Celsum, L.
5, 61. Euseb. H. E. 3, 27.

[235] Epiphan. haeres. 30, 14.

[236] Haeres. 29, 9.

[237] Credner, in den Beiträgen zur Einleitung in das N. T. 1, s. 443.
Anm.

[238] Orig. ut sup.

[239] See Neander, K. G. 1, 2, s. 615 f.

[240] Credner, über Essener, und einen theilweisen Zusammenhang beider,
in Winer’s Zeitschrift f. wissenschaftliche Theologie, 1. Bd. 2tes and
3tes Heft; see Baur, Progr. de Ebionitarum origine et doctrinâ ab
Essenis repetendâ, und christl. Gnosis, s. 403.

[241] De carne Christi, c. 14: Poterit haec opinio Hebioni convenire,
qui nudum hominem, et tantum ex semine David, i.e. non et Dei filium,
constituit Jesum, ut in illo angelum fuisse edicat.

[242] Neander and Schneckenburger are of the latter, Gieseler and
Credner of the former opinion.

[243] I here refer to the account of Hegesippus in Eusebius, H. E. iv.
22.

[244] Homil. 3, 23–27.

[245] Epiphan. haeres. 30, 18. comp. 15.

[246] That these were the traits in David’s character which displeased
the Christian sect in question, is sufficiently evident from a passage
in the Clementine Homilies, though the name is not given: Homil. 3, 25;
ἕτι μὴν καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ θης τούτου (τοῦ Καΐν) διαδοχης προεληλυθότες πρωτοι
μοιχοὶ ἐγένοντο, καὶ ψαλτήρια, καὶ κιθάραι, καὶ χαλκεῖς ὅπλων πολεμικῶν
ἐγένοντο. Δὶ ὃ καὶ ἡ τῶν ἐγγὁνων προφητεία, μοιχῶν καὶ ψαλτηρίων
γέμουσα, λανθανόντως διὰ τῶν ἡδυπαυειων ὡς τοὺς πολέμους ἐγείρει.

[247] Epiphan. haer. 30, 14. 16. 34.

[248] Homil. 3, 17.

[249] Schneckenburger, über das Evang. der Aegypter, s. 7; Baur,
christl. Gnosis, s. 760 ff. See on the other side Credner and Hoffmann.

[250] Orig. Comm. in Matth. T. 16, 12. Tertullian, De carne Christi,
14, s. Anm. 13 (a passage in which indeed the speculative and ordinary
Ebionites are mingled together).

[251] Clement, homil. 18, 13. They referred the words of Matth. xi. 27:
οὐδεὶς ἔγνω τὸν πατέρα, εἰ μὴ ὁ υἱὸς κ.τ.λ. to τοὺς πατέρα νομίζοντας
χριστοῦ τὸν Δαβὶδ, καὶ αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν χριστὸν υἱὸν ὄντα, καὶ υἱὸν θεοῦ μὴ
ἐγνωκότας, and complained that αἰτὶ τοῦ θεοῦ τὸν Δαβὶδ πάντες ἔλεγον.

[252] Haeres. 30, 14: ὁ μὲν γὰρ Κήρινθος καὶ Κάρποκρας τῷ αὐτῷ χρώμενοι
παρ’ αὐτοῖς (τοῖς Ἑβιωναίοις) εὐαγγελίῳ, ἀπὸ τῆς ἀρχις τοῦ κατὰ
Ματθαῖον εὐαγγελίου διὰ τῆς γενεαλογίας Βούλονται παριστᾷν ἐκ σπέρματος
Ἰωσὴφ καὶ Μαρίας εἶναι τὸν χριστόν.

[253] Dial. c. Tryph. 100. 120.

[254] Br..., die Nachricht, dass Jesus durch den heil. Geist und von
einer Jungfrau geboren sei, aus Zeitbegriffen erläutert. In Schmidt’s
Bibl. 1, 1. s. 101 ff.—Horst, in Henke’s Museum 1, 4, 497 ff., über die
beiden ersten Kapitel in Evang. Lukas.

[255] Bemerkungen über den Glaubenspunkt: Christus ist empfangen vom
heil. Geist. In Henke’s neuem Magazin, 3, 3, 399.

[256] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 26 f.

[257] Im neuesten theol. Journal, 7. Bd. 4. Stück, s. 407 f.

[258] Antiq. xviii. 3, 4.

[259] Iter Theil, s. 140 ff.

[260] The legend has undergone various modifications, but the name of
Panthera or Pandira has been uniformly retained. Vid. Origenes c. Cels.
1, 28., 32. Schöttgen, Horæ 2, 693 ff. aus Tract. Sanhedrin u. A.;
Eisenmenger, entdecktes Judenthum, 1, s. 105 ff. aus der Schmähschrift:
Toledoth Jeschu; Thilo, cod. apocr. s. 528. Comp. my Abhandlung über
die Namen Panther, Pantheras, Pandera, in jüdischen und patristischen
Erzählungen von der Abstammung Jesu. Athenäum, Febr. 1839, s. 15 ff.

[261] Orig. c. Celsus i. 32.

[262] Ibid. vi. 8.

[263] Ibid. i. 37.

[264] Gabler, in seinem neuesten theol. Journal, 7, 4. s. 408 f.;
Eichhorn, Einleitung in das N. T. 1, s. 428 f.; Bauer, hebr. Mythol. 1,
192 e ff.; Kaiser, bibl. Theologie, 1, s. 231 f.; Wegscheider, Instit.
§ 123; De Wette, bibl. Dogmat. § 281, und exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 18 f.,
Ammon, Fortbildung des Christenth. s. 201 ff.; Hase, L. J. § 33;
Fritzsche, Comment. in Matth. s. 56. The latter justly remarks in the
title to the first chapter: non minus ille (Jesus) ut ferunt doctorum
Judaicorum de Messiâ sententiæ, patrem habet spiritum divinum, matrem
virginem.

[265] Jamblich. vita Pythagoræ. cap. 2, ed. Kiessling.

[266] Adv. Jovin. 1, 26. Diog. Laërt., 3, 1, 2.

[267] Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 64.

[268] Apologie des L. J. s. 92.

[269] Diog. Laërt a. a. O.: Σπεύσιππος (Sororis Platonis filius,
Hieron.) δ’· ἐν τῷ ἐπιγραφομένῳ Πλάτωνος περδείπνῳ καὶ Κλέαρχος ἐν τῷ
Πλάτωνος ἐγκωμίῳ καὶ Ἀναξιλίδης ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ περὶ φιλοσόφων, φασὶν,
Ἀθήνησιν ἦν λόγος, κ.τ.λ.

[270] Neander, L. J. Ch. s. 10.

[271] Antiq. 15. 2. 6.

[272]

Gen. xviii., 14 Sept.             Luke i. 37.

μὴ ἀδυνατήσει παρὰ τῷ θεῷ ῥῆμα;   ὅτι οὐκ ἀδυνατήσει παρὰ τῷ θεῷ πᾶν
                                  ῥῆμα.

[273] De Wette, Exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 17.

[274] They are to be found however in the more modern Rabbins, s.
Matthæi, Religionsgl. der Apostel 2, a. s. 555 ff.

[275] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 47. Also Daub. 2 a. s. 311 f; Theile, § 14.
Neander, s. 9.

[276] Diog. Laërt. a. a. O. See Origenes c. Cels. 1, 37.

[277] Demonax, 29.

[278] S. Origenes in Matthæum, Opp. ed. de la Rue, Vol. 3. s. 463.

[279] The Arian Eunomius according to Photius taught τὸν Ἰωσὴφ μετὰ τὴν
ἄφραστον κυοφορίαν συνάπτεσθαι τῇ παρθένῳ. This was also, according to
Epiphanius, the doctrine of those called by him Dimaerites and
Antidicomarianites, and in the time of Jerome, of Helvidius and his
followers. Compare on this point the Sammlung von Suicer, im Thesaurus
ii., s. v. Μαρία, fol. 305 f.

[280] Comp. Hieron. adv. Helv. 6, 7, Theophylact and Suidas in Suicer,
1, s. v. ἔως, fol. 1294 f.

[281] Hieron. z. d. St.

[282] See Orig. in Matth. Tom. 10, 17; Epiphan. haeres. 78, 7; Historia
Josephi, c. 2; Protev. Jac. 9. 18.

[283] Chrysostomus, hom. 142, in Suicer, s. v. Μαρία, most repulsively
described in the Protev. Jac. xix. and xx.

[284] Hieron. ad Matth. 12, und advers. Helvid. 19.

[285] Die Brüder Jesu. In Winer’s Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche
Theologie, 1, 3. s. 364 f.

[286] Biblisches Realwörterbuch, 1 Bd. s. 664, Anm. De Wette, z. d. St.
Neander L. J. Ch., s. 34.

[287] Comment. in Matth. s. 53 ff., vgl. auch s. 835.

[288] Olshausen is exceedingly unhappy in the example chosen by him in
support of his interpretation of ἕως οὗ. For when it is said, we waited
till midnight but no one came, certainly this by no means implies that
after midnight some one did come, but it does imply that after midnight
we waited no longer; so that here the expression till retains its
signification of exclusion.

[289] On this subject compare in particular Clemen, die Brüder Jesu, in
Winer’s Zeitschrift für wiss. Theol. 1, 3, s. 329 ff.; Paulus, Exeg.
Handbuch, 1 Bd. s. 557 ff.; Fritzsche, a. a. O. s. 480 ff.; Winer,
bibl. Realwörterbuch, in den A. A.; Jesus, Jacobus, Apostel.

[290] See the different names assigned them in the legend in Thilo,
Codex apocryphus N.T., 1. s. 360 note.

[291] Euseb. H. E. 2, 1.

[292] Euseb. H. E. 3, 11.

[293] Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth. p. 482.

[294] Theile, Biographie Jesu, § 18.

[295] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1. a, s. 120 ff.

[296] S. Olshausen und de Wette, z. d. St.

[297] Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 26; Olshausen, bibl. Comm. z. d.
St.; Hoffmann, s. 226; Lange, s. 76 ff.

[298] Compare        Luke i. 47 with 1 Sam. ii. 1.
                      ,,  i. 49      ,, ,,  ii. 2.
                      ,,  i. 51      ,, ,,  ii. 3, 4.
                      ,,  i. 52      ,, ,,  ii. 8.
                      ,,  i. 53      ,, ,,  ii. 5.

Particularly Compare Luke i. 48 with 1 Sam. i. 11.
                     Luke i. 50      Deut. vii. 9.
                      ,,  i. 52      Ecclesiasticus x. 14.
                      ,,  i. 54      Ps. xcviii. 3.

[299] 5 Band, 1. Stück, s. 161. f.

[300] In Henke’s Museum, 1, 4, s. 725.

[301] Ueber den Lukas, s. 23 f.

[302] Olshausen, Paulus, Kuinöl.

[303] Tholuck, s. 194 ff. Neander, s. 19.

[304] Cassiodor. Variarum, 3, 52. Isidor. Orig. 5, 36.

[305] To refer here to the Monumentum Ancyranum, which is said to
record a census of the whole empire in the year of Rome 746 (Osiander,
p. 95), is proof of the greatest carelessness. For he who examines this
inscription will find mention only of three assessments census civium
Romanorum, which Suetonius designates census populi, and of which Dio
Cassius speaks, at least of one of them, as ἀπογραφὴ τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἰταλίᾳ
κατοικούντων. See Ideler, Chronol. 2, s. 339.

[306] In the authoritative citations in Suidas are the words taken from
Luke, αὔτη ἡ ἀπογραφὴ πρώτη ἐγένετο.

[307] Hoffmann, s. 231.

[308] Joseph. Antiq. 17, 13, 2. B. j. 2, 7, 3.

[309] Antiq. 17, 13, 5. 18, 1, 1. B. j. 2, 8, 1.

[310] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, a, s. 171. Winer, bibl. Realwörterbuch.

[311] Tacit. Annal. 1, 11. Sueton. Octav. 191. But if in this document
opes publicæ continebantur: quantum civium sociorumque in armis; quot
classes, regna, provinciæ, tributa aut vectigalia, et necessitates ac
largitiones: the number of troops and the sum which the Jewish prince
had to furnish, might have been given without a Roman tax being levied
in their land. For Judea in particular Augustus had before him the
subsequent census made by Quirinus.

[312] Ὅτι, πάλαι χρώμενος αὐτῷ φιλω, νῦν ὑπηκόῳ χρήσεται. Joseph.
Antiq. 16, 9, 3. But the difference was adjusted long before the death
of Herod. Antiq. 16, 10, 9.

[313] Joseph. Ant. 17, 2, 4. παντὸς τοῦ Ἰουδαϊκοῦ βεβαιώσαντος δι’
ὅρκων ἣ μὴν εὐνοῆσαι Καίσαρι καὶ τοῖς βασιλέως πράγμασι. That this
oath, far from being a humiliating measure for Herod, coincided with
his interest, is proved by the zeal with which he punished the
Pharisees who refused to take it.

[314] Tholuck, s. 192 f. But the insurrection which the ἀπογραφὴ after
the depositions of Archelaus actually occasioned—a fact which outweighs
all Tholuck’s surmises—proves it to have been the first Roman measure
of the kind in Judea.

[315] Antiq. 17, 9, 10, 1 ff. B. j. 2. 2. 2. His oppressions however
had reference only to the fortresses and the treasures of Herod.

[316] Antiq. 18, 1, 1.

[317] Bell. jud. 2, 8, 1. 9. 1. Antiq. 17, 13, 5.

[318] Kuinöl, Comm. in Luc. p. 320.

[319] Winer.

[320] Adv. Marcion. 4, 19.

[321] Storr, opusc. acad. 3, s. 126 f. Süskind, vermischte Aufsätze, s.
63. Tholuck, s. 182 f.

[322] Michaelis, Anm. z. d. St. und Einl. in d. N.T. 1, 71.

[323] Münter, Stern der Weisen, s. 88.

[324] Paulus. Wetstein.

[325] Credner.

[326] In Schmidt’s Bibliothek für Kritik und Exegese, 3, 1. s. 124. See
Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 230; Ammon, Fortbildung, 1, s. 196; Credner,
Einleitung, in d. N.T. 1, s. 155; De Wette, exeget. Handbuch.

[327] Chap. 17. Compare Historia de nativ. Mariae et de infantiâ
Servatoris, c. 13.

[328] Fabricius, im Codex Apocryph. N.T. 1, s. 105, not. y.

[329] Ambrosius and Jerome. See Gieseler, K. G. 1, s. 516.

[330] Dial. c. Tryph. 78.

[331] C. Cels. 1, 51.

[332] Hess, Olshausen, Paulus.

[333] Paulus.

[334] Chap. 14.

[335] Chap. 4 in Thilo, s. 69.

[336] In seinem Versuch über die Wundergeschichten des N. T. See
Gabler’s Neuestes theol. Journal, 7, 4, s. 411.

[337] Exeg. Handb. s. 180 ff. As Paulus supposes an external natural
phenomenon so Matthæi imagines a mental vision of angels. Synopse der
vier Evangelien, s. 3.

[338] Hebräische Mythologie, 2. Thl. s. 223 ff.

[339] Recension von Bauer’s hebr. Mythologie in Gabler’s Journal für
auserlesene theol. Literatur, 2, 1, s. 58 f.

[340] Neuestes theol. Journal, 7, 4, s. 412 f.

[341] In Luc. 2. in Suicer, 2, p. 789.

[342] Servius ad Verg. Ecl. 10, 26.

[343] Liban. progymn. p. 138, in Wetstein, s. 662.

[344] Thus Cyrus, see Herod. 1, 110 ff. Romulus, see Livy, 1, 4.

[345] Thilo, Codex Apocr. N. T. 1, s. 383 not.

[346] Vid. Schöttgen, 2, s. 531.

[347] Sota, 1, 48: Sapientes nostri perhibent, circa horam nativitatis
Mosis totam domum repletam fuisse luce (Wetstein).

[348] Ueber den Lukas, s. 29. f. With whom Neander and others now
agree.—L. J. Ch. s. 21 f.

[349] Comp. De Wette, Kritik der mosaischen Geschichte, s. 116; George,
Mythus u. Sage, s. 33 f.

[350]

Gen. xxxvii. 11 (LXX.):         Luc. 2, 18 f.:

Ἐζήλωσαν δὲ οὐτὸν οἱ ἀδελφοὶ    καὶ πάντες οἱ ἀκούσαντες ἐθαύμασαν — —
αὐτοῦ, ὁ δὲ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ         ἡ δὲ Μαριὰμ πάντα συνετήρει τὰ ῥήματα
διετήρησε τὸ ῥῆμα.—Schöttgen,   ταῦτα, συμβάλλουσα ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ αὐτῆς.
horae, 1, 262.                  2, 51: καὶ ἡ μήτηρ αὐτοῦ διετήρει
                                πάντα τὰ ῥήματα ταῦτα ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ
                                αὐτῆς.

[351] See Introduction.

[352] Perhaps as a precautionary measure to obviate objections on the
part of the Jews. (Ammon, Fortbildung, 1, s. 217.)

[353] Pirke R. Elieser, 33: Sex hominum nomina dicta sunt, antequam
nascerentur: Isaaci nempe, Ismaëlis, Mosis, Salomonis, Josiæ et nomen
regis Messiæ. Bereschith rabba, sect. 1, fol. 3, 3.—(Schöttgen, horae,
2, s. 436): Sex res prævenerunt creationem mundi: quædam ex illis
creatæ sunt, nempe lex et thronus gloriæ; aliæ ascenderunt in
cogitationem (Dei) ut crearentur, nimirum Patriarchæ, Israël, templum,
et nomen Messiæ.

[354] Comp. Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen
Evangeliums, s. 69 ff.

[355] Joseph. B. J. vi. vi. 4: Tacit. Histor. v. 13; Sueton. Vespas. 4.
All the extant allusions to the existence of such a hope at the era of
Christ’s birth, relate only in an indeterminate manner to a ruler of
the world. Virg. Eclog. 4; Sueton. Octav. 94.

[356] In saying that it is inadmissible to suppose a divine
intervention directly tending to countenance superstition, I refer to
what is called immediate intervention. In the doctrine of mediate
intervention, which includes the co-operation of man, there is
doubtless a mixture of truth and error. Neander confuses the two. L. J.
Ch., s. 29.

[357] Paulus and De Wette, exeg. Handb. in loc.

[358] According to Hoffmann (p. 256), that he might control the
assertion of the magi by inquiring of his own astrologers, whether they
had seen the star at the same time. This is not merely unsupported by
the text—it is in direct contradiction to it, for we are there told
that Herod at once gave terrified credence to the magi.

[359] Fritzsche, in loc. aptly says—comperto, quasi magos non ad se
redituros statim scivisset, orti sideris tempore, etc.

[360] K. Ch. L. Schmidt, exeg. Beiträge, 1, s. 150 f. Comp. Fritzsche
and De Wette in loc.

[361] Hoffman thinks that Herod shunned this measure as a breach of
hospitality; yet this very Herod he represents as a monster of cruelty,
and that justly, for the conduct attributed to the monarch in chap. ii.
of Matthew is not unworthy of his heart, against which Neander
superfluously argues (p. 30 f.), but of his head.

[362] Schmidt, ut sup. p. 155 f.

[363] Stark, Synops. bibl. exeg. in N. T., p. 62.

[364] This was the opinion of some of the Fathers, e.g. Euseb.
Demonstr. evang. 9, ap. Suicer, 1, s. 559; Joann. Damasc. de fide
orthod. ii. 7.

[365] Chrysostomus and others ap. Suicer, ut sup. and the Evang.
infant. arab. c. vii.

[366] See Kuinöl, Comm. in Matth., p. 23.

[367] Vermischte Aufsätze, s. 8.

[368] Bibl. Comm. in loc, Hoffmann, s. 261.

[369] Schmidt, exeg. Beiträge, 1, 152 ff.

[370] This is shown in opposition to Olshausen by Steudel in Bengel’s
Archiv. vii. ii. 425 f. viii. iii. 487.

[371] Schmidt, ut sup. p. 156.

[372] Babylon. Sanhedr. f. cvii. 2, ap. Lightfoot, p. 207. Comp.
Schöttgen, ii. p. 533. According to Josephus Antiq. xiii. xiii. 5, xiv.
2, they were Jews of each sex and of all ages, and chiefly Pharisees.

[373] Joseph. B. J. i. xxx. 3. Comp. Antiq. xvii. iv. 1.

[374] Macrob. Saturnal. ii. 4: Quum audisset (Augustus) inter pueros,
quos in Syriâ Herodes rex Judæorum intra bimatum jussit interfici,
filium quoque ejus occisum, ait: melius est, Herodis porcum (ὗν) esse
quam filium (υἱόν).

[375] Vid. Wetstein, Kuinöl, Olshausen in loc. Winer d. A. Herodes.

[376] Fritzsche, Comm. in Matt., p. 93 f.

[377] Chrysostom and others.

[378] Vid. Gratz, Comm. zum Ev. Matth. 1, s. 115.

[379] Kuinöl, ad Matth. p. 44 f.

[380] Wetstein, in loc.

[381] Schneckenburger, Beiträge zur Einleitung in das N. T., s. 42.

[382] Gieseler, Studien und Kritiken, 1831, 3. Heft, s. 588 f.
Fritzsche, s. 104. Comp. Hieron. ad Jesai. xi. 1.

[383] For both these explanations, see Kuinöl, in loc.

[384] Kepler, in various treatises; Münter, der Stern der Weisen;
Ideler, Handbuch der mathemat. und technischen Chronologie, 2. Bd. s.
399 ff.

[385] Olshausen, s. 67.

[386] Paulus, ut sup. s. 202, 221.

[387] Bengel’s Archiv. vii. ii. p. 424.

[388] At a later period, it is true, this journey of Jesus was the
occasion of calumnies from the Jews, but those were of an entirely
different nature, as will be seen in the following chapter.

[389] Ueber formelle oder genetische Erklärungsart der Wunder. In
Henke’s Museum, 1, 3, 399 ff. Similar essays see in the Abhandlungen
über die beiden ersten Kapitel des Matthäus u. Lukas, in Henke’s
Magazin, 5, 1, 171 ff., and in Matthäi, Religionsgl. der Apostel, 2, s.
422 ff.

[390] L. J. Ch., s. 29 ff.

[391] Orig. c. Cels. i. 60. Auctor, op. imperf. in Matth. ap. Fabricius
Pseudepigr. V. T., p. 807 ff.

[392] Schmidt’s Bibliothek, 3, 1, s. 130.

[393] In loc. Num. (Schöttgen, horæ, ii. p. 152): Multi Interpretati
sunt hæc de Messiâ.

[394] Justin, Hist. 37.

[395] Sueton. Jul. Cæs. 88.

[396] Jalkut Rubeni, f. xxxii. 3 (ap. Wetstein): quâ horâ natus est
Abrahamus, pater noster, super quem sit pax, stetit quoddam sidus in
oriente et deglutivit quatuor astra, quæ erant in quatuor cœli plagis.
According to an Arabic writing entitled Maallem, this star,
prognosticating the birth of Abraham, was seen by Nimrod in a dream.
Fabric. Cod. pseudepigr. V. T. i. s. 345.

[397] Testamentum XII. Patriarcharum, test. Levi, 18 (Fabric. Cod.
pseud. V. T. p. 584 f.): καὶ ἀνατελεῖ ἄστρον αὐτοῦ (of the Messianic
ἱερεὺς καινὸς) ἐν οὐρανῷ,—φωτίζον φῶς γνώσεως κ.τ.λ. Pesikta Sotarta,
f. xlviii. 1 (ap. Schöttgen, ii. p. 531): Et prodibit stella ab
oriente, quæ est stella Messiæ, et in oriente versabitur dies X V.
Comp. Sohar Genes. f. 74. Schöttgen, ii. 524, and some other passages
which are pointed out by Ideler in the Handbuch der Chronologie, 2 Bd.
s. 409, Anm. 1, and Bertholdt, Christologia Judæorum, § 14.

[398] Compare with the passages cited Note 7. Protevang. Jac. cap.
xxi.: εἴδομεν ἀστέρα παμμεγέθη, λάμψαντα ἐν τοῖς ἄστροις τοὺτοις καὶ
ἀμβλύνοντα αὐτοὺς τοῦ φαίνειν. Still more exaggerated in Ignat. ep. ad
Ephes. 19. See the collection of passages connected with this subject
in Thilo, cod. apocr. i. p. 390 f.

[399] Exeg. Beiträge, i. s. 159 ff.

[400] Fritzsche in the paraphrase of chap. ii. Etiam stella, quam
judaica disciplina sub Messiæ natale visum iri dicit, quo Jesus
nascebatur tempore exorta est.

[401] As in Matt. ii. 11 it is said of the magi τροσήνενκαν αὐτῷ—χρυσὸν
καὶ λίβανον: so in Isa. lx. 6 (LXX.): ἥξουσί, φέροντες χρυσίον, καὶ
λίβανον οἴσουσι. The third present is in Matt. σμύρνα, in Isa. λίθος
τίμιος.

[402] V. 1. und 3: ‏כִּי בָא אוֹרֵךְ וּכְבוֹד יהוָֹה עָלַיִךְ‎ (LXX: Ἰερουσαλὴμ) ‏קוּמִי
אוֹרִי זָרָח:—וְהָלְכוּ גּוֹיִם לְאוֹרֵךְ וּמְלָכִים לְנֹגַהּ זָרְחֵךְ‎

[403] Æneid, ii. 693 ff.

[404] Wetstein, in loc.

[405] Herod, i. 108 ff. Liv. i. 4.

[406] Octav. 94:—ante paucos quam nasceretur menses prodigium Romæ
factum publice, quo denuntiabatur, regem populi Romani naturam
parturire. Senatum exterritum, censuisse, ne quis illo anno genitus
educaretur. Eos, qui gravidas uxores haberent, quo ad se quisque spem
traheret, curasse, ne Senatus consultum ad ærarium deferretur.

[407] Bauer (über das Mythische in der früheren Lebensper. des Moses,
in the n. Theol. Journ. 13, 3) had already compared the marvellous
deliverance of Moses with that of Cyrus and Romulus; the comparison of
the infanticides was added by De Wette, Kritik der Mos. Geschichte, s.
176.

[408] Joseph. Antiq. ii. ix. 2.

[409] Jalkut Rubeni (cont. of the passage cited in Note 6): dixerunt
sapientes Nimrodi: natus est Tharæ filius hâc ipsâ horâ, ex quo
egressurus est populus, qui hæreditabit præsens et futurum seculum; si
tibi placuerit, detur patri ipsius domus argento auroque plena, et
occidat ipsum. Comp. the passage of the Arabic book quoted by Fabric.
Cod. pseudepigr. ut sup.

[410] Protev. Jacobi, c. xxii. f.

[411]

Ex. iv. 19, LXX:                    Matt. ii. 20:

βάδιζε, ἄπελθε εἰς Αἴγυπτον,        ἐγερθεὶς—πορεύου εἰς γῆν Ἰσραήλ·
τεθνήκασι γὰρ πάντες οἱ ζητοῦντές   τεθνήκασι γὰρ οἱ ζητοῦντες τὴν
σου τὴν ψυχὴν.                      ψυχὴν τοῦ παιδίου.

We may remark that the inappropriate use of the plural in the
evangelical passage, can only be explained on the supposition of a
reference to the passage in Exod. See Winer, N. T. Gramm. s. 149. Comp.
also Exod. iv. 20 with Matt. ii. 14, 21.

[412] Vide e.g. Schöttgen, Horæ, ii. p. 209.

[413] Theile, zur Biographie Jesu, § 15, Anm. 9. Hoffmann, s. 269.

[414] Comp. my Streitschriften, i. 1, s. 42 f.; George, s. 39.

[415] Neander, L. J. Ch. s. 27.

[416] Schleiermacher (Ueber den Lukas, s. 47), explains the narrative
concerning the magi as a symbolical one; but he scorns to take into
consideration the passages from the O. T. and other writings, which
have a bearing on the subject, and by way of retribution, his
exposition at one time rests in generalities, at another, takes a wrong
path.

[417] Lightfoot, Horæ, p. 202.

[418] Schneckenburger, Ueber den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen
Evangeliums, s. 69 ff.

[419] Thus, e.g. Augustin de consensu evangelistarum, ii. 5. Storr,
opusc. acad. iii. s. 96 ff. Süskind, in Bengel’s Archiv. i. 1, s. 216
ff.

[420] E.g. Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 51 ff. Paulus, Olshausen, in
loc.

[421] Süskind, ut sup. s. 222.

[422] The same difference as to the chronological relation of the two
incidents exists between the two different texts of the apocryphal
book: Historia de nativitate Mariæ et de inf. Serv., see Thilo, p. 385,
not.

[423] This incompatibility of the two narratives was perceived at an
early period by some opponents of Christianity. Epiphanius names one
Philosabbatius, together with Celsus and Porphyry (hæres. li. 8).

[424] Neander, L. J. Ch. s. 33, Anm.

[425] Schleiermacher, Ueber den Lukas, s. 47. Schneckenburger, ut sup.

[426] Antiq. xiv. ix. 4, xv. i. 1 and x. 4.

[427] The Evang. Nicodemi indeed calls him, c. xvi. ὁ μέγας διδάσκαλος,
and the Protev. Jacobi, c. xxiv. makes him a priest or even high
priest, vid. Varr. ap. Thilo Cod. Apocr. N. T. 1, s. 271, comp. 203.

[428] 1 Th. s. 205 ff.

[429] Cap. vi. Viditque illum Simeon senex instar columnæ lucis
refulgentem, cum Domina Maria virgo, mater ejus, ulnis suis eum
gestaret,—et circumdabant eum angeli instar circuli, celebrantes illum,
etc. Ap. Thilo, p. 71.

[430] Thus E. F. in the treatise, on the two first chapters of Matth.
and Luke. In Henke’s Mag. 5 bd. s. 169 f. A similar half measure is in
Matthäi, Synopse der 4 Evan. s. 3, 5 f.

[431] With the words of Simeon addressed to Mary: καὶ σοῦ δὲ αὐτῆς τὴν
ψυχὲν διελεύσεται ῥομφαία (v. 35) comp. the words in the messianic
psalm of sorrow, xxii. 21: ῥῦσαι ἀπὸ ῥομφαίας τὴν ψυχέν μου.

[432] Schleiermacher, Ueber den Lukas, s. 37. Compare on the other hand
the observations in § 18, with those of the authors there quoted, Note
19.

[433] Neander here (s. 24 f.) mistakes the apocryphal for the mythical,
as he had before done the poetical.

[434] Olshausen, bibl. Comm. 1. s. 142 f.

[435] Dial. c. Trypho, 78: Joseph came from Nazareth, where he lived,
to Bethlehem, whence he was, to be enrolled, ἀνεληλύθει (Ἰωσὴφ) ἀπὸ
Ναζαρὲτ, ἔνθα ὤκει, εἰς Βηθλεὲμ, ὅθεν ἦν, ἀπογράψασθαι. The words ὅθεν
ἦν might however be understood as signifying merely the place of his
tribe, especially if Justin’s addition be considered: For his race was
of the tribe of Judah, which inhabits that land, ἀπο γὰρ τῆς
κατοικούσης τὴν γῆν ἐκείνην φυλῆς Ἰούδα τὸ γένος ἦν.

[436] Beiträge zur Einleit. in das N. T. 1. s. 217. Comp. Hoffmann, s.
238 f. 277 ff.

[437] C. I. 8. 10.

[438] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, a, s. 178.

[439] Ueber die Unzulässigkeit der mythischen Auffassung u. s. f. 1, s.
101.

[440] L. J. Ch. s. 33.

[441] Tertull. adv. Marcion iv. 8. Epiphan. hær. xxix. 1.

[442] Comp K. Ch. L. Schmidt, in Schmidt’s Bibliothek, 3, 1, s. 123 f.;
Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 230.

[443] On this Heydenreich rests his defence, Ueber die Unzulässigkeit.
1. s. 99.

[444] Ueber den Lukas, s. 49. There is a similar hesitation in Thelte,
Biographie Jesu, § 15.

[445] Ueber den Ursprung u. s. w., s. 68 f. u. s. 158.

[446] Comp. Ammon. Fortbildung, 1, s. 194 ff.; De Wette, exeget. Handb.
1, 2, s. 24 f.; George, s. 84 ff. That different narrators may give
different explanations of the same fact, and that these different
explanations may afterwards be united in one book, is proved by many
examples in the O. T. Thus in Genesis, three derivations are given of
the name of Isaac; two of that of Jacob (xxv. 26., xxvii. 16), and so
of Edom and Beersheba (xxi. 31., xxvi. 33). Comp. De Wette, Kritik der
mos. Gesch., s. 110. 118 ff. and my Streitschriften, I, 1, s. 83 ff.

[447] Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 110.

[448] Olshausen, bibl. Comm. 1, s. 145 f.

[449] Olshausen, ut sup. 1. 150.

[450] Hase, Leben Jesu, § 37.

[451] Heydenreich, über die Unzulässigkeit u. s. f. 1, s. 103.

[452] Megillah, f. 21, apud Lightfoot, in loc.

[453] Vid. Kuinöl, in Luc. p. 353.

[454] Evang. Thomæ, c. vi. ff. Ap. Thilo. p. 288 ff. and Evang. infant,
arab. c. xlviii. p. 123, Thilo.

[455] Ibid.

[456] Evang. infant, arab. c. l.

[457] Ibid. c. l. and li.; comp. ev. Thomæ, c. xix.

[458] Olshausen confesses this, s. 151.

[459] For proofs (e.g. Hieros. Taanith, lxvii. 4) see Wetstein and
Lightfoot, in loc.

[460] Lightfoot, Horæ, p. 742.

[461] Paulus, s. 279.

[462] Kuinöl, s. 353 f.

[463] Horæ, ii. p. 886.

[464] Bibl. Comm. p. 151.

[465] Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 112.

[466] In the similar account also which Josephus gives us of himself
when fourteen, it is easy to discern the exaggeration of a
self-complacent man. Life, 2: Moreover, when I was a child, and about
fourteen years of age, I was commended by all for the love I had to
learning, on which account the high priests and principal men of the
city came there frequently to me together, in order to know my opinion
about the accurate understanding of points of the law.

[467]

1 Sam. ii. 26 (LXX):                 Luc. ii. 52:

καὶ τὸ παιδάριον Σαμουὴλ ἐπορεύετο   καὶ Ἰησοῦς προέκοπτε σοφία καὶ
μαγαλυνόμενον, καὶ ἀγαθὸν καὶ μετὰ   ἡλικίᾳ, καὶ χάριτι παρὰ θεῷ καὶ
Κυρίου καὶ μετὰ ἀνθρώπων.            ἀνθρώποις.

Compare also what Josephus says Antiq. ii. ix. 6 of the χάρις παιδικὴ
of Moses.

[468] Gabler neuest. theol. Journal 3, 1, s. 39.

[469] Joseph. Antiq. ii. ix. 6.

[470] Philo, de vita Mosis, Opp. ed. Mangey, Vol. 2. p. 83 f. οὐχ οἷα
κομιδῆ νήπιος ἥδετο τωθασμοῖς καὶ γέλωσι καὶ παιδιαῖς—ἀλλ’ αἰδω καὶ
σεμνότητα παραφαίνων, ἀπούσμασι καὶ θεάμασιν, ἃ τὴν ψυχὴν ἔμελλεν
ὠφελήσειν προσεῖχε. διδάσκαλοι δ’ εὐθὺς, ἀλλαχόθεν ἄλλος, παρῆσαν·—ὧν
ἐν οὐ μακρῷ χρόνῳ τὰς δυνάμεις ὑπερέβαλεν, εὐμοιρίᾳ φύσεως φθάνων τὰς
ὑφηγὴσεις.

[471] Chagiga, ap. Wetstein, in loc. A XII anno filius censetur
maturus. So Joma f. lxxxii. 1. Berachoth f. xxiv. 1; whereas Bereschith
Rabba lxiii. mentions the 13th year as the critical one.

[472] Schemoth R. ap. Wetstein: Dixit R, Chama: Moses duodenarius
avulsus est a domo patris sui etc.

[473] Joseph. Antiq. v. x. 4: Σαμούηλος δὲ πεπληρωκὼς ἔτος ἤδη
δωδέκατον, προεφήτευς.

[474] Ignat. ep. (interpol.) ad Magnes. c. iii.: Σολομῶν δὲ—δωδεκαετὴς
βασιλεύσας, τὴν φοβερὰν ἑκείνην καὶ δυσερμήνευτον ἐπὶ ταῖς γυναιξὶ
κρίσιν ἕνεκα τῶν παιδίων ἐποιήσατο.—Δανιὴλ ὁ σοφὸς δωδεκαετὴς γέγονε
κάτοχος τῷ θείῳ πνεύματι, καὶ τοὺς μάτην τὴν πολιὰν φέροντας πρεσβύτας
συκοφάντας καὶ ἐπιθυμητὰς ἀλλοτρίου κάλλους ἀπήλεγξε. But Solomon, ...
being king at the age of twelve years, gave that terrible and profound
judgment between the women with respect to the children.... Daniel, the
wise man, when twelve years old, was possessed by the divine spirit,
and convicted those calumniating old men who, carrying gray hairs in
vain, coveted the beauty that belonged to another. This, it is true, is
found in a Christian writing, but on comparing it with the above data,
we are led to believe that it was drawn from a more ancient Jewish
legend.

[475] This Kaiser has seen, bibl. Theol. 1, 234.

[476] Neither do we learn what Hase (Leben Jesu § 37) supposes to be
conveyed in this narrative, namely, that as it exhibits the same union
with God that constituted the idea of the later life of Jesus, it is an
intimation that his later excellence was not the result of conversion
from youthful errors, but of the uninterrupted development of his
freedom.

[477] Ueber die Unzulässigkeit u. s. f. 1, s. 92.

[478] Ueber den Lukas, s. 39 f.

[479] Cap. v. In the Greek text also the more probable reading is καὶ
μάλιστα οὐ σοφῶς, vid. Thilo, p. 287.

[480] Hence the title of an Arabian apocryphal work (according to the
Latin translation in Thilo, 1, p. 3): historia Josephi, fabri lignarii.

[481] Vid. Thilo, Cod. Apocr. N. T. p. 368 f. not.

[482] Justin. Dial. c. Tryph. 88. According to him Jesus makes these
implements, doubtless under the direction of Joseph. In the Evang.
Thomæ c. xiii. Joseph is the workman.

[483] Cap. xxxviii. ap. Thilo, p. 112 ff.

[484] C. ix. and xiii.

[485] C. Cels. vi. 36.

[486] Fritzsche, in Marc. p. 200.

[487] Vid. Wetstein and Paulus, in loc.; Winer, Realwörterbuch, 1, s.
665. Note; Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 46 f. Note.

[488] Ut sup.: ταῦτα γὰρ τὰ τεκτονικὰ ἔργα εἰργάζετο ἐν ἀνθρώποις ὢν,
ἄροτρα καὶ ζυγά. διὰ τούτων καὶ τὰ τῆς δικαιοσύνης σύμβολα διδάσκων,
καὶ ενεργῆ βίον.

[489] Cap. xxxviii.

[490] Theodoret. H. E. iii. 23.

[491] Hase, Leben Jesu, § 70; Winer, bibl. Realw. 1, s. 665.

[492] Winer, ut sup.

[493] This is done by both the above-named theologians.

[494] Paulus, exeget. Handb. 1, a, s. 273 ff.

[495] Such, however, are the arguments of Paulus, ut sup. 275 ff.

[496] Comp. Hase, Leben Jesu, § 38; Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 45 f.

[497] Paulus, ut sup.

[498] To this Schöttgen appeals, Christus rabbinorum summus, in his
horæ, ii. p. 890 f.

[499] As e.g. Reinhard does, in his Plan Jesu.

[500] Evang. infant. arab. c. i. p. 60 f. ap. Thilo, and the passages
quoted § 40 out of the same Gospel and the Evang. Thomæ.

[501] Cap. ii. p. 278, Thilo.

[502] Cap. x. ff.

[503] E.g. Evang. Thomæ, c. iii.–v. Evang. infant. arab. c. xlvi. f.
Evang. Thomæ, c. ii. Evang. inf. arab. c. xxxvi.

[504] Yet some isolated instances occur, vid. Semler, Baumgarten’s
Glaubenslehre, 1, s. 42, Anm. 8.

[505] Orig. c. Cels. 1. 28: καὶ (λέγει) ὅτι οὗτος (ὁ Ἰησοῦς) διὰ πενίαν
εἰς Αἴγυπτον μισθαρνήσας, κᾀκεῖ δυνάμεων τίνων πειραθεὶς, ἐφ’ αἷς
Αἰγύπτιοι σεμνύνονται, ἐπανῆλθεν, ἐν ταῖς δυνάμεσι μέγα φρονῶν, καὶ δι’
αὐτὰς θεὸν αὐτὸν ἀνηγόρευσε.

[506] Sanhedr. f. cvii. 2: R. Josua f. Perachja et ‏ישו‎ Alexandrian
Aegypti profecti sunt — — ‏ישו‎ ex illo tempore magiam exercuit, et
Israëlitas ad pessima quævis perduxit. (An important anachronism, as
this Josua Ben Perachja lived about a century earlier. See Jost,
Geschichte des Isr., 2, s. 80 ff. and 142 of the Appendices.) Schabbath
f. civ. 2: Traditio est, R. Elieserem dixisse ad viros doctos: annon f.
Satdae (i.e. Jesus) magiam ex Aegypto adduxit per incisionem in carne
suâ factam? vid. Schöttgen, horæ, ii. p. 697 ff. Eisenmenger,
entdecktes Judenthum, 1, s. 149 f.

[507] E.g. Des Côtes, Schutzschrift für Jesus von Nazaret, s. 128 ff.

[508] Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 39 ff.

[509] Vid. Joseph. B. j. ii. viii. 2–13. Antiq. xviii. i. 5. Comp.
Philo, quod omnis probus liber and de vita contemplativa.

[510] This opinion is judiciously developed by Stäudlin, Geschichte der
Sittenlehre Jesu, 1, s. 570 ff.; and in a romantic manner in the
Geschichte des Grossen Propheten von Nazaret, 1. Band.

[511] H. E. ii. 16 f.

[512] Comp. Bengel, Bemerkungen über den Versuch. das Christenthum aus
dem Essäismus abzuleiten, in Flatt’s Magazin, 7, s. 126 ff.; Neander,
L. J. Chr. s. 41 ff.

[513] This is stated with exaggeration by Bahrdt, Briefe über die
Bibel, zweites Bändchen, 18ter, 20ster Brief ff. 4tes Bändchen, 49ster
Brief.

[514] Comp. Paulus ut sup. 1, a, 273 ff. Planck, Geschichte des
Christenthums in der Periode seiner ersten Einführung 1, s. 84. De
Wette, bibl. Dogm. § 212. Hase L. J. § 38. Winer, bibl. Realw. s. 677
f. Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 38 ff.

[515] Exeget. Handbuch. 1 a, s. 46. Schneckenburger agrees with him,
über den Ursprung des ersten kanon. Evang., s. 30.

[516] Vermischte Aufsätze, s. 76 ff. Compare Schneckenburger, ut sup.

[517] De Wette and Fritzsche, in loc.

[518] See Paulus, ut sup., s. 336.

[519] I here collect all the passages in Josephus relative to Lysanias,
with the parallel passages in Dion Cassius. Antiq. xiii. xvi. 3, xiv.
iii. 2, vii. 8.—Antiq. xv. iv. 1. B. j. i. xiii. 1 (Dio Cassius xlix.
32). Antiq. xv. x. 1–3. B. j. i. xx. 4 (Dio Cass. liv. 9). Antiq. xvii.
xi. 4. B. j. ii. vi. 3. Antiq. xviii. vi. 10. B. j. ii. ix. 6 (Dio
Cass. lix. 8). Antiq. xix. v. 1. B. j. ii. xi. 5. Antiq. xx. v. 2, vii.
1. B. j. ii. xii. 8.

[520] Süskind, vermischte Aufsätze, s. 15 ff. 93 ff.

[521] Tholuck thinks he has found a perfectly corresponding example in
Tacitus. When this historian, Annal. ii. 42 (A.D. 17), mentions the
death of an Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, and yet, Annal. vi. 41 (A.D.
36), cites an Archelaus, also a Cappadocian, as ruler of the Clitæ, the
same historical conjecture, says Tholuck, is necessary, viz., that
there were two Cappadocians named Archelaus. But when the same
historian, after noticing the death of a man, introduces another of the
same name, under different circumstances, it is no conjecture, but a
clear historic datum, that there were two such persons. It is quite
otherwise when, as in the case of Lysanias, two writers have each one
of the same name, but assign him distinct epochs. Here it is indeed a
conjecture to admit two successive persons; a conjecture so much the
less historical, the more improbable it is shown to be that one of the
two writers would have been silent respecting the second of the
like-named men, had such an one existed.

[522] Michaelis, Paulus, in loc. Schneckenburger, in Ullmann’s und
Umbreit’s Studien, 1833, 4 Heft, s. 1056 ff. Tholuck, s. 201 ff.

[523] For, on the authority of a single manuscript to erase, with
Schneckenburger and others, the second τετραρχοῦντος, is too evident
violence.

[524] Compare with this view, Allgem. Lit. Ztg., 1803, No. 344, s. 552:
De Wette, exeg. Handbuch, in loc.

[525] See Paulus, s. 294.

[526] See Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 62.

[527] Bengel was also of this opinion. Ordo temporum, s. 204 f. ed. 2.

[528] Antiq. xviii. v. 2.

[529] So Cludius, über die Zeit und Lebensdauer Johannis und Jesu. In
Henke’s Museum, ii. iii. 502 ff.

[530] Cludius, ut sup.

[531] Stäudlin, Geschichte der Sittenlehre Jesu, 1, s. 580. Paulus,
exeg. Handb. 1 a, s. 136. Comp. also Creuzer, Symbolik, 4, s. 413 ff.

[532] Ut sup. p. 347.

[533] Bell. jud. iii. x. 7.

[534] See Winer, bibl. Realwörterbuch, A. Wüste. Schneckenburger, über
den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen Evangeliums, s. 39.

[535] Schneckenburger, ut sup., s. 38 f.

[536] Winer, ut sup., s. 691.

[537] Paulus, ut sup., s. 301.

[538] Schneckenburger, über das Alter der Jüdischen Proselytentaufe.

[539] Sanhedr. f. xcvii. 2: R. Elieser dixit: si Israëlitæ pœnitentiam
agunt, tunc per Goëlem liberantur; sin vero, non liberantur. Schöttgen,
horæ, 2, p. 780 ff.

[540] Antiq. xviii. v. 2.

[541] Thus Paulus, ut sup., s. 314 and 361, Anm.

[542] Fragment von dem Zwecke Jesu und seiner Jünger, herausgegeben von
Lessing, s. 133 ff.

[543] So thinks Semler in his answer to the above Fragments, in loc.;
so think most of the moderns; Plank, Geschichte des Christenthums in
der Periode seiner Einführung, 1, K. 7. Winer, bibl. Realwörterbuch, 1,
s. 691.

[544] Let the reader judge for himself whether Neander’s arguments be
not forced: “Even if the Baptist could have expected” (say rather must
necessarily have known) “from the circumstances of the birth of Jesus,
that he was the Messiah, the divine witness in his own mind would
eclipse all external testimony, and compared with this divine
illumination, all previous knowledge would seem ignorance.” p. 68.

[545] Lücke, Commentar zum Evang. Johannis 1, s. 362.

[546] Osiander, in despair, answers, that the heavenly communications
themselves might contain directions for—keeping the two youths apart!
s. 127.

[547] Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 117 f. Paulus, ut sup., s. 366.

[548] Comp. the Fragmentist, ut sup.

[549] Hæres, xxx. 13: Καὶ ὡς ἀνῆλθεν ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕδατος, ἡνοίγησαν οἱ
οὐρανοὶ, καὶ εἶδε τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ Θεοῦ τὸ ἅγιον ἐν εἴδει περιστερᾶς
κ.τ.λ. καὶ φωνὴ ἐγένετο κ.τ.λ. καὶ εὐθὺς περιέλαμψε τὸν τόπον φῶς μέγα·
ὃν ἰδών, φησὶν, ὁ Ἰωάννης λέγει αὐτῷ· σύ τὶς εἶ, Κύριε; καὶ πάλιν φωνὴ
κ.τ.λ. καὶ τότε, φησὶν, ὁ Ἰωάννης παραπεσὼν αὐτῷ ἔλεγε· δέομαι σοῦ
Κύριε, σύ με βάπτισον. And when he came from the water, the heavens
were opened, and he saw the holy spirit of God in the form of a dove,
etc., and a voice was heard, etc., and immediately a great light
illuminated the place; seeing which, John said to him, Who art thou,
Lord? and again a voice, etc. And then, John falling at his feet, said
to him, I beseech thee, Lord, baptize me.

[550] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen
Evangeliums, s. 121 f.; Lücke, Comm. z. Ev. Joh., 1, s. 361. Usteri,
über den Täufer Johannes u. s. w., Studien, 2, 3. s. 446.

[551] Tertull. adv. Marcion, iv. 18. Comp. Bengel, historico-exegetical
remarks in Matt. xi. 2–19, in his Archiv. 1, iii. p. 754 ff.

[552] See Paulus, Kuinöl, in loc. Bengel, ut sup., p. 763.

[553] Calvin, Comm. in harm. ex. Matth., Marc. et Luc. in loc.

[554] We agree with Schleiermacher, (über den Lukas, s. 106 f.) in thus
designating the narrative of the third evangelist, first, on account of
the idle repetition of the Baptist’s words, ver. 20; secondly, on
account of the mistake in ver. 18 and 21, of which we shall presently
treat, and to which ver. 29, 30, seem to betray a similar one.

[555] Compare Calvin in loc. and Bengel ut sup., s. 753 ff.

[556] Thus most recent commentators: Paulus, Kuinöl, Bengel, Hase,
Theile, and even Fritzsche.

[557] This difficulty occurred to Bengel also, ut sup., p. 769.

[558] The gospel writers, after what they had narrated of the relations
between Jesus and the Baptist, of course understood the question to
express doubt, whence probably v. 6 (Matt.) and v. 23 (Luke) came in
this connection. Supposing these passages authentic, they suggest
another conjecture; viz. that Jesus spoke in the foregoing verses of
spiritual miracles, and that the Baptist was perplexed by the absence
of corporeal ones. The ἀκούσας τὰ ἔργα τ. Χ. must then be set down to
the writer’s misapprehension of the expressions of Jesus.

[559] Gabler and Paulus.

[560] De Wette, de morte Christi expiatoria, in his Opusc. theol., s.
77 ff. Lücke, Comm. zum Ev. Joh. 1, s. 347 ff. Winer, bibl.
Realwörterb. 1, s. 693, Anm.

[561] Gabler and Paulus. De Wette.

[562] De Wette, ut sup., p. 76.

[563] Paulus, Leben Jesu, 2 a, die Übers., s. 29. 31.

[564] Tholuck and Lücke, in loc.

[565] Lücke, ut sup.

[566] See Bertholdt, Christologia Judæorum Jesu apostolorumque ætate, §
23–25.

[567] Probabilia, p. 41.

[568] See Gfrörer, Philo und die Alexandr. Theosophie, part ii. p. 180.

[569] Lücke, ut sup., p. 500.

[570] Compare especially:

Joh. iii. 11 (Jesus to Nicodemus):     Joh. iii. 32 (the Baptist): καὶ
ἀμὴν, ἀμὴν, λέγω σοι, ὅτι ὃ οἴδαμεν,   ὃ ἑώρακε καὶ ἤκουσε, τοῦτο
λαλοῦμεν, καὶ ὃ ἑωράκαμεν,             μαρτυρεῖ· καὶ τὴν μαρτυρίαν
μαρτυροῦμεν· καὶ τὴν μαρτυρίαν ἡμῶν    αὐτοῦ οὐδεὶς λαμβάνει.
οὐ λαμβάνετε.

V. 18: ὁ πιστεύων εἰς αὐτὸν οὐ         V. 36: ὁ πιστεύων εἰς τὸν υἱὸν
κρίνεται· ὁ δὲ μὴ πιστεύων, ἤδη        ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον· ὁ δὲ ἀπειθῶν
κέκριται, ὅτι μὴ πεπίστευκεν εἰς το    τῷ υἱῷ, οὐκ ὄψεται ζωὴν, ἀλλ’ ἡ
ὄνομα τοῦ μονογενοῦς υἱοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ.    ὀργὴ τοῦ Θεοῦ μένει ἐπ’ αὐτόν.

Comp. also the words of the Baptist v. 31, with Joh. iii. 6. 12 f.
viii. 23; v. 32 with viii. 26; v. 33 with vi. 27; v. 34 with xii. 49,
50; v. 35 with v. 22, 27, x. 28 f. xvii. 2.

[571] Bibl. Comm. 2, p. 105.

[572] Paulus, Olshausen, in loc.

[573] E.g. here, v. 32, it is said: τὴν μαρτυρίαν αὐτοῦ οὐδεὶς
λαμβάνει, but in the Prolog. v. 11: καὶ οἱ ἴδιοι αὐτὸν οὐ παρέλαβον.
Comp. Lücke, s. 501.

[574] Ut sup.

[575] De Wette, de morte Christi expiatoria, in s. Opusc. theol. p. 81;
biblische Dogmatik, § 209; Winer, bibl. Realwörterbuch 1, s. 692.

[576] Neander, p. 75. This author erroneously supposes that there is an
indication of the Baptist having directed his disciples to Jesus in
Acts xviii. 25, where it is said of Apollos: ἐδίδασκεν ἀκριβῶς τὰ περὶ
τοῦ Κυρίου, ἐπιστάμενος τὸ βάπτισμα Ἰωάννου. For on comparing the
following chapter, we find that Paul had to teach the disciples of
John, that by the ερχόμενος announced by their master, they were to
understand Jesus; whence it is clear that the things of the Lord
expounded by Apollos, consisted only in the messianic doctrine,
purified by John into an expectation of one who was to come, and that
the more accurate instruction which he received from the Christians,
Aquila and Priscilla, was the doctrine of its fulfilment in the person
of Jesus.

[577] Gesenius, Probeheft der Ersch und Gruber’schen Encyclopädie, d.
A. Zabier.

[578] Bretschneider, Probab., s. 46 f.; comp. Lücke, s. 493 f.; De
Wette, Opusc a. a. O.

[579] Greiling, Leben Jesu von Nazaret, s. 132 f.

[580]

      2 Sam. iii. 1.              John iii. 30.

               ‏וְדָוִד הֹלֵךְ וְחָזֵק‎      ἐκεῖνον δεῖ αὐξάνειν.
      ‏וּבֵית שָׁאוּל הֹלְכִם וְדַלּים :‏‎      ἐμὲ δὲ ἐλαττοῦσθαι.

[581] Schulz, die Lehre vom Abendmahl, s. 145. Winer, Realwörterbuch,
1, s. 693.

[582] Commentar, s. 380.

[583] The passage above quoted from the Acts gives us also some
explanation, why the fourth Evangelist of all others should be
solicitous to place the Baptist in a more favourable relation to Jesus,
than history allows us to conceive. According to v. 1 ff. there were
persons in Ephesus who knew only of John’s baptism, and were therefore
rebaptized by the Apostle Paul in the name of Jesus. Now an old
tradition represents the fourth gospel to have been written in Ephesus
(Iræneus adv. hær. iii. 1). If we accept this (and it is certainly
correct in assigning a Greek locality for the composition of this
Gospel), and presuppose, in accordance with the intimation in the Acts,
that Ephesus was the seat of a number of the Baptist’s followers, all
of whom Paul could hardly have converted; the endeavour to draw them
over to Jesus would explain the remarkable stress laid by the fourth
Evangelist on the μαρτυρία Ἰωάννου. Storr has very judiciously remarked
and discussed this, über den Zweck der Evangelischen Geschichte und der
Briefe Johannis, s. 5 ff. 24 f. Compare Hug, Einleitung in das N. T.,
s. 190 3te Ausg.

[584] Antiq. xviii. v. 2.

[585] Ueber den Lukas, s. 109.

[586] Ibid. p. 106.

[587] Ueber den Ursprung u. s. w. s. 79.

[588] The expression οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι is thus interpreted by the most
learned exegetists. Comp. Paulus, Lücke, Tholuck in loc.

[589] Lücke, Commentar, s. 327.

[590] Lücke, s. 339.

[591] Whether the dialogue between John and his complaining disciples
(John iii. 25 ff.) be likewise a transmutation of the corresponding
scene, Matt. ix. 14 f., as Bretschneider seeks to show, must remain
uncertain. Probab., p. 66 ff.

[592] That Jesus, as many suppose, assigns a low rank to the Baptist,
because the latter thought of introducing the new order of things by
external violence, is not to be detected in the gospels.

[593] For a different explanation see Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 48
ff.

[594] Antiq. xviii. v. 2.

[595] This former husband of Herodias is named by the Evangelists,
Philip, by Josephus, Herod. He was the son of the high priest’s
daughter, Mariamne, and lived as a private person. V. Antiq. xv. ix. 3;
xviii. v. 1. 4. B. j. i. xxix. 2, xxx. 7.

[596] Antiq. xviii. v. 4.

[597] Hase, Leben Jesu, s. 88.

[598] Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth. in loc. Winer, bibl. Realwörterb. 1,
s. 694.

[599] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, a, s. 361; Schleiermacher, über den
Lukas, s. 109.

[600] Vergl. Fritzsche, Comm. in Marc., p. 225.

[601] E.g. Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen
Evangeliums, s. 86 f. That the ἐλυπήθη of Matthew, v. 9, is not
contradictory to his own narrative, see Fritzsche, in loc.

[602] S. Winer, b. Realwörterb. d. A. Herodes Antipas.

[603] Fritzsche, Commentar. in Matt., p. 491.

[604] Antiq. xviii. v. 1.

[605] Dial. c. Tryph. 8, s. 110. der Mauriner Ausg.

[606] Hess. Geschichte Jesu, 1 Bd. s. 118.

[607] Paulus, ut sup., s. 362 ff. 337. Hase, L. J., s. 48, erste Ausg.

[608] Hieron. adv. Pelagian. iii. 2: In Evangelio juxta Hebræos—narrat
historia: Ecce mater Domini et fratres ejus dicebant ei: Joannes
baptista baptizat in remissionem peccatorum; eamus et baptizemur ab eo.
Dixit autem eis: quid peccavi ut vadam et baptizer ab eo? nisi forte
hoc ipsum quod dixi, ignorantia est.

[609] The author of the Tractatus de non iterando baptismo in Cyprian’s
works, Rigalt., p. 139, says (the passage is also found in Fabric. Cod.
apocr. N.T., s. 799 f.): Est—liber, qui inscribitur Pauli prædicatio.
In quo libro, contra omnes scripturas et de peccato proprio confitentem
invenies Christum, qui solus omnino nihil deliquit, et ad accipiendum
Joannis baptisma pæne invitum â matre suâ Mariâ esse compulsum.

[610] Justin. Mart. dial. c. Tryph. 88: κατελθόντος τοῦ Ἰησοῦ ἐπὶ τὸ
ὕδωρ, καὶ πῦρ ἀνήφθη ἐν τῷ Ἰορδάνη, κ.τ.λ.. Epiphan. hæres. 30, 13
(after the heavenly voice): καὶ εὐθὺς περιέλαμψε τὸν τόπον φῶς μέγα.

[611] See Usteri, über den Täufer Johannes, die Taufe und Versuchung
Christi, in the theolog. Studien und Kritiken, 2 Bd. 3 Heft, s. 442
ff., and Bleek, in the same periodical, 1833, 2, s. 428 ff.

[612] Bauer, hebr. Mythologie, 2 s. 225 f. Comp. Gratz, Comm. zum
Evang. Matt. i. s. 172 ff.

[613] These are Theodore’s words, in Münter’s Fragmenta patr. græc.
Fasc. 1, s. 142. Orig. c. Cels. i. 48. Basil. M. in Suicer’s Thesaurus,
2, p. 1479.

[614] As even Lücke confesses, Comm. zum Evang. Joh. i., s. 370, and
Bleek, ut sup., s. 437.

[615] Comp. Eusebius, H. E. vi. 29.

[616] See Paulus, Bauer, Kuinöl, Hase and Theile.

[617] De Wette, bibl. Dogmatik, § 208. Anm. 6, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 34
f. 1, 3, s. 29 f. Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 58 f. Usteri,
Bleek, Hase, Kern, Neander.

[618] According to Bava Mezia, f. lix. 1 (in Wetstein, p. 427), R.
Elieser appealed to a heavenly sign, in proof that he had tradition in
his favour: tum personuit echo cœlestis: quid vobis cum R. Eliesere?
nam ubivis secundum illum obtinet traditio.

[619] Dial. c. Tryph. 88.

[620] Hæres. xxx. 13.

[621] Pædagog. i. 6.

[622] De consens. Evangg. ii. 14.

[623] S. Wetstein in loc. des Lukas, and De Wette, Einl. in das N. T.,
s. 100.

[624] S. Rosenmüller’s Schol. in Psalm ii.

[625] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 57.

[626] Tibull. Carm. L. 1, eleg. 8, v. 17 f. See the remark of
Broeckhuis on this passage; Creuzer, Symbolik, ii. s. 70 f.; Paulus,
exeg. Handb. 1, a, s. 369.

[627] Creuzer, Symbolik, ii. s. 80.

[628] Chagiga c. ii.: Spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas, sicut
columba, quæ fertur super pullos suos nec tangit illos. Ir Gibborim ad
Genes. 1, 2, ap. Schöttgen, horæ, i. p. 9.

[629] Targum Koheleth, ii. 12, vox turturis is interpreted as vox
spiritus sancti. To regard this, with Lücke, as an arbitrary
interpretation, seems itself like arbitrariness, in the face of the
above data.

[630] Bereschith rabba, s. 2, f. 4, 4, ad Genes. T. 2 (ap. Schöttgen ut
sup.): intelligitur spiritus regis Messiæ, de quo dicitur, Jes. xi. 2:
et quiescet super illum spiritus Domini.

[631] Sohar. Numer. f. 68. col. 271 f. (in Schöttgen, horæ, 2, p. 537
f.). The purport of this passage rests on the following cabalistic
conclusion: If David, according to Ps. lii. 10, is the olive tree; the
Messiah, a scion of David, is the olive leaf: and since it is said of
Noah’s dove, Gen. viii. 11, that it carried an olive leaf in its mouth;
the Messiah will be ushered into the world by a dove.—Even Christian
interpreters have compared the dove at the baptism of Jesus to the
Noachian one; see Suicer, Thesaurus, 2, Art. περιστερὰ, p. 688. It has
been customary to cite in this connection, that the Samaritans paid
divine honours to a dove under the name of Achima, on Mount Gerizim;
but this is a Jewish accusation, grounded on a wilful misconstruction.
See Stäudlin’s and Tzschirner’s Archiv. für K. G. 1, 3, s. 66. Lücke,
1, s. 367.

[632] See Fritzsche, Comm. in Matt., p. 148.

[633] Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 120.

[634] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 175 f.

[635] Comm. zum Evang. Joh. 1, s. 378 f.

[636] From the orthodox point of view, it cannot be consistently said,
with Hoffmann (p. 301), that for the conviction of his messiahship and
the maintenance of the right position, amid so many temptations and
adverse circumstances, an internally wrought certainty did not suffice
Jesus, and external confirmation by a fact was requisite.

[637] Epiphan. hæres. xxx. 14: ἐπειδὴ γὰρ βούλονται τὸν μὲν Ἰησοῦν
ὄντως ανθρώπον εἶναι, Χριστὸν δὲ ὲν αὐτῷ γεγενῆσθαι τὸν ἐν εἴδει
περιστερᾶς καταβεβηκότα, κ.τ.λ.:—They maintain that Jesus was really
man, but that that which descended from heaven in the form of a dove
became Christ in him.

[638] Epiphan. hæres. xxviii. 1.

[639] Epiphan. hæres. xxx. 13:—περιστερᾶς κατελθούσης καὶ εἰσελθούσης
εἰς αὐτὸν:—of a dove descending and entering into him.

[640] See the passage above, § 48, note 7.

[641] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen Evang.,
s. 39.

[642] Comm. z. Ev. Joh. 1, s. 344.

[643] Comp. de Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 27.

[644] Compare Fritzsche, Comm. in Marc, s. 23 De Wette, exeg. Handb.,
1, 2, s. 33.

[645] Kuinöl, Comm. in Luc., s. 379.

[646] Lightfoot, horæ, p. 243.

[647] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung des ersten kan. Evang., s. 46.

[648] Ibid.

[649] Thus Euthymius, Kuinöl, and others.

[650] Fritzsche, in loc.

[651] Beitrag zur Erklärung der Versuchungsgeschichte, in Ullmann’s and
Umbreit’s Studien, 1834, 4, s. 789.

[652] Ueber den Lukas, s. 56.

[653] Compare Schneckenburger, ut sup., s. 46 f.

[654] Exegetische Beiträge, 1, s. 277 ff.

[655] Comm. in Matth. s. 172 ff.

[656] In the Essay quoted, s. 768.

[657] Thus, e.g., Kuinöl, Comm. in Matth., p. 84. Comp. Gratz, Comm.
zum Matth., 1, s. 229. Hoffmann, p. 315.

[658] Usteri, über den Täufer Johannes, die Taufe und Versuchung
Christi. In den theol. Studien und Kritiken, zweiten Jahrgangs (1829),
drittes Heft, s. 450. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 38.

[659] De Wette, bibl. Dogmatik, § 171. Gramberg, Grundzüge einer
Engellehre des A. T., § 5, in Winer’s Zeitschrift f. wissenschaftliche
Theologie, 1 Bd. s. 182 f.

[660] Glaubenslehre, 1, ss. 44, 45, der zweiten Ausg.

[661] Schmidt, exeg. Beiträge. Kuinöl, in Matt.

[662] In a fragment of Theodore of Mopsuestia in Münter’s Fragm. Patr.
Græc. Fasc. 1, p. 99 f.

[663] Paulus.

[664] Hoffmann thinks that the devil, in his second temptation,
designedly chose so startling an example as the leap from the temple
roof, the essential aim of the temptation being to induce Jesus to a
false use of his miraculous power and consciousness of a divine nature.
But this evasion leaves the matter where it was, for there is the same
absurdity in choosing unfit examples as unfit temptations.

[665] Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s. 124.

[666] See the author of the discourse de jejunio et tentationibus
Christi, among Cyprian’s works.

[667] Compare Joseph. B. J. v. v. 6, vi. v. 1. Fritzsche, in Matth., s.
164. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 40.

[668] The one proposed by Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 90; the other by
Fritzsche, p. 168.

[669] Theodore of Mopsuestia, ut sup. p. 107, maintained against Julian
that the devil had made the image of a mountain, φαντασίαν ὄρους τὸν
διάβολον πεποιηκέναι, and according to the author of the discourse,
already cited, de jejunio et tentationibus Christi, the first
temptation it is true passed localiter in deserto, but Jesus only went
to the temple and the mountain as Ezekiel did from Chaboras to
Jerusalem—that is, in spiritu.

[670] Paulus, s. 379.

[671] See for the former, H. Farmer, Gratz, Comm. zum Ev. Matth. 1, s.
217; for the latter, Olshausen in loc., and Hoffmann (s. 326 f.) if I
rightly apprehend him.

[672] Paulus, s. 377 ff.

[673] Fritzsche, in Matth. 155 f. Usteri, Beitrag zur Erklärung der
Versuchungsgeschichte, s. 774 f.

[674] Ullmann, über die Unsündlichkeit Jesu, in his Studien, 1, 1, s.
56. Usteri, ut sup., s. 775.

[675] Usteri, s. 776.

[676] 1 Bd. s. 512 ff.

[677] The former in Henke’s n. Magazin 4, 2, s. 352; the latter in the
natürlichen Geschichte, 1, s. 591 ff.

[678] This view is held by Ullmann, Hase, and Neander.

[679] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 54. Usteri, ut sup., s. 777.

[680] If something really experienced by Jesus is supposed as the germ
of the parable, this opinion is virtually the same as the preceding.

[681] J. E. C. Schmidt, in seiner Bibliothek, 1, 1, s. 60 f.
Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 54 f. Usteri, über den Täufer
Johannes, die Taufe und Versuchung Christi, in den theol. Studien, 2,
3, s. 456 ff.

[682] K. Ch. L. Schmidt, exeg. Beiträge, 1, s. 339.

[683] Hasert, Bemerkungen über die Ansichten Ullmann’s und Usteri’s von
der Versuchungsgesch., Studien, 3, 1, s. 74 f.

[684] Hasert, ut sup., s. 76.

[685] Zur Biographie Jesu, § 23.

[686] See Zech. iii. 1, where Satan resists the high priest standing
before the angel of the Lord; farther Vajikra rabba, f. cli. 1 (in
Bertholdt, Christol. Jud., p. 183), where, according to Rabbi Jochanan,
Jehovah said to ‏מלאך המות‎ (i.e. to Satan, comp. Heb. ii. 14 and
Lightfoot, horæ, p. 1088): Feci quidem te κοσμοκράτορα, at vero cum
populo fœderis negotium nulla in re tibi est.

[687] See the passages quoted by Fabricius in Cod. pseudepigr. V. T.,
p. 395, from Gemara Sanhedrin.

[688] The same, p. 396. As Abraham went out to sacrifice his son in
obedience to Jehovah, antevertit eum Satanas in via, et tali colloquio
cum ipso habito a proposito avertere eum conatus est, etc. Schemoth, R.
41 (ap. Wetstein in loc. Matth.): Cum Moses in altum adscenderet, dixit
Israëli: post dies XL hora sexta redibo. Cum autem XL illi dies elapsi
essent, venit Satanas, et turbavit mundum, dixitque: ubi est Moses,
magister vester? mortuus est. It is worthy of remark that here also the
temptation takes place after the lapse of 40 days.

[689] Thus Fritzsche, in Matt. p. 173. His very title is striking, p.
154: Quod in vulgari Judæorum opinione erat, fore, ut Satanas
salutaribus Messiæ consiliis omni modo, sed sine effectu tamen, nocere
studeret, id ipsum Jesu Messiæ accidit. Nam quum is ad exemplum
illustrium majorum quadraginta dierum in deserto loco egisset jejunium,
Satanas eum convenit, protervisque atque impiis— —consiliis ad
impietatem deducere frustra conatus est.

[690] Schöttgen, horæ, ii. 538, adduces from Fini Flagellum Judæorum,
iii. 35, a passage of Pesikta: Ait Satan: Domine, permitte me tentare
Messiam et ejus generationem? Cui inquit Deus: Non haberes ullam
adversus eum potestatem. Satanas iterum ait: Sine me, quia potestatem
habeo. Respondit Deus: Si in hoc diutius perseverabis, Satan, potius
(te) de mundo perdam quam aliquam animam generationis Messiæ perdi
permittam. This passage at least proves that a temptation of the
Messiah undertaken by the devil, was not foreign to the circle of
Jewish ideas. Although the author of the above quotation represents the
demand of Satan to have been denied, others, so soon as the imagination
was once excited, would be sure to allow its completion.

[691] Deut. viii. 2 (LXX.) the people are thus addressed: μνησθήσῃ
πᾶσαν τὴν ὁδὸν, ἥν ἤγαγέ σε Κύριος ὁ Θεός σου τοῦτο τεσσαρακοστὸν ἔτος
ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, ὅπως κακώσῃ σε καὶ πεῖρασῃ σε καὶ διαγνωσθῇ τὰ ἐν τῇ
καρδίᾳ σου, εἰ φυλάξῃ τὰς ἐντολάς αὐτοῦ ἢ οὔ.

[692] Ziegler, in Gabler’s n. theol. Journ., 5, 201; Theile, zur Biogr.
J., § 23.

[693] See Wetstein, s. 270; De Wette, Kritik der mos. Geschichte, s.
245; the same in Daub’s and Creuzer’s Studien, 3, s. 245; v. Bohlen,
Genesis, s. 63 f.

[694] Deut. viii. 3, καὶ ἐκάκωσέ σε καὶ ἐλιμανχόνησε σε, κ.τ.λ.

[695] S. Fabricius, Cod. pseudepigr. V. T., p. 398 ff.

[696] Gemara Sanh., as in note 3. The colloquy between Abraham and
Satan is thus continued:

1. Satanas: Annon tentare te (Deum) in tali re ægre feras? Ecce
erudiebas multos—labantem erigebant verba tua—quum nunc advenit ad te
(Deus taliter te tentans) nonne ægre ferres (Job iv. 2–5)?

Cui resp. Abraham: Ego in integritate mea ambulo (Ps. xxvi. 11).

2. Satanas: Annon timor tuus, spes tua (Job iv. 6)?

Abraham: Recordare quæso, quis est insons, qui perierit (v. 7)?

3. Quare, quum videret Satanas, se nihil proficere, nec Abrahamum sibi
obedire, dixit ad illum: et ad me verbum furtim ablatum est (v. 12),
audivi—pecus futurum esse pro holocausto (Gen. xxii. 7), non autem
Isaacum.

Cui resp. Abraham: Hæc est pæna mendacis, ut etiam cum vera loquitur,
fides ei non habeatur.

I am far from maintaining that this rabbinical passage was the model of
our history of the temptation; but since it is impossible to prove, on
the other side, that such narratives were only imitations of the New
Testament ones, the supposed independent formation of stories so
similar shows plainly enough the ease with which they sprang out of the
given premises.

[697] Note 1.

[698] Bertholdt, Christolog. Judæorum Jesu ætate, § 36, not. 1 and 2;
Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth., s. 169 f.

[699] Compare with the above statement the deductions of Schmidt,
Fritzsche, and Usteri, as given § 54, notes 1–3, and of De Wette, exeg.
Handbuch, 1, 1, s. 41 ff.

[700] Fritzsche, p. 591.

[701] Olshausen, bibl. Comm., 1, s. 189 f.

[702] Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 38 f.; über den Ursprung u. s. f.,
s. 7 f.

[703] De Wette, Einleitung in das N. T., § 98 u. 106.

[704] Paulus, exeg. Handb., 1, a, s. 39.

[705] Guerike, Beiträge zur Einleitung in das N. T., s. 33; Tholuck,
Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 303.

[706] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung u. s. w., s. 9.

[707] Kern, über den Ursprung des Evang. Matthäi, in der Tübinger
Zeitschrift, 1834, 2tes Heft, s. 198 ff. Comp. Hug, Einleit. in d. N.
T., 2, s. 205 ff. (3te Ausg.).

[708] Tholuck, Comm. zum Evang. Joh., p. 207.

[709] Comp. Lücke, ut sup., s. 546.

[710] De Wette, Einleitung in das N. T., § 98.

[711] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 7.; Beiträge u.
s. f., s. 38 ff.

[712] Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 207. Comp. Gabler’s Treatise on the
Resurrection of Lazarus, in his Journal für auserlesene theol.
Literatur, 3, 2.

[713] Hug, Einleit. in das N. T., 2, s. 210.

[714] Hug, ut supra, s. 211. f.

[715] Compare Weisse, die evang. Geschichte 1, s. 29 ff.

[716] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, 6, s. 463.

[717] This Schleiermacher has made evident, über den Lukas, s. 63.

[718] Sieffert, über den Ursprung des ersten kanonischen Evangeliums,
s. 89.

[719] Olshausen, Fritzsche, in loc. Hase, Leben Jesu, § 62. Sieffert,
ut supra.

[720] Sieffert, ut supra.

[721] What these mighty works were can only be made clear when we come
to the chapter on the Miracles.

[722] Schleiermacher, ut supra, s. 64.

[723] Schleiermacher, ut supra, s. 63 f.

[724] Ordo temporum, p. 220 ff. ed. 2.

[725] Paulus, ut supra, 1, b, s. 407.

[726] Paulus, ut supra. Lightfoot, horæ, p. 765.

[727] Bibl. Comm. 1, 470.

[728] Hase, Leben Jesu, § 62.

[729] Ueber den Lukas, s. 93.

[730] Ut supra, 479; comp. 2, p. 214.

[731] Adv. Marcion, iv. 8.

[732] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 788 f.

[733] Lücke, Comm. zum Evang. Joh., 2, s. 6.

[734] Bengel, ordo temporum, p. 219 f.

[735] Hug, Einleit. in das N. T. 2, s. 229 ff.

[736] Paulus, Comm. zum Ev. Joh., s. 279 f. Exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 784
ff.

[737] Summaries of the different opinions are given by Hase, L. J., §
53; and by Lücke, Comm. z. Ev. Joh., 2, s. 2 ff.

[738] Exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 785.

[739] See Storr, über den Zweck der evang. Gesch. und der Briefe
Johannis, s. 330.

[740] Winer, b. Realw. 1, s. 666.

[741] Clem. Alex. Stromat. 1, p. 174, Würzb. ed., 340 Sylburg; Orig. de
principp. iv. 5, comp. homil. in Luc. 32.

[742] Iren. adv. hær. i. 1, 5. ii. 35, 38, on the Valentinians. Clem.
hom. xvii. 19.

[743] Iren. ii. xxii. 5 f. Comp. Credner, Einl. in das N. T. 1, s. 215.

[744] Lightfoot and Tholuck in loc.

[745] Joseph. Antiq. xviii. iv. 2.

[746] Sueton. Tiber. c. lxxiii. Joseph. Antiq. xviii. vi. 10.

[747] Comp. Paulus, Leben Jesu, 1, a, 214 f.

[748] See especially the labours of Paulus in the Chronological
Excursus of his Commentary and his exegetical Manual; of Hug, in the
Einl. z. N. T. 2, s. 2, 233 ff.; and others, given by Winer in his
bibl. Realwörterbuch 1, s. 667.

[749] Winer, ut sup.; comp. Kaiser, biblische Theologie, 1, s. 254.
Anm.; die Abhandlung über die verschiedenen Rücksichten u. s. w., in
Bertholdt’s krit. Journal, 5, s. 239.

[750] Olshausen 1, s. 24 ff.

[751] Schneckenburger’s Beiträge, s. 25 ff.

[752] All that relates to the idea of the Messiah as suffering, dying,
and rising again, is here omitted, and reserved for the history of the
Passion.

[753] Paulus, exeget. Handb. 1, 6, s. 465; Fritzsche, in Matth., p.
320.

[754] Thus after Herder, Köster e.g. in Immanuel, s. 265.

[755] Lücke, Comm. zum Joh., 1, s. 397 f.

[756] e.g. Grotius.

[757] Abenesra, see Hävernick, ut sup. Comm. zum Daniel, s. 244.

[758] Schöttgen, horæ, ii. s. 63, 73; Hävernick, ut sup., s. 243 f.

[759] See for the most important opinions, Hävernick, ut sup., s. 242
f.

[760] Let the reader bear in mind the designation of David’s elegy, 2
Sam. i. 17 ff. as ‏קֶשֶׁת‎ and the denomination of the Messiah as ‏צֶמַח‎.
Had Schleiermacher considered the nature of Jewish appellatives, he
would not have called the reference of υἰὸς τοῦ ἀ. to the passage in
Daniel, a strange idea. (Glaubensl., § 99, s. 99, Anm.)

[761] That the expression οἱ ἑν τῷ πλοίῷ includes more than the
disciples, vid. Fritzsche, in loc.

[762] There is a difficulty involved in the form of the question, put
by Jesus to his disciples: τίνα με λέγουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι εἶναι, τον υἱὸν
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου; i.e. what opinion have the people of me, the Messiah?
This, when compared with the sequel, seems a premature disclosure;
hence expositors have variously endeavoured to explain away its primâ
facie meaning. Some (e.g. Beza) understand the subordinate clause, not
as a declaration of Jesus concerning his own person, but as a closer
limitation of the question: For whom do the people take me? for the
Messiah? But this would be a leading question, which, as Fritzsche well
observes, would indicate an eagerness for the messianic title, not
elsewhere discernible in Jesus. Others, therefore, (as Paulus and
Fritzsche,) give the expression υἱὸς τ. ἀ. a general signification, and
interpret the question thus: Whom do men say that I, the individual
addressing you, am? But this explanation has been already refuted in
the foregoing section. If, then, we reject the opinion that the υἱὸς τ.
ἀ. is an addition which the exuberant faith of the writer was apt to
suggest even in an infelicitous connexion, we are restricted to De
Wette’s view (exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 86 f.), namely, that the
expression, ὁ υἱὸς τ. ἀ. was indeed an appellation of the Messiah, but
an indirect one, so that it might convey that meaning, as an allusion
to Daniel, to Jesus and those already aware of his Messiahship, while
to others it was merely the equivalent of, this man.

[763] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 28 f.

[764] This distinction of two periods in the public life of Jesus is
also made by Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth., s. 213. 536, and
Schneckenburger ut sup.

[765] Schneckenburger, ut sup., s. 29.

[766] Fritzsche, in Matth. p. 309, comp. 352. Olshausen, s. 265.

[767] Fritzsche, p. 352. Olshausen, ut sup.

[768] The opposite view is held by the Fragmentist, who thinks the
prohibition was intended to stimulate the popular eagerness.

[769] Fritzsche, s. 309.

[770] Comp. Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 74.

[771] Comp. the excellent treatise of Paulus on the following question
in the Einl. zum Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 28 ff.

[772] Even if a different reading be adopted for the parallel passage
in Matthew (xix. 16 f.), it must remain questionable whether his
statement deserves the preference to that of the two other Evangelists.

[773] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 130, 253.

[774] Olshausen, ut sup. 1, s. 108 ff.

[775] Bertholdt, Christol. Judæor. §§ 8. 35, 42.

[776] Bretschneider, Probab., p. 59.

[777] Porphyr. Vita Pythag., 26 f. Jamblich. 14, 63. Diog. Laert. viii.
4 f. 14. Baur, Apollonius von Tyana, pp. 64 f. 98 f. 185 f.

[778] See a notification and exposition of the passages in Lücke, Comm.
zum Ev. Joh., 1, s. 211 ff.

[779] Winer, de Onkeloso, p. 10. Comp. De Wette, Einleit. in das A. T.,
§ 58.

[780] Bertholdt, Christol. Judæor., §§ 23–25. Comp. Lücke ut sup., s.
244, note.

[781] Schöttgen, ii. s. 6 f.

[782] Targ. Jes. xvi 1: Iste (Messias) in deserto fuit rupes ecclesiæ
Zionis. In Bertholdt, ut sup. p. 145.

[783] Sohar chadasch f. lxxxii. 4, ap. Schöttgen, ii. s. 440.

[784] Nezach Israël c. xxxv. f. xlviii. 1. Schmidt, Bibl. für Kritik u.
Exegese, 1, s. 38: ‏משׂיח מפני תוהו‎. Sohar Levit. f. xiv. 56.
Schöttgen, ii. s. 436: Septem (lumina condita sunt, antequam mundus
conderetur), nimirum ... et lumen Messiæ. Here we have the
pre-existence of the Messiah represented as a real one: for a more
ideal conception of it, see Bereschith Rabba, sect. 1, f. iii. 3
(Schöttgen).

[785] Von dem Zweck Jesu und seiner Jünger, s. 108–157.

[786] Comp. Fritzsche, in Matth., s. 114.

[787] Kuinöl, Comm. in Matt., p. 518. Olshausen also, p. 744,
understands the discourse symbolically, though he attaches to it a
different meaning.

[788] Paulus, exeget. Handb. 2, s. 613 f.

[789] Liebe, in Winer’s exeg. Studien, 1, 59 ff.

[790] So Reinhard, über den Plan, welchen der Stifter der christlichen
Religion zum Besten der Menschheit entwarf, s. 57 ff. (4te Aufl.).

[791] Paulus, Leben Jesu 1, b, s. 85, 94, 106 ff.; Venturini, 2, s. 310
f.; Hase, Leben Jesu 1 ed. §§ 68, 84. Hase has modified this opinion in
his 2nd edition, §§ 49, 50 (comp. theol. Streitschrift, 1, s. 61 ff.),
though with apparent reluctance, and he now maintains that Jesus had
risen above the political notion of the messianic kingdom before his
public appearance.

[792] Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 606 f.

[793] De Wette, Bibl. Dogm., § 216.

[794] Bertholdt, Christol. Judæor., §§ 30 ff.

[795] Ibid., § 39.

[796] E.g. Reinhard, Plan Jesu, s. 14 ff.

[797] For an exaggeration in the Ebionite Gospel, vid. Epiphanius,
hæres. xxx. 16.

[798] Bertholdt, ut sup. § 31.

[799] This is done the most concisely in the Wolfenbüttel Fragments,
von dem Zweck u. s. f., s. 66 ff.

[800] Especially Fritzsche, in Matt., s. 214 ff.

[801] Winer, bibl. Realwörterb. 2, s. 406 ff.

[802] Comp. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 273.

[803] Winer, b. Realw., 1 Bd. s. 426.

[804] Fritzsche, s. 214 ff.

[805] Reinhard, s. 15 ff. Planck, Geschichte des Christenthums in der
Periode seiner Einführung, 1, s. 175 ff.

[806] De Wette, Bibl. Dogm., § 210.

[807] Fritzsche, s. 214.

[808] Vid. the Fragmentist, s. 69.

[809] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 600 f. Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 296,
312.

[810] Comp. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 598 f.

[811] Comp. Hase, L. J., s. 84. Rabbinical notions of the abrogation of
the Law in Schöttgen, ii. s. 611 ff.

[812] Thus the Wolfenbüttel Fragmentist, ut sup. s. 72 ff.

[813] Reinhard; Planck, Geschichte des Christenthums in der Per. seiner
Einführung, 1, s. 179 ff.

[814] Paulus, Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 380 f. Hase, L. J., § 102.

[815] Olshausen, 1, s. 507.

[816] Hase, ut sup.

[817] Antiq. xx. vi. 1. For some rabbinical rules not quite in
accordance with this, see Lightfoot, p. 991.

[818] Bertholdt, Christol. Judæor., § 7.

[819] Some erroneously attribute this meaning to their question; see in
Lücke 1, s. 533.

[820] Bretschneider, ut sup. s. 47 ff. 97 f.

[821] Lücke, 1, s. 520 ff.

[822] Tholuck, in loc.

[823] Lücke and Tholuck, in loc. Hase, L. J., 67.

[824] E.g. Tholuck, in many passages.

[825] Comp. Schöttgen, horæ, i. s. 970 f. Wetstein, s. 863.

[826] Paulus, Leben Jesu, 1, a, 187; Comment. 4, in loc.

[827] Comp. Olshausen in loc., and Bretschneider, Probab., s. 50.

[828] Olshausen, Lücke, in loc.

[829] Comp. Bretschneider, ut sup. s. 49 f.

[830] Homil. ii. 6, comp. iii. 12.

[831] Schöttgen, horæ, ii. p. 371 f.

[832] Lightfoot, p. 1002.

[833] Lücke, 1, s. 542.

[834] Lücke, s. 540, note. Bretschneider, s. 52

[835] Comm. in Joan, tom. 13.

[836] Kuinöl, Comm. in Matth., s. 100; Lücke, Comm. z. Joh. 1, s. 388;
Olshausen, bibl. Comm. 1, s. 197; Hase, Leben Jesu, §§ 56, 61.

[837] Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 212.

[838] Paulus, Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 213; Sieffert, über den Ursprung u.
s. f., s. 72.

[839] See Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 189.

[840] Schöttgen, horæ, ii. p. 372.

[841] Paulus, ut sup.

[842] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 464.

[843] Gnomon, in loc.

[844] Paulus, Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 168.

[845] S. 385.

[846] Vid. Lücke, s. 389 f.

[847] Ut sup.

[848] P. 141.

[849] Storr, üeber den Zweck der ev. Gesch. und der Br. Joh., s. 350.

[850] Exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 449.

[851] Bibl. Comm. 1, p. 283.

[852] Ueber den Lukas, s. 70.

[853] This, with the legendary character of both narratives, is
acknowledged by De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 37, 1, 2, s. 38 f.

[854] Neander is of the same opinion, L. J., s. 249 f.

[855] Uber den Ursprung des ersten kan. Ev., s. 73.

[856] Berliner Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik, 1834 Nov.; now
in the Charakteristiken u. Kritiken, s. 264 f.

[857] According to De Wette, the copious draught of fishes was a
symbolical miracle, typifying the rich fruits of the apostolic
ministry.

[858] Porphyr. vita Pythagoræ, no. 25, ed. Kiessling; Jamblich. v. P.
no. 36. ders. Ausg. It is fair to adduce this history, because, being
less marvellous than the gospel narrative, it can hardly be an
imitation, but must have arisen independently, and hence it evinces a
common tendency of the ancient legend.

[859] Luke v. 5: δι’ ὅλης τῆς νυκτὸς κοπιάσαντες οὐδὲν ἐλάβομεν. John
xxi. 3: καὶ ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ νυκτὶ ἐπίασαν ουδέν.

[860] Comp. de Wette, exeg Handb., 1, 3, s. 213.

[861] Vid. Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 255.

[862] Sieffert, ut sup. p. 55.

[863] Kuinöl, ut sup. Paulus, exeg. Handb., 1, b, s. 513. L. J., 1, a,
240.

[864] Bertholdt, Einleitung, 3, s. 1255 f. Fritzsche, s. 340.

[865] Sieffert, s. 56; De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 91.

[866] Sieffert, s. 60.

[867] De Wette, ut sup.

[868] Exeg. Handb., 1, b, s. 510. L. J., 1, a, 240.

[869] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 76.

[870] Grätz, Comm. z. Matth. 1, s. 470.

[871] Augustin c. Faust. Manich. xvii. 1.

[872] iii. i. 4.

[873] Plutarch. de gloria Atheniens., at the beginning.

[874] Schulz, Ueber das Abendmahl, s. 308.

[875] Comp. de Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 2, p. 134.

[876] Ut sup., p. 77.

[877] De Wette, exeg. Handb. I, 1, p. 93.

[878] Paulus, exeg. Handb., 3, a, s. 48. Kuinöl, in Luc., p. 632.

[879] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 85.

[880] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 85.

[881] Ut sup., s. 88.

[882] Ep. Barnab. 8, and the Gospel of the Ebionites ap. Epiphanius,
hær. xxx. 13.

[883] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 87.

[884] If ἡ πόλις Ἀνδρέου καὶ Πέτρου, John i. 45, mean the same as ἡ
ἰδία πόλις, Matth. ix. 1, that is, the place where they were resident,
there exists a contradiction on this point between John and the
synoptists.

[885] Comp. Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 358.

[886] Comp. Lightfoot, in loc.

[887] Comp. Saunier, über die Quellen des Markus, s. 55 f.

[888] Comp. de Wette, in loc.

[889] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 556.

[890] This is probably a mere inference of Mark. Because Jesus excluded
the multitude, and forbade the publication of the event, the Evangelist
saw in it one of those secret scenes, to which Jesus was accustomed to
admit only the three favoured apostles.

[891] In the ancient church it was thought that Jesus had communicated
to these three individuals the γνῶσις, to be mysteriously transmitted.
Vid. in Gieseler, K. G. 1, s. 234.

[892] Even Paulus, L. J. 1, a, s. 167 f., remarks that the fourth
Evangelist seems to have had a design in noticing this circumstance.

[893] This has not escaped the acumen of Dr. Paulus. In a review of the
first volume of the second ed. of Lücke’s Comm. zum Johannes, in Lt.
Bl. zur allg. Kirchenzeitung, Febr., 1834, no. 18, s. 137 f., he says:
“The gospel of John has only preserved the less advantageous
circumstances connected with Peter (excepting vi. 68), such as place
him in marked subordination to John [here the passages above considered
are cited]. An adherent of Peter can hardly have had a hand in the
Gospel of John.” We may add that it seems to have proceeded from an
antagonist of Peter, for it is probable that he had such of the school
of John, as well as of Paul.

[894] Vid. Lücke, Comm. zum Joh. 2, s. 708.

[895] Paulus, in his review of Bretschneider’s Probabilien, in the
Heidelberger Jahrbüchern, 1821, no. 9, s. 138.

[896] Lücke, ut sup. s. 664.

[897] Bretschneider, Probabilia, p. 111 f.

[898] Comp. Paulus, ut sup. s. 137.

[899] Thus most of the expositors, Fritzsche, Matth., s. 359; Winer,
Realwörterb. 1, s. 163 f. Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 98.

[900] Joseph., bell. jud. iv. iii. 9.

[901] Comp. Credner, Einleitung 1, s. 64; De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1,
s. 98 f.

[902] De Wette, ut sup.

[903] Ueber den Lukas, s. 88 f.

[904] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 307; Schneckenburger, über den
Ursprung, s. 13 f.

[905] Tuf haarez, f. xix. c. iii.; Clem. hom. xviii. 4; Recognit.
Clement. ii. 42; Epiphan. hær. i. 5.

[906] Schneckenburger, ut sup.; Gieseler, über Entstehung der schriftl.
Evangelien, s. 127 f.

[907] Lightfoot, p. 786.

[908] De Wette, exeget. Handb., 1, 1, s. 99 f. 1, 2, s. 61. 1, 3, s.
220; Theile, zur Biogr. J., § 24. For the contrary opinion, see
Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 498 f.

[909] All that relates to the sufferings, death, and resurrection of
Jesus is here excluded.

[910] Augustin, de consens. ev. ii. 19; Storr, über den Zweck des
Evang. u. d. Br. Joh., s. 347 ff. For further references see Tholuck’s
Auslegung der Bergpredigt, Einl., § 1.

[911] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 47 ff. 1, 2, s. 44.

[912] Tholuck, s. 24; Paulus, exeg. Handb., 1, b, s. 584.

[913] Schulz, vom Abendmahl, s. 313 f.; Sieffert, s. 74 ff.; Fritzsche,
s. 301.

[914] Olshausen, Bibl. Comm., 1, s. 197; Kern, in der Tüb. Schrift,
1834, 2, s. 33.

[915] Schulz, ut sup. s. 315; Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 26;
Credner, Einleit., 1, s. 69.

[916] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 89 f.

[917] Tholuck, p. 11, and my Review of the writings of Sieffert and
others in the Jahrbuch f. wiss. Kritik, Nov. 1834; now in my
Charakteristiken u. Kritiken, s. 252 ff.

[918] Comp. Tholuck, ut sup. s. 25 ff.; De Wette, exeget. Handb., 1, 1,
s. 49.

[919] Storr, Ueber den Zweck u. s. w., s. 348 f. Olshausen.

[920] De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 2, s. 44 f.; Neander, L. J. Chr., s.
155 f., Anm.

[921] Homil. xv. 7; comp. Credner in Winer’s Zeitschrift f. wiss.
Theologie, 1, s. 298 f.; Schneckenburger, über das Evangelium der
Aegyptier, § 6.

[922] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung, s. 29.

[923] Ut sup. s. 90, Neander agrees with him, ut sup.

[924] The Rabbins also attached weight to these Mosaic blessings and
curses, vid. Lightfoot, p. 255. As here we have eight blessings, they
held that Abraham had beenblessed benedictionibus septem (Baal Turim,
in Gen. xii. Lightfoot, p. 256); David, Daniel with his three
companions, and the Messiah, benedictionibus sex. (Targ. Ruth. 3,
ibid.) They also counted together with the twenty beatitudines in the
Psalms, as many væ in Isaiah. (Midrasch Tehillim in Ps. i. ib.).

[925] Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 58. Neander tries to show, very
artificially, a real connection of thought, s. 157, Anm.

[926] Olshausen in loc. The true reading is indicated by
Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 58; Tholuck, ut sup. s. 11.

[927] This cause is overlooked by Schleiermacher, s. 205; comp. De
Wette, in loc.

[928] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 90. Tholuck, s. 21.

[929] Tholuck, s. 12, 187; De Wette, in loc.

[930] Ut sup. 206 f.

[931] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 2, s. 86.

[932] De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 48.

[933] Orig. de orat. xviii. and Hess, Gesch. Jesu, 2, s. 48 f.

[934] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 173; Olshausen, 1, s. 235; Sieffert,
s. 78 ff. Neander, s. 235 f. note.

[935] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 69. 1, 2, s. 65.

[936] N.T. 1, 323. The parallels may be seen in Wetstein and Lightfoot.

[937] Comm. in Matt., p. 265.

[938] Comp. De Wette, 1, 1, s. 69 ff.; Neander, s. 237 ff.

[939] Comp. De Wette, 1, 2, s. 176.

[940] From vi. 19 to the end of the chapter even Neander finds no
orderly association, and conjectures that the editor of the Greek
Gospel of Matthew was the compiler of this latter half of the discourse
(p. 169, note).

[941] Neander, ut sup.; De Wette, in loc.

[942] De Wette, 1, 2, s. 45.

[943] De Wette in loc. des Lukas.

[944] E.g. Hess, Gesch. Jesu, 1, s. 545.

[945] Schulz, ut sup. s. 308, 314; Sieffert, s. 80 ff.

[946] Olshausen, in loc. The latter bold assertion in Kern, Über den
Ursprung des Evang. Matth., s. 63.

[947] Schulz, s. 315.

[948] Vid. De Wette, Archäol., § 265, and in loc.

[949] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 99.

[950] Schulz, s. 308; Sieffert, s. 82 ff.

[951] The satisfactory connexion which modern criticism finds
throughout the 12th chap. of Luke, I am as little able to discover as
Tholuck, Auslegung der Bergpredigt, s. 13 f., who has strikingly
exposed the partiality of Schleiermacher for Luke, to the prejudice of
Matthew.

[952] Vid. De Wette in loc.

[953] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 169 f.; Schneckenburger, über
den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 32 f.

[954] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 110. 1, 2, s. 62.

[955] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 314.

[956] Olshausen, bibl. Comm. 1, s. 437.

[957] L. J. Chr., s. 175.

[958] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 33.

[959] Olshausen, s. 438.

[960] Schleiermacher, s. 120.

[961] Fritzsche, Comm. in Marc., s. 120, 128, 134; De Wette, in loc.

[962] Comp. Saunier, über die Quellen des Markus, s. 74; Fritzsche ut
sup.; De Wette in loc.

[963] Schleiermacher, ut. sup. s. 192; Olshausen, 1, s. 431;
Schneckenburger, ut sup. s. 33.

[964] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 2, s. 73 f.

[965] Analogies to these parables and apothegms are given out of the
rabbinical literature by Wetstein, Lightfoot, and Schöttgen, in loc.

[966] Ueber den Lukas, s. 220.

[967] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 202 ff. Olshausen in loc.

[968] Ut sup.

[969] Schneckenburger has decided, Beiträge, No. V. where he refutes
Olshausen’s interpretation of the parable, that this verse does not
really belong to its present position, while with respect to the
preceding verses from v. 9, he finds it possible to hold the contrary
opinion. De Wette also considers that v. 13 is the only one decidedly
out of place. He thinks it possible, by supplying an intermediate
proposition, which he supposes the writer to have omitted, and which
led from the prudent use of riches to faithfulness in preserving those
entrusted to us, to give a sufficient connexion to v. 9 and 10–12,
without necessarily referring the idea of faithfulness to the conduct
of the steward. The numerous attempts, both ancient and modern, to
explain the parable of the steward without a critical dislocation of
the associated passages, are only so many proofs that it is absolutely
requisite to a satisfactory interpretation.

[970] Comp. de Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 2, s. 80.

[971] Ut sup. s. 208.

[972] Vid. Kuinöl, in loc.

[973] Comp. De Wette, 1, 2, s. 86 f.

[974] On the Essenes as contemners of riches (καταφρονητὰς πλούτου),
comp. Joseph., b. j. ii. viii. 3; Credner, über Essener und Ebioniten,
in Winer’s Zeitschrift, 1, s. 217; Gfrörer, Philo, 2, s. 311.

[975] Thus Kuinöl, Comm. in Luc., p. 635.

[976] Ueber den Lukas, 239 f. Neander agrees with him, L. J. Chr., p.
188.

[977] This is a reply to Neander’s objection, p. 191, note.

[978] How Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, a, p. 76, can pronounce the more
complex form of the parable in Luke as not only the most fully
developed but the best wound up, I am at a loss to understand.

[979] Comp. De Wette, I, I, s. 208 f.

[980] V. 12. Ἄνθρωπος τις εὐγενὴς ἐπορεύθη εἰς χώραν μακρὰν, λαβεῖν
ἑαυτῷ βασιλείαν, καὶ ὑποστρέψαι. 14. οἱ δὲ πολίται αὐτοῦ ἐμίσουν αὐτὸν,
καὶ ἀπέστειλαν πρεσβείαν ὀπισω αὐτοῦ, λέγοντες· οὐ θέλομεν τοῦτον
βασιλεῦσαι ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς. 15. καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ ἐπανελθεῖν αὐτὸν λαβόντα τὴν
βασιλείαν, καὶ εἶπε φωνηθῆναι αὐτῷ τοὺς δούλους—(καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς·) 27.
—τοὺς ἐχθρούς μου ἐκείνους, τοὺς μὴ θελήσαντάς με βασιλεῦσαι έπ’
αὐτοὺς, ἀγάγετε ὧδε καὶ κατασφάξατε ἕμπροσθέν μου.

[981] Fritzsche, p. 656. This remark serves to refute De Wette’s
vindication of the above particular in his exeg. Handb.

[982] Paulus, exeg. Handb 3, a, s. 210; Olshausen, bibl. Comm. 1, s.
811.

[983] Vid. Fritzsche, ut sup.

[984] From the appendix to Schneckenburger’s Beiträgen, I see that a
reviewer in the Theol. Literaturblatt, 1831, No. 88, has also
conjectured that we have here a blending of two originally distinct
parables.

[985] Comp. De Wette, 1, 1, s. 152.

[986] Ueber den Lukas, s. 153 f.

[987] Comp. De Wette, in loc.

[988] Vid. Fritzsche and De Wette, in loc.

[989] Saunier, über die Quellen des Markus, s. 111.

[990] Comp. De Wette, in loc., Matt.

[991] Vid. de Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, p. 155.

[992] Analogous passages from Jewish writings are given in Wetstein,
Lightfoot, Schöttgen, in loc.

[993] Bemidbar R. ad. Num. v. 30, in Wetstein, p. 303.

[994] E.g. Paulus, L. J. 1, b, s. 46.

[995] For probable doubts as to the correctness of the position given
to this discourse of Jesus, vid. Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 525, Anm.

[996] Paulus, ib. s. 50, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 599.

[997] In this passage, it is true that celibacy is at first recommended
as good for the present distress; but the Apostle does not rest there;
for at v. 32 ff. he adds, He that is unmarried careth for the things of
the Lord—he that is married for the things of the world:—a motive to
celibacy which must be equally valid under all circumstances, and which
affords us a glimpse into the fundamental asceticism of Paul’s views.
Comp. Rückert’s Commentary in loc.

[998] Vid. Gfrörer, Philo, 2, s. 310 f.

[999] A concise elucidation of them may be found in Hase, L. J. § 129.

[1000] Vid. Gemara Hieros. Berac. f. v. 4, in Lightfoot, p. 423, and R.
Manasse Ben Isr. in Schöttgen, i. p. 180.

[1001] See his 4th Fragment, Lessing’s 4ten Beitrag, s. 434 ff.

[1002] L. J. 1, b, s. 115 ff.

[1003] Vid. Wetstein, in loc. Hengstenberg, Christol. 1, a, s. 140 f.;
also Paulus himself, exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 283 f.

[1004] Comp. De Wette, in loc.

[1005] Ueber den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 45, 47.

[1006] Paulus and Olshausen, in loc.

[1007] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 186.

[1008] Sieffert, über den Ursprung des ersten Ev., s. 117 f.

[1009] Comp. De Wette, 1, 1. s. 189.

[1010] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 313 f.; Schneckenburger, über den
Ursprung, s. 54.

[1011] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 182, 196 f.; Olshausen, in
loc., and the writers mentioned in the foregoing note.

[1012] Ut sup. 180.

[1013] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 189, 1, 2, s. 67, 76.

[1014] Joseph., b. j. iv. v. 4.

[1015] Eichhorn, Einleitung in das N.T., 1, s. 510 ff.; Hug, Einl. in
das N.T., 2, s. 10 ff.; Credner, Einl., 1, s. 207.

[1016] Vid. Theile, über Zacharias Barachias Sohn, in Winer’s und
Engelhardt’s neuem krit. Journ., 2, s. 401 ff.; De Wette, in loc.

[1017] Targum Thren. ii. 20, in Wetstein, s. 491.

[1018] Comp. De Wette, in loc.

[1019] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 321.

[1020] This “secret information” is very welcome to Dr. Paulus, because
it gives a useful hint “as to many occurrences in the life of Jesus,
the causes of which are not obvious” (L. J. 1, b, s. 141); that is
Paulus, like Bahrdt and Venturini, though less openly, is fond of using
such secret and influential allies as deus ex machinâ, for the
explanation of much that is miraculous in the life of Jesus (the
transfiguration, residence after the resurrection, etc.).

[1021] Orig. c. Cels. i. 62.

[1022] Let the reader bear in mind the kindred names Nicolaus and
Nicolaitans.

[1023] Prob., p. 44. Bretschneider is right, however, in declaring
against Kuinöl’s method of supplying a connexion between the discourses
in John, by the insertion of propositions and intermediate discourses,
supposed to have been omitted. Lücke judiciously admits (1, p. 446)
that if, in John, something appears to be wanting between two
consecutive expressions of Jesus, we are yet to suppose that there was
an immediate connexion between them in the mind of the Evangelist, and
it is this connexion which it is the task of exegesis to ascertain. In
truth the discourses in the fourth gospel are never entirely wanting in
connexion (apart from the exceptions to be noticed in § 81), though
that connexion is sometimes very latent.

[1024] Bereschith R., sect 39 f. xxxviii. 2. Bammidbar R., s. 11 f.
ccxi. 2. Tanchuma f. v. 2, in Schöttgen, i. s. 704. Something similar
is said of Moses, from Schemoth R., ib.

[1025] Jevamoth f. lxii. 1, xcii. 1, in Lightfoot, p. 984.

[1026] E.g. Knapp, comm. in colloq. Christi cum Nicod. in loc.

[1027] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 183. L. J. 1, a, s. 176.

[1028] Lücke and Tholuck, in loc.

[1029]

III. 11: ὃ ἑωράκαμεν μαρτυροῦμεν καὶ   I. 18: θεὸν οὐδεὶς ἑώρακε
τὴν μαρτυρίαν ἡμῶν οὐ λαμβάνετε. 13:   πώποτε. ὁ μονογενὴς υἱὸς, ὁ ὣν
καὶ οὐδεὶς ἀναβέβηκεν εἰς τὸν          εἰς τὸν κόλπον τοῦ πατρὸς
οὐρανὸν, εἰ μὴ ὁ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ        ἐκεῖνος ἐξηγήσατο.
καταβὰς, ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ὁ ὢν ἐν
τῷ οὐρανῷ.                             11: —καὶ οἱ ἴδιοι αὐτὸν οὐ
                                       παρέλαβον.

[1030] Sup. § 46.

[1031] This is informed in the Probabilia, p. 46.

[1032] Ut sup. p. 476.

[1033] Comp. Bretschneider, ut sup.

[1034] De Wette adduces as examples of a similar procedure on the part
of Jesus in the synoptical gospels, Matt. xix. 21, xx. 22 f. But these
two cases are of a totally different kind from the one under
consideration in John. We have here to treat of a want of
comprehension, in the face of which it is surprising that Jesus instead
of descending to its level, chooses to elevate himself to a still less
attainable altitude. In the passages quoted from the synoptists, on the
other hand, we have examples of an excessive self-valuation, too high
an estimate of their ability to promote the cause of Jesus, on the part
of the rich young man and of the sons of Zebedee, and Jesus with
perfect propriety checks their egotistic ardour by the abrupt
presentation of a higher demand. These instances could only be parallel
with that of Nicodemus, if the latter had piqued himself on his
enlightenment, and Jesus, by a sudden flight into a higher region, had
sought to convince him of his ignorance.

[1035] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 96.

[1036]

III. 19: αὕτη δέ ἐστιν ἡ κρίσις,    I. 9: ἦν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινὸν, τὸ
ὅτι τὸ φῶς ἐλήλυθεν εἰς τὸν         φωτίζον πάντα ἄνθρωπον, ἐρχόμενον
κόσμον, καὶ ἠγάπησαν οἱ ἄνθρωποι    εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 5: καὶ τὸ φῶς ἐν τῆ
μᾶλλον τὸ σκότος ἢ τὸ φῶς.          σκοτίᾳ φαίνει, καὶ ἡ σκοτία αὐτὸ οὐ
                                    κατέλαβεν.
III. 16: ὅυτω γὰρ ἠγάπησεν ὁ θεὸς
τὸν κόσμον, ὥστε τὸν υἱὸν αὑτοῦ     1 John iv. 9: ἐν τούτῳ ἐφανερώθη ἡ
τὸν μονογενῆ ἔδωκεν, ἵνα πᾶς ὁ      ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν, ὅτι τὸν
πιστεύων εἰς αὐτὸν, μὴ ἀπόληται     υἱὸν αὑτοῦ τὸν μονογενῆ ἀπέστειλεν
ἀλλ’ ἔχη ζωὴν αἰώνιον.              ὁ θεὸς εἰς τὸν κόσμον, ἵνα ζήσωμεν
                                    δι’ αὐτοῦ.

[1037] Paulus and Olshausen, in loc.

[1038] Tholuck (Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 335) adduces as examples of a
similar unobserved fusion of a discourse quoted from a foreign source,
with the writer’s own matter, Gal. ii. 14 ff. Euseb., H. E. iii. 1, 39.
Hieron. Comm. in Jes. 53. But such instances in an epistle, a
commentary or an historical work interspersed with reasoning and
criticism are not parallel with those in an historical narrative of the
nature of our fourth gospel. In works of the former kind, the reader
expects the author to reason, and hence, when the discourse of another
party has been introduced, he is prepared at the slightest pause to see
the author again take up the argument. It is quite different with a
work like our fourth gospel. The introduction, it is true, is put forth
as the author’s own reasoning, and it is there quite natural that after
a brief quotation from the discourse of another, v. 15, he should, at
v. 16, resume the character of speaker without any express intimation.
But when once he has entered on his narrative, which is strictly a
recital of what has been done, and what has been said, all that he
annexes without any mark of distinction (as e.g. xii. 37) to a
discourse explicitly ascribed to another, must be considered as a
continuation of that discourse.

[1039] Philo. Opp. ed. Mang. i. 44. apud Gfrörer, i. p. 122.

[1040]

Joh. v. 20: ὁ γὰρ πατὴρ φιλεῖ τὸν   John iii. 35 (the Baptist): ὁ γὰρ
υἱὸν καὶ πάντα δείκνυσιν αὐτῷ, ἃ    πατηρ ἀγαπᾷ τὸν υἱὸν καὶ πάντα
αὑτὸς ποιεῖ.                        δέδωκεν ἐν τῇ χειρὶ αὐτοῦ.

24: ὁ τὸν λόγον μου                 1 Joh. iii. 14: ἡμεῖς οἴδαμεν, ὅτι
ἀκούων—μεταβέβηκεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου   μεταβεβηκαμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς
εἰς τὴν ζωήν.                       τὴν ζωήν.

32: καὶ οἶδα, ὅτι ἀληθής ἐστιν ἡ    Joh. xix. 35: καὶ ἀληθινή ἑστιν
μαρτυρία, ἣν μαρτυρεῖ περὶ ἐμοῦ.    αὐτοῦ ἡ μαρτυρία, κἀκεῖνος οἶδεν,
                                    ὃτι ἀληθῆ λέγει. Comp. xxi. 24. 1
34: ἑγὼ δὲ οὐ παρὰ ἀνθρώπου τὴν     Joh. 3, 12.
μαρτυρίαν λαμβάνω.
                                    1 Joh. v. 9: εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν τῶν
36: ἐγὼ δὲ ἔχω μαρτυρίαν μείζω      ἀνθρώπων λαμβάνομεν, ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ
τοῦ Ἰωάννου.                        θεοῦ, μείζων ἐστίν· ὅτι αὔτη ἐστιν
                                    ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ, ἣν μεμαρτύρηκε
37: καὶ ὁ πέμψας με πατὴρ, αὐτὸς    περὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ.
μεμαρτύρηκε περὶ ἐμοῦ.
                                    Joh. i. 18: θεὸν οὐδεὶς ἑώρακε
Ib.: ὄυτε τὴν φωνὴν αὐτοῦ           πώποτε. Comp. 1 Joh. iv. 12.
ἀκηκόατε πώποτε, οὕτε τὸ εἶδος
αὐτοῦ ἑωράκατε.                     1 Joh. i. 10: καὶ ὁ λόγος αὐτοῦ οὐκ
                                    ἐστιν ἐν ὑμῖν.
38: καὶ τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἔχετε
μένοντα ἐν ὑμῖν.                    1 Joh. v. 12: ὁ μὴ ἔχων τὸν υἱὸν
                                    τοῦ θεοῦ ζωὴν οὐκ ἔχει.
40: καὶ οὐ θέλετε ἐλθείν πρός με,
ἵνα ζωὴν ἔχητε.                     1 Joh. ii. 15: οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ἀγάπη
                                    τοῦ πατρὸς ἐν αὐτῷ.
42: ὅτι τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ
ἔχετε ἐν ἑαυτοῖς.                   Joh. xi. 43: ἡγάπησαν γὰρ τὴν δόξαν
                                    τῶν ἀνθρώπων μᾶλλον, ἤπερ τὴν δόξαν
44: πῶς δύνασθε ὑμεῖς πιστεύειν,    τοῦ θεοῦ.
δόξαν παρὰ ἀλλήλων λαμβάνοντες,
καὶ τὴν δόξαν τὴν παρὰ του μόνου
θεοῦ οὐ ζητεῖτε·

[1041] Vid. the passages compared by Gfrörer, 1, s. 194, from Philo, de
linguarum confusione.

[1042] Sup. § 14.

[1043] De profugis, Opp. Mang., i. s. 566, Gfrörer, 1, s. 202. What is
farther said of the λόγος: ἀφ’ οὒ πᾶσαι παιδεῖαι καὶ σοφίαι ῥέουσιν
ἀένναοι may be compared with John iv. 14, vi. 35, vii. 38.

[1044] See Lücke’s History of the interpretation of this passage in his
Comm. 2, Appendix B, p. 727 ff.

[1045] Hase, L. J. § 99.

[1046] Comp. Bretschneider, Probab., pp. 56, 88 ff.

[1047] In relation to this chapter, I entirely approve the following
remark in the Probabilia (p. 56): videretur—Jesus ipse studuisse, ut
verbis illuderet Judæis, nec ab iis intelligeretur, sed reprobaretur.
Ita vero nec egit, nec agere potuit, neque si ita docuisset, tanta
effecisset, quanta illum effecisse historia testatur. Comp. De Wette,
exeg. Handb., 1, 3, s. 6.

[1048] E.g. by Tholuck and Lücke. The latter, however, allows that it
is rather an incipient than a complete parable. Olshausen also remarks,
that the discourses of the Shepherd and the Vine are rather comparisons
than parables; and Neander shows himself willing to distinguish the
parable presented by the synoptists as a species, under the genus
similitude, to which the παροιμίαι of John belong.

[1049]

x. 27: τὰ πρόβατα τὰ ἐμὰ τῆς   x. 3: καὶ τὰ πρόβατα τῆς φωνῆς
φωνῆς μου ἀκούει,              αὐτοῦ ἀκούει.

κἀγὼ γινώσκω αὐτά·             14: καὶ γινώσκω τυ ἐμα

28: καὶ ἀκολουθοῦσί μοι.       4: καὶ τὰ πρόβατα αὐτῷ ἀκολουθεῖ.

Also κἀγω ζωὴν αἰώνιον δίδωμι αὐτοῖς corresponds to ἐγὼ ἠλθον, ἳνα ζωὴν
ἔχωσι, v. 10, and καὶ οὐχ ἁρπάσει τις αὐτὰ ἐκ τῆς χειρός μου is the
counterpart of what is said v. 12 of the hireling who allows the sheep
to be scattered.

[1050] Comp. v. 44 with vii. 17; v. 46 with viii. 12; v. 47 with iii.
17; v. 48 with iii. 18, v. 45; v. 49 with viii. 28; v. 50 with vi. 40,
vii. 17, viii. 28.

[1051] L. J., b, s. 142.

[1052] Lücke, Tholuck, Paulus, in loc.

[1053] Cyril, Erasmus. Tholuck’s expedient, which Olshausen approves,
is to give ἐμαρτύρησεν the signification of the pluperfect, and to
understand γὰρ as an explicative. But I do not see how this can be of
any avail, for γὰρ and οὖν (v. 45) would still form a relation of
agreement between two propositions, which one would have expected to be
opposed to each other by μὲν and δὲ.

[1054] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 251, 56.

[1055] This idea is so entirely in the spirit of the ancient
harmonists, that I can scarcely believe Lücke to be the first to whom
it had occurred (Comm. 1, s. 545 f.).

[1056] Vid. sup. § 39.

[1057] Paulus, L. J. 1, b, s. 158.

[1058] Lücke, 2, s. 478.

[1059] Tholuck, in loc.

[1060] Paulus, L. J. 1, b, s. 175; Lücke, Tholuck, Olshausen, in loc.;
Hug, Einl. in das N. T. 2, s. 209.

[1061] Wegscheider, Einl. in das Evang. Joh., s. 271; Tholuck, Comm. s.
37 f.

[1062] Thus Eckermann, theol. Beiträge, 5, 2, s. 228; (Vogel) der
Evangelist Johannes und seine Ausleger vor dem jüngsten Gericht, 1, s.
28 ff.; Wegscheider, s. 281; Bretschneider, Probabil., 33, 45, apud
Wegscheider, ut sup. s. 281; Bretschneider, Probab., p. 33, 45.

[1063] De Wette, Einl. in das N. T., § 105; Tholuck, Comm. z. Joh., s.
38 f.; Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 344 ff.; Lücke, 1, s. 198 f.

[1064] Commentar, 4, s. 275 f.

[1065] Verosimilia de origine evangelii Joannis, opusc. p. 1 ff.,
Einleit. in das N. T., s. 1302 ff. This opinion is approved by
Wegscheider, ut sup. p. 270 ff. and also Hug, 2. 263 f., and Tholuck,
Comm. p. 38, think the supposition of early notes not to be altogether
rejected.

[1066] Lücke, 1, s. 192 f.

[1067] Henke, programm. quo illustratur Johannes apostolus nonnullorum
Jesu apophthegmatum et ipse interpres.

[1068] Bretschneider, Probab., p. 14 f.

[1069] Ut sup. p. 199.

[1070] Wegscheider, p. 286; Lücke, p. 195 f.

[1071] Wegscheider, p. 285; Lücke, ut sup.

[1072] Lücke, s. 124 f. 175. Kern, über den Ursprung des Evang.
Matthäi, in der Tüb. Zeitschrift, 1834, 2, s. 109.

[1073] S. 39.

[1074] S. 197. “But lastly, why should we fear to adduce,” etc.

[1075] The aid promised to the disciples when brought before rulers and
tribunals, Matt. x. 19 f., is quite distinct from a bringing to
remembrance of the discourses of Jesus (John xiv. 26).

[1076] Bretschneider, Probab., p. 2, 3, 31 ff.

[1077] De Wette, Einl. in das N. T., § 103; Hase, L. J., § 7.

[1078] Lücke, ut sup. pp. 336, 337. Kern, ut sup.

[1079] Tholuck, ut sup.

[1080] Bretschneider, ut sup.

[1081] De Wette, ut sup. § 105.

[1082] Comp. Schulze, der schriftst. Charakter und Werth des Johannes.
1803.

[1083] Stronck—de doctrinâ et dictione Johannis apostoli, ad Jesu
magistri doctrinam dictionemque exacte composita. 1797.

[1084] Lücke, Comm. z. Joh. 1, p. 200.

[1085] Ut. sup. p. 199.

[1086] In his review of the 2nd Ed. of Lücke’s Commentar., in the Litt.
Blatt der allgem. Kirchenzeitung 1834, no. 18.

[1087] This peculiarity of the discourses in John cannot be better
described than by Erasmus in his Epist. ad Ferdinandum, prefatory to
his Paraphrase: habet Johannes suum quoddam dicendi genus, ita sermonem
velut ansulis ex sese cohærentibus contexens, nonnunquam ex contrariis,
nonnunquam ex similibus, nonnunquam ex iisdem, subinde repetitis,——ut
orationis quodque membrum semper excipiat prius, sic ut prioris finis
sit initium sequentis, etc.

[1088] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 303 ff.; Sieffert, über den
Urspr. des ersten kanon. Evang. s. 58, 73, u. s.; Schneckenburger, über
den Urspr. s. 73.

[1089] Olshausen, b. Comm. 1. s. 15.

[1090] See the above named critics, passim; and Hug, Einl. in das N. T.
2, s. 212.

[1091] Comp. Saunier, über die Quellen des Markus, s. 42 ff.

[1092] Kern, über den Urspr. des Ev. Matt. ut sup. s. 70 f.

[1093] I say, examine whether—not, consider it decided that—so that the
accusation of opponents, that I use both the particularity and the
brevity of narratives as proofs of their mythical character, falls to
the ground of itself.

[1094] Ueber den Lukas, s. 74, and elsewhere.

[1095] Ut sup. s. 311.

[1096] Schleiermacher (s. 175) does not perceive the connexion of the
discourse on the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, in Matthew (xii. 31
f.), though it links on excellently to the foregoing expression, ἐγὼ ἐν
πνεύματι θεοῦ ἐκβάλλω τὰ δαιμόνια (v. 28). It is more easy, however, to
understand this difficulty, than that he should think (s. 185 f.) that
discourse better introduced in Luke (xii. 10). For here, between the
preceding proposition, that whosoever denies the Son of Man before men,
shall be denied before the angels of God, and the one in question, the
only connexion is that the expression ἀρνεῖσθαι τὸν υἰὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου
brought to the writer’s recollection the words εἰπεῶ λὸγος εἰς τὸν υίὸν
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. One proof of this is that between the latter passage and
the succeeding declaration, that the necessary words would be given to
the disciples, when before the tribunal, by the πνεῦμα ἅγιον, the
connexion consists just as superficially in the expression πνεῦμα
ἅγιον. What follows in Matthew (v. 33–37), had been partly given
already in the Sermon on the Mount, but stands here in a better
connexion than Schleiermacher is willing to admit.

[1097] Luke makes the demand of a sign follow immediately on the
accusation, and then gives in succession the answers of Jesus to both.
This representation modern criticism holds to be far more probable than
that of Matthew, who gives first the accusation and its answer, then
the demand of a sign and its refusal; and this judgment is grounded on
the difficulty of supposing, that after Jesus had given a sufficiently
long answer to the accusation, the very same people who had urged it
would still demand a sign (Schleiermacher, s. 175; Schneckenburger,
über den Urspr. s. 52 f.). But on the other hand, it is equally
improbable that Jesus, after having some time ago delivered a forcible
discourse on the more important point, the accusation concerning
Beelzebub, and even after an interruption which had led him to a
totally irrelevant declaration (Luke xi. 27 f.), should revert to the
less important point, namely, the demand of a sign. The discourse on
the departure and return of the unclean spirit, is in Matthew (v.
43–45) annexed to the reply of Jesus to this demand; but in Luke (xi.
24 ff.) it follows the answer to the imputation of a league with
Beelzebub, and this may at first seem to be a more suitable
arrangement. But on a closer examination, it will appear very
improbable that Jesus should conclude a defence, exacted from him by
his enemies, with so calm and purely theoretical a discourse, which
supposes an audience, if not favourably prepossessed, at least open to
instruction; and it will be found that here again there is no further
connexion than that both discourses treat of the expulsion of demons.
By this single feature of resemblance, the writer of the third gospel
was led to sever the connexion between the answer to the oft-named
accusation, and that to the demand of a sign, which accusation and
demand, as the strongest proofs of the malevolent unbelief of the
enemies of Jesus, seem to have been associated by tradition. The first
Evangelist refrained from this violence, and reserved the discourse on
the return of the unclean spirit, which was suggested by the suspicion
cast on the expulsion of demons by Jesus, until he had communicated the
answer by which Jesus parries the demand of a sign.

[1098] Vid. Griesbach, Comm. crit. in loc.

[1099] Comp. Schleiermacher, s. 190 f.

[1100] De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 139.

[1101] Ueber den Urspr. s. 115.

[1102] For the proof of this interpretation, see Fritzsche, comm. in
Marc. p. 97 ff.

[1103] Ueber den Lukas, s. 121.

[1104] Schneckenburger (über den Ur. s. 54) finds an attempt at
dramatic effect in the εἰπέτις, and the ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα of Matthew,
as compared with the εἶπον and περιβλεψάμενος κύκλῳ of Mark. This is a
remarkable proof of the partial acumen which plays so distinguished a
part to the disadvantage of Matthew in modern criticism. For who does
not see that if Matthew had εἶπον, it would be numbered among the
proofs that his narrative is wanting in dramatic life? As for the words
ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα, there is nothing to be discovered in them which
could give to them more than to the περιβλεψάμενος of Mark, the stamp
of artificiality; we might as well attribute the latter expression to
Mark’s already discovered fondness for describing the action of the
eyes, and consequently regard it as an addition of his own.

[1105]

Answer to the announcement, viii.   Answer to the woman, xi. 28:
21: μήτηρ μοῦ καὶ ἀδελφοί μοῦ       μενοῦγγε μακάριοι (sc. οὐχ ἡ μήτηρ
οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ τὸν λὸγον τοῦ θεοῦ   μοῦ, ἀλλ’) οἱ ἀκούοντες τὸν λόγον
ἀκούντες καὶ ποιοῦντες αὐτόν.       τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ φυλάσσοντες αὐτόν.

[1106] Ut sup s. 177 f.

[1107] That which decided the Evangelist to place the visit after the
parable of the sower, was probably not, as Schleiermacher thinks, a
real chronological connexion. On the contrary, we recognize the usual
characteristic of his arrangement, in the transition from the
concluding sentence in the explanation of the parable: these are they
who having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience, to the similar expression of Jesus on the occasion of the
visit: those who hear the word of God and do it.

[1108] Ut sup. s. 152.

[1109] Schulz (üb. d. Abendm. s. 320) speaks consistently with the tone
of the recent criticism on Matthew when he asserts, that he does not
doubt for a moment that every observant reader will, without
hesitation, prefer the representation of Mark, who, without mentioning
the mother, confines the whole transaction to Jesus and the two
apostles. But so far as historical probability is concerned, I would
ask, why should not a woman, who was one of the female companions of
Jesus (Matt. xxvii. 56), have ventured on such a petition? As regards
psychological probability, the sentiment of the church, in the choice
of the passage for St. James’s day, has usually decided in favour of
Matthew; for so solemn a prayer, uttered on the spur of the moment, is
just in character with a woman, and more especially a mother devoted to
her sons.

[1110] Compare Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 283.

[1111] Paulus and Tholuck, in loc.; Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 388, Anm.

[1112] Ueber den Urspr. s. 108 ff.

[1113] Lücke, 1, s. 435 ff.; De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 174 f.; i.
3, s. 40.

[1114] Ut sup. s. 109; comp. Schneckenburger, s. 26 f.

[1115] Lightfoot, s. 632, from Bab. Jevamoth, f. vi. 2.

[1116] Lücke, s. 438.

[1117] Lücke, s. 437; Sieffert, s. 110.

[1118] Comm. in Joh. tom. 10, § 17; Opp. 1, p. 322, ed. Lommatzsch.

[1119] Kuinöl, in loc.

[1120] Bretschneider, Probab. p. 43.

[1121] English Commentators, ap. Lücke, 1, s. 435 f., Anm.

[1122] Eng. Comm. ap. Lücke. According to Neander (s. 387, Anm.),
Jesus, after his last entrance into Jerusalem, when the enthusiasm of
the populace was on his side, must have shunned every act that could be
interpreted into a design of using external force, and thus creating
disturbances. But he must equally have shunned this at the beginning,
as at the end, of his career, and the proceeding in the temple was
rather a provocation of external force against himself, than a use of
it for his own purposes.

[1123] Comm. in Joh. Tom. 10, 16, p. 321 f., ed. Lommatzsch.

[1124] Lücke, in loc.

[1125] Lücke, s. 413.

[1126] Ib. and Tholuck, in loc.

[1127] Olshausen, 1, s. 785.

[1128] Comm. 4, s. 164.

[1129] Hieros. Joh. tobh. f. lxi. 3, ap. Lightfoot, p. 411.

[1130] Lücke, Comm. 1, s. 410.

[1131] Ut sup., comp. also Woolston, Disc. 1.

[1132] Thus Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 766; L. J. 1, a, s. 292;
Tholuck, Lücke, Olshausen, in loc.; Hase, L. J. § 96, Anm.

[1133] This difference struck Origen, who has given a critical
comparison of these four narratives, to which, in point of acumen,
there is no parallel in more modern commentaries. See his in Matth.
Commentarior. series, Opp. ed. de la Rue, 3, s. 892 ff.

[1134] Origenes, ut sup.

[1135] Ib.

[1136] Ib.

[1137] Ib.

[1138] Comp. Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 111.

[1139] Origenes and Schleiermacher. Winer, N. T. Gramm., s. 149.

[1140]

Luke vii. 38: τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ—ταῖς   John xii. 3: ἐξέμαξεν ταῖς
θριξὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς αὑτῆς ἐξέμασσε.     θριξὶν αὑτῆς τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ.

[1141] Kuinöl, Comm. in Matt., p. 687.

[1142] Sieffert, über den Ursprung, s. 125 f.

[1143] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 277.

[1144] Vid. Kuinöl, ut sup. p. 688; also Tholuck, s. 228.

[1145] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 582; 3, b, s. 466.

[1146] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung, u. s. f., s. 60. There is no
trace in Mark’s account that the words συντρίψασα τὸ ἀλάβαστρον signify
an accidental fracture; nor, on the other hand can they, without the
harshest ellipsis, be understood to imply merely the removal of that
which stopped the opening of the vessel, as Paulus and Fritzsche
maintain. Interpreted without violence, they can only mean a breaking
of the vessel itself. Is it asked with Paulus (Ex. Handb. 3. b. s.
471): To what purpose destroy a costly vessel? or with Fritzsche (in
Marc. p. 602): To what purpose risk wounding her own hand, and possibly
the head of Jesus also? These are questions which have a bearing on the
matter considered as the act of the woman, but not as a narrative of
Mark; for that to him, the destruction of a precious vessel should
appear suited to the noble prodigality of the woman, is in perfect
accordance with the exaggerating style which we have often observed in
him.

[1147] Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 689.

[1148] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 466, and many others.

[1149] Ueber den Lukas, s. 111 ff.

[1150] Sieffert, ut sup. s. 123 f.

[1151] Schulz, ut sup. s. 320 f.

[1152] Schneckenburger, ut sup. s. 60.

[1153] Lücke, 2, s. 417; comp. Lightfoot, horæ, p. 468, 1081.

[1154] Schulz, ut sup.

[1155] Thus Grotius and Herder.

[1156] Ap. Wetstein, Paulus, Lücke, in loc.

[1157] Maimonides on Sanhedr. 7, 1.

[1158] Mischna, tr. Sanhedr. c. 10.

[1159] For a thorough discussion of this and the following points, vid.
Paulus and Lücke in loc.

[1160] Probab., p. 72 ff.

[1161] Euseb. H. E. iii. 39: ἐκτέθειται δὲ (ὁ Παπίας) καὶ ἄλλην
ἱστορίαν περὶ γυναικὸς ἐπὶ πολλαῖς ἁμαρτίαις διαβληθείσης ἐπὶ τοῦ
Κυρίου, ἣν τὸ καθ’ Ἑβραίους εὐαγγέλιον περιέχει.

[1162] Lücke, 2, s. 217. Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 410.

[1163] Elsewhere also the two were confounded, vid. Fabricii Cod.
apocryph. N. T. 1, s. 357, not.

[1164] 3, s. 379 f.

[1165] See the passages quoted in the first volume, Introd. § 14, notes
9, 10, to which may be added 4 Esdr. xiii. 50 (Fabric. Cod. pseudepigr.
V. T. ii. p. 286), and Sohar Exod. fol. iii. col. 12 (Schöttgen, horæ,
ii. p. 541, also in Bertholdt’s Christol. § 33, note 1).

[1166] See the rabbinical passages quoted in the 1st vol. ut sup.

[1167] That the σεληνιαζόμενοι associated with them by Matthew are only
a particular species of demoniacs, whose malady appeared to be governed
by the changes of the moon, is proved by Matt. xvii. 14 ff. where a
δαιμόνιον is expelled from a σεληνιαζόμενος.

[1168] Compare the passages of ancient physicians, ap. Winer, bibl.
Realwörterb. 1, s. 191.

[1169] Rabbinical and other passages, ap. Winer, ut sup. s. 192.

[1170] Exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 475; comp. Hase, L. J. s. 60.

[1171] Ut sup. s. 191.

[1172] Grätz, Comm. z. Matth. 1, s. 615.

[1173] B. Comm. 1, s. 424. According to this, the passage relates to
the Jewish people, who before the exile were possessed by the devil in
the form of idolatry, and afterwards in the worst form of Pharisaism.

[1174] Thus Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 447.

[1175] Exeg. Handb. 2, s. 566.

[1176] Ut sup. 1, b, s. 483; 2, s. 96.

[1177] Hence the words δαιμονᾷν, κακοδαιμονᾷν were used as synonymous
with μελανχολᾷν μαίνεσθαι. Hippocrates had to combat the opinion that
epilepsy was the effect of demoniacal influence. Vid. Wetstein, s. 282
ff.

[1178] Let the reader compare the ‏רוּחַ רָעָה מֵאֵת יְהוָֹה‎, which made Saul
melancholy, 1 Sam. xvi. 14. Its influence on Saul is expressed by
‏בִּעֲתַתּוּ‎.

[1179] Vid. Creuzer, Symbolik, 3, s. 69 f.; Baur, Apollonius von Tyana
und Christus, s. 144.

[1180] Bell. jud. vii. vi. 3.

[1181] Antiq. vi. xi. 2. On the state of Saul.

[1182] Philopseud., 16.

[1183] Vitæ Apollon. iv. 20, 25, comp. Baur, ut sup. s. 38 f. 42. Even
Aristotle speaks of δαίμονί τινι γενομένοις κατόχοις. de mirab. 166,
ed. Bekk.

[1184] Ut sup., bell. j.: τὰ γὰρ καλούμενα δαιμόνια—πονηρῶν ἐστιν
ἀνθρώπων πνεύματα, τοῖς ζῶσιν εἰσδυόμενα καὶ κτείνοντα τοὺς βοηθείας μὴ
τυνχάνοντας.

[1185] Apoll. i. 18.

[1186] Ut sup. iii. 38.

[1187] Vid. Eisenmenger, entdecktes Judenthum, 2, s. 427.

[1188] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 39; L. J. 1, a, s. 217. He appeals in
support of this to Matt. xiv. 2, where Herod, on hearing of the
miracles of Jesus, says: It is John the Baptist, he is risen from the
dead. In this expression Paulus finds the rabbinical opinion of the
‏עיבור‎, which is distinct from that of the ‏גלגזל‎, or transmigration
of souls properly so called, (that is, the passage of disembodied souls
into the bodies of infants, while in the process of formation), and
according to which the soul of a dead person might unite itself to that
of a living one, and add to its power (vid. Eisenmenger 2, s. 85 ff.)
But, as Fritzsche and others have shown, the word ἠγέρθη refers to an
actual resurrection of the Baptist, and not to this rabbinical notion;
which, moreover, even were it implied, is totally different from that
of demoniacal possession. Here it would be a good spirit who had
entered into a prophet for the strengthening of his powers, as
according to a later Jewish idea the soul of Seth was united to that of
Moses, and again the souls of Moses and Aaron to that of Samuel
(Eisenmenger, ut sup.); but from this it would by no means follow, that
it was possible for wicked spirits to enter into the living.

[1189] Justin, Apol. ii. 5., Eisenmenger, ut sup.

[1190] Homil. viii. 18 f., ix. 9 f.

[1191] Orat. contra Græcos, 16.

[1192] See his Commentatio de dæmoniacis quorum in N. T. fit mentio,
and his minute consideration of demoniacal cases. So early as the time
of Origen, physicians gave natural explanations of the state of those
supposed to be possessed. Orig. in Matth. xvii. 15.

[1193] B. Comm. 1, s. 296, Anm.

[1194] S. 295 f.

[1195] S. 302, after the example of Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 474.

[1196] Homil. viii. 19.

[1197] Thus Asmodeus chooses Sara and her husband as objects of torment
and destruction, not because either the former or the latter were
particularly wicked, but because Sara’s beauty attracted him. Tob. vi.
12–15.

[1198] S. 294.

[1199] It fills s. 289–298.

[1200] I have endeavoured to present helps towards a scientific
conception of the states in question in several essays, which are now
incorporated in my Charakteristiken u. Kritiken. Comp. Wirth, Theorie
des Somnambulismus. S. 311 ff.

[1201] See note 16, the passage quoted from Lucian.

[1202] Joseph., Antiq. viii. ii. 5.

[1203] Joseph., ut sup.

[1204] Gittin, f. lxvii. 2.

[1205] Justin Mart. dial. c. Tryph. lxxxv.

[1206] Exeg. Handb. 1, 6, s. 422; L. J. 1, a, s. 128.

[1207] Bibl. Comm. i. 296.

[1208] Comp. Bertholdt, Christol. Jud. §§ 36–41.

[1209] According to Pesikta in Jalkut Schimoni ii. f. lvi. 3 (s.
Bertholdt, p. 185). Satan recognizes in the same manner the
pre-existing Messiah at the foot of the throne of God with terror, as
he qui me et omnes gentiles in infernum præcipitaturus est.

[1210] Fritzsche, in Marc., p. 35: In multis evangeliorum locis homines
legas a pravis dæmonibus agitatos, quum primum conspexerint Jesum, eum
Messiam esse, a nemine unquam de hac re commonitos, statim intelligere.
In qua re hac nostri scriptores ducti sunt sententia, consentaneum
esse. Satanæ satellites facile cognovisse Messiam, quippe insignia de
se supplicia aliquando sumturum.

[1211] A favourite resort of maniacs, vid. Lightfoot and Schöttgen, in
loc., and of unclean spirits, vid. rabbinical passages, ap. Wetstein.

[1212] The notion that the cutting himself with stones which Mark
ascribes to the demoniac, was an act of penance in lucid moments,
belongs to the errors to which Olshausen is led by his false opinion of
a moral and religious point of view in relation to these phenomena. It
is well known, however, that the paroxysms of such disorders are
precisely the occasions on which a self-destructive fury is manifested.

[1213] Vid. the collection of such explanations, ap. Fritzsche, in
Matt., p. 327.

[1214] Thus Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 309; Paulus, in loc. Hase,
L. J. § 75.

[1215] Schulz, ut sup.

[1216] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 127.

[1217] Paulus, L. J. 1, a, s. 232.

[1218] Vid. Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 329.

[1219] Natürliche Geschichte, 2, 174.

[1220] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, 473; Olshausen, s. 302.

[1221] This even Paulus, s. 474, and Olshausen, s. 303, find
surprising.

[1222] It is the narrative of the manner in which Apollonius of Tyana
unmasked a demon (empusa), vit. Ap. iv. 35; ap. Baur, s. 145.

[1223] Ut sup. s. 128. When, however, he accounts for this incorrect
supplement of Luke’s by supposing that his informant, being engaged in
the vessel, had remained behind, and thus had missed the commencement
of the scene with the demoniac, this is too laboured an exercise of
ingenuity, and presupposes the antiquated opinion, that there was the
most immediate relation possible between the evangelical histories and
the facts which they report.

[1224] S. 305, Anm.

[1225] Clem. Horn. ix. 10.

[1226] Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 332. According to Eisenmenger, 2, 447
ff., the Jews held that demons generally had a predilection for impure
places, and in Jalkut Rubeni f. x. 2. (Wetstein) we find this
observation: Anima idololatrarum, quæ venit a spiritu immundo, vocatur
porcus.

[1227] Ut sup. s. 474, 485. Winer, b. Realw. 1, s. 192.

[1228] Fritzsche, in Matth., s. 330.

[1229] Paulus, ut sup. s. 475 f.

[1230] Olshausen, s. 307.

[1231] Paulus, s. 474.

[1232] Paulus, s. 485; Winer, ut sup.

[1233] Olshausen, ut sup.

[1234] Ibid.

[1235] Ullmann, über die Unsündlichkeit Jesu, in seinen Studien, 1, 1,
s. 51 f.

[1236] Olshausen, ut sup.

[1237] Paulus.

[1238] Ullmann.

[1239] E.g. Woolston, Disc. 1, p. 32 ff.

[1240] Jamblich. vita Pythag. no. 36. ed. Kiessling.

[1241] In the Abhandlung über genetische oder formelle Erklärungsart
der Wunder in Henke’s Museum, 1, 3, s. 410 ff.

[1242] Exeg. Beiträge, 2, 109 ff.

[1243] Antiq. viii. ii. 5.

[1244] Philostr. v. Ap. iv. 20; ap. Baur, ut sup. s. 39.

[1245] Schulz. s. 319.

[1246] As Schulz appears to do, ut sup.

[1247] See the passages quoted by Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 569,
and by Winer, 1, s. 191 f.

[1248] Thus Fritzsche, in loc.

[1249] Schleiermacher, s. 150.

[1250] Köster, Immanuel, s. 197; Fritzsche, in loc.

[1251] De abstinent. ii. p. 204 and 417 f.; Vid. Winer, 1, s. 191.

[1252] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 471 f.

[1253] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 438; L. J. 1, a, s. 223; De Wette,
bibl. Dogm. § 222, Anm. c.

[1254] Exeg. Handb. in loc.

[1255] Natürliche Geschichte, 2, s. 429.

[1256] Bibl. Theol. 1, s. 196.

[1257] Among the transient disorders on which Jesus may have acted
psychologically, we may perhaps number the fever of Peter’s
mother-in-law, which Jesus is said to have cured, Matt. viii. 14 ff.
parall.

[1258] It is so more or less by Eichhorn, in the allg. Bibliothek, 4,
s. 435; Herder, von Gottes Sohn u. s. f., s. 20; Wegscheider, Einl. in
das Evang. Joh., s. 313; De Wette, bibl. Dogm., § 269.

[1259] Exeg. Handb., 1, b, s. 698 ff.

[1260] Ut sup. s. 705, and elsewhere.

[1261] Compare Hase, L. J., § 86.

[1262] Paulus, L. J. 1, b, s. 68.

[1263] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 215.

[1264] Vid. Winer, Realw., Art. Blinde.

[1265] Gratz, Comm z. Matth. 2, s. 323.

[1266] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 44.

[1267] Schulz, Anmerkungen zu Michaelis, 2, s. 105.

[1268] Sieffert, ut sup. s. 104.

[1269] Ueber den Zweck der evang. Geschichte und der Briefe Joh., s.
345.

[1270] Ut sup. s. 237.

[1271] Paulus, L. J. 1, a, s. 249.

[1272] Natürl. Gesch. des Propheten von Naz. 2, s. 216.

[1273] Vid. vol. i. p. 81, note.

[1274] Elsewhere also we find proof that in those times the power of
effecting miraculous cures, especially of blindness, was commonly
ascribed to men who were regarded as favourites of the Deity. Thus
Tacitus, Hist. iv. 81, and Suetonius, Vespas. vii. tell us, that in
Alexandria a blind man applied to Vespasian, shortly after he was made
emperor, alleging that he did so by the direction of the god Serapis,
with the entreaty that he would cure him of his blindness by wetting
his eyes with his spittle. Vespasian complied, and the result was that
the blind man immediately had his sight restored. As Tacitus attests
the truth of this story in a remarkable manner, Paulus is probably not
wrong in regarding the affair as the contrivance of adulatory priests,
who to procure for the emperor the fame of a miracle-worker, and by
this means to secure his favour on behalf of their god, by whose
counsel the event was occasioned, hired a man to simulate blindness.
Ex. Handb. 2, s. 56 f. However this may be, we see from the narrative
what was expected, even beyond the limits of Palestine, of a man who,
as Tacitus here expresses himself concerning Vespasian, enjoyed favor e
cœlis and an inclinatio numinum.

[1275] These are nearly the words of Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 312,
391.

[1276] De Wette, Beitrag zur Charakteristik des Evangelisten Markus, in
Ullmann’s und Umbreit’s Studien, 1, 4, 789 ff. Comp. Köster, Immanuel,
f. 72. On the other hand: comp. De Wette’s exeg. Handb. 1, 2, s. 148 f.

[1277] Pliny, H. N. xxviii. 7, and other passages in Wetstein.

[1278] Paulus, ut sup. s. 312 f. 392 ff.; Natürliche Geschichte, 3, s.
31 ff. 216 f.; Köster, Immanuel, s. 188 ff.

[1279] For the former explanation, Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 1, s, 390 f.;
for the latter, Olshausen, b, Comm. 1. s. 510.

[1280] Kuinöl, in Marc., p. 110.

[1281] Olshausen, s. 509.

[1282] Comp. De Wette, Kritik der Mosaischen Geschichte, s. 36 f.

[1283] Fritzsche, Comm. in Marc., p. xliii.

[1284] Vid. ap. Wetstein and Lightfoot, John ix. 6.

[1285] Thus Fritzsche, after Euthymius, in Marc., p. 304.

[1286] The former is the supposition of Kuinöl, the latter of Schott.

[1287] Hess, Gesch. Jesu, 1, s. 391, Anm. 1.

[1288] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 472.

[1289] Natürliche Gesch. 3, s. 215.

[1290] Vid. Tholuck and Lücke, in loc.

[1291] Vid. Paulus and Lücke, in loc.

[1292] Thus Euthymius and Paulus, in loc.

[1293] B. Comm. 2, s. 230, where, however, he refers the ἀπεσταλμένος
to the outflow of the spirit proceeding from God.

[1294] S. 93.

[1295] Köster, Immanuel, s. 79; Bretschneider, Probab., s. 122.

[1296] Wetstein, in loc.

[1297] Nedarim f. xli. 1. (Schöttgen, 1, p. 93): Dixit R. Chija fil.
Abba: nullus ægrotus a morbo suo sanatur, donec ipsi omnia peccata
remissa sint.

[1298] Hase, L. J. § 73. Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 335.

[1299] Sanhedr. f. xci. 2, and Bereschith Rabba f. xxxviii. 1.
(Lightfoot, p. 1050): Antonius interrogavit Rabbi (Judam): a quonam
tempore incipit malus affectus prævalere in homine? an a tempore
formationis ejus (in utero), an a tempore processionis ejus (ex utero)?
Dicit ei Rabbi: a tempore formationis ejus.

[1300] Paulus Comm. 4, s. 264; Lücke, 2, s. 22.

[1301] This is done by Tholuck, in loc.

[1302] See the examples in Wetstein, N. T. 1, s. 284, and in Wahl’s
Clavis.

[1303] Comp. Winer, Realw., and Fritzsche, in Matt. p. 194.

[1304] Winer, ut sup. Art. Dach.

[1305] Lightfoot, p. 601.

[1306] Woolston, Disc. 4.

[1307] 1, s. 310 f.

[1308] Köster, Immanuel, s. 166, Anm. 66.

[1309] This appears to be the meaning of Paulus, L. J. 1, a, s. 238.
Otherwise exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 505.

[1310] Thus Lightfoot, Kuinöl, Olshausen, in loc.

[1311] Vid. Fritzsche, in Marc., p. 52.

[1312] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 498, 501.

[1313] Bengel, Gnomon, 1, 245, ed. 2. Paulus, s. 502, again takes an
obvious fable in Livy ii. 36 for a history, capable of a natural
explanation.

[1314] Paulus, ut sup. s. 501.

[1315] Ueber den Zweck der evang. Geschichte und der Briefe Joh., s.
351 f.

[1316] Schulz, ut sup. s. 317; Olshausen, 1, s. 322.

[1317] Exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 524 f.; bibl. Comm. 1, s. 324 f.; comp.
Köster, Immanuel, s. 201 ff.

[1318] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 524 f. 530. L. J. 1, a, s. 244 f.;
Venturini, 2, s. 204 ff.; Köster, ut sup.

[1319] Vid. Evangelium infantiæ arabicum, ap. Fabricius and Thilo.

[1320] See the observations of Paulus, Lücke, Tholuck, and Olshausen,
in loc.

[1321] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 92.

[1322] Augustin, de consens. evang. i. 20; Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b,
s. 709; Köster, Immanuel, s. 63.

[1323] Ueber den Zweck Jesu, u. s. f., s. 351.

[1324] Vid. Lücke, 1, s. 552.

[1325] Fritzsche, in Matth. p. 310: discrepat autem Lucas ita a Matthæi
narratione, ut centurionem non ipsum venisse ad Jesum, sed per legatos
cum eo egisse tradat; quibus dissidentibus pacem obtrudere, boni nego
interpretis esse.

[1326] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 92 f.

[1327] Kuinöl, in Matt., p. 221 f.

[1328] Tholuck, in loc.; Hase § 68, Anm. 2.

[1329] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 253 f.; Venturini, 2, s. 140 ff.; comp.
Hase, § 68.

[1330] Lücke, 1, s. 550 f.

[1331] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 710 f.; Natürliche Geschichte, 2,
s. 285 ff.

[1332] Clem. homil. ix. 21; Fritzsche, in Matth., 313.

[1333] Wetstein, N. T. 1, p. 349; comp. Olshausen, in loc.

[1334] Köster, Immanuel, s. 195, Anm.

[1335] Lücke, 1, s. 550.

[1336] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 268.

[1337] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 80 f.

[1338] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung, u. s. f., s. 50.

[1339] Schleiermacher, ut sup.

[1340] Exeg. Handb. 2, s. 48 ff.

[1341] Natürliche Geschichte, 2, s. 421.

[1342] Winer, b. Realw. 1, s. 796.

[1343] Paulus, ut sup. s. 49, 54; Köster, Immanuel, s. 185 f.

[1344] Ut sup. s. 83, ex Tract. Schabbat.

[1345] Schabbat, f. 12, ap. Schöttgen, i. p. 123.

[1346] See the passage last cited.

[1347] Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 427; in Mar., p. 79.

[1348]

1 Kings xiii. 4, LXX: καὶ ἰδοὺ     Matth. xii. 10: καὶ ἰδοὺ ἄνθρωπος
ἐξηράνθη ἡ χεὶρ αὐτοῦ.             ἐ͂ν τὴν χεῖρα ἔχων ξηράν (Mark,
                                   ἐξηραμμένην.)
6: καὶ ἐπέστρεψε τὴν χεῖρα τοῦ
βασιλέως πρὸς αὐτὸν, καὶ ἐγένετο   13: τότε λέγει τῷ ἀνθρωπῳ· ἔκτεινον
καθὼς τὸ πρότερον.                 τὴν χεῖρα σου· καὶ ἐξέτεινε· καὶ
                                   ἀποκατεστάθη ὑγιὴς ὡς ἡ ἄλλη.

[1349] Tacit. Hist. iv. 81.

[1350] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 341 f.

[1351] Ut sup. s. 196.

[1352] Winer (bibl. Realw. 1, s. 796) says: We should be contented to
refrain from seeking a natural explanation in individual cases (of the
cures of Jesus), and ever bear in mind that the banishment of the
miraculous out of the agency of Jesus can never be effected so long as
the gospels are regarded historically.

[1353] Disc. 3.

[1354] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 263 ff. L. J. 1, a, s. 298.

[1355] Vid. Lücke and Tholuck, in loc.

[1356] Comp. with Comm. 4, s. 290, his Leben Jesu, 1, a, s. 298.

[1357] Bretschneider, Probab., s. 69.

[1358] As by Hase, L. J. § 92.

[1359]

Mark ii. 9: (τί ἐστιν, εὐκοπώτερον,     John v. 8: ἔγειραι, ἆρον τὸν
εἰπεῖν——) ἔγειραι, καὶ ἆρόν σου τὸν     κράββατόν σου, καὶ περιπάτει.
κράββατον καὶ περιπάτει;

11:—ἔγειρα καὶ ἆρον τὸν κράββατόν σου   9: καὶ εὐθέως ἐγένετο ὑγιὴς ὁ
καὶ ὕπαγε εἰς τὸν οἶκόν σου.            ἄνθρωπος, καὶ ἦρε τὸν
                                        κράββατον αὑτοῦ καὶ
12: καὶ ἠγέρθη εὐθέως, καὶ ὤρας τὸν     περιεπάτει.
κράββατον ἐξῆλθεν ἐναντίον πάντων.

[1360] Ueber den Zweck des Evang. und der Briefe Joh., s. 351 ff.

[1361] Comm. in Matth. p. 263. Observe his argumentation: verba [N.B.
Matthaei]: ἄρτι ἐτελεύτησεν, non possunt latine reddi: jam mortua est:
nam, auctore [N.B. Luca] patri adhuc cum Christo colloquenti nuntiabat
servus, filiam jam exspirasse; ergo [auctore Matthaeo?] nondum mortua
erat, cum pater ad Jesum accederet.

[1362] Compare, on the subject of these vain attempts at
reconciliation, Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 132, and Fritzsche,
in Matth., p. 347 f.

[1363] Olshausen, in loc.

[1364] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 131 ff.; Schulz, über d. Abendmahl,
s. 316 f.

[1365] Vid. Fabricius, Cod. Apocr. N. T. 2, p. 449 ff.

[1366] Homil. ii. 19.

[1367] Cap. x.

[1368] Ut sup. s. 129.

[1369] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 526, 31 f.; Schleiermacher, ut
sup. s. 132; Olshausen, 1, s. 327. Even Neander does not express
himself decidedly against this interpretation of the words of Jesus;
while with regard to the girl’s real condition, he thinks the
supposition of a merely apparent death probable. L. J. Chr., s. 343.
Comp. 338 f.

[1370] Comp. de Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 95; Weisse, die ev.
Geschichte, 1, s. 503.

[1371] Comp. Neander. L. J., s. 342.

[1372] Natürliche Geschichte, 2, s. 212.

[1373] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 1, b, s. 716, Anm. and 719 f.

[1374] Ibid, ut sup. s. 723. Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 2, s. 47.

[1375] Thus Hase also, L. J. § 87.

[1376] Venturini, 2, s. 293.

[1377] Comp. Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 103 f.

[1378] Paulus, Comp. 4, s. 535 ff.; L. J. 1, b, s. 55 ff.

[1379] Im the translation of the text in his Leben Jesu, 2, b, s. 46,
Paulus appears to suppose, beside the message mentioned in the gospel,
three subsequent messages.

[1380] Comp. C. Ch. Flatt, etwas zur Vertheidigung des Wunders der
Wiederbelebung des Lazarus, in Süskind’s Magazin, 14tes Stück, s. 93
ff.

[1381] Journal für auserlesene theol. Literatur, 3, 2, s. 261, Anm.

[1382] Flatt, ut sup. 102 f.; De Wette, in loc.; Neander, s. 351 f.

[1383] Flatt, ut sup.; Lücke, Tholuck and De Wette, in loc.

[1384] Lücke, 2, s. 388.

[1385] Flatt, ut sup. s. 104 f.; Lücke, ut sup.

[1386] Flatt, s. 106; Olshausen, 2, s. 269.

[1387] Flatt, s. 97 f.

[1388] Compare on this subject, especially Flatt and Lücke.

[1389] Comm. 4, s. 437; in the L. J. 1, b, s. 57, and 2, b, s. 46, this
conjecture is no longer employed.

[1390] Ut sup. s. 272 ff. Even Neander shows himself not disinclined to
such a conjecture as far as regards v. 4 (s. 349). As Gabler believes
that these expressions cannot have come from Jesus, but only from John,
so Dieffenbach, in Bertholdt’s Krit. Journal, 5, s. 7 ff., maintains
that they cannot have proceeded from John, and as he holds that the
rest of the gospel is the production of that apostle, he pronounces
those passages to be interpolations.

[1391] Disc. 5.

[1392] Bretschneider, Probab., s. 61.

[1393] 1, s. 276 f.

[1394] Comm. 2, s. 376. Also Neander, s. 346.

[1395] Tholuck, s. 202; Olshausen, 2, s. 260.

[1396] Ut sup.

[1397] Andachtsbuch, 1, s. 292 f. Exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 134.

[1398] S. 59 f. 79.

[1399] Comp. de Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 135.

[1400] This is what Neander maintains, L. J. Chr., s. 354. He objects
that the fourth Evangelist must in any case have known of
resuscitations of the dead by Jesus, even supposing the narrative in
question to be an unhistorical exaggeration. But this objection is
refuted by the observation, that, as an inducement to the formation of
such a narrative, the general tradition that Jesus had raised the dead
would be sufficient, and an acquaintance with particular instances as
exemplars was not at all requisite.

[1401] This argument applies also to De Wette, who, while acknowledging
that such an idea would be unsuitable in the mouth of Jesus, supposes
nevertheless that it was really in his mind.

[1402] Dieffenbach, über einige wahrscheinliche Interpolationen im
Evangelium Johannis, in Bertholdt’s krit. Journal, 5, s. 8 f.

[1403] Comm. z. Joh., 1te Aufl., 2, s. 310.

[1404] Thus the author of the Probabilia also argues, p. 61.

[1405] Disc. 5.

[1406] Comp. Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 103 ff.

[1407] Saunier, über die quellen des Markus, s. 66 ff.

[1408] Comp. Winer bibl. Realw. d. A.

[1409] Let the reader recollect the well-known expression of Spinoza.

[1410] Whitby, Annot. in loc.

[1411] Thus Grotius and Herder; Olshausen also adopts this explanation
under the form of conjecture, 2, s. 256 f., Anm.

[1412] See these arguments dispersed in Paulus and Lücke on this
chapter; in Gabler, ut sup. p. 238 ff.; and Hase, L. J. § 119.—A new
reason why Matthew in particular is silent on the resurrection of
Lazarus, has been excogitated by Heydenreich (über die Unzulässigkeit
der mythischen Auffassung, 2tes Stück, s. 42). The Evangelist, he says,
omitted it, because it required to be represented and treated with a
tenderness and liveliness of feeling, of which he did not think himself
capable. Hence, the modest man chose to avoid the history altogether
rather than to deprive it by his manner of narration, of its proper
pathos and sublimity.—Idle modesty truly!

[1413] Schneckenburger, über den Urspr., s. 10.

[1414] Gabler, ut sup. s. 240 f.; also Neander, s. 357.

[1415] Comm. z. Joh. 2, s. 402.

[1416] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 139. In Schleiermacher’s
Lectures on the Life of Jesus (if I may be permitted to refer to a work
not yet printed), the silence in question is explained in the following
manner. The synoptical Evangelists in general were ignorant of the
relations of Jesus with the family of Bethany, because perhaps the
apostles did not wish an intimate personal connection of this kind to
pass into the general tradition, from which those Evangelists drew; and
ignorance of the relations of Jesus with the family in general, of
course included ignorance of this particular fact connected with them.
But what motive could the apostles have for such reserve? Are we to
infer secret, or even, with Venturini, tender ties? Must not such a
private relation in the case of Jesus have presented much to edify us?
The intimations which John and Luke afford us on this subject contain
in fact much of this description, and from the narrative which the
latter gives of the visit of Jesus to Martha and Mary, we see also that
the apostles, in furnishing their accounts, were by no means averse to
allow something of these relations to appear, so far as they could
retain a general interest. Now in this light, the resurrection of
Lazarus, as a pre-eminent miracle, was incomparably more valuable than
that visit with its single aphorism “One thing is needful,” and
involved less of the private relations of Jesus with the family of
Bethany; the supposed effort to keep these secret, could not therefore
have hindered the promulgation of the resurrection of Lazarus.

[1417] Kern, über den Ursprung des Evang. Matth., Tübing. Zeitschrift,
1834, 2, s. 110.

[1418] Bertholdt. Christol. Jud. § 35.

[1419] See the passages quoted from Tanchuma, Vol. I. § 14.

[1420] 1 Kings xvii. 23, LXX. καί ἔδωκεν αὐτὸ τῇ μητρὶ αὑτοῦ, Luke vii.
15: καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτὸν τῇ μητρὶ αὑτοῦ.

[1421] Thus the author of the Abhandlung über die verschiedenen
Rücksichten, in welchen der Biograph Jesu arbeiten kann, in Bertholdt’s
krit. Journ., 5, s. 237 f., Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 202.—A
resuscitation strikingly similar to that of the young man at Nain is
narrated by Philostratus, of Apollonius of Tyana. “As according to
Luke, it was a young man, the only son of a widow, who was being
carried out of the city; so, in Philostratus, it is a young maiden
already betrothed, whose bier Apollonius meets. The command to set down
the bier, the mere touch, and a few words, are sufficient here, as
there, to bring the dead to life” (Baur, Apollonius v. Tyana und
Christus, s. 145). I should like to know whether Paulus, or any other
critic, would be inclined to explain this naturally; if, however, it
ought to be regarded as an imitation of the evangelical narrative (a
conclusion which can hardly be avoided), we must have a preconceived
opinion of the character of the books of the New Testament, to evade
the consequence, that the resuscitations of the dead which they contain
are only less designed imitations of those in the Old Testament; which
are themselves to be derived from the belief of antiquity, that a
victorious power over death was imparted to the favourites of the gods
(Hercules, Esculapius, etc), and more immediately, from the Jewish idea
of a prophet.

[1422] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 287.

[1423] Thus Paulus, exeg. Handb., 1, b, s. 468 ff.; Venturini, 2, s.
166 ff.; Kaiser, bibl. Theol., 1, s. 197. Hase, also, § 74, thinks this
view probable.

[1424] Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 363, who for the rest here offers but a
weak defence against the natural explanation.

[1425] Hase, ut sup.

[1426] Vid. Vol. 1, § 14, note 9.

[1427] Neander alters the fact, when he describes Jesus as falling
asleep in the midst of the fury of the storm and the waves, and thus
manifesting a tranquillity of soul which no terror of nature could
disturb (s. 362). Luke says expressly, as they sailed he fell asleep:
and there came down a storm, etc., πλεόντων δὲ αὐτῶν ἀφὺπνωσε· καὶ
κατέβη λαίλαψ κ.τ.λ., and according to the representation of the other
Evangelists also, the sleeping of Jesus appears to have preceded the
breaking out of the storm, since otherwise the timorous disciples would
not have awaked him—they would rather not have allowed him to go to
sleep.

[1428] Comp Saunier, über die Quellen des Markus, s. 82.

[1429] This may serve as an answer to Tholuck’s accusation,
Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 110.

[1430] Ueber den Ursprung, u. s. f., s. 68 f.

[1431] According to Jamblich. vita Pyth, 135, ed. Kiessling, there were
narrated of Pythagoras, ἀνέμων βιαίων χαλαζῶν τε χύσεως παραυτίκα
κατευνήσεις καὶ κυμάτων ποταμίων τε καὶ θαλασσίων ἀπευδιασμοὶ πρὸς
εὐμαρῆ τῶν ἑταίρων διάβασιν, instantaneous tranquillizings of violent
winds and hailstorms, and soothings of the waves of rivers and seas, to
afford easy transit to his companions. Comp. Porphyr. v. p. 29 same ed.

[1432] Ut sup. s. 491.

[1433] Paulus, Memorabilien, 6, Stuck, No. V.; exeg. Handb. 2, s. 238
ff.

[1434] Against the extremely arbitrary expedient which Paulus has here
adopted, see Storr, Opusc. acad. 3, p. 288.

[1435] The former by Bolten, Bericht des Matthäus, in loc; the latter
in Henke’s neuem Magazin, 6, 2, s. 327 ff.

[1436] Comp. Paulus and Fritzsche, in loc.

[1437] See the excellent passage in Fritzsche, Comm. in Matth., p. 505.

[1438] Mark’s inclination to exaggerate shows itself also in his
concluding sentence, v. 51, (comp. vii. 37): and they were sore amazed
in themselves beyond measure and wondered; which will scarcely be
understood to import, as Paulus supposes (2, s. 266), a disapproval of
the excessive astonishment.

[1439] Schneckenburger, über den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 68 f.; Weisse,
die evang. Geschichte, 1, s. 521.

[1440] Vid. Lücke and Tholuck.

[1441] Homil. in Joann. 43.

[1442] In De Wette’s objection, that the opinion of an exaggeration of
the miracle in John, is discountenanced by the addition that they were
immediately at the land (ex. Handb. 1, 3, s. 79), there appears to me
only a misunderstanding; but his assertion that in John the manner in
which Jesus goes over the sea is not represented as a miracle (s. 78),
is to me thoroughly incomprehensible.

[1443] Bretschneider, Probab., p. 81.

[1444] See the passages in Wetstein, p. 417 f.

[1445] Jamblich, vita Pythagoræ, 136; comp. Porphyr. 29.

[1446] Lucian, Philopseudes, 13.

[1447] Schneckenburger, über den Urspr., s. 68.

[1448] See the examples in Wetstein, in loc.

[1449] Die h. Schrift des n. Bundes, 1, s. 314, 2te Aufl.

[1450] Paulus, ex. Handb. 2, 502 ff. Comp. Hase, L. J. § 111.

[1451] Comp. Storr, in Flatt’s Magazin, 2, s. 68 ff.

[1452] Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 200. Comp. Hase, ut sup.

[1453] Olshausen, 1, s. 512. This theologian, in the note on the same
page, observes, that according to the words, We have taken no bread,
Matt. xvi. 7, the disciples, even after the second feeding, were not
alive to the fact, that there was no necessity for providing themselves
with food for the body in the neighbourhood of the Son of Man. But this
instance is not to the point, for the circumstances are here altogether
different. That from the miraculous feeding of the people when they
were accidentally belated in the wilderness, the disciples did not draw
the same convenient conclusion with the biblical commentator, can only
redound to their honour.

[1454] Ibid.

[1455] Gratz, Comm. z. Matth. 2, s. 90 f.; Sieffert, über den Ursprung,
s. 97.

[1456] Thiesz, Krit. Commentar, 1, s. 168 ff.; Schulz, über das
Abendmahl, s. 311. Comp. Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 523.

[1457] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 145; Sieffert, ut sup. s. 95
ff.; Hase, § 97. Neander is undecided, L. J. Chr., s. 372 ff., Anm.

[1458] Comp. Saunier, ut sup. s. 105.

[1459] Paulus, ex. Handb. 2, s. 315; Olshausen, ut sup.

[1460] Olshausen, s. 513.

[1461] See the proof in De Wette, Kritik der mos. Gesch., s. 220 ff.,
314 ff.

[1462] Thus Olshausen, in loc. after Pfenninger. Comp. Hase, § 97.

[1463] This lamentable observation of mine, according to Olshausen, has
its source in something worse than intellectual incapacity, namely, in
my total disbelief in a living God: otherwise assuredly it would not
have appeared so great a difficulty to me that the Divine causality
should have superseded human operations (s. 479, der 3ten Aufl.).

[1464] Jesus Messias, 2, Bd. No. 14, 15 and 20.

[1465] For this reason Neander (s. 377) passes over the miracle with a
few entirely general remarks.

[1466] Exeg. Handb. 2, s. 205 ff.

[1467] Olshausen, in loc.

[1468] Against Neander’s attempt at reconciliation, compare De Wette,
exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 77.

[1469] This indication has been recently followed up by Weisse. He
finds the key to the history of the miraculous multiplication of the
loaves, in the question addressed by Jesus to the disciples when they
misunderstand his admonition against the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadducees. He asks them whether they did not remember how many baskets
they had been able to fill from the five and again from the seven
loaves, and then adds, How is it that ye do not understand that I spake
it not to you concerning bread, etc. (Matt. xvi. 11). Now, says Weisse,
the parallel which Jesus here institutes between his discourse on the
leaven, and the history of the feeding of the multitude, shows that the
latter also is only to be interpreted parabolically (s. 511 ff.). But
the form of the question of Jesus: πόσους κοφίνους (σπυρίδας) ἐλάβετε;
how many baskets ye took up, presupposes a real event; we can form no
conception, as we have already remarked in relation to the history of
the temptation, of a parable in which Jesus and his disciples would
have played a principal part; moreover, the inference which Jesus would
convey is, according to the text, not that because the present
narrative was figurative, so also must be the interpretation of the
subsequent discourse, but that after the earlier proof how superfluous
was any solicitude about physical bread where Jesus was at hand, it was
absurd to understand his present discourse as relating to such.

[1470] Vid. Vol. I. § 14.

[1471]

2 Kings iv. 43, LXX.: τί δῶ      John vi. 9: ἀλλὰ ταῦτα τί ἐστιν εἰς
τοῦτο ἔνώπιον ἑκατὸν ἀνδρῶν;     τοσούτους;
Ibid. v. 44: καὶ ἕφαγον, καὶ     Matt. xiv. 20: καὶ ἔφαγον πάντες,
κατέλιπον κατὰ τὸ ῥῆμα Κυρίου.   καὶ ἐχορτάσθησαν, καὶ ἦραν τὸ
                                 περισσεῦον τῶν κλασμάτων, κ.τ.λ.

[1472] Exeg. Handb. 2, s. 237 f.

[1473] Joma f. 39, 1: Tempore Simeonis justi benedictio erat super duos
panes pentecostales et super decem panes προθέσεως, ut singuli
sacerdotes, qui pro rata parte acciperent quantitatem olivæ, ad
satietatem comederent, imo ut adhuc reliquiæ superessent.

[1474] Comp. De Wette, ex Handb. 1, 1, s. 133 f.

[1475] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 74.

[1476] Neander is of opinion that an analogy may be found for this
miracle yet more easily than for that of the loaves—in the mineral
springs, the water of which is rendered so potent by natural agencies,
that it produces effects which far exceed those of ordinary water, and
in part resemble those of wine! (s. 369.)

[1477] In Joann. tract. 8: Ipse vinum fecit in nuptiis, qui omni anno
hoc facit in vitibus.

[1478] Thus Augustine, ut sup. approved by Olshausen: sicut enim, quod
miserunt ministri in hydrias in vinum conversum est opere Domini, sic
et quod nubes fundunt, in vinum convertitur ejusdem opere Domini.

[1479] Even Lücke, 1, s. 405, thinks the analogy with the above natural
process deficient and unintelligible, and does not know how to console
himself better than by the consideration, that a similar inconvenience
exists in relation to the miracle of the loaves.

[1480] Chrysost. hom. in Joann. 21.

[1481] Woolston, Disc. 4.

[1482] P. 42.

[1483] Tholuck, in loc.

[1484] Comm. 4, s. 151 f.

[1485] Von Gottes Sohn u. s. f. nach Johannes Evangelium, s. 131 f.

[1486] C. Ch. Flatt, über die Verwandlung des Wassers in Wein, in
Süskind’s Magazin, 14. Stück, s. 86 f.; Olshausen, ut sup. s. 75 f.;
comp. Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 372.

[1487] Olshausen, ut sup.

[1488] Lücke also thinks this symbolical interpretation too
far-fetched, and too little supported by the tone of the narrative, s.
406. Comp. De Wette, ex. Handb. 1, 3, s. 37.

[1489] [A Wirtemberg wine Maas, or measure, is equal to about 3½ pints
English, or more exactly 3·32.—Tr.]

[1490] Wurm, de ponderum, mensurarum etc. rationibus, ap. Rom. et
Græc., p. 123, 126. Comp. Lücke, in loc.

[1491] Homil. in Joann. in loc.

[1492] Tholuck, in loc.

[1493] This argument is valid against Neander also, who appeals to the
faith of Mary chiefly as a result of the solemn inauguration at the
baptism (s. 370).

[1494] Hess, Gesch. Jesu, 1, s. 135. Comp. also Calvin, in loc.

[1495] E.g. by Woolston, ut sup.

[1496] Flatt, ut sup. s. 90; Tholuck, in loc.

[1497] Olshausen, in loc.

[1498] Comp. also the Probabilia, p. 41 f.

[1499] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 150 ff.; L. J. 1, a, s. 169 ff.; Natürliche
Gesch. 2, s. 61 ff.

[1500] Compare on this point, Flatt, ut sup. s. 77 ff. and Lücke, in
loc.

[1501] He makes the word μεθύσκεσθαι, v. 10, refer to John also.

[1502] Lücke, s. 407.

[1503] Bibl. Theol. 1, s. 200.

[1504] In the passages cited Vol. I. § 14, out of Midrasch Koheleth, it
is said among other things: Goël primus—ascendere fecit puteum: sic
quoque Goël postremus ascendere faciet aquas, etc.

[1505] A natural explanation of this miracle is given by Josephus in a
manner worthy of notice, Antiq. iii. 1, 2.

[1506] We may also remind the reader of the transmutation of water into
oil, which Eusebius (H. E. vi. 9.) narrates of a Christian bishop.

[1507] Compare the Probabilia, ut sup.

[1508] De Wette thinks the analogies adduced from the Old Testament too
remote; according to him, the metamorphosis of wine into water by
Bacchus, instanced by Wetstein, would be nearer to the subject, and not
far from the region of Greek thought, out of which the gospel of John
arose. The most analogous mythical derivation of the narrative would be
to regard this supply of wine as the counterpart to the supply of
bread, and both as corresponding to the bread and wine in the last
supper. But, he continues, the mythical view is opposed, 1, by the not
yet overthrown authenticity of the fourth gospel; 2, by the fact that
the narrative bears less of a legendary than a subjective impress, by
the obscurity that rests upon it, and its want of one presiding idea,
together with the abundance of practical ideas worthy of Jesus which it
embodies. By these observations De Wette seems to intimate his approval
of a natural explanation, built on the self-deception of John; an
explanation which is encumbered with the difficulties above noticed.

[1509] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 157 ff.

[1510] L. J. § 128.

[1511] Augustin. de verbis Domini in ev. sec. Joann., sermo 44: Quid
arbor fecerat, fructum non afferendo? quæ culpa arboris infæcunditas?

[1512] Disc. 4.

[1513] Orig. Comm. in Matt., Tom. xvi. 29: Ὁ δὲ Μάρκος ἀναγράψας τὰ
κατὰ τὸν τόπον, ἀπεμφαῖνόν τι ὡς πρὸς τὸ ῥητὸν προσέθηκε, ποιήσας,
ὅτι—οὐ γὰρ ἦν καιρὸς σύκων.—Εἴποι γὰρ ἃν τις· εἰ μὴ ὁ καιρὸς σύκων ἦν,
πῶς ἦλθεν ὁ Ἰ. ὡς εὑρήσων τι ἐν αὐτῇ. καὶ πῶς δικαίως εἶπεν αὐτῇ·
μηκέτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα ἐκ σοῦ μηδεὶς καρπὸν φάγῃ; comp. Augustin ut sup.
Mark, in relating this event, adds something which seems not to tally
well with his statement, when he observes that it was not the season
for figs. It might be urged: if it was not the season for figs, why
should Jesus go and look for fruit on the tree, and how could he, with
justice, say to it, Let no man eat fruit of thee for ever?

[1514] Toupii emendd. in Suidam, 1, p. 330 f.

[1515] Heinsius and others, ap. Fritzsche, in loc.

[1516] Maji Obs., ib.

[1517] Dahme, in Henke’s n. Magazin, 2. Bd. 2. Heft, s. 252. Kuinöl, in
Marc, p. 150 f.

[1518] Vid. Kuinöl, in loc.

[1519] Paulus, exeg. Handb., 3, a, s. 175; Olshausen, b, Comm. 1, s.
782.

[1520] As Sieffert thinks, Ueber den Urspr., s. 113 ff. Compare my
reviews, in the Charakteristiken und Kritiken, s. 272.

[1521] Vid. Paulus, ut sup. s. 168 f.; Winer, b. Realw. d. A.
Feigenbaum.

[1522] Bell. Jud. III. x. 8.

[1523] Ullman, über die Unsündlichkeit Jesu, in his Studien, 1, s. 50;
Sieffert, ut sup. s. 115 ff.; Olshausen, 1, s. 783 f.; Neander, L. J.
Chr., s. 378.

[1524] Paulus, ut sup. s. 170; Hase, L. J. § 128; also Sieffert, ut
sup.

[1525] Heydenreich, in the Theol. Nachrichten, 1814, Mai., s. 121 ff.

[1526] Comm. in Matt. p. 637.

[1527] Comm., in Marc. p. 481: Male—vv. dd. in eo hæserunt, quod Jesus
sine ratione innocentem ficum aridam reddidisse videretur, mirisque
argutiis usi sunt, ut aliquod hujus rei consilium fuisse ostenderent.
Nimirum apostoli, evangelistæ et omnes primi temporis Christiani, qua
erant ingeniorum simplicitate, quid quantumque Jesus portentose fecisse
diceretur, curarunt tantummodo, non quod Jesu in edendo miraculo
consilium fuerit, subtiliter et argute quæsi verunt.

[1528] Μὴ ἀκριβολογοῦ διατί τετιμώρηται τὸ φυτὸν, ἀναίτιον ὄν· ἀλλὰ
μόνον ὂρα τὸ θαῦμα, καὶ θαύμαζε τὸν θαυματουργόν.

[1529] Ambrosius, Comm. in Luc, in loc. Neander adopts this opinion, ut
sup.

[1530] Conceptions of the narrative in the main accordant with that
here given, may be found in De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 176 f.; 1,
2, s. 174 f., and Weisse, die evang. Gesch., 1, s. 576 f.

[1531] Vom Erlöser der Menschen nach unsern drei ersten Evangelien, s.
114.

[1532] In a treatise on the history of the Transfiguration, in his
neuesten theol. Journal, 1. Bd. 5. Stück, s. 517 ff. Comp. Bauer, hebr.
Mythol. 2, s. 233 ff.

[1533] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 534 f.

[1534] Olshausen, ut sup. s. 537.

[1535] Olshausen, 1, s. 539; comp. s. 178.

[1536] Thus Tertull. adv. Marcion, iv. 22; Herder, ut sup. 115 f., with
whom also Gratz agrees. Comm. z. Matth. 2, s. 163 f., 169.

[1537] Comp. Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 552; Olshausen, 1, s. 523.

[1538] Olshausen, ut sup.

[1539] Rau, symbola ad illustrandam Evv. de metamorphosi J. Chr.
narrationem; Gabler, ut sup. s. 539 ff.; Kuinöl, Comm. z. Matth. p. 459
ff.; Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 474 f.

[1540] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 319; Schleiermacher, über den
Lukas, s. 148 f.; comp. also Köster, Immanuel, s. 60 f.

[1541] Bauer has discerned this, ut sup. s. 237; Fritzsche, p. 556; De
Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 2, s. 56 f.; Weisse, die evang. Gesch. 1, s.
536; and Paulus also partly, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 447 f.

[1542] Paulus, exeg. Handb., 2, 436 ff.; L. J. 1, b, s. 7 ff.;
Natürliche Geschichte, 3, s. 256 ff.

[1543] Ut sup.

[1544] Paulus, exeg. Handb., s. 446; Gratz, 2, s. 165 f.

[1545] Comp. De Wette, Einleitung in das N. T. § 79.

[1546] Thus Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 62 ff.

[1547] Neander, because he considers the objective reality of the
transfiguration doubtful, also finds the silence of the fourth
Evangelist a difficulty in this instance (s. 475 f.).

[1548] Olshausen, s. 533, Anm.

[1549] Vid. Rau, in the Programme quoted in Gabler, neuestes theolog.
Journal, 1, 3, s. 506; De Wette, in loc. Matth.

[1550] Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 553; Olshausen, 1, s. 541. Still less
satisfactory expedients in Gabler, ut sup. and in Matthäi, Religionsgl.
der Apostel, 2, s. 596.

[1551] This even Paulus admits, 2, s. 442.

[1552] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 149.

[1553] This is an answer to Weisse’s objection, s. 539.

[1554] Comp. Jalkut Simeoni, p. 2 f. x. 3, (ap. Wetstein, p. 435):
Facies justorum futuro tempore similes erunt soli et luna, cælo et
stellis, fulguri, etc.

[1555] Bereschith Rabba, xx. 29, (ap. Wetstein): Vestes lucis vestes
Adami primi. Pococke, ex Nachmanide (ibid.): Fulgida facta fuit facies
Mosis instar solis, Josuæ instar lunæ; quod idem affirmarunt veteres de
Adamo.

[1556] In Pirke Elieser, ii. there is, according to Wetstein, the
following statement: inter docendum radios ex facie ipsius, ut olim e
Mosis facie, prodiisse, adeo ut non dignosceret quis, utrum dies esset
an nox.

[1557] Nizzachon vetus, p. 40, ad Exod. xxxiv. 33 (ap. Wetstein): Ecce
Moses magister noster felicis memoriæ, qui homo merus erat, quia Deus
de facie ad faciem cum eo locutus est, vultum tam lucentem retulit, ut
Judæi vererentur accedere: quanto igitur magis de ipsa divinitate hoc
tenere oportet, atque Jesu faciem ob uno orbis cardine ad alterum
fulgorem diffundere conveniebat? At non præditus fuit ullo splendore,
sed reliquis mortalibus fuit simillimus. Qua propter constat, non esse
in eum credendum.

[1558] From this parallel with the ascent of the mountain by Moses may
perhaps be derived the interval—the ἡμέραι ἓξ—by which the two first
Evangelists separate the present event from the discourses detailed in
the foregoing chapter. For the history of the adventures of Moses on
the mountain begins with a like statement of time, it being said that
after the cloud had covered the mountain six days, Moses was called to
Jehovah (v. 16). Although the point of departure was a totally
different one, this statement of time might be retained for the opening
of the scene of transfiguration in the history of Jesus.

[1559] Vide Bertholdt, Christologia Judæorum, § 15, s. 60 ff.

[1560] Debarim Rabba, iii. (Wetstein): Dixit Deus S. B. Mosi: per vitam
tuam, quemadmodum vitam tuam posuisti pro Israelitis in hoc mundo, ita
tempore futuro, quando Eliam prophetam ad ipsos mittam, vos quo eodem
tempore venietis. Comp. Tanchuma f. xlii. 1, ap. Schöttgen 1, s. 149.

[1561] This narrative is pronounced to be a mythus by De Wette, Kritik
der mos. Gesch. s. 250; comp. exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 146 f.; Bertholdt,
Christologia Jud. § 15, not. 17; Credner, Einleitung in das N. T. 1, s.
241; Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 319, at least admits that there is
more or less of the mythical in the various evangelical accounts of the
transfiguration, and Fritzsche, in Matt. p. 448 f. and 456 adduces the
mythical view of this event not without signs of approval. Compare also
Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 459, and Gratz, 2, s. 161 ff.

[1562] Plato also in the Symposion (p. 223, B. ff. Steph.), glorifies
his Socrates by arranging in a natural manner, and in a comic spirit, a
similar group to that which the Evangelists here present in a
supernatural manner, and in a tragic spirit. After a bacchanalian
entertainment, Socrates outwatches his friends, who lie sleeping around
him: as here the disciples around their master; with Socrates there are
awake two noble forms alone, the tragic and the comic poet, the two
elements of the early Grecian life, which Socrates united in himself:
as, with Jesus, the lawgiver and prophet, the two pillars of the Old
Testament economy, which in a higher manner were combined in Jesus;
lastly, as in Plato both Agathon and Aristophanes at length sleep, and
Socrates remains alone in possession of the field: so in the gospel,
Moses and Elias at last vanish, and the disciples see Jesus left alone.

[1563] Weisse, not satisfied with the interpretation found by me in the
mythus, and labouring besides to preserve an historical foundation for
the narrative, understands it as a figurative representation in the
oriental manner, by one of the three eye-witnesses, of the light which
at that time arose on them concerning the destination of Jesus, and
especially concerning his relation to the Old Testament theocracy and
to the messianic prophecies. According to him, the high mountain
symbolizes the height of knowledge which the disciples then attained;
the metamorphosis of the form of Jesus, and the splendour of his
clothes, are an image of their intuition of the spiritual messianic
idea; the cloud which overshadowed the appearance, signifies the
dimness and indefiniteness in which the new knowledge faded away, from
the inability of the disciples yet to retain it; the proposal of Peter
to build tabernacles, is the attempt of this apostle at once to give a
fixed dogmatical form to the sublime intuition. Weisse is fearful (s.
543) that this his conception of the history of the transfiguration may
also be pronounced mythical: I think not; it is too manifestly
allegorical.

[1564] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 160.

[1565] Kuinöl and Gratz, in loc.

[1566] Thus e.g. Lightfoot, in loc.

[1567] Wetstein, Olshausen, in loc., Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 164,
214.

[1568] Vid. De Wette, in loc.

[1569] Fritzsche, in Marc. p. 415: Marcus Matthæi, xix. 1, se
auctoritati h. l. adstringit, dicitque, Jesum e Galilæa (cf. ix. 33)
profectum esse per Peraeam. Sed auctore Luca, xvii. 11, in Judæam
contendit per Samariam itinere brevissimo.

[1570] Paulus, 2, s. 293, 554. Comp. Olshausen, 1, s. 583.

[1571] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 159.

[1572] Paulus, 2, s. 294 ff.

[1573] Paulus, ut sup. 295 f., 584 f.

[1574] Schleiermacher, ut sup. s. 161 f.; Sieffert, über den Urspr., s.
104 ff. With the former agrees, in relation to Luke, Olshausen, ut sup.

[1575] Tholuck, Comm. z. Joh., s. 227; Olshausen, 1, s. 771 f.

[1576] Tholuck and Olshausen, ut sup.

[1577] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 92 ff., 98 ff.; Schleiermacher,
über den Lukas, s. 244 f.

[1578] Schleiermacher, ut sup.

[1579] Comp. Lücke, 2, s. 432, Anm.

[1580] Hase, L. J. § 124.

[1581] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 172.

[1582] Paulus, 3, a, s. 115; Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 541.

[1583] Olshausen, 1, s. 776.

[1584] Comm. in Matth., p. 630. His expedient is approved by De Wette,
exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 173.

[1585] Paulus, ut sup. s. 143 f.

[1586] Glassius, phil. sacr., p. 172. Thus also Kuinöl and Gratz, in
loc.

[1587] N. T. Gramm., s. 149.

[1588] Eichhorn, allgem. Bibliothek, 5, s. 896 f.; comp. Bolten,
Bericht des Matthäus, s. 317 f.

[1589] Vide Fritzsche, in loc. This is admitted by Neander also, s.
550, Anm.

[1590] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 310 f.; Sieffert, über den
Urspr., s. 107 f.

[1591] That the above motive will not suffice to explain the conduct of
Jesus, Paulus has also felt; for only the despair on his part of
finding a more real and special motive, can account for his becoming in
this solitary instance mystical, and embracing the explanation of
Justin Martyr, whom he elsewhere invariably attacks, as the author of
the perverted ecclesiastical interpretations of the Bible. According to
Justin, the ass designated ὑποζύγιον (that is under the yoke), is a
symbol of the Jews; the ass never yet ridden, of the Gentiles (Dial. c.
Tryph. 53); and Paulus, adopting this idea, endeavours to make it
probable that Jesus, by mounting an animal which had never before been
ridden, intended to announce himself as the founder and ruler of a new
religious community. Exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 116 ff.

[1592] Natürliche Gesch. 3, s. 566 f.; Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 550,
Anm.

[1593] Weisse, s. 573.

[1594] Apol. i. 32: τὸ δὲ δεσμεύων πρὸς ἄμπελον τὸν πῶλον
αὐτοῦ—σύμβολον δηλωτικὸν ἦν τῶν γενησομένων τῷ Χριστῷ καὶ τῶν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ
πραχθησομένων. πῶλος γάρ τις ὄνου εἱστήκει ἔν τινι εἰσόδῳ κώμης πρὸς
ἄμπελον δεδεμένος ὃν ἐκέλευσεν ἀγαγεῖν αὐτῷ κ.τ.λ. Binding his colt to
a vine—was a symbol indicative of what would happen to Christ; for
there stood at the entrance of a certain village, bound to a vine, an
ass’s colt, which he ordered them to bring to him, etc.

[1595] Vid. Schöttgen, horæ, ii. p. 146.

[1596] Midrasch Rabba, f. xcviii.

[1597] On account of this silence of the fourth Evangelist, even
Neander (ut sup.) is in this instance inclined to admit, that a more
simple event, owing to the disproportionate importance subsequently
attached to it, was unhistorically modified.

[1598] Comp. Paulus, in loc.

[1599] The citation given by Matthew is a combination of a passage from
Isaiah with that of Zechariah. For the words Tell ye the daughter of
Zion, εἴπατε τῇ θυγατρὶ Σιὼν, are from Isa. lxii. 11; the rest from
Zechariah ix. 9, where the LXX. has with some divergency: ἰδοὺ ὁ
βασιλεύς σου ἔρχεταί σοι δίκαιος καὶ σώζων αὐτὸς πραῢς καὶ ἐπιβεβηκὼς
ἐπὶ ὑποζύγιον καὶ πῶλον νέον.

[1600] Hitzig, über die Abfassungszeit der Orakel, Zach. ix.–xiv. in
the Theol. Studien, 1830, 1, s. 36 ff. refers the preceding verse to
the warlike deeds of this king, and the one in question to his pacific
virtues.

[1601] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 121 ff.

[1602] Rosenmüller, Schol. in V. T. 7, 4, s. 274 ff.

[1603] In the passage cited Introd., § 14, from Midrasch Coheleth, the
description, pauper et insidens asino in Zechariah, is in the very
first instance referred to the Goël postremus. This ass of the Messiah
was held identical with that of Abraham and Moses, vid. Jalkut Rubeni
f. lxxix. 3, 4, ap. Schöttgen, i. s. 169; comp. Eisenmenger, entdecktes
Judenthum, 2, s. 697 f.

[1604] Sanhedrin f. xcviii. 1 (ap. Wetstein): Dixit R. Alexander: R.
Josua f. Levi duobus inter se collatis locis tanquam contrariis visis
objecit: scribitur Dan. vii. 13: et ecce cum nubibus cœli velut filius
hominis venit. Et scribitur Zach. ix. 9: pauper et insidens asino.
Verum hæc duo loca ita inter se conciliari possunt: nempe, si justitia
sua mereantur Israëlitæ, Messias veniet cum nubibus cœli: si autem non
mereantur, veniet pauper, et vehetur asino.

[1605] His predictions concerning particular circumstances of his
passion, uttered shortly before its occurrence, in the last days of his
life, can only be considered farther on, in the history of those days.

[1606] Comp. Olshausen, bibl. Comm., 1, s. 528.

[1607] Gesenius, Jesaias, iii. 137 ff.; Hitzig, Comm. zu Jes., s. 550.

[1608] Gesenius, ut sup. s. 158 ff.; Hitzig, s. 577 ff.; Vatke, bibl.
Theol. 1, s. 528 ff.

[1609] De Wette, Comm. zu den Psalmen, s. 514 ff.; 3te Aufl.

[1610] Ibid. s. 224 ff.

[1611] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 677 ff., and De Wette in loc.

[1612] See this view developed by Fritzsche, Comm. in Marc, p. 381 f.

[1613] Vid. Fritzsche, ut sup.

[1614] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 415 ff.; Ammon, bibl. Theol. 2, s.
377 f.; Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 246. Fritzsche also, ut sup. and
Weisse, 1, s. 423, partly admit this.

[1615] Bertholdt, Einleitung in d. N. T. 1305 ff.; Wegscheider, Einl.
in das Evang. Johannis, s. 271 f.

[1616] Daniel, übersetzt und erklärt von Bertholdt, 2, s. 541 ff., 660
ff.; Rosenmüller, Schol. in V. T. 7, 4, p. 339 ff.

[1617] De Wette, de morte Christi expiatoria, in his Opusc. Theol., p.
130; Hase, L. J. § 06.

[1618] Vom Zweck Jesu und seiner Junger, s. 114 ff. 153 f.

[1619] Ueber den Zweck und die Wirkungen des Todes Jesu, in the
Göttingischen Bibliothek, 1, 4, s. 252 ff.

[1620] See the list in De Wette, ut sup. s. 6 ff. The most important
voices for the existence of the idea in question in the time of Jesus,
have been noticed by Stäudlin in the above treatise, 1, s. 233 ff., and
by Hengstenberg, Christologie des A. T., 1, a, s. 270 ff., b, s, 290
ff; for the opposite opinion, by De Wette, ut sup. p. 1 ff.

[1621] Comp. De Wette, bibl. Dogm, § 201 f.; Baumgarten Crusius, bibl.
Theol. § 54.

[1622] Vid. De Wette, ut sup. § 189 ff.

[1623] Comp. De Wette, ut sup. § 193.

[1624] Gfrörer, Philo, 1, s. 495 ff.

[1625] A passage to this effect out of the law (νόμος) properly so
called, would be difficult to find: De Wette, de morte, p. 72, refers
to Isa. ix. 5; Lücke, in loc. to Ps. cx. 4; Dan. vii. 14, ii. 44.

[1626] Vom Zweck Jesu und seiner Jünger, s. 179 f.

[1627] Vid. De Wette, de morte Chr. p. 73 f.

[1628] Comp. Gesenius, Jesaias 2, Th. s. 66; De Wette, Einleitung in
das A. T. § 59, 3te Ausg.

[1629]

Literal translation according to     Targum of Jonathan: Quemadmodum
Hitzig, lii. 14:—As many were        per multos dies ipsum exspectârunt
amazed at him, so disfigured, not    Israëlitae, quorum contabuit inter
human, was his appearance, and his   gentes adspectus et splendor (et
form not that of the children of     evanuit) e filiis hominum, etc.
men, etc.

liii. 4:—But he bore our             Idcirco pro delictis nostris ipse
infirmities, and charged himself     deprecabitur, et iniquitates
with our sorrows, and we esteemed    nostræ propter eum condonabuntur,
him stricken, smitten of God and     licet nos reputati simus contusi,
afflicted.                           plagis affecti et afflicti.

Origen also relates, c. Celsus, i. 55, how a person esteemed a wise man
among the Jews, λεγόμενος παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις σοφὸς, maintained, in
opposition to his Christian interpretation of the passage in Isaiah,
that this was prophesied concerning the whole nation, which had been
dispersed and afflicted, in order that many might become proselytes,
ταῦτα πεπροφητεῦσθαι ὡς περὶ ἑνὸς τοῦ ὅλου λαοῦ, καὶ γενομένου ἐν τῇ
διασπορᾷ, καὶ πληγέντος, ἳνα πολλοὶ προσήλυτοι γένωνται.

[1630] Vid. Schöttgen, 2, s. 182 f.; Eisenmenger, entdecktes Judenthum,
2, s. 758.

[1631] Ap. Schöttgen, 2 s. 181 f.

[1632] De Wette, de morte Chr. expiatoria, ut sup. s. 50.

[1633] vii. 29.

[1634] Schöttgen, 2, s. 509 ff.; Schmidt, Christologische Fragmente, in
his Bibliothek, 1, s. 24 ff.; Bertholdt, Christol. Jud., § 13.

[1635] Schmidt, ut sup.; Bertholdt, ut sup., § 16.

[1636] Pesikta in Abkath Rochel, ap. Schmidt, s. 48 f.

[1637] Sohar, P. II. lxxxv. 2, ap. Schmidt, § 47 f.

[1638] Gemara Sanhedrin, f. xcviii. 1; ap. De Wette, de morte Chr., p.
95 f., and ap. Hengstenberg, s. 292.

[1639] Sohar, P. II. f. lxxx. ii. 2; ap. De Wette, s. 94: Cum Israëlitæ
essent in terra sancta, per cultus religiosos et sacrificia quæ
faciebanto, omnes illos morbos et pœnas e mundo, sustulerunt; nunc vero
Messias debet auferre eas ab hominibus.

[1640] Vid. Bertholdt, ut sup. § 17.

[1641] De Wette, de morte Chr., p. 112; comp. 53 ff.

[1642] Hase, L. J. § 108.

[1643] Ibid.

[1644] Ibid. and § 109.

[1645] See his animated and impressive treatise, vom Zweck, u. s. f.,
s. 121 ff. Comp. Briefe über den Rationalismus, s. 224 ff., and De
Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 143.

[1646] Thus especially Herder, vom Erlöser der Menschen, s. 133 ff.
Briefe über den Rationalismus, s. 227. Comp. Kuinöl, Comm. in Matth.,
p. 444 f.

[1647] LXX.: ὑγιάσει ἡμᾶς μετὰ δύο ἡμέρας· ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τρίτῃ
ἐξαναστησόμεθα, καὶ ζησόμεθα ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ.

[1648] Comp. Süskind, einige Bemerkungen über die Frage, ob Jesus seine
Auferstehung bestimmt vorhergesagt habe? in Flatt’s Magazin, 7, s. 203
ff.

[1649] Paulus, ut sup. 2, s. 415 ff.; Hase, L. J. § 109.

[1650] E.g. Lücke, 1, s. 426; comp., on the contrary, Tholuck, in loc.

[1651] Vid. Tholuck, ut sup.

[1652] Henke, Joannes apostolus nonnullorum Jesu apophthegmatum in
evang. suo et ipse interpres. In Pott’s and Ruperti’s Sylloge Comm.
theol. 1, s. 9; Gabler, Recension des Henke’schen Programms im neuesten
theol. Journal, 2, 1, s. 88; Lücke, in loc.

[1653] Thus, besides Henke in the above Programm, Herder, von Gottes
Sohn nach Johannes Evang., s. 135 f.; Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 165 f.; L. J.
1, a, s. 173 f.; Lücke, and De Wette, in loc.

[1654] Storr, in Flatt’s Magazin, 4, s. 199.

[1655] Tholuck and Olshausen, in loc.

[1656] Hence Neander remains suspended in indecision between the two,
s. 395 f.

[1657] Thus Kern, die Hauptthatsachen der evang. Gesch., Tüb.
Zeitschrift, 1836, 2, s. 128.

[1658] Thus Olshausen.

[1659] Kern says, indeed, that a similar doubleness of meaning is found
elsewhere in significant discourse; but he refrains from adducing an
example.

[1660] Probab., p. 23 ff.

[1661] Comp. Neander, s. 396, Anm.

[1662] Paulus, exeg. Handb. in loc.

[1663] Comp. Fritzsche and Olshausen, in loc.

[1664] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 2, s. 97 ff. Schulz, über das Abendm., s.
317 f.

[1665] Süskind, ut sup. s. 184 ff.

[1666] Vid. Lücke, in loc.

[1667] Vid. de Wette, Comm. über die Psalmen, s. 178.

[1668] Compare, on the import and connexion of this discourse,
Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 695 ff; De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s. 197
ff; Weizel, die unchristliche Unsterblichkeitslehre, in the theol.
Studien und Kritiken, 1836, s. 599 ff.—In agreement with these
commentators I append the following division of the passage in Matthew:

I. Signs of the end, τέλος, xxiv. 4–14.

    a. More remote signs, the beginning of sorrows, ἀρχὴ ὠδίνων,
       4–8.
    b. More immediate signs, the actual sorrows, 9–14.

II. The end, τέλος, itself, xxiv. 15–25, 46.

    a. Its commencement with the destruction of Jerusalem, and
       the great tribulation θλῖψις which accompanies it, 15–28.
    b. Its culminating point: the advent of the Messiah, together
       with the assembling of his elect, 29–31. (Here follow
       retrospective observations and warnings, xxiv. 32-xxv. 30.)
    c. Close of the τέλος with the messianic judgment, 31–46.

[1669] Vom Zweck Jesu und seiner Jünger, s. 184, 201 ff., 207 ff.

[1670] The former adv. hæres. v. 25; the latter, Comm. in Matth. in
loc. Compare on the different interpretations of this passage the list
in Schott, Commentarius in eos J. Chr. sermones, qui de reditu ejus ad
judicium—agunt, p. 73 ff.

[1671] Bahrdt., Uebersetzung des N. T., 1, s. 1103, 3te Ausg.;
Eckermann, Handb. der Glaubenslehre, 2, s. 579, 3, s. 427, 437, 709 ff;
and others in Schott, ut sup.

[1672] This is the opinion of Lightfoot, in loc., Flatt, Comm. de
notione vocis βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν, in Velthusen’s und A. Sammlung 2,
461 ff.; Jahn, Erklärung der Weissagungen Jesu von der Zerstörung
Jerusalems u. s. w., in Bengel’s Archiv. 2, 1, s. 79 ff., and others,
cited in Schott, s. 75 f.

[1673] Thus especially Jahn, in the treatise above cited.

[1674] Kern, Hauptthatsachen der evang. Geschichte, Tüb. Zeitschr.
1836, 2, s. 140 ff.

[1675] Thus Storr, Opusc. acad. 3, s. 34 ff.; Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3,
a, s. 346 f. 402 f.

[1676] Ut sup. s. 188.

[1677] Storr, ut sup. s. 39, 116 ff.

[1678] Paulus, in loc.

[1679] Vid. Kuinöl in Matt., s. 649.

[1680] Comp. the Wolfenbüttel Fragmentist, ut sup. s. 190 ff. Schott,
ut sup. s. 127 ff.

[1681] Kern, ut sup. s. 141 f. That Jesus conceived the epoch at which
he spoke to be separated from the end of the world by a far longer
interval than would elapse before the destruction of Jerusalem, Kern
thinks he can prove in the shortest way from v. 14, of the 24th chapter
of Matthew, where Jesus says, And this gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations, and then
shall the end come. For such a promulgation of Christianity, he thinks,
it is “beyond contradiction” that a far longer space of time than these
few lustrums would be requisite. As it happens, the apostle Paul
himself presents the contradiction, when he represents the gospel as
having been already preached to that extent before the destruction of
Jerusalem, e.g. Col. i. 5: τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, (6) τοῦ παρόντος—ἐν παντὶ τῷ
κόσμῳ—(23)—τοῦ κηρυχθέντος ἐν πάσῃ τῇ κτίσει τῇ ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν. Comp.
Rom. x. 13.

[1682] The former is chosen by Süskind, vermischte Aufsätze, s. 90 ff.;
the latter by Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 653 ff.

[1683] See his Commentarius, in loc.

[1684] Ueber das Abendmahl, s. 315 f.

[1685] Ueber den Ursprung des ersten kanon. Evangel., s. 119 ff. Also
Weisse, ut sup.

[1686] Ueber den Lukas, s. 215 ff., 265 ff. Here also his opinion is
approved by Neander, s. 562.

[1687] Olshausen, bibl. Comm. 1, s. 865; Kern, ut sup. s. 138 ff. Comp.
Steudel Glaubensl. s. 479 ff.

[1688] [“Die Weltgeschichte ist das Weltgericht:” Schiller. Tr.]

[1689] Comp. especially Weizel, die Zeit des jüngsten Tags u. s. f. in
den Studien der evang. Geistlichkeit Würtembergs, 9, 2, s. 140 ff., 154
ff.

[1690] According to Kern, the appearing of the Son of Man in the
clouds, signifies “the manifestation of everything which forms so great
an epoch in the development of the history of mankind, that from it,
the agency of Christ, who is the governing power in the history of
mankind, may be as clearly recognised as if the sign of Christ were
seen in the heavens. The mourning of all the tribes of the earth is to
be understood of the sorrow with which men will be visited, owing to
the judgment, κρίσις, which accompanies the propagation of the kingdom
of Christ, as consisting in an expulsion of ungodliness out of the
world, and the annihilation of the old man.” Still further does Weisse
allow himself to be carried away by the allegorizing propensity: Christ
“commiserates those who are with child and who give suck, i.e. those
who would still labour and produce in the old order of things; he
further pities those whose flight falls in the winter, i.e. in a rude,
inhospitable period, which bears no fruit for the spirit.” (Die evang.
Gesch. 2, s. 592.)

[1691] Hengstenberg, Christologie des A. T., 1, a, s. 305 ff.

[1692] Exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 403. Comp. also Kern, Hauptthatsachen, ut
sup. s. 137.

[1693] Bibl. Comm. 1, s. 865 ff.

[1694] Ueber den Ursprung u. s. f., s. 119. Weisse advances a similar
opinion, ut sup.

[1695] Compare also my Streitschriften, 1, 1, conclusion.

[1696] Comp. e.g. Gratz, Comm. zum Matth. 2, 444 ff.

[1697] Antiq. xx. viii. 6 (comp. bell. jud. ii. xiii. 4.): And now
these impostors and deceivers persuaded the multitude to follow them
into the wilderness, and pretended that they would exhibit manifest
wonders and signs that should be performed by the providence of God.
And many that were prevailed on by them, suffered the punishments of
their folly; for Felix brought them back, and then punished them.

[1698] Bell. jud. v. xii. 1, 2.

[1699] More ample comparisons of the results mentioned by Josephus and
others, with the prophecy, see in Credner, Einleit. in das N. T. 1, s.
207.

[1700] Bertholdt, Daniel übersetzt und erklärt, 2, s. 668 ff.; Paulus,
exeg. Handb. 3, a, s, 340 f.; De Wette, Einleit. in das A. T., § 254
ff.

[1701] Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 247; Credner, Einl. in das N. T. 1,
s. 206 f.

[1702] De Wette, Einl. in das N. T., § 97, 101. Exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s.
204, 1, 2, s. 103.

[1703] Paulus, Fritzsche, De Wette in loc.

[1704] B. j. V. xii. 1: To encompass the whole city round with his
army, was not very easy, by reason of its magnitude and the difficulty
of the situation; and on other accounts dangerous.

[1705] B. j. V. xi. 1 ff, xii. 1.

[1706] Vid. Schöttgen, 2, s. 509 ff.; Bertholdt, § 13; Schmidt,
Biblioth. 1, s. 24 ff.

[1707] Vid. Schöttgen, 2, s. 525 f.

[1708] Antiq. X. xi. 7. After having interpreted the little horn of
Antiochus, he briefly adds: In the very same manner Daniel also wrote
concerning the government of the Romans, and that our country should be
made desolate by them. He doubtless supposed that the fourth, iron
monarchy, Dan. ii. 40, represented the Romans, since, besides
attributing it to a dominion over all the earth, he explains its
destruction by the stone as something still future, Ant. X. x. 4:
Daniel did also declare the meaning of the stone to the King; but I do
not think proper to relate it, since I have only undertaken to describe
things past or things present, but not things that are future. Now
Daniel ii. 44 interprets the stone to mean the heavenly kingdom, which
would destroy the iron one, but would itself endure for ever,—a
messianic particular, on which Josephus does not choose to dilate. But
that, correctly interpreted, the iron legs of the image signify the
Macedonian empire, and the feet of iron mixed with clay, the Syrian
empire which sprang out of the Macedonian, see De Wette, Einleit. in
das N. T., § 254.

[1709] Vid. Joseph., Antiq. xii. v.

[1710] Vid. Hase, L. J., § 130.

[1711] The passages bearing on this subject are collected and explained
in Schott, Commentarius, etc., p. 364 ff. Comp. Lücke, in loc. and
Weizel, urchristl. Unsterblichkeitslehre, in the Theol. Studien, 1836,
s. 626 ff.

[1712] Vid. Tholuck, in loc.

[1713] Comp. Tholuck, ut sup.

[1714] Thus Lücke, and also Tholuck, in loc.; Schott, p. 409.

[1715] Olshausen, 1, s. 870.

[1716] Fleck, de regno divino, p. 483.

[1717] Winer’s bibl. Realwörterb.

[1718] Schneckenburger, über den Urspr., s. 9 f. Lücke, 1, s. 133, 159,
2, s. 402.

[1719] Comp. besides the critics above cited, Hug, Enleit. in das N. T.
2, s. 215.

[1720] For the most correct views on this point see Lücke, 2, s. 407
ff.

[1721] As the author of the Probabilia thinks, s. 94.

[1722] Hug, ut sup. s. 221.

[1723] Kuinöl, in loc.

[1724] Paulus, Comm. 4, s. 579 f.

[1725] Lücke, in loc.

[1726] Lightfoot, in loc.

[1727] Probabil. ut sup.

[1728] Vol. II. § 62.

[1729] Olshausen gives us more precise information concerning the
descent of the traitor, when he says (bibl. Comm. 2, s. 458 Anm.):
“Perhaps the passage, Gen. xlix. 17, Dan shall be a serpent, an adder
in the path, that biteth the horse’s heels, so that his rider shall
fall backward, is a prophetic intimation of the treachery of Judas,
whence we might conclude that he was of the tribe of Dan.”

[1730] That, according to the account in John, Judas first went to the
chief priests from the meal, is acknowledged by Lightfoot also (horæ,
p. 465), but he on this account regards the meal described by John as
earlier than the synoptical one.

[1731] Comm. z. Joh. 2, s. 484.

[1732] Vol. II. § 89.

[1733] See these and the following reasons in Olshausen, 2, s. 458 ff.

[1734] Olshausen, ut sup.

[1735] Such an argument may be gathered from what Olshausen says, 2, s.
387, 388.

[1736] Ueber den Lukas, s. 88.

[1737] Orig. c. Cels., ii. 11 f.

[1738] Comp. Probabil., p. 139.

[1739] Still farther back we find, not the knowledge of Jesus
concerning his betrayer, but an important meeting between them, in the
apocryphal Evangelium infantiæ arabicum, c. xxxv. ap. Fabricius 1, p.
197 f., ap. Thilo, 1, p. 108 f. Here a demoniacal boy, who in his
attacks bit violently at everything around him, is brought to the child
Jesus, attempts to bite him, and because he cannot reach him with his
teeth gives him a blow on the right side, whereupon the child Jesus
weeps, while Satan comes out of the boy in the form of a furious dog.
Hic autem puer, qui Jesum percussit et ex quo Satanas sub forma canis
exivit, fuit Judas Ischariotes, qui illum Judæis prodidit.

[1740] Iren. adv. hær. I. 35: Judam proditorem—solum præ ceteris
cognoscentem veritatem perfecisse proditionis mysterium, per quem et
terrena et cælestia omnia dissoluta dicunt. Epiphan. xxxviii. 3: Some
Cainites say, that Judas betrayed Jesus because he regarded him as a
wicked man πονηρὸν, who meant to destroy the good law: ἄλλοι δὲ τῶν
αὐτῶν, οὐχι φασιν, ἀλλὰ ἀγαθὸν αὐτὸν ὤντα παρέδωκε κατὰ τὴν ἑπουράνιον
γνῶσιν ἔγνωσαν γάρ, φησιν, οἱ ἄρχοντες, ὅτι, ἐὰν ὁ Χριστὸς παραδοθῇ
σταυρῷ, κενοῦται αὐτῶν ἡ ἀσθενὴς δύναμις· καὶ τοῦτό, φησι γνούς ὁ
Ἰούδας, ἔπευσε καὶ πάντα ἐκίνησεν ὤστε παραδοῦναι αὐτὸν, ἀγαθὸν ἔργον
ποιήσας ἡμῖν εἰς σωτηρίαν. καὶ δεῖ ἡμᾶς ἐπαινεῖν καὶ ἀποδιδόναι αὐτῷ
τὸν ἔπαινον, ὅτι δι’ αὐτοῦ κατεσκευάσθη ἡμῖν ἡ τοῦ σταυροῦ σωτηρία καὶ
ἡ διὰ τῆς ποιαύτης ὑποθέσεως τῶν ἄνω ἀποκάλυψις.

[1741] Theophylact, in Matth. xxvii. 4.

[1742] Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 249. Klopstock gives a similar
representation in his Messias.

[1743] K. Ch. L. Schmidt, exeg. Beiträge, 1, Thl. 2ter Versuch, s. 18
ff.; comp. Schmidt’s Bibliothek, 3, 1, s. 163 ff.

[1744] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 451 ff. L. J. 1, b, s. 143 ff.;
Hase, L. J., § 132. Comp. Theile, zur Biographie Jesu, § 33.

[1745] Schmidt, ut sup.

[1746] Hase.

[1747] Paulus.

[1748] Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 578 f.

[1749] Vol. II. § 88; comp. Hase, ut sup.

[1750] [The German Thaler (Rixthaler) is equivalent to about three
shillings. Tr.]

[1751] Rosenmüller, Schol. in V. T. 7, 4, s. 318 ff.

[1752] Even Neander thinks this a possible origin of the above
statement in the first gospel, s. 574, Anm.

[1753] L. J. Chr., s. 573.

[1754] Comp. also Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 759 f.

[1755] Ueber die Anordnung des letzten Paschamahls Jesu, in his neust.
theol. Journal, 2, 5, s. 441 ff.

[1756] Bell. jud. vi. ix. 3.

[1757] Thus Gabler, ut sup.; Paulus, exeg. Handb., 3, b, s. 781; Kern,
Hauptthatsachen, Tüb. Zeitschr. 1836, 3, s. 3 f.; Neander, s. 583.

[1758] Beza, in Matth. xxvi. 18, correctly, save that he supposes too
special a reference to the approaching sufferings of Jesus, thus
represents the object of this prediction: ut magis ac magis
intelligerent discipuli, nihil temere in urbe magistro eventurum, sed
quæ ad minutissimas usque circumstantias penitus perspecta haberet.

[1759] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 385 f. Comp. in opposition to this De Wette,
in loc.

[1760] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 321; Schleiermacher, über den
Lukas, s. 280; Weisse, die evang. Gesch., s. 600 f.

[1761] Vid. Theile, über die letzte Mahlzeit Jesu, in Winer’s and
Engelhardt’s neuem krit. Journal, 2, s. 169, Anm., and zur Biographie
Jesu, § 31.

[1762] Thus Lightfoot, horæ, p. 463 ff.; Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 2, s.
273 ff.; also Venturini 3, s. 634 ff.

[1763] An insufficient outlet from this difficulty is pointed out by
Lightfoot, p. 482 f.

[1764] Fragm. ex Claudii Apollinaris libro de Paschate, in Chron.
Paschal, ed. du Fresne. Paris, 1688, p. 6 f. præf.

[1765] See especially Tholuck and Olshausen, in loc.; Kern,
Hauptthatsachen, Tüb. Zeitschr. 1836, 3, s. 5 ff.

[1766] Diss. de verâ notione cœnæ Domini, annexed to Cudworth, syst.
intell., p. 22, not. 1.

[1767] See these counter observations particularly in Lücke and de
Wette, in loc.; in Sieffert über den Ursprung, s. 127 ff., and Winer,
bibl. Realwörterb. 2, s. 238 ff.

[1768] Antiq. II. xiv. 16.

[1769] Fritzsche, vom Osterlamm; more recently, Rauch, in the theol.
Studien und Kritiken, 1832, 3, s. 537 f.

[1770] Comp. De Wette, theol. Studien und Krit. 1834, 4, s. 939 f.;
Tholuck, Comm. z. Joh. s. 245 f.; Winer, ut sup.

[1771] Calvin, in Matth. xxvi. 17.

[1772] Grotius, in Matth. xxvi. 18.

[1773] Iken, Diss. philol. theol., vol. 2, p. 416 ff.

[1774] Vid. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, a, s. 486 ff.

[1775] Michaelis, Anm. zu Joh. 13.

[1776] Sieffert, ut sup.; Hase, L. J., § 124; De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1,
3, s. 149 ff; Theile, zur Biographie Jesu, § 31.

[1777] Theile, in Winer’s Krit. Journal, 2, s. 157 ff.; Sieffert and
Lücke, ut sup.

[1778] Pesachin f. lxv. 2, ap. Lightfoot, p. 654: Paschate primo
tenetur quispiam ad pernoctationem. Gloss.: Paschatizans tenetur ad
pernoctandum in Hierosolyma nocte prima. On the other hand, Tosaphoth
ad tr. Pesachin 8: In Paschate Aegyptiaco dicitur: nemo exeat—usque ad
mane. Sed sic non fuit in sequentibus generationibus,—quibus
comedebatur id uno loco et pernoctabant in alio. Comp. Schneckenburger,
Beiträge, s. 9.

[1779] Tract. Sanhedr. f. lxxxix. 1, ap. Schöttgen, i. p. 221; comp.
Paulus, ut sup. s. 492.

[1780] Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 763 f.; comp. 755; Lücke, 2, s. 614.

[1781] Sanhedr. f. xliii. 1, ap. Schöttgen, ii. p. 700.

[1782] Ueber die ursprüngliche Bedeutung des Passahfestes u. s. w.,
Tübinger Zeitschrift f. Theol. 1832, 1, s. 90 ff.

[1783] Ut sup. s. 167 ff.

[1784] Sieffert, ut sup. s. 144 ff.; Lücke, s. 628 ff.; Theile, zur
Biogr. Jesu, § 31; De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 149 ff.; comp.
Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 580 ff. Anm.

[1785] Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 763; Kern, über den Urspr. des Ev.
Matth. in der Tüb. Zeitschrift, 1834, 2, s. 98.

[1786] Comp. Suicer, thesaur. 2, s. 613.

[1787] Another view as to the cause of the error in the fourth gospel
is given in the Probabilia, s. 100 ff.; comp. Weisse, die evang. Gesch.
1, s. 446 f. Anm.

[1788] Paulus, 3, b, s. 499; Olshausen, 2, s. 294.

[1789] Lücke, 2, s. 484 f.; Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 583, Anm.

[1790] Olshausen, ut sup.

[1791] Sieffert, über den Urspr., s. 152.

[1792] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 310, 381 f.

[1793] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 497.

[1794] Meyer, Comm. über den Joh., in loc.

[1795] L. J. Chr., s. 587, Anm.

[1796] Sieffert, s. 152 ff.

[1797] Comp. Lücke, s. 468.

[1798] Die Hauptthatsachen der evang. Gesch. Tüb. Zeitschr. 1836, 3, s.
12.

[1799] Hase, L. J., § 133; Kern, Hauptthatsachen, s. 11; Theile, zur
Biographie Jesu, § 31.

[1800] Sieffert, s. 153; Paulus and Olshausen, in loc. For the opposite
opinion comp. De Wette, 1, 1, s. 222, 1, 2, s. 107.

[1801] Vol. II. § 83.

[1802] The conjecture as to the origin of this anecdote in the
Probabilia, s. 70 f. is too far-fetched.

[1803] Comp. De Wette, in loc.

[1804] Ueber den Lukas, s. 275.

[1805] Olshausen, 2, s. 380.

[1806] Thus Lücke, Paulus, Olshausen.

[1807] Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 707.

[1808] This is Olshausen’s expedient, 2, s. 402. Against it see
Sieffert, s. 148. f.

[1809] Ut sup. s. 147 ff.

[1810] Comm. über die Gesch. des Leidens und Todes Jesu, in loc.

[1811] See De Wette, in loc.

[1812] Vid. Lücke and Tholuck, in loc.

[1813] P. 62: reliqui quidem narrant evangelistæ servatorem scivisse
proditionis consilium, nee impedivisse; ipsum vero excitâsse Judam ad
proditionem nemo eorum dicit, neque convenit hoc Jesu.

[1814] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 538. L. J. 1, b, s. 192. Hase, L.
J., § 137.

[1815] Comp. Lightfoot and Paulus, in loc.

[1816] Comp. on this subject especially, Lightfoot, horæ, p. 474 ff.,
and Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 511 ff.

[1817] Süskind, in the treatise: Hat Jesus das Abendmahl als einen
mnemonischen Ritus angeordnet? in his Magazin 11, s. 1 ff.

[1818] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 527.

[1819] Ueber das Abendmahl, s. 217 ff.

[1820] Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 2, a, s. 39; Stephani, das h. Abendmahl, s.
61.

[1821] Vol. II. § 81.

[1822] Paulus, ut sup. s. 519 ff.; Kaiser, ut sup. s. 37 ff.

[1823] Orig. c. Cels. ii. 24: λέγει (ὁ Κέλσος)· τί οὖν ποτνιᾶται, καὶ
ὀδύρεται, καὶ τὸν τοῦ ὀλέθρου φόβον εὔχεται παραδραμεῖν, λέγων κ.τ.λ.:
He says (i.e. Celsus): Why then does he supplicate help, and bewail
himself, and pray for escape from the fear of death, saying, etc.
Julian, in a Fragment of Theodore of Mopsuestia, ap. Münter, Fragm.
Patr. græc. Fasc. 1, p. 121: ἀλλὰ καὶ τοιαῦτα προσεύχεται, φήσιν, ὁ Ἰ.,
οἶα ἄθλιος ἄνθρωπος, συμφορὰν φέρειν εὐκόλως οὐ δυνάμενος, καὶ ὑπ’
ἀγγέλου, θεὸς ὢν, ἐνισχύεται. Jesus, says he, also presents such
petitions as a wretched mortal would offer, when unable to bear a
calamity with serenity; and although divine, he is strengthened by an
angel.

[1824] Gramond. hist. Gall. ab. exc. Henr. IV. L. iii. p. 211: Lucilius
Vanini—dum in patibulum trahitur—Christo illudit in hæc eadem verba:
illi in extremis præ timore imbellis sudor: ego imperterritus morior.

[1825] Evang. Nicod. c. xx. ap. Thilo, 1, s. 702 ff.: ἐγὸ γὰρ οἶδα, ὅτι
ἄνθρωπός ἐστι, καὶ ἥκουσα αὐτοῦ λέγοντος· ὅτι περίλυπός ἐστιν ἡ ψυχή
μου ἕως θανάτου.

[1826] Ibid. s. 706. Hades replies to Satan: εἰ δὲ λέγεις, ὅτι ἥκουσας
αὑτοῦ φοβουμένου τὸν θάνατον, παίξων σε καὶ γελῶν ἔφη τοῦτο, θέλων, ἵνα
σε ἀρπάσῃ ἐν χειρὶ δυνατῇ.

[1827] Orig. c. Cels. ii. 25.

[1828] Hieron. Comm. in Matth. in loc.: Contristabatur non timore
patiendi, qui ad hoc venerat, ut pateretur, sed propter infelicissimum
Judam, et scandalum omnium apostolorum, et rejectionem populi Judæorum,
et eversionem miseræ Hierusalem.

[1829] Calvin, Comm. in harm. evangg. Matth. xxvi. 37: Non—mortem
horruit simpliciter, quatenus transitus est e mundo sed quia
formidabile Dei tribunal illi erat ante oculos, judex ipse
incomprehensibili vindicta armatus, peccata vero nostra, quorum onus
illi erat impositum, sua ingenti mole eum premebant. Comp. Luther’s
Hauspostille, die erste Passionspredigt.

[1830] Lightfoot, p. 884 f.

[1831] Thiess, Krit. Comm. s. 418 ff.

[1832] Ut sup. s. 549, 554 f., Anm.

[1833] Schuster, zur Erläuterung des N. T., in Eichhorn’s Biblioth. 9,
s. 1012 ff.

[1834] Hess, Gesch. Jesu, 2, s. 322 ff.; Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 719.

[1835] Ullmann, über die Unsündlichkeit Jesu, in his Studien, 1, s. 61.
Hasert, ib. 3, 1, s. 66 ff.

[1836] Ullmann, ut sup.

[1837] Hasert, ut sup.

[1838] Luther, in der Predigt vom Leiden Christi im Garten.

[1839] Ambrosius in Luc., Tom. x. 56.

[1840] In Matthaei’s N. T., p. 447.

[1841] Lightfoot, ut sup.

[1842] Venturini, 3, 677, and conjecturally Paulus also, s. 561.

[1843] Eichhorn, allg. Bibl. 1, s. 628; Thiess, in loc.

[1844] Comp. on this subject and the following, Gabler, neust. theol.
Journal, 1, 2, s. 109 ff. 3, s. 217 ff.

[1845] Comp. Julian, ap. Theod. of Mopsuestia in Münter’s Fragm. Patr.
1, p. 121 f.

[1846] Ueber den Lukas, s. 288; comp. De Wette, in loc. and Theile,
zur. Biogr. Jesu, § 32. Neander also appears willing silently to
abandon this trait and the following one.

[1847] Ancoratus, 31.

[1848] Vid. Wetstein, s. 807.

[1849] De part. animal. iii. 15.

[1850] Vid. ap. Michaelis, not. in loc., and Kuinöl, in Luc., p. 691 f.

[1851] Paulus, ut sup. s. 549.

[1852] Theile, in Winer’s and Engelhardt’s krit. Journal, 2, s. 353;
Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 616 f.

[1853] Comp. Weisse, die evang. Gesch. 1, s. 611.

[1854] Olshausen, 2, s. 429.

[1855] Lücke, 2, s. 591.

[1856] Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 65 f.

[1857] Comm. 1, s. 177 f.

[1858] Lücke, 2, s. 392 ff.

[1859] Olshausen, 2, s. 429 f.

[1860] Commentatio critica, qua Evangelium Joannis genuinum
esse—ostenditur, p. 57 ff.

[1861] Probab. p. 33 ff.

[1862] Goldhorn, über das Schweigen des Joh. Evangeliums über den
Seelenkampf Jesu in Gethsemane, in Tzschirner’s Magazin. f. christl.
Prediger, 1, 2, s. 1 ff.

[1863] Vid. the Review of Usteri’s Comm. crit., in Winer’s and
Engelhardt’s n. krit. Journal, 2, s. 359 ff.

[1864] Hase, L. J., § 134; Lücke, 2, s. 591 f., Anm.

[1865] Against the offence which it has pleased Tholuck (Glaubw. s. 41)
to take at this expression (Verwischen), comp. the Aphorismen zur
Apologie des Dr. Strauss und seines Werkes, s. 69 f.

[1866] L. J. 1, b, s. 165 f.

[1867] Vom Zweck J. und seiner Jünger, s. 124.

[1868] 2, s. 588 f.

[1869] Ut sup.

[1870] Vid. Lücke, in loc.; Hase, L. J., § 135.

[1871] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 567.

[1872] Lücke, 2, s. 599; Hase, ut sup.; Olshausen, 2. s. 435.

[1873] How can Lücke explain the omission of the kiss of Judas in the
Gospel of John from its having been too notorious a fact? and how can
he adduce as an analogous instance the omission of the transaction
between the betrayer and the Sanhedrim by John? for this, as something
passing behind the scenes, might very well be left out, but by no means
an incident which, like that kiss, happened so conspicuously in the
foreground and centre of the scene.

[1874] So says the Jew of Celsus, Orig. c. Cels. ii. 9: ἐπειδὴ ἡμεῖς
ἐλέγξαντες αὐτὸν καὶ καταγνόντες ἠστιοῦμεν κολάζεσθαι, κρυπτόμενος μὲν
καὶ διαδιδράσκων ἐπονειδιστότατα ἑάλω. When we, having convicted and
condemned him, had determined that he should suffer punishment;
concealing himself, and endeavouring to escape, he experienced a most
shameful capture.

[1875] Lücke, 2, s. 597 f.; Olshausen, 2, s. 435; Tholuck, s. 299. The
reference to the murderer of Coligny is, however, unwarranted, as any
one will find who will look into the book incorrectly cited by Tholuck:
Serrani commentatorium de statu religionis et reip. in regno Galliæ, L.
x. p. 32, b. The murderer was not in the least withheld from the
prosecution of his design by the firmness of the noble old man. Comp.
also Schiller, Werke, 16 Bd. s. 382 f., 384; Ersch and Gruber’s
Encyclopädie, 7 Band, s. 452 f. Such inaccuracies in the department of
modern history cannot indeed excite surprise in a writer who elsewhere
(Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 437) speaks of the duke of Orleans, Louis
Philippe’s father, as the brother of Louis XVI. How can a knowledge so
diversified as that of Dr. Tholuck be always quite accurate.

[1876] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 570.

[1877] Ibid.

[1878] As Lücke, Tholuck and Olshausen, in loc.

[1879] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 290.

[1880] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 576.

[1881] Paulus, ut sup. s. 577; Olshausen, 2, s. 244.

[1882] Thus e.g. Erasmus, in loc.

[1883] Thus Winer, N. T. Gramm., § 41, 5; Tholuck and Lücke, in loc.

[1884] Winer, Gramm., § 57, 4.

[1885] Thus Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 295.

[1886] Schleiermacher, ut sup.; comp. Fritzsche, in loc. Matth.

[1887] Vol. II. § 67. Vol. III. § 114.

[1888] Ut sup.

[1889] Matthew does not mention the blindfolding, and appears to
imagine that Jesus named the person who maltreated him, whom he saw,
but did not otherwise know.

[1890] Vid. Gesenius, in loc.

[1891] Matth. xxvi. 63; comp. Mark xiv. 61: ὁ δὲ Ἰ. ἐσιώπα.

Matth. xxvii. 12: οὐδὲν ἀπεκρίνατο.

Matth. xxvii. 14; comp. Mark xv. 5: καὶ οὐκ ἀπεκρίνατο αὐτῷ πρὸς οὐδὲ
ἓν ῥῆμα, ὥστε θαυμάζειν τὸν ἡγεμόνα λίαν.

Luke xxiii. 9: αὐτὸς δὲ οὐδὲν ἀπεκρίνατο αὐτῷ.

John xix. 9: ὁ δὲ Ἰ. ἀπόκρισιν οὐκ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ.

[1892] Vol. II. § 74.

[1893] Thus Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 289; Olshausen, 2, s.
445.

[1894] Thus Paulus, ut sup. s. 577 f.

[1895] Comp. Weisse, die evang. Geschichte, 1, s. 609.

[1896] Bengel, in the Gnomon.

[1897] Paulus, ut sup. s. 578.

[1898] Hess, Geschichte Jesu, 2, s. 343.

[1899] Paulus and Olshausen, in loc.; Schleiermacher, ut sup. 289;
Neander, s. 622, Anm.

[1900] Comp. de Wette, in loc.

[1901] Thesaurus, vid. ἀπάνχω.

[1902] Grotius.

[1903] Heinsius.

[1904] Perizonius.

[1905] Thus the Vulgate and Erasmus. See in opposition to all these
interpretations, Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 473 ff.

[1906] Œcumenius, on the Acts, I.: ὁ Ἰούδας οὐκ ἐναπέθανε τῇ ἀνχόνῃ,
ἀλλ’ ἐπεβίω, κατενεχθεὶς πρὸ τοῦ ἀποπνιγῆναι. Comp. Theophylact, on
Matth. xxvii. and a Schol. Ἀπολιναρίου ap. Matthæi.

[1907] Thus, after Casaubon, Paulus, 3, b, s. 457 f.; Kuinöl, in Matth.
747 f.; Winer, b. Realw. Art. Judas, and with some indecision
Olshausen, 2, s. 455 f. Even Fritzsche is become so weary on the long
way to these last chapters of Matthew, that he contents himself with
this reconciliation, and, on the presupposition of it, maintains that
the two accounts concur amicissime.

[1908] 2 Band, 2 Stück, s. 248 f.

[1909] L. J., § 132. Comp. Theile, zur Biographie Jesu, § 33.

[1910] Vid. Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 748.

[1911] Vid. Schmidt’s Biblioth., ut sup. s. 251 f.

[1912] Paulus, 3, b, s. 457 f.; Fritzsche, p. 799.

[1913] Vid. De Wette, in loc.

[1914] In other parts of the N. T. also we find passages from this
psalm messianically applied: as v. 4, John xv. 25, v. 9; John ii. 17;
and John xix. 28 f., probably v. 21.

[1915] Still for other conjectures see Kuinöl, in loc.

[1916] § 119.

[1917] Hitzig, in Ullmann’s and Umbreit’s Studien, 1830, 1, s. 35;
Gesenius, Wörterbuch; comp. Rosenmüller’s Scholia in V. T. 7, 4, s. 320
ff.

[1918] Tertull. Apologet. c. xxi.: Ea omnia super Christo Pilatus, et
ipse jam pro sua conscientia Christianus, Cæsari tum Tiberio nunciavit.
c. v.: Tiberius ergo, cujus tempore nomen Christianum in seculum
introit, annunciatum sibi ex Syria Palæstina, quod illic veritatem
illius Divinitatis revelaverat, detulit ad Senatum cum prærogativa
suffragii sui. Senatus, quia non ipse probaverat, respuit. For further
details on this subject, see Fabricius, Cod. Apocr. N. T. 1, p. 214
ff., 298 ff.; comp. 2, p. 505.

[1919] Œcumen. ad Act. i.: τοῦτο δὲ σαφέστερον ἱστορεῖ Παπίας, ὁ
Ἰωάννου τοῦ ἀποστόλου μαθητής· μέγα ἀσεβείας ὑπόδειγμα ἐν τούτῳ τῷ
κόσμῳ περιεπάτησεν Ἰούδας. Πρησθεὶς γὰρ ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον τὴν σάρκα, ὥστε μὴ
δύνασθαι διελθεῖν, ἁμάζης ῥᾳδίως διερχομένης, ὑπὸ τῆς ἁμάξης ἐπίεσθη,
ὥστε τὰ ἔνκατα αὐτοῦ ἐκκενωθῆναι.

[1920] Vid. sup.

[1921] In Münter’s Fragm. Patr. 1, p. 17 ff. For the rest the passage
is of very similar tenor with that of Œcumenius, and is partly an
exaggeration of it: τοῦτο δὲ σαφέστερον ἱστορεῖ Παπίας, ὁ Ἰωάννου
μαθητὴς, λέγων οὔτως ἐν τῷ τετάρτῳ τῆς ἐξηγήσεως τῶν κυριακῶν λόγων·
μέγα δὲ ἀσεβείας ὑπόδειγμα έν τούτῳ τῷ κόσμῳ περιεπάτησεν ὁ Ἰούδας·
πρησθεὶς ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον τὴν σάρκα, ὥστε μηδὲ ὁπόθεν ἃμαξα ῥᾳδίως
δίερχεται, ἐκεῖνον δύνασθαι διελθεῖν, ἀλλὰ μηδὲ αὐτὸν μόνον τὸν ὄνκον
τῆς κεφαλῆς αὐτοῦ· τὰ μὲν γὰρ βλέφαρα τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν αὐτοῦ (Cod. Venet.:
φασὶ τοσοῦτον ἐξοιδῆσαι, ὡς αὐτὸν μὲν καθόλου τὸ φῶς μὴ βλέπειν) μηδὲ
ὑπὸ ἰατροῦ δίοπτρας ὀφθῆναι κ.τ.λ. Μετὰ πολλὰς δὲ βασάνους καὶ τιμωρίας
ἐν ἰδίῳ, φασὶ, χωρίω τελευτήσαντος κ.τ.λ.. Papias, the disciple of
John, gives a clearer account of this (in the fourth section of his
exegesis of our Lord’s words) as follows: Judas moved about in this
world a terrible example of impiety, being swollen in body to such a
degree that where a chariot could easily pass he was not able to find a
passage, even for the bulk of his head. His eyelids, they say, were so
swelled out that he could not see the light, nor could his eyes be made
visible even by the physician’s dioptra, etc. After suffering many
torments and judgments, dying, as they say, in his own field, etc.

[1922] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 231 f.; 1, 4, s. 10 f.

[1923] According to Babl. Sanhedrin, ap. Lightfoot, p. 486, this mode
of procedure would have been illegal. It is there said: Judicia de
capitalibus finiunt eodem die si sint ad absolutionem; si vero sini ad
damnationem, finiuntur die sequente.

[1924] Besides this passage of John: ἡμὶν οὐκ ἔξεστιν ἀποκτεῖναι
οὐδένα, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, there is no
other authority for the existence of this state of things than an
obscure and variously interpreted tradition, Avoda Zara f. viii. 2
(Lightfoot, p. 1123 f.): Rabh Cahna dicit, cum ægrotaret R. Ismaël bar
Jose, miserunt ad eum, dicentes: dic nobi, ô Domine, duo aut tria, quæ
aliquando dixisti nobis nomine patris tui. Dicit iis —— quadraginta
annis ante excidium templi migravit Synedrium et sedit in tabernis.
Quid sibi vult hæc traditio? Rabh Isaac, bar Abdimi dicit: non
judicârunt judicia mulctativa. Dixit R. Nachman bar Isaac: ne dicat,
quod non judicârunt judicia mulctativa, sed quod non judicârunt judicia
capitalia. With this may be compared moreover the information given by
Josephus, Antiq. xx. ix. 1, that it was not lawful for Ananus (the high
priest) to assemble the Sanhedrim without the consent of the
procurator. On the other hand the execution of Stephen (Acts vii.)
without the sanction of the Romans might seem to speak to the contrary;
but this was a tumultuary act, undertaken perhaps in the confidence
that Pilate was absent. Compare on this point Lücke, 2, s. 631 ff.

[1925] De bell. Jud. II. ix. 3.

[1926] As Lücke supposes, s. 631.

[1927] Calvin, in loc.

[1928] Lücke and Tholuck, in loc.

[1929] Comp. Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 252.

[1930] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 291.

[1931] Dial. cum Tryph. 103.

[1932] It is doubted whether this custom, of which we should have known
nothing but for the N. T., was of Roman or Jewish origin; comp.
Fritzsche and Paulus, in loc, and Baur, über die ursprungliche
Bedeutung des Passahfestes, u. s. f., Tüb. Zeitschr. f. Theol. 1832, 1,
s. 94.

[1933] According to one reading, the full name of this man was Jesus
Barabbas, which we mention here merely because Olshausen finds it
“remarkable.” Bar Abba meaning Son of the father, Olshausen exclaims:
All that was essential in the Saviour appears in the murderer as
caricature! and he quotes as applicable to this case the verse: ludit
in humanis divina potentia rebus. For our own part, we can only see in
this idea of Olshausen’s a lusus humanæ impotentiæ.

[1934] In the Evang. Nicodemi and in later ecclesiastical historians
she is called Procula Πρόκλη. Comp. Thilo. Cod. Apocr. N. T., p. 522,
Paulus, exeg. Handb., 2, b, s. 640 f.

[1935] Cap. II. s. 520, ap. Thilo.

[1936] Ignat. ad Philippens. iv.: φοβεῖ δὲ τὸ γύναιον, ἐν ὀνείροις αὐτὸ
καταταράττων καὶ παύειν πειρᾶται τὰ κατὰ τὸν σταυρόν. (The devil)
terrifies the woman, troubling her in her dreams, and endeavours to put
a stop to the things of the cross. The Jews in the Evang. Nicodemi, c.
II. p. 524, explain the dream as a result of the magic arts of Jesus:
γόης ἐστι—ἰδοὺ ὀνειρόπεμπτα ἔπεμψε πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκά σου, He is a
magician—see, he has sent messages in a dream to thy wife.

[1937] E.g. Theophylact, vid. Thilo, p. 523.

[1938] Vid. Paulus and Kuinöl, in loc. They especially adduce the dream
of Cæsar’s wife the night before his assassination.

[1939] Comp. Sota, viii 6.

[1940] Fritzsche, in Matth., p. 808.

[1941] Comp. in particular the passages cited by Wetstein, on Matth.
xxvii. 26.

[1942] Paulus, ut sup. s. 647.

[1943] From the explanation of Paulus, s. 649 f., it appears highly
probable that the στέφανος ἐξ ἀκανθῶν was not a crown of sharp thorns,
but one taken from the nearest hedge, in order to deride Jesus by the
vilissima corona, spineola (Plin. H. N. xxi. 10).

[1944] A similar disguising of a man, in derision of a third party, is
adduced by Wetstein, (p. 533 f.) from Philo, in Flaccum.

[1945] Thus Paulus, Kuinöl, Tholuck and Olshausen in their
Commentaries; Neander, L. J. Chr., s. 634.

[1946] Fritzsche, in Marc. 684: Significat Joannes, Jesum suam crucem
portavisse, donec ad Calvariæ locum pervenisset.

[1947] Joseph., Antiq. xiv. vii. 2.

[1948] It is used in the former way by Grotius; in the latter, by
Olshausen, 2. s. 481.

[1949] Comp. Paulus, Fritzsche, and De Wette, in loc.

[1950] Vid. Paulus and Fritzsche, in loc. Winer, bibl. Realw. art.
Golgotha.

[1951] Wassenbergh, Diss. de trajectionibus N. T. in Balcknaer’s scholæ
in 11. quosdam N. T. 2, p. 31.

[1952] Comp. Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 295; Winer, N. T.
Gramm., s. 226, and Fritzsche, in Matt., p. 814.

[1953] Apol. i. 35. Dial. c. Tryph. xcvii.

[1954] Christologie des A. T. 1, a, s. 182 ff.

[1955] Paulus, exeg. Handbuch 3, b, s. 669–754; Bähr, in Tholuck’s
liter. Anzeiger für christl. Theol. 1835, No. 1–6. Comp. also Neander,
L. J. Chr., s. 636, Anm.

[1956] Adv. Marcion, iii. 19.

[1957] Mostellaria, ii. 1.

[1958] Vid. Kuinöl, Paulus, in loc.

[1959] Sanhedrim, f. xliii. 1, ap. Wetstein, p. 635: Dixit R. Chaja, f.
R. Ascher, dixisse R. Chasdam: exeunti, ut capite plectatur, dant
bibendum granum turis in poculo vini, ut alienetur mens ejus, sec. d.
Prov. xxxi. 6: date siceram pereunti et vinum amaris anima.

[1960] Vid. Fritzsche, in loc.

[1961] Comp. Paulas, in loc.

[1962] Thus Kuinöl, in Luc., p. 710 f.; Tholuck, s. 316.

[1963] Comp. also Bleek, Comm. zum Hebräerbrief, 2, s. 312, Anm.; De
Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 198.

[1964] Kuinöl, in Luc. p. 710.

[1965] Olshausen, p. 484; Neander, s. 637.

[1966] Thus Chrysostom and others.

[1967] Beza and Grotius.

[1968] Paulus, s. 763; Winer, N. T. Gramm., s. 143; Fritzsche, in
Matth., p. 817.

[1969] Vid. Thilo, Cod. apocr. 1, s. 143. Further apocryphal
information concerning the two malefactors crucified with Jesus is to
be found in the evang. infant. arab. c. xxiii. ap. Thilo, p. 92 f.;
comp. the note p. 143; in the evang. Nicod. c. ix. 10, Thilo, p. 581
ff.; c. xxvi. p. 766 ff.

[1970] Paulus and Kuinöl, in loc.

[1971] Confessio Judæi ægroti, ap. Wetstein, p. 820:—da portionem meam
in horto Edenis, et memento mei in seculo futuro, quod absconditum est
justis. Other passages are given, ib., p. 819.

[1972] Cetuboth, f. ciii. ap. Wetstein, p. 819: Quo die Rabbi moriturus
erat, venit vox de cœlo, dixitque: qui præsens aderit morienti Rabbi,
ille intrabit in paradisum.

[1973] Vid. Wetstein, in loc. Matth.

[1974] Quoted in Wetstein, p. 536; compare, however, the correction of
the text in Paulus, ex. handb. 3, b, s. 751.

[1975] Tholuck, in loc.

[1976] E. G. Theile, zur Biographie Jesu, § 36, Anm. 13.

[1977] Expositors observe in connexion with this particular, that the
coat of the Jewish high priest was also of this kind. Jos. Antiq. iii.
vii. 4—The same view of the above difference nas been already presented
in the Probabilia, p. 80 f.

[1978] Apol. i. 35.

[1979] Adv. Marcion, ut sup.

[1980] Justin, Apol. i. 50, and elsewhere, even speaks of apostacy and
denial on the part of all the disciples after the crucifixion.

[1981] Vid. Calvin, Comm. in harm. evv. in Matth. xxvii. 46; Olshausen,
in loc.

[1982] Thus Paulus, Gratz, in loc. Schleiermacher, Glaubenslehre, 2, s.
154, Anm.

[1983] Such is the inference drawn by the author of the Wolfenbüttel
Fragments, von Zweck Jesu und seiner Jünger, s. 153.

[1984] Schneckenburger, Beiträge, s. 66 f.

[1985] According to Olshausen, s. 495, there is no syllable in this
speech by which such a meaning is intimated; on the contrary, a secret
horror had already diffused itself over the minds of the scoffers, and
they trembled at the thought that Elias might appear in the storm. But
when one who attempts to give a beverage to Jesus is dissuaded under
the pretext of waiting to see if Elias would come to save him, εἰ
ἔρχεται Ἠλίας, σώσων αὐτὸν, this pretext is plainly enough shown to be
meant in derision, and hence the horror and trembling belong only to
the unscientific animus of the biblical commentator, which makes him
contemplate the history of the passion above all else, as a mysterium
tremendum, and causes him to discover even in Pilate a depth of feeling
which is nowhere attributed to this Roman in the gospels.

[1986] Credner, Einleitung in das N. T. 1, s. 198.

[1987] Thus Rettig, exegetische Analekten, in Ullmann’s und Umbreit’s
Studien, 1830, 1, s. 106 ff.; Tholuck, Glaubwürdigkeit, s. 307 ff.;
comp. on the various attempts at reconciliation Lücke and De Wette, in
loc. Joh.

[1988] The Evang. Nicodemi makes the Jews very absurdly maintain: there
happened an eclipse of the sun in the ordinary course ἔκλειψις ἡλίου
γέγονε κατὰ τὸ εἰωθός, c. xi. p. 592, ap. Thilo.

[1989] Thus Paulus and Kuinöl, in loc.; Hase, L. J. § 143; Neander, L.
J. Chr. s. 639 f.

[1990] Comp. Fritzsche and De Wette, in loc. Matth.

[1991] Tertull. Apologet. c. xxi.; Orig. c. Cels. ii. 33, 59.

[1992] Euseb. can. chron. ad. Ol. 202, Anm. 4; comp. Paulus, s. 765 ff.

[1993] Serv. ad Virgil. Georg. i. 465 ff.: Constat, occiso Cæsare in
Senatu pridie Idus Martias, solis fuisse defectum ab hora sexta usque
ad noctem.

[1994] Echa R. iii. 28.

[1995] R. Bechai Cod. Hakkema: Cum insignis Rabbinus fato concederet,
dixit quidam: iste dies gravis est Israëli, ut cum sol occidit ipso
meridie.

[1996] Succa, f. xxix. 1: Dixerunt doctores: quatuor de causis sol
deficit: prima, ob patrem domus judicii mortuum, cui exequiæ non fiunt
ut decet, etc.

[1997] Vid. Fritzsche, in loc.; comp. also De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1,
s. 238; Theile, zur Biogr. Jesu, § 36.

[1998] Hieron. ad Hedib. ep. cxlix. 8 (comp. his Comm. in loc.): In
evangelio autem, quod hebraicis literis scriptum est, legimus, non
velum templi scissum, sed superliminare templi miræ magnitudinis
corruisse.

[1999] The possibility of this is admitted by Neander also, but with
the presupposition of some fact as a groundwork (s. 640 f.).

[2000] Ueber den Lukas, s. 293. Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb., 1, 1, s.
240.

[2001] Georg. i. 463 ff.

[2002] When Hase, § 143, writes: “The earth trembled, mourning for her
greatest Son,” we see how the historian in speaking of this feature,
which he maintains to be historical, involuntarily becomes a poet; and
when in the second edition the author qualifies the phrase by the
addition of an “as it were:” it is further evident that his historical
conscience had not failed to reproach him for the license.

[2003] Only such must be here thought of, and not sectatores Christi,
as Kuinöl maintains. In the Evang. Nicodemi, c. xvii., there are indeed
adherents of Jesus, namely, Simeon (Luke ii.) and his two sons, among
those who come to life on this occasion; but the majority in this
apocryphal book also, and as well in the ἀναφορὰ Πιλάτου (Thilo, p.
810), according to Epiphanius, orat. in sepulchrum Chr. 275, Ignat. ad
Magnes. IX. and others (comp. Thilo, p. 780 ff.), are Old Testament
persons, as Adam and Eve, the patriarchs and prophets.

[2004] Comp. the various opinions in Thilo, p. 783 f.

[2005] Comp. especially Eichhorn, Einl. in d. N. T. 1, s. 446 ff.

[2006] Stroth, von Interpolationen im Evang. Matth. In Eichhorn’s
Repertorium, 9, s. 139. It is hardly a preferable expedient to regard
the passage as an addition of the Greek translator. See Kern, Ueber den
Urspr. des Evang. Matth. s. 25 and 100.

[2007] Thus Paulus and Kuinöl, in loc. The latter calls this
explanation a mythical one.

[2008] Leben Jesu, § 148.

[2009] Ueber den Urspr. s. 67.

[2010] Paulus, exeg. Handb., 3, b. s. 798.

[2011] Dial. c. Tryph. cxiii.

[2012] See the collection of passages relative to this subject in
Schöttgen, 2, p. 570 ff.; and in Bertholdt’s Christologia, § 35.

[2013] See the passages collected by Wetstein.

[2014] See this idea further developed in the Evang. Nicod. c. xviii.
ff.

[2015] The instances are collected in Paulus, exeg. Handb., 3, b. s.
781 ff.; Winer, bibl. Realwörterb. 1, s. 672 ff.; and Hase, § 144.

[2016] According to Tertullian by the former, according to Grotius by
the latter; see Paulus, s. 784, Anm.

[2017] Thus Gruner and others ap. Paulus, s. 782 ff.; Hase, ut sup.;
Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 647.

[2018] Orig. c. Cels. ii. 36: τῶν μὲν οὖν ἄλλων νεκρῶν σωμάτων τὸ αἷμα
πήγνυται, καὶ ὕδωρ καθαρὸν οὐκ ἀποῤῥει· τοῦ δὲ κατὰ τὸν Ἰησοῦν νεκροῦ
σώματος τὸ παράδοξον, καὶ περὶ τὸ νεκρὸν σῶμα ἦν αἷμα καὶ ὕδωρ ἀπὸ τῶν
πλευρῶν προχυθέν. Comp. Euthymius in loc. ἐκ νεκροῦ γὰρ ἀνθρώπου, κἄν
μυριάκις νύξῃ τις, οὐκ ἐξελεύσεται αἷμα. ὑπερφυὲς τοῦτο τὸ πρᾶγμα, καὶ
τρανῶς διδάσκον, ὅπι ὑπὲρ ἄνθρωπον ὁ νυγείς.

[2019] Schuster, in Eichhorn’s Bibl. 9, s. 1036 ff.

[2020] Gruner, Comm. de morte J. Chr. vera, p. 47; Tholuck, Comm. z.
Joh. s. 318.

[2021] Comp. Hase, ut sup.

[2022] Winer, ut sup.

[2023] Comp. the similar statement of an anatomist in De Wette, in loc.
and Tholuck ut sup.

[2024] Wetstein and Olshausen, in loc.; comp. Hase, ut sup.

[2025] Lücke, in loc.

[2026] Thus Less, Auferstehungsgeschichte, s. 95 f.; Tholuck, in loc.
According to Weisse (die evang. Gesch. 1, s. 102, 2, s. 237 ff.) the
Evangelist referred to a passage of the apostolic epistle, under a
misapprehension of its meaning, namely, to 1 John v. 6: οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ
ἐλθὼν δὶ ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος, Ἰ. ὁ Χρ.· οὐκ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι μόνον, ἀλλ’ ἐν
τῷ ὕδατι καὶ τῷ αἵματι.

[2027] Comp. Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 253.

[2028] Rosenmüller, Schol. in V. T. 7, 4, p. 340.

[2029] Vid. ap. Rosenmüller, in loc.; Schöttgen, 2, p. 221; Bertholdt,
§ 17, not. 12.

[2030] Comp. Joseph, b. j. iv. v. 2. Sanhedrin, vi. 5, ap. Lightfoot,
p. 499.

[2031] Vid. Lipsius, de cruce, L. II. cap. 14.

[2032] Comp. Winer, 1, s. 802.

[2033] Sanhedrin, ap. Lightfoot, p. 499.

[2034] Ulpian, xlviii. 24, 1 ff.

[2035] Vol. II. § 80.

[2036] Michaelis, Begräbniss- und Auferstehungsgeschichte, s. 68 ff.

[2037] Thus Grotius; Less, Auferstehungsgeschichte, s. 165.

[2038] See the fifth Fragment, in Lessing’s viertem Beitrag zur
Geschichte und Literatur, s. 467 f. Comp. concerning these differences
also Lessing’s Duplik.

[2039] Michaelis, ut sup. s. 102 ff.

[2040] Kuinöl, in Luc. p. 721.

[2041] Thus Tholuck, in loc.

[2042] See the Fragments, ut sup. s. 469 ff.

[2043] Michaelis, ut sup. s. 99 f.; Kuinöl and Lücke leave open the
choice between this expedient and the former.

[2044] Comp. De Wette, in loc. Matth.

[2045] Michaelis, ut sup. s. 45 ff.

[2046] Kuinöl, in Matth. p. 786; Hase, § 145; Tholuck, Comm. s. 320.

[2047] A confusion of the κῆπος garden near to the place of execution,
where according to John Jesus was buried, with the garden of
Gethsemane, where he was taken prisoner, appears to have given rise to
the statement of the Evang. Nicodemi, that Jesus was crucified ἐν τῷ
κήπῳ, ὅπου ἐπιάσθη in the garden where he was apprehended, C. ix. p.
580, ap. Thilo.

[2048] Τῇ ἐπαύριον, ἥτις ἐστὶ μετὰ τὴν παρασκευὴν (the next day, that
followed the day of the preparation), is certainly a singular
periphrasis for the sabbath, for it is a strangely inappropriate mode
of expression to designate a solemn day, as the day after the previous
day: nevertheless we must abide by this meaning so long as we are
unable to evade it in a more natural manner than Schneckenburger in his
chronology of the Passion week, Beiträge, s. 3 ff.

[2049] The former, ut sup. s. 437 ff.; the latter in the exeg. Handb.
3, b, s. 837 ff. Comp. Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 253.

[2050] Michaelis, Begräbniss- und Auferstehungsgeschichte, s. 206;
Olshausen 2, s. 506.

[2051] Michaelis, ut sup.

[2052] Olshausen overlooks the latter point when he (ut sup.) says the
watch had not received the command to prevent the completion of the
interment.

[2053] Olshausen indeed is here still so smitten with awe, that he
supposes Pilate to have been penetrated with an indescribable feeling
of dread on hearing this communication from the Sanhedrists, s. 505.

[2054] Olshausen, s. 506.

[2055] Michaelis, ut sup. s. 198 f.

[2056] Stroth, in Eichhorn’s Repertorium, 9, s. 141.

[2057] Kern, über den Ursprung des Ev. Matth. Tüb. Zeitschrift, 1834,
2, s. 100 f.; comp. 123. Compare my Review, Jahrbücher f. wiss. Kritik,
Nov. 1834; now in the Charakteristiken u. Kritiken, s. 280.

[2058] Hase, L. J., § 145.

[2059] Comp. Theile, zur Biogr. Jesu, § 37; Weisse, die Evang. Gesch.
2, s. 343 f.

[2060] Comp. Theile, ut sup.

[2061] Comp. Fritzsche, in loc., and Kern, Tüb. Zeitschr. 1834, 2, s.
102 f.

[2062] Kuinöl, in Marc. p. 194 f.

[2063] Michaelis, ut sup. s. 112.

[2064] Schneckenburger, über den Urspr. des ersten kanon. Evang., s. 62
f. Comp. the Wolfenbüttel Fragmentist in Lessing’s viertem Beitrag, s.
472 ff. On the other hand, Lessing’s Duplik, Werke, Donauösch. Ausg. 6.
Thl. s. 394 f.

[2065] De Wette, in loc.

[2066] Michaelis, s. 150 ff.

[2067] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 825.

[2068] Michaelis, s. 117.

[2069] Michaelis, s. 146.—Celsus stumbled at this difference respecting
the number of the angels, and Origen replied that the Evangelists mean
different angels: Matthew and Mark the one who had rolled away the
stone, Luke and John those who were commissioned to give information to
the women, c. Cels. v. 56.

[2070] Paulus, in loc. Matth.

[2071] I subjoin the table sketched by the Fragmentist (ut sup. s. 477
f.)

   “1. Luke xxiv. 12: Peter ran to the grave, ἔδραμεν. John xx. 4:
       Peter and John ran, ἔτρεχον.

    2. Luke v. 12: Peter looked in, παρακύψας. John v. 5: John looked
       in, παρακύψας.

    3. Luke v. 12: Peter saw the clothes lying alone, βλέπει τὰ ὀθόνια
       κείμενα μόνα. John v. 6, 7: Peter saw the clothes lie, and the
       napkin not lying with the clothes: θεωρεῖ τὰ ὀθόνια κείμενα, καὶ
       τὸ σουδάριον οὐ μετά τῶν ὀθονίων κείμενον.

    4. Luke v. 12: Peter went home, ἀπῆλθε πρὸς ἑαυτὸν. John v. 10:
       Peter and John went home again, ἀπῆλθον πάλιν πρὸς ἑαυτούς.”

[2072] Kuinöl, in Matth., p. 800 f.

[2073] Progr. de fontibus, unde Evangelistæ suas de resurrectione
Domini narrationes hauserint. Opusc. acad. ed. Gabler, Vol. 2, p. 241
ff.

[2074] Comp. Schneckenburger, ut sup. s. 64 f., Anm.

[2075] On this subject comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 245;
Ammon, Fortbildung des Christenthums zur Weltreligion, 2, 1, s. 6;
Theile, zur Biogr. Jesu, § 37.

[2076] Schulz, über das Abendmahl, s. 321 f.; Schneckenburger, ut sup.
s. 61 ff.

[2077] Vol. II. § 74.

[2078] Concerning this sense of ἐπίστευσεν, and its not being
contradicted by οὔπω γὰρ ἤδεισαν τὴν γραφὴν κ.τ.λ. (v. 9), see the
correct view in Lücke, in loc.

[2079] Weisse is of a different opinion, ut sup. s. 355, Anm.

[2080] As Paulus, Fritzsche, Credner, Einleitung, 1, § 49. Comp. De
Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 2, s. 199 f. A middle view in Hug, Einl. in d.
N. T. 2, § 69.

[2081] Orig. c. Cels. v. 52: ὁ γὰρ τοῦ θεοῦ παῖς, ὡς ἕοικεν. οὐκ
ἐδύνατο ἁνοῖζαι τὸν τάφον, ἁλλα’ ἑδεήθη ἄλλου ἀποκινήσοντος τὴν πέτραν.

[2082] Schuster, in Eichhorn’s allg. Biblioth. 9, s. 1034 ff.: Kuinöl,
in Matth., p. 779.

[2083] Friedrich, über die Engel in der Auferstehungsgeschichte. In
Eichhorn’s allg. Bibl. 6, s. 700 ff. Kuinöl, ut sup.

[2084] Thus a treatise in Eichhorn’s allg. Bibl. 8, s. 629 ff., and in
Schmidt’s Bibl. 2, s. 545 f.; also Bauer, hebr. Myth. 5, s. 259.

[2085] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 829, 55, 60, 62.

[2086] Fritzsche, in Marc. in loc., Nemo—quispiam primi temporis
Christianis tam dignus videri poterat, qui de Messia in vitam reverso
nuntium ad homines perferret, quam angelus, Dei minister, divinorumque
consiliorum interpres et adjutor. Then on the differences in relation
to the number of the angels, etc.: Nimirum insperato Jesu Messiæ in
vitam reditui miracula adjecere alii alia, quæ Evangelistæ religiose,
quemadmodum ab suis auctoribus acceperant, literis mandârunt.

[2087] Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 254 ff.

[2088] In Lessing’s Beiträgen, ut sup. s. 485.

[2089] Michaelis, s. 259 f.; Kuinöl, in Luc., p. 743.

[2090] Schleiermacher, über den Lukas, s. 299 f.; Paulus, s. 910.

[2091] Ut sup. s. 486.

[2092] Griesbach, Vorlesungen über Hermeneutik des N. T., mit Anwendung
auf die Leidens- und Auferstehungsgeschichte Christi, herausgegeben von
Steiner, s. 314.

[2093] Duplik, Werke, 6 Bd. s. 352.

[2094] Schneckenburger, über den Urspr. des ersten kanon. Evang., s. 17
f.

[2095] Exeg. Handb. 3, b. s. 835.

[2096] Bibl. Comm. 2, s. 524.

[2097] This is done by Schulz, über das Abendm. s. 321;
Schneckenburger, ut sup.

[2098] On which account Michaelis, s. 118 f., is of opinion that εἶπεν
was the original reading in Matthew also. Comp. Weisse, die Evang.
Gesch. 2, s. 347 f.

[2099] Vol. I. § 57.

[2100] The opinion that the true locality of the appearances of the
risen Jesus before the disciples was Galilee, is concurred in by
Weisse, 2, s. 358 ff.; but in accordance with his fundamental
supposition concerning the synoptical gospels, he gives the preference
to the narrative of Mark before that of Matthew.

[2101] Vid Billroth’s Commentar, in loc.

[2102] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b. s. 897; Olshausen, 2, s. 541.

[2103] Hieron. de viris illustr. ii.: Evangelium quoque, quod
appellatur secundum Hebræos,—post resurrectionem Salvatoris refert:
Dominus autem, postquam dedisset sindonem servo sacerdotis (apparently
in relation to the watch at the grave, which is here represented as a
sacerdotal instead of a Roman guard; vid. Credner, Beiträge zur Einl.
in das N. T. s. 406 f.), ivit ad Jacobum et apparuit ei. Juraverat enim
Jacobus, se non comesturum panem ab illa hora, qua biberat calicem
Domini, donec videret eum resurgentum a dormientibus (on the
inconceivableness of such a vow, despairing as the disciples were,
comp. Michaelis, s. 122). Rursusque post paululum: Afferte, ait
Dominus, mensam et panem. Statimque additur Tulit panem et benedixit ac
fregit, et dedit Jacobo justo et dixit ei: frater mi, comede panem
tuum, quia resurrexit filius hominis a dormientibus.

[2104] Lessing, Duplik, s. 449 ff.

[2105] As Kern admits, Hauptthats. Tüb. Zeitschr. 1836, 3, s. 57.

[2106] Hauptthatsachen, ut sup. s. 47.

[2107] Comp. De Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 3, s. 205, 210; Weisse, die
evang. Gesch. 2, s. 409.

[2108] Comp. Kaiser, bidl. Theol. 1, s. 254 ff.; De Wette ut sup.;
Ammon, Fortbildung, 2, 1, Kap. 1; Weisse, die Evang. Gesch., 2, 7 tes
Buch.

[2109] That it was the marks of the nails in the hand, which became
visible in the act of breaking bread, by which Jesus was recognized
(Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b. s. 882; Kuinöl, in Luc. p. 734.) is without
any intimation in the text.

[2110] The part of this conversation which relates to John, has already
(§ 116) been considered. In that relating to Peter, the thrice repeated
question of Jesus: Lovest thou me? has reference, according to the
ordinary opinion, to his as often repeated denial; but to the words:
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself and walkedst whither thou
wouldest, but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shalt gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
wouldest not, ὅτε ἦς νεώτερος, ἐζώννυες σεαυτὸν καὶ περιεπάτεις ὅπου
ἤθελες· ὅταν δὲ γηράσῃς, ἐκτενεῖς τὰς χεῖράς σου καὶ ἅλλος σε ζὼσει καὶ
οἴσει ὄπου οὐ θέλεις (v. 18 f.), the Evangelist himself gives the
interpretation, that Jesus spoke them to Peter, signifying by what
death he should glorify God. He must here have alluded to the
crucifixion, which, according to the ecclesiastical legend (Tertull. de
præescr. hæer. xxxvi. Euseb. H. E. ii. 25) was the death suffered by
this apostle, and to which in the intention of the Evangelist the words
Follow me, v. 20 and 22 (i.e. follow me in the same mode of death) also
appear to point. But precisely the main feature in this interpretation,
the stretching forth of the hands, is here so placed as to render a
reference to crucifixion impossible, namely, before the leading away
against the will; on the other hand, the girding, which can only
signify binding for the purpose of leading away, should stand before
the stretching forth of the hands on the cross. If we set aside the
interpretation which, as even Lücke (s. 703) admits, is given to the
words of Jesus ex eventu by the narrator: they appear to contain
nothing more than the commonplace of the helplessness of age contrasted
with the activity of youth, for even the phrase, shall carry thee
whither thou wouldest not, does not outstep this comparison. But the
author of John xxi., whether the words were known to him as a
declaration of Jesus or otherwise, thought them capable of being
applied in the manner of the fourth gospel, as a latent prophecy of the
crucifixion of Peter.

[2111] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b. s. 834 ff.; L. J. 1, b. s. 265 ff.;
Ammon, ut sup.; Hase, L. J. § 149; Michaelis, ut sup., s. 251 f. Comp.
also Neander, L. J. Chr. s. 650.

[2112] Tholuck, in loc., comp. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b. s. 866, 881.
A similar natural explanation has lately been adopted by Lücke, from
Hug.

[2113] Paulus, ut sup. s. 882.

[2114] Paulus, ut sup. 883, 93; Lücke, 2, s. 684 f.

[2115] Calvin, Comm. in Joh. in loc., p. 363 f. ed. Tholuck.

[2116] Thus Suicer, Thes. s. v. θύρα; comp. Michaelis, s. 265.

[2117] Tholuck and Olshausen, in loc.

[2118] Griesbach, Vorlesungen über Hermeneutik, s. 305; Paulus, s. 835.
Comp. Lücke, 2, s. 683 ff.

[2119] Vid. Tholuck and De Wette, in loc.

[2120] Comp. Olshausen, 2, s. 531, Anm.

[2121] Thus, besides Calvin, Lücke, ut sup.; Olshausen, 530 f.

[2122] Olshausen, ut sup. s. 530.

[2123] Comp. Fritzsche, in Marc. p. 725.

[2124] See the various explanations in Tholuck and Lücke, of whom the
latter finds an alteration of the reading necessary. Even Weisse’s
interpretation of the words (2, s. 395 ff.), although I agree with the
general tenor of the explanation of which it forms a part, I must
regard as a failure.

[2125] Comp. on this subject especially Weisse, ut sup. s. 339 ff.

[2126] Brennecke, biblischer Beweis, dass Jesus nach seiner
Auferstehung noch 27 Jahre leibhaftig auf Erden gelebt, und zum Wohle
der Menschheit in der Stille fortgewirkt habe. 1819.

[2127] Ut sup. s. 793, 925. Comp. Briefe über den Rationalismus, s.
240.

[2128] Noch etwas über die Frage: warum haben die Apostel Matthäus und
Johannes nicht ebenso wie die zwei Evangelisten Markus und Lukas die
Himmelfahrt ausdrücklich erzählt? In Süskind’s Magazin, 17, s. 165 ff.

[2129] Joann. Damasc. de f. orth. 4, 1: εἰ καὶ ἐγεύσατο βρώσεως μετὰ
τὴν ἀνάστασιν, ἀλλ’ οὐ νόμῳ φύσευως· οὐ γὰρ ἐπείνασεν· οἰκονομίας δὲ
τρόπῳ τὸ ἀληθὲς πιστούμενος τῆς ἀναστάσεως, ὡς αὐτή ἐστιν ἡ σὰρξ ἡ
παθοῦσα καὶ ἀναστᾶσα.

[2130] The vagueness of the conception which lies at the foundation of
the evangelical accounts is well expressed by Origen, when he says of
Jesus: καὶ ἦν γε μετὰ τὴν ἀνάστασιν αὑτοῦ ὡσπερεὶ ἐν μεθορίῳ τινὶ τῆς
παχύτητος τοῦ πρὸ τοῦ πάθους σώματος, καὶ τοῦ γυμνὴν τοιούτον σώματος
φαίνεσθαι ψυχὴν. After the resurrection, he existed in a form which
held the mean between the materiality of his body before his passion,
and the state of the soul when altogether destitute of such body (c.
Cels. ii. 62).

[2131] Hence even Kern admits that he knows not how to reconcile that
particular in Luke with the rest, and regards it as of later,
traditional origin (Hauptthats., ut sup. s. 50). But what does this
admission avail him, since he still has, from the narrative of John,
the quality of palpability, which equally with the act of eating
belongs to the “conditions of earthly life, the relations of the
material world,” to which the body of the risen Jesus, according to
Kern’s own presupposition, “was no longer subjected”?

[2132] Many fathers of the church and orthodox theologians held the
capability thus exhibited by Jesus of penetrating through closed doors,
not altogether reconcileable with the representation, that for the
purpose of the resurrection the stone was rolled away from the grave,
and hence maintained: resurrexit Christus clauso sepulchro, sive nondum
ab ostio sepulchri revoluto per angelum lapide. Quenstedt, theol.
didact. polem. 3, p. 542.

[2133] Comp. Schleiermacher’s Weihnachtsfeier, s. 117 f.

[2134] Joseph. vita, 75: πεμφθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ Τίτου Καίσαρος σὺν Κερεαλίῳ
καὶ χιλίοις ἱππεῦσιν εἰς κώμην τινὰ Θεκώαν λεγομένην, πρὸς κατανόησιν,
εἰ τόπος ἐπιτήδειος ἐστι χάρακα δέξασθαι, ὡς ἐκεῖθεν ὑποστρέφων εἶδον
πολλοὺς αἰχμαλώτους ἀνεσταυρωμένους, καὶ τρεῖς γνωρίσας συνήθεις μοὶ
γενομένους, ἤλγησα τὴν ψυχὴν, καὶ μετὰ δακρύων προσελθὼν Τίτῳ εἴπον. Ὁ
δ’ εὐθὺς ἐκέλευσεν καθαιρεθέντας αὐτοὺς θεραπείας ἐπιμελεστάτης τυχεῖν.
καὶ οἱ μὲν δύο τελευτῶσιν θεραπευόμενοι, ὁ δὲ τρίτος ἔζησεν. And when I
was sent by Titus Cæsar with Cerealius and 1,000 horsemen, to a certain
village called Thecoa, in order to know whether it were a place fit for
a camp, as I came back, I saw many captives crucified; and remembered
three of them as my former acquaintance. I was very sorry at this in my
mind, and went with tears in my eyes to Titus, and told him of them; so
he immediately commanded them to be taken down, and to have the
greatest care taken of them, in order to their recovery; yet two of
them died under the physician’s hands, while the third recovered. For
the arguments of Paulus on this passage, see exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 786;
and in the Appendix, s. 929 ff.

[2135] Bretschneider, über den angeblichen Scheintod Jesu am Kreuze, in
Ullmann’s und Umbreit’s Studien, 1832, 3, s. 625 ff.; Hug, Beiträge zur
Geschichte des Verfahrens bei der Todesstrafe der Kreuzigung,
Freiburger Zeitschr. 7, s. 144 ff.

[2136] Bahrdt, Ausführung des Plans und Zwecks Jesu. Comp. on the other
hand, Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, 793 f.

[2137] Xenodoxien, in der Abh.: Joseph und Nikodemus. Comp. on the
other hand Klaiber’s Studien der würtemberg. Geistlichkeit, 2, 2, s. 84
ff.

[2138] Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 785 ff. L. J. 1, b, s. 281 ff.

[2139] Schuster, in Eichhorn’s allg. Biblioth. 9, s. 1053.

[2140] Winer, bibl. Realw. 1, s. 674.

[2141] Orig. c. Cels. ii. 63: Μετὰ ταῦτα ὁ Κέλσος οὐκ εὐκαταφροντήτως
τὰ γεγραμμένα κακολογῶν, φησὶν, ὅτι ἐχρῆν, εἶπερ ὄντως θείαν δύναμιν
ἑκφῇναι ἤθελεν ὁ Ἰ., αὐτοῖς τοῖς ἐπηρεάσασι καὶ τῷ καταδικάσαντι καὶ
ὅλως πᾶσιν ὀφθῆναι.—67: οὐ γὰρ—ἐπὶ τοῦτ’ ἐπέμφθη τὴν ἀρχὴν, ἵνα λάθῃ.
Comp. the Wolfenbüttel Fragmentist, in Lessing, s. 450, 60, 92 ff.;
Woolston, Disc 6. Spinoza, ep. 23, ad Oldenburg, p. 558 f. ed. Gfrörer.

[2142] Ut sup. 67: ἐφείδετο γὰρ καὶ τοῦ καταδικάσαντος καὶ τῶν
ἐπηρεασάντων ὁ Χριστὸς, ἵνα μὴ παταχθῶσιν ἀορασίᾳ.

[2143] Comp. Mosheim, in his translation of the work of Origen against
Celsus, on the passage above quoted; Michaelis, Anm. zum fünften
Fragment, s. 407.

[2144] Hase, L. J., § 149; Diss.: librorum sacrorum de J. Chr. a
mortuis revocato atque in cœlum sublato narrationem collatis vulgaribus
illa ætate Judæorum de morte opinionibus interpretari conatus est C. A.
Frege, p. 12 f.; Weisse, die evang. Gesch. 2, s. 362 ff.

[2145] Orig. c. Cels. ii. 55: τίς τοῦτο εἶδε (the pierced hands of
Jesus, and, in general, his appearances after the resurrection), γυνὴ
πάροιστρος, ὡς φατὲ, καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος τῶν ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς γοητείας, ἤτοι
κατά τινα διάθεσιν ὀνειρώξας, ἢ κατὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ βούλησιν δόξῃ
πεπλανημένῃ φαντασιωθεὶς, ὅπερ δὴ μυρίοις συμβέβηκεν· ἢ, ὅπερ μᾶλλον,
ἐκπλῆξαι τοὺς λοιποὺς τῇ τερατείᾳ ταύτῃ θελήσας, καὶ διὰ τοῦ τοιούτου
ψεύσματος ἀφορμὴν ἄλλοις ἀγύρταις παρασχεῖν.

[2146] The 5th Fragment, in Lessing’s 4th Beitrag. Woolston, Disc. 8.

[2147] Ut sup. 56.

[2148] Ullmann, Was setzt die Stiftung der Christlichen Kirche durch
einen Gekreuzigten voraus? In his Studien, 1832, 3, s. 589 f. (Röhr);
Briefe über den Rationalismus, s. 28, 236. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b,
s. 826 f.; Hase, § 146.

[2149] Spinoza, ut sup.: Apostolos omnes omnino credidisse, quod
Christus a morte resurrexerit, et ad cœlum revera ascenderit—ego non
nego. Nam ipse etiam Abrahamus credidit, quod Deus apud ipsum pransus
fuerit—cum tamen hæc et plura alia hujusmodi apparitiones seu
revelationes fuerint, captui et opinionibus eorum hominum accommodatæ,
quibus Deus mentem suam iisdem revelare voluit. Concludo itaque Christi
a mortuis resurrectionem revera spiritualem, et solis fidelibus ad
eorum captum revelata fuisse, nempe quod Christus æternitate donatus
fuit, et a mortuis (mortuos hic intelligo eo sensu, quo Christus dixit:
sinite mortuos sepelire mortuos suos) surrexit, simul atque vita et
morte singularis sanctitatis exemplum dedit, et eatenus discipulos suos
a mortuis suscitat, quatenus ipsi hoc vitæ ejus et mortis exemplum
sequuntur.

[2150] Die evang. Gesch. 2, s. 426 ff.

[2151] Versuch über die Auferstehung Jesu, in Schmidt’s Bibliothek, 2,
4, s. 545 ff.

[2152] Ibid., s. 537; Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 258 f.; Frege, ut sup.
p. 13.

[2153] In his allg. Bibliothek, 6, 1, s. 1 ff.

[2154] Comm. exeg. de repentina Sauli—conversione. In his opusc.
theol.; Fortbildung des Christenth. 2, 1, Kap. 3. Comp. also my
Streitschriften, 2tes Heft, s. 52 ff.

[2155] Gesch. der Pflanzung und Leitung der Christl. Kirche durch die
Apostel, 1, s. 75 ff.

[2156] This is done in the treatise in Schmidt’s Bibliothek, and by
Kaiser, ut sup.

[2157] Comp. Weisse, ut sup. p. 398 ff.

[2158] Comp. Friedrich, in Eichhorn’s Biblioth. 7, s. 223.

[2159] Comp. also Schmidt’s Biblioth. 2, s. 548.

[2160] May the three days’ abode of Jonah in the whale have had any
influence on this determination of time? or the passage in Hosea quoted
above, § 111, note 3? The former is indeed only placed in this
connexion in one gospel, and the latter is nowhere used in the N. T.

[2161] Compare with this explanation the one given by Weisse, in the
7th chapter of his work above quoted. He agrees with the above
representation in regarding the death of Jesus as real, and the
narratives of the grave being found empty as later fabrications; the
point in which he diverges is that above mentioned—that in his view the
appearances of the risen Jesus are not merely psychological and
subjective, but objective magical facts.

[2162] Vol. II. § 68.

[2163] Apol. i. 61.

[2164] As is done by Teller, im excurs. 2, ad Burneti I. de fide et
offic. Christ, p. 262.

[2165] The work of Beckhaus, über die Aechtheit der sog. Taufformel,
1794, met with general approval.

[2166] Comp. De Wette. exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 246.

[2167] Comp. Baur, in the Tübinger Zeitschrift fur Theologie, Jahrgang
1830, 2, s. 75 ff.

[2168] Comm. z. Joh., s. 332.

[2169] Lücke, Comm. z. Joh. 2, s. 686; De Wette, s. 204.

[2170] Less, Auferstehungsgeschichte, s. 281; Kuinöl, in loc.

[2171] Lücke, s. 687.

[2172] Vid. ap. Michaelis, Begräbniss- und Auferstehungsgeschichte, s.
268; Olshausen, 2, s. 533.

[2173] This is Tholuck’s opinion, ut sup.

[2174] Comp. Weisse, die evang. Geschichte, 2, s. 418.

[2175] Gabler, in the neuesten theol. Journal 3, s. 417, and in the
Vorrede zu Griesbach’s opusc. acad. p. xcvi. comp. Kuinöl, in Marc., p.
222.

[2176] Seiler, ap. Kuinöl, ut sup. s. 223.

[2177] Comp. Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b, s. 921; De Wette, Religion und
Theologie, s. 161.

[2178] Kern, Hauptthatsachen, Tüb. Zeitschrift, 1836, 3, s. 58, Comp.
Steudel (Glaubenslehre, s. 323), who supposes the ascension to have
been a vision which God produced in the disciples. Against this comp.
my Streitschriften, 1, s. 152 ff.

[2179] See especially Paulus, ut sup. s. 910 ff.; L. J. 1, b, s. 318
ff.

[2180] Briefe über den Rationalismus, s. 146, Anm. 28.

[2181] Seiler, ap. Kuinöl, ut sup. s. 221; Olshausen, s. 591 f. Comp.
Griesbach, locorum N. T. ad ascensionem Christi in cœlum spectantium
sylloge. In his opusc. acad. ed. Gabler, vol. 2, s. 484 ff.

[2182] Schneckenburger, über den Urspr. u. s. f., s. 19.

[2183] Olshausen, s. 593 f.

[2184] Even Fritzsche, weary at the conclusion of his labour, writes in
Matth., p. 835: Matthæus Jesu in cœlum abitum non commemoravit, quippe
nemini ignotum.

[2185] Michaelis, ut sup. 352.

[2186] The treatise: Warum haben nicht alle Evangelisten die
Himmelfahrt Jesu ausdrücklich miterzählt? in Flatt’s Magazin, 8, s. 67.

[2187] The above-named Treatise in Flatt’s Magazin.

[2188] Schneckenburger, ut sup. s. 19 f.

[2189] As by Kuinöl, p. 208 f., 217.

[2190] Nevertheless comp. De Wette on the Acts, i. 12.

[2191] Vid. Vol. i., § 56, and the authors there cited. The reference
to a reckoning in Daniel, in Paulus, exeg. Handb. 3, b. s. 923, appears
to me too artificial.

[2192] On this subject comp. especially Ammon, Ascensus J. C, in cœlum
historia biblica. In his opusc. nov. p. 43 ff. Fortbildung des
Christenth. 2, 1, s. 13 ff.; also Kaiser, bibl. Theol. 1, s. 83 ff.; de
Wette, exeg. Handb. 1, 1, s. 247; Weisse, die evang. Gesch. 2, p. 375
ff.

[2193] This is also Hase’s opinion, L. J. § 150.

[2194] Joseph. Antiq. iv., viii. 48, it is said of Moses: And as he was
going to embrace Eleazar and Joshua, and was still discoursing with
them, a cloud stood over him on a sudden, and he disappeared in a
certain valley, although he wrote in the holy books that he died, which
was done out of fear, lest they should venture to say that because of
his extraordinary virtue, he went to God. Philo, however, vita Mosis,
opp. ed. Mangey, vol. ii. p. 179, makes the soul only of Moses ascend
into heaven.

[2195] Iren. adv. hær. i. 10. Tertull. de præscr. hær. xiii. adv. Prax.
ii. de veland. virg. i. Orig. de principp. proem. iv.

[2196] Iren. adv. hær. iii. xviii. 7.

[2197] Athanas. contra Arianos, orat. 2, 33.

[2198] Gregor. Naz. Or. 51, p. 740, B.: τὸ γὰρ ἀπρόσληπτον ἀθεράπευμον.
ὃ δὲ ἥνωται τῷ θεῷ, τοῦτο καὶ σώζεται.

[2199] —ἕνα καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν ὁμολογεῖν υἱὸν τὸν κύριον ἡμῶν Ἰ. Χ. συμφώνως
ἄπαντες ἐκδιδάσκομεν, τέλειον τὸν αὐτὸν ἐν θεότητι, καὶ τέλειον τὸν
αὐτὸν ἐν ἀνθρωπότητι, θεὸν ἀληθῶς καὶ ἄνθρωπον ἀληθῶς τὸν αὐτὸν ἐκ
ψυχῆς λογικῆς καὶ σώματος, ὁμοούσιον τῷ πατρὶ κατὰ τὴν θεότητα, καὶ
ὁμοούσιον τὸν αὐτὸν ἡμῖν κατὰ τὴν ἀνθρωπότητα, κατὰ πάντα ὅμοιον ἡμῖν
χωρὶς ἁμαρτίας· πρὸ αἰώνων μὲν ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς γεννηθέντα κατὰ τὴν
θεότητα, ἐπ’ ἐσχάτων δὲ τῶν ἡμερῶν τὸν αὐτὸν δι’ ἡμᾶς καὶ διὰ τὴν
ἡμετέραν σωτηρίαν ἐκ Μαρίας τῆς παρθένου τῆς θεοτόκου κατὰ τὴν
ἀνθρωπότητα, ἕνα καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν Χριστὸν, υἱὸν, κύριον, μονογενῆ, ἐκ δύο
φύσεων ασυνχύτως, ἀτρέπτως, ἀδιαιρέτως, ἀχωρίστως γνωριζόμενον· οὐδαμοῦ
τῆς τῶν φύσεων διαφορᾶς ἀνῃρημένης διὰ τὴν ἕνωσιν, σωζομένης δὲ μᾶλλον
τῆς ἰδιότητος ἑκατέρας φύσεως, καὶ εἰς ἓν πρόσωπον καὶ μίαν ὑπόστασιν
συντρεχούσης· οὐκ εἰς δύο πρόσωπα μεριζόμενον ἣ διαιρούμενον, ἀλλ’ ἔνα
καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν υἱὸν καὶ μονογενῆ, θεὸν λόγον, κύριον Ἰ. Χ.

[2200] The 6th Œcumenical Synod of Constantinople declared: δύο φυσικὰ
θελήματα οὐχ ὑπεναντία,—ἀλλ’ ἑπόμενον τὸ ἀνθρώπινον αὐτοῦ θέλημα—καὶ
ὑποτασσόμενον τῷ θείῷ αὐτοῦ καὶ πανσθενεῖ θελήματι.

[2201] Athanas. de incarn. 54: αὐτὸς ἐνηνθρώπησεν, ἵνα ἡμεῖς
θεοποιηθῶμεν. Greg. Nyt. Orat. cass. 35: τότε τε κατεμίχθη πρὸς τὸ
θεῖον, ἵνα τὸ ἡμέτερον τῇ πρὸς τὸ θεῖον ἐπιμιξίᾳ γένηται θεῖον. Joann.
Damasc. de f. orth. iii. 20: πάντα ἀνέλαβεν (τὰ αδιάβλη τὰ πάθη τοῦ
ἀνθρώπου ὁ Χ.) ἵνα πάντα ἁγιάση. Greg. Naz. or. ii. 23 f. Hilar.
Pictav. de trin. ii. 24: humani generis causa Dei filius natus ex
virgine est—ut homo factus ex virgine naturam in se carnis acciperet
perque hujus admixtionis societatem sanctificatum in eo universi
generis humani corpus existeret. For other expressions of the kind, see
Münscher, Dogmengesch., herausg. von Cölln, 1, § 97, Anm. 10.

[2202] Münscher, § 96, Anm. 5, s. 423 f.

[2203] Augustin, de Catechiz. rudib. 7.

[2204] Vid. Münscher, § 96.

[2205] Ibid. § 97.

[2206] Comp. Form. Concord., Epit. und Sol. decl. VIII. p. 605 ff. and
761 ff. ed. Hase. Chemniz, de duabus naturis in Christo libellus, and
loci theol., loc. 2, de filio; Gerhard. II. th. 1, p. 640 ff. (ed.
1615); Quenstedt, theol. didact. polem. P. 3, c. 3. Comp. De Wette,
bibl. Dogm. § 64 ff.

[2207] See the Oratio appended to the locus de pers. et offic. Chr.
Gerhard, ut sup. p. 719 ff.

[2208] Vid. Gerhard, II. th. 1, p. 685 ff.; Marheineke, Instit. symb. §
71 f.

[2209] Reinhard, Vorles. über die Dogm. s. 354, conformably to the
proposition urged by the Reformed against the Lutherans: Nulla natura
in se ipsam recipit contradictoria, Planck, Gesch. des protest.
Lehrbegriffs, Bd. 6, s. 782.

[2210] Fausti Socini de Christi natura disputatio. Opp. Bibl. Fr. Pol.
1, p. 784; Catech. Racov. Q. 96 ff. Comp. Marheineke, Instit. symb. §
96. Spinoza, also, ep. 21, ad Oldenburg, Opp. ed. Gfrörer, p. 556,
says: Quod quædam ecclesiæ his adduut, quod Deus naturam humanam
assumpserit, monui expresse, me, quid dicant, nescire; imo, ut verum
fatear, non minus absurde mihi loqui videntur, quam si quis mihi
diceret, quod circulus naturam quadrati induerit.

[2211] (Röhr) Briefe über den Rationalismus, s. 378 ff.; Wegscheider
Inst. theol. § 128; Bretschneider, Handb. der Dogm. 2, § 137 ff.; also
Kant, Relig. innerhalb der Gränzen der blossen Vernunft. 2tes St. 2ter
Absch. b.

[2212] Glaubenslehre, 2, §§ 96–98.

[2213] Spinoza, tract. theol. polit. c. vi. p. 133. ed. Gfrörer, and
ep. 23, ad Oldenburg, p. 558 f. Briefe über den Rat., 4ter, 5ter, 6ter,
12ter. Wegscheider, §§ 11, 12. Schleiermacher, §§ 14, 47.

[2214] Prælect. theol. c. xv.

[2215] In the work: defensio fidei cath. de satisfactione Chr. adv. F.
Socinum.

[2216] Summa, P. 3, Q. 48, A. 2.

[2217] Comm. in Sentt. L. 3, Dist. 19.

[2218] See, besides Socinus, Kant, Relig. innerhalb der Grenzen der
blossen Vernunft, 2tes Stück, 1ter Abschn., c.

[2219] Töllner, Der thätige Gehorsam Christi untersucht. 1768.

[2220] Wegscheider, § 199.

[2221] Compare with what follows especially the Briefe über den
Rationalismus, s. 372 ff.; Wegscheider, §§ 128, 133, 140.

[2222] For the different views, see Bretschneider, Dogm. 2, s. 353,
systematische Entwicklung, § 107.

[2223] Röhr, Briefe, s. 36, 405 ff.

[2224] Schleiermacher, on his Glaubenslehre, to Dr. Lücke, 2tes
Sendschreiben, Studien, 2, 3, s. 481 ff.

[2225] Glaubenslehre, 2, §§ 92–105.

[2226] This opinion has been already put forth in the most noted
reviews of Schleiermacher’s system; comp. Braniss, über
Schleiermacher’s Glaubenslehre; H. Schmid, über Schl. Glaubensl. s. 263
ff.; Baur, die christl. Gnosis, s. 626 ff., and the Review of
Rosenkranz, Jahrb. fur wiss. Kritik, 1831.

[2227] 2ter Sendschreiben.

[2228] Schmid, ut sup.

[2229] Comp. Rosenkranz, ut sup. s. 935 ff.

[2230] Baur, ut sup. s. 653.

[2231] Thus Schmid, ut sup. s. 267.

[2232] Ep. 21, ad Oldenburg. Opp. ed. Gfrörer, p. 556:—dico, ad salutem
non esse omnino necesse, Christum secundum carnem noscere; sed ed
æterno illo filio Dei, h. e. Dei æterna sapientia, quæ sese in omnibus
rebus, et maxime in mente humana, et omnium maxime in Christo Jesu
manifestavit, longe aliter sentiendum. Nam nemo absque hac ad statum
beatitudinis potest pervenire, utpote quæ sola docet, quid verum et
falsum, bonum et malum sit.

[2233] Religion innerhalb der Gränzen der blossen Vernunft. drittes
Stück, 1te Abthl. vii.

[2234] Ut sup. 2tes Stück, 1ter Abschn. 3tes Stück, 1te Abthlg.

[2235] This is shown by Baur, christl. Gnosis, s. 660 ff.

[2236] Censur des christl. protestantischen Lehrbegriffs, 3, s. 180.

[2237] Religion und Theologie, 2ter Abschnitt, Kap. 3; comp. bibl.
Dogmatik, § 255; kirchliche, § 64 ff.

[2238] Ideen über Mythologie u. s. w. in Henke’s neuer Magazin, b. s.
454 ff. Comp. Henke’s Museum, 3, s. 455.

[2239] Vorlesungen über die Methode des akademischen Studiums, s. 192.

[2240] Hegel’s Phänomenologie des Geistes, s. 561 ff.; Vorlesungen über
die Philos. der Relig. 2, s. 234 ff. Marheineke, Grundlehren der
christl. Dogmatik. s. 174 ff. Rosenkranz, Encyklopädie der theol.
Wissenschaften, s. 38 ff., 148 ff.; comp. my Streitschriften, 3tes
Heft, s. 76 ff.

[2241] Dogmatik, § 326.

[2242] Encyklopädie, s. 160.

[2243] Selbstbewusstsein und Offenbarung, s. 295 f. Comp. Bauer,
Recens. des L. J., Jahrbücher f. wiss. Kritik, 1836, Mai, s. 699 ff.

[2244] Compare with this my Streitschriften, 3 Heft, s. 68 ff. 125.

[2245] With this should be compared the explanation in the
Streitschriften, ut sup. s. 119.

[2246] Of this also there is an explanation in the Streitschriften, 3,
s. 166 f.

[2247] Herein lies the answer to the objection which Schaller (der
historische Christus und die Philosophie, s. 64 ff.) has made to the
above view; namely, that it teaches only a substantial, not a personal
unity of man with God. That unity which exists in the determination of
the race has already been present in individuals separately, according
to the different measure of their religious development, and thus the
substantial unity has become, in different degrees, a personal unity.

[2248] Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion, 2, s. 263 ff.
Compare the collection of the several propositions of Hegel on the
person of Christ and the evangelical history, in my Streitschriften, 3.
Heft, s. 76.

[2249] Glaubenslehre, 1, s. 47.

[2250] In the 2ten Sendschreiben on his Glaubenslehre.


