CHAPTER I.

RELATIONS BETWEEN JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST.

§ 44.

CHRONOLOGICAL RELATIONS BETWEEN JOHN AND JESUS.

For the ministry of John the Baptist, mentioned in all the Gospels, the
second and fourth evangelists fix no epoch; the first gives us an
inexact one; the third, one apparently precise. According to Matt. iii.
1, John appeared as a preacher of repentance, in those days, ἐν ταῖς
ἡμέραις ἐκείναις, that is, if we interpret strictly this reference to
the previous narrative, about the time when the parents of Jesus
settled at Nazareth, and when Jesus was yet a child. We are told,
however, in the context, that Jesus came to John for baptism; hence
between the first appearance of the Baptist, which was cotemporary with
the childhood of Jesus, and the period at which the latter was
baptized, we must intercalate a number of years, during which Jesus
might have become sufficiently matured to partake of John’s baptism.
But Matthew’s description of the person and work of the Baptist is so
concise, the office attributed to him is so little independent, so
entirely subservient to that of Jesus, that it was certainly not the
intention of the evangelist to assign a long series of years to his
single ministry. His meaning incontestably is, that John’s short career
early attained its goal in the baptism of Jesus.

It being thus inadmissible to suppose between the appearance of John
and the baptism of Jesus, that is, between verses 12 and 13 of the 3rd
chapter of Matthew, the long interval which is in every case
indispensable, nothing remains but to insert it between the close of
the second and the beginning of the third chapter, namely, between the
settlement of the parents of Jesus at Nazareth and the appearance of
the Baptist. To this end we may presume, with Paulus, that Matthew has
here introduced a fragment from a history of the Baptist, narrating
many particulars of his life immediately preceding his public agency,
and very properly proceeding with the words, in those days, ἐν ταῖς
ἡμέραις ἐκείναις, which connecting phrase Matthew, although he omitted
that to which it referred, has nevertheless retained [515]; or we may,
with Süskind, apply the words, not to the settlement, but to the
subsequent residence of Jesus at Nazareth; [516] or better still, ἐν
ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις, like the corresponding Hebrew expression, ‏בַּיָמִים
הַהֵם‎ e.g., Exod. ii. 11, is probably to be interpreted as relating
indeed to the establishment at Nazareth, but so that an event happening
thirty years afterwards may yet be said, speaking indefinitely, to
occur in those days. [517] In neither case do we learn from Matthew
concerning the time of John’s appearance more than the very vague
information, that it took place in the interval between the infancy and
manhood of Jesus.

Luke determines the date of John’s appearance by various synchronisms,
placing it in the time of Pilate’s government in Judea; in the
sovereignty of Herod (Antipas), of Philip and of Lysanias over the
other divisions of Palestine; in the high priesthood of Annas and
Caiaphas; and, moreover, precisely in the 15th year of the reign of
Tiberius, which, reckoning from the death of Augustus, corresponds with
the year 28–29 of our era [518] (iii. 1, 2). With this last and closest
demarcation of time all the foregoing less precise ones agree. Even
that which makes Annas high priest together with Caiaphas appears
correct, if we consider the peculiar influence which, according to John
xviii. 13, Acts iv. 6, that ex-high priest retained, even when deposed,
especially after the assumption of office by his son-in-law, Caiaphas.

A single exception occurs in the statement about Lysanias, whom Luke
makes cotemporary with Antipas and Philip as tetrarch of Abilene.
Josephus, it is true, speaks of an Ἀβίλα ἡ Λυσανίου, and mentions a
Lysanias as governor of Chalcis in Lebanon, near to which lay the
territory of Abila; so that the same Lysanias was probably master of
the latter. But this Lysanias was, at the instigation of Cleopatra, put
to death 34 years before the birth of Christ, and a second Lysanias is
not mentioned either by Josephus or by any other writer on the period
in question. [519] Thus, not only is the time of his government earlier
by 60 years than the 15th year of Tiberius, but it is also at issue
with the other dates associated with it by Luke. Hence it has been
conjectured that Luke here speaks of a younger Lysanias, the descendant
of the earlier one, who possessed Abilene under Tiberius, but who,
being less famous, is not noticed by Josephus. [520] We cannot indeed
prove what Süskind demands for the refutation of this hypothesis,
namely, that had such a younger Lysanias existed, Josephus must have
mentioned him; yet that he had more than one inducement to do so,
Paulus has satisfactorily shown. Especially, when in relation to the
times of the first and second Agrippa he designates Abila, ἡ Λυσανίου,
he must have been reminded that he had only treated of the elder
Lysanias, and not at all of the younger, from whom, as the later ruler,
the country must at that time have derived its second appellation.
[521] If, according to this, the younger Lysanias is but an historic
fiction, the proposed alternative is but a philological one. [522] For
when it is said in the first place: Φιλίππου — τετραρχοῦντος τῆς
Ἰτουραίας, κ.τ.λ., and when it follows: καὶ Λυσανίου τῆς Ἀβιληνῆς
τετραρχοῦντος: we cannot possibly understand from this, that Philip
reigned also over the Abilene of Lysanias. For in that case the word
τετραρχοῦντος ought not to have been repeated, [523] and τῆς ought to
have been placed before Lysanias, if the author wished to avoid
misconstruction. The conclusion is therefore inevitable that the writer
himself erred, and, from the circumstance that Abilene, even in recent
times, was called, after the last ruler of the former dynasty, ἡ
Λυσανίου, drew the inference that a monarch of that name was still
existing; while, in fact, Abilene either belonged to Philip, or was
immediately subject to the Romans. [524]

The above chronological notation relates directly to John the Baptist
alone; a similar one is wanting when Luke begins farther on (v. 21 ff.)
to speak of Jesus. Of him it is merely said that he was about thirty
years of age, ὡσεὶ ἐτῶν τριάκοντα, on his public appearance
(ἀρχόμενος), but no date is given; while, in the case of John, there is
a contrary omission. Thus even if John commenced his ministry in the
15th year of Tiberius, we cannot thence gather anything as to the time
when Jesus commenced his, as it is nowhere said how long John had been
baptizing when Jesus came to him on the Jordan; while, on the other
hand, although we know that Jesus, at his baptism, was about 30 years
old, this does not help us to ascertain the age of John when he entered
on his ministry as Baptist. Remembering, however, Luke i. 26, according
to which John was just half a year older than Jesus, and calling to our
aid the fact that Jewish usage would scarcely permit the exercise of
public functions before the thirtieth year, we might infer that the
Baptist could only have appeared half a year before the arrival of
Jesus on the banks of the Jordan, since he would only so much earlier
have attained the requisite age. But no express law forbade a public
appearance previous to the thirtieth year; and it has been justly
questioned whether we can apply to the freer office of a Prophet a
restriction which concerned the Priests and Levites, for whom the
thirtieth year was fixed for their entrance on regular service [525]
(Num. iv. 3, 47. Compare besides 2 Chron. xxxi. 17, where the 20th year
is named). This then would not hinder us from placing the appearance of
John considerably prior to that of Jesus, even presupposing the averred
relation between their ages. Hardly, however, could this be the
intention of the Evangelist. For to ascertain so carefully the date of
the Forerunner’s appearance, and leave that of the Messiah himself
undetermined, would be too great an oversight, [526] and we cannot but
suppose that his design, in the particulars he gives concerning John,
was to fix the time for the appearance of Jesus. To agree with this
purpose, he must have understood that Jesus came to the banks of the
Jordan and began to teach, shortly after the appearance of John. [527]
For that the above chronological determination was originally merely
the introduction to a document concerning John, quoted by Luke, is
improbable, since its exactness corresponds with the style of him who
had perfect understanding of all things from the very first,
παρηκολουθηκότι ἄνωθεν πᾶσιν ἀκριβῶς, and who sought to determine, in
like manner, the epoch of the Messiah’s birth.

It is not easy, however, to imagine, in accordance with this statement,
that John was by so little the predecessor of Jesus, nor is it without
reason that the improbability of his having had so short an agency is
maintained. For he had a considerable number of disciples, whom he not
only baptized, but taught (Luke xi. 1), and he left behind a party of
his peculiar followers (Acts xviii. 25, xix. 3), all which could hardly
be the work of a few months. There needed time, it has been observed,
for the Baptist to become so well known, that people would undertake a
journey to him in the wilderness; there needed time for his doctrine to
be comprehended, time for it to gain a footing and establish itself,
especially as it clashed with the current Jewish ideas; in a word, the
deep and lasting veneration in which John was held by his nation,
according to Josephus [528] as well as the evangelists, could not have
been so hastily won. [529]

But the foregoing considerations, although they demand, in general, a
longer agency for the Baptist, do not prove that the evangelists err in
placing the commencement of his ministry shortly before that of Jesus,
since they might suppose the required prolongation as a sequel, instead
of an introduction, to the appearance of Jesus. Such a prolongation of
the Baptist’s ministry, however, is not to be found, at least in the
first two Gospels; for not only do these contain no details concerning
John, after the baptism of Jesus, except his sending two disciples
(Matt. xi.), which is represented as a consequence of his imprisonment;
but we gather from Matt. iv. 12, Mark i. 14, that during or shortly
after the forty days’ abode of Jesus in the wilderness, the Baptist was
arrested, and thereupon Jesus went into Galilee, and entered on his
public career. Luke, it is true (iv. 14), does not mention the
imprisonment of John as the cause of the appearance of Jesus in
Galilee, and he seems to regard the commission of the two disciples as
occurring while John was at large (vii. 18 ff.); and the fourth
Evangelist testifies yet more decisively against the notion that John
was arrested so soon after the baptism of Jesus; for in chap. iii. 24,
it is expressly stated, that John was actively engaged in his ministry
after the first passover, attended by Jesus during His public life. But
on the one hand, as it appears from Luke ix. 9; Matt. xiv. 1 ff.; Mark
xiv. 16, that John was put to death long before Jesus, the continuance
of his agency after the rise of the latter could not be very protracted
(Luke ix. 9; Matt. xiv. 1 ff.; Mark xiv. 16); and on the other, that
which may be added to the agency of John after the appearance of Jesus,
will not make amends for that which is subtracted from it before that
epoch. For, apart from the fact implied by the fourth Evangelist (i.
35), that the Baptist had formed a definite circle of familiar
disciples before the appearance of Jesus, it would be difficult to
account for the firm footing acquired by his school, if he had laboured
only a few months, to be, at their close, eclipsed by Jesus.

There is yet one resource, namely, to separate the baptism of Jesus
from the commencement of his ministry, and to say: It was indeed after
the first half-year of John’s agency that Jesus was so attracted by his
fame, as to become a candidate for his baptism; but for some time
subsequently, he either remained among the followers of the Baptist, or
went again into retirement, and did not present himself independently
until a considerable interval had elapsed. By this means we should
obtain the requisite extension of John’s ministry prior to the more
brilliant career of Jesus, without impugning the apparent statement of
our evangelists that the baptism of Jesus followed close upon the
public appearance of John. But the idea of a long interim, between the
baptism of Jesus and the commencement of his ministry, is utterly
foreign to the New Testament writers. For that they regard the baptism
of Jesus as his consecration to the Messianic office, is proved by the
accompanying descent of the spirit and the voice from heaven; the only
pause which they allow to intervene, is the six weeks’ fast in the
wilderness, immediately after which, according to Luke, or after the
apparently cotemporary arrest of the Baptist, according to Matthew and
Mark, Jesus appears in Galilee. Luke, in particular, by designating
(iii. 23) the baptism of Jesus as his ἄρχεσθαι, his assumption of
office, and by dating the intercourse of Jesus with his disciples from
the βάπτισμα Ἰωάννου (Acts i. 22), evinces his persuasion that the
baptism and public manifestation of Jesus were identical.

Thus the gospel narrative is an obstacle to the adoption of the two
most plausible expedients for the prolongation of John’s ministry,
viz., that Jesus presented himself for baptism later, or that his
public appearance was retarded longer after his baptism, than has been
generally inferred. We are not, however, compelled to renounce either
of these suppositions, if we can show that the New Testament writers
might have been led to their point of view even without historical
grounds. A sufficient motive lies close at hand, and is implied in the
foregoing observations. Let the Baptist once be considered, as was the
case in the Christian Church (Acts xix. 4), not a person of independent
significance, but simply a Forerunner of the Christ; and the
imagination would not linger with the mere Precursor, but would hasten
forward to the object at which he pointed. Yet more obvious is the
interest which primitive Christian tradition must have had in
excluding, whatever might have been the fact, any interval between the
baptism of Jesus and the beginning of his public course. For to allow
that Jesus, by his submission to John’s baptism, declared himself his
disciple, and remained in that relation for any length of time, was
offensive to the religious sentiment of the new church, which desired a
Founder instructed by God, and not by man: another turn, therefore,
would soon be given to the facts, and the baptism of Jesus would be
held to signify, not his initiation into the school of John, but a
consecration to his independent office. Thus the diverging testimony of
the evangelists does not preclude our adopting the conclusion to which
the nature of the case leads us; viz., that the Baptist had been long
labouring, anterior to the appearance of Jesus.

If, in addition to this, we accept the statement of Luke (i. 26 and
iii. 23), that Jesus, being only half a year younger than John, was
about in his thirtieth year at his appearance, we must suppose that
John was in his twentieth year when he began his ministry. There is, as
we have seen, no express law against so early an exercise of the
prophetic office; neither do I, so decidedly as Cludius, [530] hold it
improbable that so young a preacher of repentance should make an
impression, or even that he should be taken for a prophet of the olden
time—an Elias; I will only appeal to the ordinary course of things as a
sanction for presuming, that one who entered so much earlier upon the
scene of action was proportionately older, especially when the
principles and spirit of his teaching tell so plainly of a mature age
as do the discourses of John. There are exceptions to this rule; but
the statement of Luke (i. 26), that John was only six months older than
Jesus, is insufficient to establish one in this instance, as it accords
with the interest of the poetical legend, and must therefore be
renounced for the slightest improbability.

The result then of our critique on the chronological data Luke iii. 1,
2, comp. 23 and i. 26, is this: if Jesus, as Luke seems to understand,
appeared in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, the appearance of John
occurred, not in the same year, but earlier; and if Jesus was in his
thirtieth year when he began his ministry, the Baptist, so much his
predecessor, could hardly be but six months his senior.




§ 45.

APPEARANCE AND DESIGN OF THE BAPTIST. HIS PERSONAL RELATIONS WITH
JESUS.

John, a Nazarite, according to our authorities (Matt. iii. 4, ix. 14,
xi. 18; Luke i. 15), and in the opinion of several theologians, [531]
an Essene, is said by Luke (iii. 2) to have been summoned to his public
work by the word of God ῥῆμα Θεοῦ, which came to him in the wilderness.
Not possessing the Baptist’s own declaration, we cannot accept as
complete the dilemma stated by Paulus, [532] when he says, that we know
not whether John himself interpreted some external or internal fact as
a divine call, or whether he received a summons from another
individual; and we must add as a third possibility, that his followers
sought to dignify the vocation of their Teacher by an expression which
recalls to mind the ancient Prophets.

While from the account of Luke it appears that the divine call came to
John in the wilderness, ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, but that for the purpose of
teaching and baptizing he resorted to the country about Jordan,
περίχωρος τοῦ Ἰορδάνου (ver. 3); Matthew (iii. ff.) makes the
wilderness of Judea the scene of his labours, as if the Jordan in which
he baptized flowed through that wilderness. It is true that, according
to Josephus, the Jordan before emptying itself into the Dead Sea
traverses a great wilderness, πολλὴν ἐρημίαν, [533] but this was not
the wilderness of Judea, which lay farther south. [534] Hence it has
been supposed that Matthew, misled by his application of the prophecy,
the voice of one crying in the wilderness, φωνὴ βοῶντος ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, to
John, who issued from the wilderness of Judea, ἔρημος τῆς Ἰουδαίας,
placed there his labours as a preacher of repentance and a baptizer,
although their true scene was the blooming valley of the Jordan. [535]
In the course of Luke’s narrative, however, this evangelist ceases to
intimate that John forsook the wilderness after receiving his call, for
on the occasion of John’s message to Jesus, he makes the latter ask,
Whom went ye out into the wilderness to see? Τί ἐξεληλύθατε εἰς τὴν
ἔρημον θεάσασθαι (vii. 24). Now as the valley of the Jordan in the
vicinity of the Dead Sea was in fact a barren plain, the narrow margin
of the river excepted, no greater mistake may belong to Matthew than
that of specifying the wilderness as the ἔρημος τῆς Ἰουδαίας; and even
that may be explained away by the supposition, either that John, as he
alternately preached and baptized, passed from the wilderness of Judea
to the borders of the Jordan, [536] or that the waste tract through
which that river flowed, being a continuation of the wilderness of
Judea, retained the same name. [537]

The baptism of John could scarcely have been derived from the baptism
of proselytes, [538] for this rite was unquestionably posterior to the
rise of Christianity. It was more analogous to the religious
lustrations in practice amongst the Jews, especially the Essenes, and
was apparently founded chiefly on certain expressions used by several
of the prophets in a figurative sense, but afterwards understood
literally. According to these expressions, God requires from the
Israelitish people, as a condition of their restoration to his favour,
a washing and purification from their iniquity, and he promises that he
will himself cleanse them with water (Isaiah i. 16, Ez. xxxvi. 25,
comp. Jer. ii. 22). Add to this the Jewish notion that the Messiah
would not appear with his kingdom until the Israelites repented, [539]
and we have the combination necessary for the belief that an ablution,
symbolical of conversion and forgiveness of sins, must precede the
advent of the Messiah.

Our accounts are not unanimous as to the signification of John’s
baptism. They all, it is true, agree in stating repentance, μετάνοια,
to be one of its essential requirements; for even what Josephus says of
the Baptist, that he admonished the Jews, practising virtue, just
towards each other, and devout towards God, to come to his baptism,
ἀρετὴν ἐπασκοῦντας, καὶ τῇ πρὸς ἀλλήλους δικαιοσύνῃ καὶ πρὸς τὸν Θεὸν
εὐσεβεία χρωμένους βαπτισμῷ συνιέναι, [540] has the same sense under a
Greek form. Mark and Luke, however, while designating the baptism of
John, βάπτισμα μετανοίας, add, εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν (i. 4, iii. 3).
Matthew has not the same addition; but he, with Mark, describes the
baptized as confessing their sins, ἐξομολογοὺμενοι τὰς ἁμαρτίας αὐτῶν
(iii. 6). Josephus, on the other hand, appears in direct contradiction
to them, when he gives it as the opinion of the Baptist, that baptism
is pleasing to God, not when we ask pardon for some transgressions, but
when we purify the body, after having first purified the mind by
righteousness, οὕτω γὰρ καὶ τὴν βάπτισιν ἀποδεκτὴν αὐτῷ (τῷ Θεῷ)
φανεῖσθαι, μὴ ἐπί τίνων ἁμαρτάδων παραιτήσει χρωμένων, ἀλλ’ ἐφ’ ἁγνείᾳ
τοῦ σώματος, ἄτε δὴ, καὶ τῆς ψυχῆς δικαιοσύνῃ προεκκεκαθαρμένης. We
might here be led to the supposition that the words for the remission
of sins, εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν, as in Acts ii. 38, and other passages,
was commonly used in relation to Christian baptism, and was thence
transferred unhistorically to that of John; but as in the passages
quoted from Ezekiel the washing typified not only reformation but
forgiveness, the probabilities are in favour of the evangelical
statement. Moreover, it is possible to reconcile Josephus and the
Evangelists, by understanding the words of the former to mean that the
baptism of John was intended to effect a purification, not from
particular or merely Levitical transgressions, but of the entire man,
not immediately and mysteriously through the agency of water, but by
means of the moral acts of reformation. [541]

The several accounts concerning John are farther at variance, as to the
relation in which they place his baptism to the kingdom of heaven,
βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν. According to Matthew, the concise purport of the
appeal with which he accompanied his baptism was, Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand, μετανοεῖτε’ ἤγγικε γὰρ ἡ βασιλεία τῶν
οὐρανῶν (iii. 2); according to Luke, the Baptist in the first instance
mentions only repentance and remission of sins, but no kingdom of
heaven; and it is the conjecture of the people, that he might be the
Messiah, by which he is first led to direct them to one who was coming
after him (iii. 15 ff.). In Josephus, there is no trace of a relation
between the ministry of John and the Messianic idea. Yet we must not
therefore conclude that the Baptist himself recognized no such
relation, and that its only source was the Christian legend. For the
baptism of John, waiving the opinion that it was derived from the
baptism of proselytes, is not quite explicable without a reference to
the above-mentioned expiatory lustrations of the people—lustrations
which were to usher in the times of the Messiah; moreover, the
appearance of Jesus is made more comprehensible by the supposition,
that John had introduced the idea of the proximity of the Messiah’s
kingdom. That Josephus should keep back the Messianic aspect of the
fact, is in accordance with his general practice, which is explained by
the position of his people with respect to the Romans. Besides, in the
expression, to assemble for baptism, βαπτισμῷ συνιέναι, in his mention
of popular assemblages, συστρέφεσθαι, and in the fear of Antipas lest
John should excite a revolt, ἀπόστασις there lies an intimation of
precisely such a religious and political movement as the hope of the
Messiah was calculated to produce. That the Baptist should so
distinctly foretell the immediate appearance of the Messiah’s kingdom
must create surprise, and (Luke’s reference to a divine call and
revelation being held unsatisfactory) might lead to the supposition
that the Christian narrator, believing that the true Messiah was
actually manifested in the person of Jesus, the cotemporary of John,
gave to the language of the latter a definiteness which did not belong
to it originally; and while the Baptist merely said, consonantly with
the Jewish notion already mentioned: Repent, that the kingdom of heaven
may come, μετανοεῖτε, ἵνα ἔλθῃ ἡ βας. τ. οὐρ., a later edition of his
words gave γὰρ (for) instead of ἵνα (that). But such a supposition is
needless. In those times of commotion, John might easily believe that
he discerned signs, which certified to him the proximity of the
Messiah’s kingdom; the exact degree of its proximity he left undecided.

According to the Evangelists, the coming of the kingdom of heaven,
βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν, was associated by John with a Messianic
individual to whom he ascribed, in distinction from his own baptism
with water, a baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, βαπτίζειν
πνεύματι ἁγίῳ καὶ πυρὶ (Matt. iii. 11 parall.), the outpouring of the
Holy Spirit being regarded as a leading feature of the Messianic times
(Joel ii. 28; Acts ii. 16 ff.). Of this personage he farther predicted,
in imagery akin to that used by the prophets on the same subject, that
he would winnow the people as wheat (Mal. iii. 2, 3; Zech. xiii. 9).
The Synoptical Gospels state the case as if John expressly understood
this Messianic individual to be Jesus of Nazareth. According to Luke,
indeed, the mothers of these two men were cousins, and aware of the
destination of their sons. The Baptist while yet unborn acknowledged
the divinity of Jesus, and all the circumstances imply that both were
early acquainted with their relative position, predetermined by a
heavenly communication. Matthew, it is true, says nothing of such a
family connexion between John and Jesus; but when the latter presents
himself for baptism, he puts into the mouth of John words which seem to
presuppose an earlier acquaintance. His expression of astonishment that
Jesus should come to him for baptism, when he had need to be baptized
of Jesus, could only arise from a previous knowledge or instantaneous
revelation of his character. Of the latter there is no intimation; for
the first visible sign of the Messiahship of Jesus did not occur till
afterwards. While in the first and third Gospels (in the second, the
facts are so epitomized that the writer’s view on the subject is not
evident), John and Jesus seem to have been no strangers to each other
prior to the baptism; in the fourth, the Baptist pointedly asserts that
he knew not Jesus before the heavenly appearance, which, according to
the Synoptical Gospels, was coincident with his baptism (i. 31, 33).
Simply considered, this looks like a contradiction. By Luke, the
previous acquaintance of the two is stated objectively, as an external
matter of fact; by Matthew, it is betrayed in the involuntary
confession of the astonished Baptist; in the fourth Gospel, on the
contrary, their previous unacquaintance is attested subjectively, by
his premeditated assertion. It was not, therefore, a very far-fetched
idea of the Wolfenbüttel fragmentist, to put down the contradiction to
the account of John and Jesus, and to presume that they had in fact
long known and consulted each other, but that in public (in order
better to play into one another’s hands) they demeaned themselves as if
they had hitherto been mutual strangers, and each delivered an
unbiassed testimony to the other’s excellence. [542]

That such premeditated dissimulation might not be imputed to John, and
indirectly to Jesus, it has been sought to disprove the existence of
the contradiction in question exegetically. What John learned from the
heavenly sign was the Messiahship of Jesus; to this therefore, and not
to his person, refer the words, I knew him not, κᾀγὼ οὐκ ᾔδειν αὐτὸν.
[543] But it may be questioned whether such an acquaintance as John
must have had with Jesus, presupposing the narrative of Matthew and
Luke, was separable from a knowledge of his Messiahship. The connection
and intercourse of the two families, as described by Luke, would render
it impossible for John not to be early informed how solemnly Jesus had
been announced as the Messiah, before and at his birth; he could not
therefore say at a later period that, prior to the sign from heaven, he
had not known, but only that he had not believed, the story of former
wonders, one of which relates to himself. [544] It being thus
unavoidable to acknowledge that by the above declaration in the fourth
Gospel, the Baptist is excluded, not only from a knowledge of the
Messiahship of Jesus, but also from a personal acquaintance with him;
it has been attempted to reconcile the first chapter of Luke with this
ignorance, by appealing to the distance of residence between the two
families, as a preventive to the continuance of their intercourse.
[545] But if the journey from Nazareth to the hill country of Judea was
not too formidable for the betrothed Mary, how could it be so for the
two sons when ripening to maturity? What culpable indifference is
hereby supposed in both families to the heavenly communications they
had received! nay, what could be the object of those communications, if
they had no influence on the early life and intercourse of the two
sons? [546]

Let it be granted that the fourth Gospel excludes an acquaintance with
the Messiahship only of Jesus, and that the third presupposes an
acquaintance with his person only, on the part of John; still the
contradiction is not removed. For in Matthew, John, when required to
baptize Jesus, addresses him as if he knew him, not generally and
personally alone, but specially, in his character of Messiah. It is
true that the words: I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest
thou to me? (iii. 14), have been interpreted, in the true spirit of
harmonizing, as referring to the general superior excellence of Jesus,
and not to his Messiahship. [547] But the right to undertake the
baptism which was to prepare the way for the Messiah’s kingdom, was not
to be obtained by moral superiority in general, but was conferred by a
special call, such as John himself had received, and such as could
belong only to a prophet, or to the Messiah and his Forerunner (John i.
19 ff.). If then John attributed to Jesus authority to baptize, he must
have regarded him not merely as an excellent man, but as indubitably a
prophet, nay, since he held him worthy to baptize himself, as his own
superior: that is, since John conceived himself to be the Messiah’s
Forerunner, no other than the Messiah himself. Add to this, that
Matthew had just cited a discourse of the Baptist, in which he ascribes
to the coming Messiah a baptism more powerful than his own; how then
can we understand his subsequent language towards Jesus otherwise than
thus: “Of what use is my water baptism to thee, O Messiah? Far more do
I need thy baptism of the Spirit!” [548]

The contradiction cannot be cleared away; we must therefore, if we
would not lay the burthen of intentional deception on the agents, let
the narrators bear the blame; and there will be the less hindrance to
our doing so, the more obvious it is how one or both of them might be
led into an erroneous statement. There is in the present case no
obstacle to the reconciliation of Matthew with the fourth evangelist,
farther than the words by which the Baptist seeks to deter Jesus from
receiving baptism; words which, if uttered before the occurrence of
anything supernatural, presuppose a knowledge of Jesus in his character
of Messiah. Now the Gospel of the Hebrews, according to Epiphanius,
places the entreaty of John that Jesus would baptize him, as a sequel
to the sign from heaven; [549] and this account has been recently
regarded as the original one, abridged by the writer of our first
Gospel, who, for the sake of effect, made the refusal and confession of
the Baptist coincident with the first approach of Jesus. [550] But that
we have not in the Gospel of the Hebrews the original form of the
narrative, is sufficiently proved by its very tedious repetition of the
heavenly voice and the diffuse style of the whole. It is rather a very
traditional record, and the insertion of John’s refusal after the sign
and voice from heaven, was not made with the view of avoiding a
contradiction of the fourth Gospel, which cannot be supposed to have
been recognized in the circle of the Ebionite Christians, but from the
very motive erroneously attributed to Matthew in his alleged
transposition, namely, to give greater effect to the scene. A simple
refusal on the part of the Baptist appeared too weak; he must at least
fall at the feet of Jesus; and a more suitable occasion could not be
given than that of the sign from heaven, which accordingly must be
placed beforehand. This Hebrew Gospel, therefore, will not help us to
understand how Matthew was led into contradiction with John; still less
will it avail for the explanation of Luke’s narrative.

All is naturally explained by the consideration, that the important
relation between John and Jesus must have been regarded as existing at
all times, by reason of that ascription of pre-existence to the
essential which is a characteristic of the popular mind. Just as the
soul, when considered as an essence, is conceived more or less clearly
as pre-existent; so in the popular mind, every relation pregnant with
consequences is endowed with pre-existence. Hence the Baptist, who
eventually held so significant a relation to Jesus, must have known him
from the first, as is indistinctly intimated by Matthew, and more
minutely detailed by Luke; according to whom, their mothers knew each
other, and the sons themselves were brought together while yet unborn.
All this is wanting in the fourth Gospel, the writer of which
attributes an opposite assertion to John, simply because in his mind an
opposite interest preponderated; for the less Jesus was known to John
by whom he was afterwards so extolled, the more weight was thrown on
the miraculous scene which arrested the regards of the Baptist—the more
clearly was his whole position with respect to Jesus demonstrated to be
the effect, not of the natural order of events, but of the immediate
agency of God.




§ 46.

WAS JESUS ACKNOWLEDGED BY JOHN AS THE MESSIAH? AND IN WHAT SENSE?

To the foregoing question whether Jesus was known to John before the
baptism, is attached another, namely, What did John think of Jesus and
his Messiahship? The evangelical narratives are unanimous in stating,
that before Jesus had presented himself for baptism, John had announced
the immediate coming of One to whom he stood in a subordinate relation;
and the scene at the baptism of Jesus marked him, beyond mistake, as
the personage of whom John was the forerunner. According to Mark and
Luke, we must presume that the Baptist gave credence to this sign;
according to the fourth Gospel, he expressly attested his belief (i.
34), and moreover uttered words which evince the deepest insight into
the higher nature and office of Jesus (i. 29 ff. 36; iii. 27 ff.);
according to the first Gospel, he was already convinced of these before
the baptism of Jesus. On the other hand, Matthew (xi. 2 ff.) and Luke
(vii. 18 ff.) tell us that at a later period, the Baptist, on hearing
of the ministry of Jesus, despatched some of his disciples to him with
the inquiry, whether he (Jesus) was the promised Messiah, or whether
another must be expected.

The first impression from this is, that the question denoted an
uncertainty on the part of the Baptist whether Jesus were really the
Messiah; and so it was early understood. [551] But such a doubt is in
direct contradiction with all the other circumstances reported by the
Evangelists. It is justly regarded as psychologically impossible that
he whose belief was originated or confirmed by the baptismal sign,
which he held to be a divine revelation, and who afterwards pronounced
so decidedly on the Messianic call and the superior nature of Jesus,
should all at once have become unsteady in his conviction; he must then
indeed have been like a reed shaken by the wind, a comparison which
Jesus abnegates on this very occasion (Matt. xi. 7). A cause for such
vacillation is in vain sought in the conduct or fortunes of Jesus at
the time; for the rumour of the works of Christ, ἔργα τοῦ Χριστοῦ,
which in Luke’s idea were miracles, could not awaken doubt in the
Baptist, and it was on this rumour that he sent his message. Lastly,
how could Jesus subsequently (John v. 33 ff.) so confidently appeal to
the testimony of the Baptist concerning him, when it was known that
John himself was at last perplexed about his Messiahship? [552]

Hence it has been attempted to give a different turn to the facts, and
to show that John’s inquiry was not made on his own account, but for
the sake of his disciples, to overcome in them the doubt with which he
was himself untainted. [553] Hereby it is true, the above-named
difficulties are removed; in particular it is explained why the Baptist
should contrive to send this message precisely on hearing of the
miracles of Jesus; he plainly hoping that his disciples, who had not
believed his testimony to the Messiahship of Jesus, would be convinced
of its truth by beholding the marvellous works of the latter. But how
could John hope that his envoys would chance to find Jesus in the act
of working miracles? According to Matthew, indeed, they did not so find
him, and Jesus appeals (v. 4) only to his former works, many of which
they had seen, and of which they might hear wherever he had presented
himself. Luke alone, in giving his evidently second-hand narrative,
[554] misconstrues the words of Jesus to require that the disciples of
John should have found him in the exercise of his supernatural power.
Further, if it had been the object of the Baptist to persuade his
disciples by a sight of the works of Jesus, he would not have charged
them with a question which could be answered by the mere words, the
authentic declaration of Jesus. For he could not hope by the assertion
of the person whose Messiahship was the very point in debate, to
convince the disciples whom his own declaration, in other cases
authoritative, had failed to satisfy. On the whole, it would have been
a singular course in the Baptist to lend his own words to the doubts of
others, and thereby, as Schleiermacher well observes, to compromise his
early and repeated testimony in favour of Jesus. It is clear that Jesus
understood the question proposed to him by the messengers as proceeding
from John himself; (ἀπαγγείλατε Ἰωάννῃ, Matt. xi. 4;) and he indirectly
complained of the want of faith in the latter by pronouncing those
blessed who were not offended in him (ver. 6). [555]

If then it must be granted that John made his inquiry on his own
behalf, and not on that of his disciples, and if nevertheless we cannot
impute to him a sudden lapse into doubt after his previous confidence;
nothing remains but to take the positive instead of the negative side
of the question, and to consider its scepticism as the mere garb of
substantial encouragement. [556] On this interpretation, the time which
Jesus allowed to escape without publicly manifesting himself as the
Messiah, seemed too tedious to John in his imprisonment; he sent
therefore to inquire how long Jesus would allow himself to be waited
for, how long he would delay winning to himself the better part of the
people by a declaration of his Messiahship, and striking a decisive
blow against the enemies of his cause—a blow that might even liberate
the Baptist from his prison. But if the Baptist, on the strength of his
belief that Jesus was the Messiah, hoped and sued for a deliverance,
perhaps miraculous, by him from prison, he would not clothe in the
language of doubt an entreaty which sprang out of his faith. Now the
inquiry in our evangelical text is one of unmixed doubt, and
encouragement must be foisted in, before it can be found there. How
great a violence must be done to the words is seen by the way in which
Schleiermacher handles them in accordance with this interpretation. The
dubitative question, σὺ εἶ ὁ ἐρχόμενος; he changes into the positive
assumption, thou art he who was to come; the other still more
embarrassing interrogatory, ἢ ἕτερον προσδοκῶμεν; he completely
transfigures thus: wherefore (seeing that thou performest so great
works) do we yet await thee?—shall not John with all his authority
command, through us, all those who have partaken of his baptism to obey
thee as the Messiah, and be attentive to thy signs? Even if we allow,
with Neander, the possibility of truth to this interpretation, a mere
summons to action will not accord with the earlier representation of
Jesus given by the Baptist. The two enunciations are at issue as to
form; for if John doubted not the Messiahship of Jesus, neither could
he doubt his better knowledge of the fitting time and manner of his
appearance: still farther are they at issue as to matter; for the
Baptist could not take offence at what is termed the delay of Jesus in
manifesting himself as the Messiah, or wish to animate him to bolder
conduct, if he retained his early view of the destination of Jesus. If
he still, as formerly, conceived Jesus to be the Lamb of God that
taketh away the sins of the world, ὁ ἀμνὸς τοῦ Τεοῦ, ὁ αἴρων τὴν
ἁμαρτίαν τοῦ κόσμοῦ, no thought could occur to him of a blow to be
struck by Jesus against his enemies, or in general, of a violent
procedure to be crowned by external conquest; rather, the quiet path
which Jesus trod must appear to him the right one—the path befitting
the destination of the Lamb of God. Thus if the question of John
conveyed a mere summons to action, it contradicted his previous views.

These expedients failing, the original explanation returns upon us;
namely, that the inquiry was an expression of uncertainty respecting
the messianic dignity of Jesus, which had arisen in the Baptist’s own
mind; an explanation which even Neander allows to be the most natural.
This writer seeks to account for the transient apostacy of the Baptist
from the strong faith in which he gave his earlier testimony, by the
supposition that a dark hour of doubt had overtaken the man of God in
his dismal prison; and he cites instances of men who, persecuted for
their Christian faith or other convictions, after having long borne
witness to the truth in the face of death, at length yielded to human
weakness and recanted. But on a closer examination, he has given a
false analogy. Persecuted Christians of the first centuries, and,
later, a Berengarius or a Galileo, were false to the convictions for
which they were imprisoned, and by abjuring which they hoped to save
themselves: the Baptist, to be compared with them, should have
retracted his censure of Herod, and not have shaken his testimony in
favour of Christ, which had no relation to his imprisonment. However
that may be, it is evident here that these doubts cannot have been
preceded by a state of certainty.

We come again to the difficulty arising from the statement of Matthew
that John sent his two disciples on hearing of the works of Christ,
ἀκούσας τὰ ἔργα τοῦ Χριστοῦ, or as Luke has it, because his disciples
showed him of all these things, ἀπήγγειλαν περὶ πάντων τούτων. The
latter evangelist has narrated, immediately before, the raising of the
widow’s son, and the healing of the centurion’s servant. Could John,
then, believe Jesus to be the Messiah before he had performed any
messianic works, and be seized with doubt when he began to legitimatize
his claim by miracles such as were expected from the Messiah [557]?
This is so opposed to all psychological probability, that I wonder Dr.
Paulus, or some other expositor versed in psychology and not timid in
verbal criticism, has not started the conjecture that a negative has
slipped out of Matt. xi. 2, and that its proper reading is, ὁ δὲ
Ἰωάννης οὐκ ἀκούσας ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ Χριστοῦ, κ.τ.λ. It
might then be conceived, that John had indeed been convinced, at a
former period, of the Messiahship o£ Jesus; now, however, in his
imprisonment, the works of Jesus came no longer to his ears, and
imagining him inactive, he was assailed with doubt. But had John been
previously satisfied of the Messiahship of Jesus, the mere want of
acquaintance with his miracles could not have unhinged his faith. The
actual cause of John’s doubt, however, was the report of these
miracles;—a state of the case which is irreconcilable with any previous
confidence.

But how could he become uncertain about the Messiahship of Jesus, if he
had never recognised it? Not indeed in the sense of beginning to
suspect that Jesus was not the Messiah; but quite possibly in the sense
of beginning to conjecture that a man of such deeds was the Messiah.

We have here, not a decaying, but a growing certainty, and this
discrimination throws light on the whole purport of the passages in
question. John knew nothing of Jesus before, but that he had, like many
others, partaken of his baptism, and perhaps frequented the circle of
his disciples; and not until after the imprisonment of the Baptist did
Jesus appear as a teacher, and worker of miracles. Of this John heard,
and then arose in his mind a conjecture, fraught with hope, that as he
had announced the proximity of the Messiah’s kingdom, this Jesus might
be he who would verify his idea. [558] So interpreted, this message of
the Baptist excludes his previous testimony; if he had so spoken
formerly, he could not have so inquired latterly, and vice versâ. It is
our task, therefore, to compare the two contradictory statements, that
we may ascertain which has more traces than the other, of truth or
untruth.

The most definite expressions of John’s conviction that Jesus was the
Messiah are found in the fourth Gospel, and these suggest two distinct
questions: first, whether it be conceivable that John had such a notion
of the Messiah as is therein contained; and, secondly, whether it be
probable that he believed it realized in the person of Jesus.

With respect to the former, the fourth Gospel makes the Baptist’s idea
of the Messiah include the characteristics of expiatory suffering, and
of a premundane, heavenly existence. It has been attempted, indeed, so
to interpret the expressions with which he directs his disciples to
Jesus, as to efface the notion of expiatory suffering. Jesus, we are
told, is compared to a lamb on account of his meekness and patience;
αἴρειν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν τοῦ κόσμου, is to be understood either of a patient
endurance of the world’s malice, or of an endeavour to remove the sins
of the world by reforming it; and the sense of the Baptist’s words is
this: “How moving is it that this meek and gentle Jesus should have
undertaken so difficult and painful an office [559]!” But the best
critics have shown that even if αἴρειν by itself might bear this
interpretation, still ἀμνὸς, not merely with the article but with the
addition τοῦ Θεοῦ, must signify, not a lamb in general, but a special,
holy Lamb; and if, as is most probable, this designation has reference
to Isa. liii. 7., αἴρειν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν can only be expounded by what is
there predicated of the lamb-like servant of God, that he τὰς ἁμαρτίας
ἡμῶν φέρει, καὶ περὶ ἡμῶν ὀδυνᾶται (V. 4, LXX.), words which must
signify vicarious suffering. [560] Now that the Baptist should have
referred the above prophetic passage to the Messiah, and hence have
thought of him as suffering, has been recently held more than doubtful.
[561]

For so foreign to the current opinion, at least, was this notion of the
Messiah, that the disciples of Jesus, during the whole period of their
intercourse with him, could not reconcile themselves to it; and when
his death had actually resulted, their trust in him as the Messiah was
utterly confounded (Luke xxiv. 20 ff.). How, then, could the Baptist,
who, according to the solemn declaration of Jesus, Matt. xi. 11,
confirmed by the allusions in the Gospels to his strict ascetic life,
ranked below the least in the kingdom of heaven, to which the apostles
already belonged—how could this alien discern, long before the
sufferings of Jesus, that they pertained to the character of the
Messiah, when the denizens were only taught the same lesson by the
issue? Or, if the Baptist really had such insight, and communicated it
to his disciples, why did it not, by means of those who left his circle
for that of Jesus, win an entrance into the latter—nay, why did it not,
by means of the great credit which John enjoyed, mitigate the offence
caused by the death of Jesus, in the public at large [562]? Add to
this, that in none of our accounts of the Baptist, with the exception
of the fourth Gospel, do we find that he entertained such views of the
Messiah’s character; for, not to mention Josephus, the Synoptical
Gospels confine his representation of the Messianic office to the
spiritual baptism and winnowing of the people. Still it remains
possible that a penetrating mind, like that of the Baptist, might, even
before the death of Jesus, gather from Old Testament phrases and types
the notion of a suffering Messiah, and that his obscure hints on the
subject might not be comprehended by his disciples and cotemporaries.

Thus the above considerations are not decisive, and we therefore turn
to the expressions concerning the premundane existence and heavenly
origin of the Messiah, with the question: Could the Baptist have really
held such tenets? That from the words, John i. 15, 27, 30: He that
cometh after me is preferred before me; for he was before me, ὁ ὀπίσω
μοῦ ἐρχόμενος ἔμπροσθέν μοῦ γέγονεν, ὄτι πρῶτος μου ἦν, nothing but
dogmatical obstinacy can banish the notion of pre-existence, is seen by
a mere glance at such expositions as this of Paulus: “He who in the
course of time comes after me; has so appeared in my eyes, ἔμπροσθέν
μοῦ, that he (ὅτι—ὥστε, premiss—conclusion!) deserves rather from his
rank and character to be called the first.” [563] With preponderating
arguments more unprejudiced commentators have maintained, that the
reason here given why Jesus, who appeared after the Baptist in point of
time, had the precedence of him in dignity, is the pre-existence of the
former. [564] We have here obviously the favourite dogma of the fourth
Evangelist, the eternal pre-existence of the λόγος, present indeed to
the mind of that writer, who had just been inditing his proem, but that
it was also present to the mind of the Baptist is another question. The
most recent expositor allows that the sense in which the Evangelist
intends πρῶτος μοῦ, must have been very remote from the Baptist’s point
of view, at least so far as the λόγος is concerned. The Baptist, he
thinks, held the popular Jewish notion of the pre-existence of the
Messiah, as the subject of the Old Testament theophanies. [565] There
are traces of this Jewish notion in the writings of Paul (e.g. 1 Cor.
x. 4. Col. i. 15 f.) and the rabbins [566]; and allowing that it was of
Alexandrian origin, as Bretschneider argues, [567] we may yet ask
whether even before the time of Christ, the Alexandrian-judaic theology
may not have modified the opinions of the mother country? [568] Even
these expressions then, taken alone, are not conclusive, although it
begins to appear suspicious that the Baptist, otherwise conspicuous for
exhibiting the practical side of the idea of the Messiah’s kingdom,
should have ascribed to him by the fourth Evangelist solely, two
notions which at that time undoubtedly belonged only to the deepest
messianic speculations; and that the form in which those notions are
expressed is too peculiarly that of the writer, not to be put to his
account.

We arrive at a more decisive result by taking into examination the
passage John iii. 27–36, where John replies to the complaints of his
disciples at the rival baptism of Jesus, in a way that reduces all
commentators to perplexity. After showing how it lay at the foundation
of their respective destinies, which he desired not to overstep, that
he must decrease, while Jesus must increase, he proceeds (ver. 31) to
use forms of expression precisely similar to those in which the
Evangelist makes Jesus speak of himself, and in which he delivers his
own thoughts concerning Jesus. Our most recent commentator [569] allows
that this discourse of John seems the echo of the foregoing
conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus. [570] The expressions in the
speech lent to the Baptist are peculiarly those of the apostle John;
for instance, σφραγίζω (to seal), μαρτυρία (testimony), the antithesis
of ἄνωθεν and ἐκ τῆς γῆς (from above and of the earth), the phrase
ἔχειν ζωὴν αἰώνιον (to have eternal life); and the question presents
itself: Is it more probable that the Evangelist, as well as Jesus, in
whose mouth these expressions are so often put, borrowed them from the
Baptist, or that the Evangelist lent them (I will only at present say)
to the latter? This must be decided by the fact that the ideas, to
which the Baptist here gives utterance, lie entirely within the domain
of Christianity, and belong specially to the Christianity of the
Apostle John. Take for example that antithesis of ἄνω (from above), and
ἐκ τῆς γῆς (of the earth), the designation of Jesus as ἄνωθεν ἐρχόμενος
(he that cometh from above), as ὃν ἀπέστειλεν ὁ Θεὸς (he whom God hath
sent), who consequently τὰ ῥήματα τοῦ θεοῦ λαλεῖ (speaketh the words of
God), the relation of Jesus to God as the υἱὸς (son), whom ὁ πατὲρ
ἀγαπᾷ (the Father loveth):—what can be characteristic of Christianity,
and of the Apostle John’s mode of presenting it, if these ideas are not
so? and could they belong to the Baptist? Christianismus ante Christum!
And then, as Olshausen well observes, [571] is it consistent for John,
who, even on the fourth Evangelist’s own showing, remained separate
from Jesus, to speak of the blessedness of a believing union with him?
(v. 33 and 36).

Thus much then is certain, and has been acknowledged by the majority of
modern commentators: the words v. 31–36 cannot have been spoken by the
Baptist. Hence theologians have concluded, that the Evangelist cannot
have intended to ascribe them to him, but from v. 31 speaks in his own
person. [572] This sounds plausible, if they can only point out any
mark of division between the discourse of the Baptist and the addenda
of the Evangelist. But none such is to be found. It is true that the
speaker from v. 31 uses the third person, and not the first as in v.
30, when referring to the Baptist: but in the former passage the
Baptist is no longer alluded to directly and individually, but as one
of a class, in which case he must, though himself the speaker, choose
the third person. Thus there is no definitive boundary, and the speech
glides imperceptibly from those passages which might have been uttered
by the Baptist, into those which are altogether incongruous with his
position; moreover from v. 30 Jesus is spoken of in the present tense,
as the Evangelist might represent the Baptist to speak during the
lifetime of Jesus, but could not in his own person have written after
the death of Jesus. In other passages, when presenting his own
reflections concerning Jesus, he uses the preterite. [573] Thus,
grammatically, the Baptist continues to speak from v. 31, and yet,
historically, it is impossible that he should have uttered the sequel;
a contradiction not to be solved, if it be added that, dogmatically,
the Evangelist cannot have ascribed to the Baptist words which he never
really pronounced. Now if we do not choose to defy the clear rules of
grammar, and the sure data of history, for the sake of the visionary
dogma of inspiration, we shall rather conclude from the given premises,
with the author of the Probabilia, that the Evangelist falsely ascribes
the language in question to the Baptist, putting into his mouth a
Christology of his own, of which the latter could know nothing. This is
no more than Lücke [574] confesses, though not quite so frankly, when
he says that the reflections of the Evangelist are here more than
equally mixed with the discourse of the Baptist, in such a way as to be
undistinguishable. In point of fact, however, the reflections of the
Evangelist are easily to be recognized; but of the fundamental ideas of
the Baptist there is no trace, unless they are sought for with a good
will which amounts to prejudice, and to which therefore we make no
pretension. If then we have a proof in the passages just considered,
that the fourth Evangelist did not hesitate to lend to the Baptist
messianic and other ideas which were never his; we may hence conclude
retrospectively concerning the passages on which we formerly suspended
our decision, that the ideas expressed in them of a suffering and
pre-existent Messiah belonged, not to the Baptist, but to the
Evangelist.

In giving the above reply to our first question, we have, in
strictness, answered the remaining one; for if the Baptist had no such
messianic ideas, he could not refer them to the person of Jesus. But to
strengthen the evidence for the result already obtained, we will make
the second question the object of a special examination. According to
the fourth Evangelist the Baptist ascribed to Jesus all the messianic
attributes above discussed. If he did this so enthusiastically,
publicly, and repeatedly, as we read in John, he could not have been
excluded by Jesus from the kingdom of heaven (Matt. xi. 11), nor have
been placed below the least of its citizens. For such a confession as
that of the Baptist, when he calls Jesus the υἱὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ, who was
before him,—such refined insight into the messianic economy, as is
shown by his designating Jesus ὁ ἀμνὸς τοῦ Θεοῦ, ὁ αἴρων τὴν ἁμαρτίαν
τοῦ κόσμου, Peter himself had not to produce, though Jesus not only
receives him into the kingdom of heaven for his confession, Matt. xvi.
16, but constitutes him the rock on which that kingdom was to be
founded. But we have something yet more incomprehensible. John, in the
fourth gospel, gives it as the object of his baptism, ἵνα φανερωθῆ
(Jesus as Messiah) τῷ Ἰσραὴλ (i. 31), and acknowledges it to be the
divine ordinance, that by the side of the increasing Jesus, he must
decrease (iii. 30); nevertheless after Jesus had begun to baptize by
the instrumentality of his disciples, John continues to practise his
baptism (iii. 32). Why so, if he knew the object of his baptism to be
fulfilled by the introduction of Jesus, and if he directed his
followers to him as the Messiah? (i. 36 f.). [575] The continuance of
his baptism would be to no purpose; for Lücke’s supposition that John’s
baptism was still of effect in those places where Jesus had not
appeared, he himself overthrows by the observation, that at least at
the period treated of in John iii. 22 ff., Jesus and John must have
been baptizing near to each other, since the disciples of John were
jealous of the concourse to the baptism of Jesus. But the continuance
of John’s baptism appears even to counteract his aim, if that aim were
merely to point out Jesus as the Messiah. He thereby detained a circle
of individuals on the borders of the Messiah’s kingdom, and retarded or
hindered their going over to Jesus (and that through his own fault, not
theirs alone, [576] for he nullified his verbal direction to Jesus by
his contradictory example). Accordingly we find the party of John’s
disciples still existing in the time of the Apostle Paul (Acts xviii.
24 f., xix. 1 ff.); and, if the Sabæans are to be credited concerning
their own history, the sect remains to this day. [577] Certainly,
presupposing the averred conviction of the Baptist relative to Jesus,
it would seem most natural for him to have attached himself to the
latter; this, however, did not happen, and hence we conclude that he
cannot have had that conviction. [578]

But chiefly the character and entire demeanour of the Baptist render it
impossible to believe that he placed himself on that footing with
Jesus, described by the fourth evangelist. How could the man of the
wilderness, the stern ascetic, who fed on locusts and wild honey, and
prescribed severe fasts to his disciples, the gloomy, threatening
preacher of repentance, animated with the spirit of Elias—how could he
form a friendship with Jesus, in every thing his opposite? He must
assuredly, with his disciples, have stumbled at the liberal manners of
Jesus, and have been hindered by them from recognizing him as the
Messiah. Nothing is more unbending than ascetic prejudice; he who, like
the Baptist, esteems it piety to fast and mortify the body, will never
assign a high grade in things divine to him who disregards such
asceticism. A mind with narrow views can never comprehend one whose
vision takes a wider range, although the latter may know how to do
justice to its inferior; hence Jesus could value and sanction John in
his proper place, but the Baptist could never give the precedence to
Jesus, as he is reported to have done in the fourth gospel. The
declaration of the Baptist (John iii. 30), that he must decrease, but
Jesus must increase, is frequently praised as an example of the noblest
and sublimest resignation. [579] The beauty of this representation we
grant; but not its truth. The instance would be a solitary one, if a
man whose life had its influence on the world’s history, had so readily
yielded the ascendant, in his own æra, to one who came to eclipse him
and render him superfluous. Such a step is not less difficult for
individuals than for nations, and that not from any vice, as egotism or
ambition, so that an exception might be presumed (though not without
prejudice) in the case of a man like the Baptist; it is a consequence
of that blameless limitation which, as we have already remarked, is
proper to a low point of view in relation to a higher, and which is all
the more obstinately maintained if the inferior individual is, like
John, of a coarse, rugged nature. Only from the divine point of view,
or from that of an historian, bent on establishing religious doctrines,
could such things be spoken, and the fourth Evangelist has in fact put
into the mouth of the Baptist the very same thoughts concerning the
relation between him and Jesus, that the compiler of the 2nd book of
Samuel has communicated, as his own observation, on the corresponding
relation between Saul and David. [580] Competent judges have recently
acknowledged that there exists a discrepancy between the synoptical
gospels and the fourth, the blame of which must be imputed to the
latter: [581] and this opinion is confirmed and strengthened by the
fact that the fourth Evangelist transforms the Baptist into a totally
different character from that in which he appears in the Synoptical
gospels and in Josephus; out of a practical preacher he makes a
speculative christologist; out of a hard and unbending, a yielding and
self-renunciating nature.

The style in which the scenes between John and Jesus (John i. 29 ff. 35
ff.) are depicted, shows them to have originated partly in the free
composition of the imagination, partly in a remodelling of the
synoptical narratives with a view to the glorification of Jesus. With
respect to the former: Jesus is walking, v. 35, near to John; in v. 29
he is said to come directly to him; yet on neither occasion is there
any account of an interview between the two. Could Jesus really have
avoided contact with the Baptist, that there might be no appearance of
preconcerted action? This is Lampe’s conjecture; but it is the product
of modern reflections, foreign to the time and circumstances of Jesus.
Or shall we suppose that the narrator, whether fortuitously or
purposely, omitted known details? But the meetings of Jesus and John
must have furnished him with peculiarly interesting matter, so that, as
Lücke allows, [582] his silence is enigmatical. From our point of view
the enigma is solved. The Baptist had, in the Evangelist’s idea,
pointed to Jesus as the Messiah. This, understood as a visible
pointing, required that Jesus should pass by or approach John; hence
this feature was inserted in the narrative; but the particulars of an
actual meeting being unnecessary, were, though very awkwardly, omitted.
The incident of some disciples attaching themselves to Jesus in
consequence of the Baptist’s direction, seems to be a free version of
the sending of two disciples by John from his prison. Thus, as in
Matthew xi. 2, and Luke vii. 18, John despatches two disciples to Jesus
with the dubitative question, “Art thou he that should come?” so in the
fourth gospel he likewise sends two disciples to Jesus, but with the
positive assertion that he (Jesus) is the Lamb of God, ἀμνὸς Θεοῦ; as
Jesus in the former case gives to the disciples, after the delivery of
their message, the direction: “Go and tell John the things ye have seen
and heard,” ἂ εἴδετε καὶ ἠκοῦσατε: so in the latter, he gives to the
inquiry concerning his abode, the answer: Come and see, ἔρχεσθε καὶ
ἴδετε. But while in the synoptical gospels the two disciples return to
John, in the fourth, they permanently attach themselves to Jesus.

From the foregoing considerations, it is inconceivable that John should
ever have held and pronounced Jesus to be the Messiah: but it is easy
to show how a belief that he did so might obtain, without historical
foundation. According to Acts xix. 4, the Apostle Paul declares what
seems sufficiently guaranteed by history, that John baptized εἰς τὸν
ἐρχόμενον, and this coming Messiah, adds Paul, to whom John pointed was
Jesus (τουτέστιν εἰς Χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν). This was an interpretation of the
Baptist’s words by the issue; for Jesus had approved himself to a great
number of his cotemporaries, as the Messiah announced by John. There
was but a step to the notion that the Baptist himself had, under the
ἐρχόμενος, understood the individual Jesus,—had himself the τουτέστιν,
κ.τ.λ. in his mind; a view which, however unhistorical, would be
inviting to the early Christians, in proportion to their wish to
sustain the dignity of Jesus by the authority of the Baptist, then very
influential in the Jewish world. [583] There was yet another reason,
gathered from the Old Testament. The ancestor of the Messiah, David,
had likewise in the old Hebrew legend a kind of forerunner in the
person of Samuel, who by order from Jehovah anointed him to be king
over Israel (1 Sam. xvi.), and afterwards stood in the relation of a
witness to his claims. If then it behoved the Messiah to have a
forerunner, who, besides, was more closely characterized in the
prophecy of Malachi as a second Elias, and if, historically, Jesus was
preceded by John, whose baptism as a consecration corresponded to an
anointing; the idea was not remote of conforming the relation between
John and Jesus to that between Samuel and David.

We might have decided with tolerable certainty which of the two
incompatible statements concerning the relation between the Baptist and
Jesus is to be renounced as unhistorical, by the universal canon of
interpretation, that where, in narratives having a tendency to
aggrandise a person or a fact (a tendency which the Gospels evince at
every step), two contradictory statements are found, that which best
corresponds to this aim is the least historical; because if, in
accordance with it, the original fact had been so dazzling, it is
inconceivable that the other less brilliant representation should
afterwards arise; as here, if John so early acknowledged Jesus, it is
inexplicable how a story could be fabricated, which reports him to have
been in doubt on the same subject at a very late period. We have,
however, by a separate examination of the narrative in the fourth
gospel, ascertained that it is self-contradictory and contains its own
solution; hence our result, found independently of the above canon,
serves for its confirmation.

Meanwhile that result is only the negative, that all which turns upon
the early acknowledgment of Jesus by John has no claim to be received
as historical; of the positive we know nothing, unless the message out
of prison may be regarded as a clue to the truth, and we must therefore
subject this side of the matter to a separate examination. We will not
extend our arguments against the probability of an early and decided
conviction on the part of the Baptist, to a mere conjecture awakened in
him at a later period that Jesus was the Messiah; and therefore we
leave uncontested the proper contents of the narrative. But as regards
the form, it is not to be conceived without difficulty. That the
Baptist in prison, ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ, should have information of the
proceedings of Jesus; that he should from that locality send his
disciples to Jesus; and that these as we are led to infer, should bring
him an answer in his imprisonment.

According to Josephus, [584] Herod imprisoned John from fear of
disturbances: allowing this to be merely a joint cause with that given
by the Evangelist, it is yet difficult to believe that to a man, one
motive of whose imprisonment was to seclude him from his followers, his
disciples should have retained free access; although we cannot prove it
an impossibility that circumstances might favour the admission of
certain individuals. Now that the message was sent from prison we learn
from Matthew alone; Luke says nothing of it, although he tells of the
message. We might hence, with Schleiermacher, [585] consider Luke’s
account the true one, and the δεσμωτηρίῳ of Matthew an unhistorical
addition. But that critic has himself very convincingly shown, from the
tedious amplifications, partly betraying even misunderstanding, which
the narrative of Luke contains (vii. 20, 21, 29, 30), that Matthew
gives the incident in its original, Luke in a revised form. [586] It
would indeed be singular if Matthew had supplied the δεσμωτηρίῳ when it
was originally wanting; it is far more natural to suppose that Luke,
who in the whole paragraph appears as a reviser, expunged the original
mention of the prison.

In judging of Luke’s motives for so doing, we are led to notice the
difference in the dates given by the evangelists for the imprisonment
of John. Matthew, with whom Mark agrees, places it before the public
appearance of Jesus in Galilee; for he gives it as the motive for the
return of Jesus into that province (Matt. iv. 12; Mark i. 14). Luke
assigns no precise date to the arrest of the Baptist (iii. 19 f.), yet
it is to be inferred from his silence about the prison, in connexion
with the sending of the two disciples, that he regarded it as a later
occurrence; but John expressly says, that after the first passover
attended by Jesus in his public character, John was not yet cast into
prison (iii. 24). If it be asked, who is right? we answer that there is
something on the face of the account of the first Evangelist, which has
inclined many commentators to renounce it in favour of the two last.
That Jesus, on the report of John’s imprisonment in Galilee by Herod
Antipas, should have returned into the dominions of that prince for the
sake of safety, is, as Schneckenburger well maintains, [587] highly
improbable, since there, of all places, he was the least secure from a
similar fate. But even if it be held impossible to dissociate the
ἀνεχώρησεν (he withdrew) from the cognate idea of seeking security, we
may still ask whether, disregarding the mistake in the motive, the fact
itself may not be maintained. Matthew and Mark connect with this
journey into Galilee after John’s imprisonment, the commencement of the
public ministry of Jesus; and that this was consequent on the removal
of the Baptist, I am quite inclined to believe. For it is in itself the
most natural that the exit of the Baptist should incite Jesus to carry
on in his stead the preaching of μετανοιεῖτἐ· ἦγγικε γὰρ ἡ βασιλεία τῶν
οὐρανῶν; and the canon cited above is entirely in favour of Matthew.
For if it be asked which fiction best accords with the aggrandising
spirit of the Christian legend,—that of John’s removal before the
appearance of Jesus, or that of their having long laboured in
conjunction?—the answer must be, the latter. If he to whom the hero of
a narrative is superior disappears from the scene before the entrance
of the latter, the crowning opportunity for the hero to demonstrate his
ascendancy is lost—the full splendour of the rising sun can only be
appreciated, when the waning moon is seen above the horizon, growing
paler and paler in the presence of the greater luminary. Such is the
case in the Gospels of Luke and John, while Matthew and Mark rest
satisfied with the less effective representation. Hence, as the least
calculated to magnify Jesus, the account of Matthew has the advantage
in historical probability.

Thus at the time when the two disciples must have been sent to Jesus,
the Baptist was already imprisoned, and we have remarked above, that he
could hardly, so situated, transmit and receive messages. But popular
legend might be prompted to fabricate such a message, that the Baptist
might not depart without at least an incipient recognition of Jesus as
the Messiah; so that neither the one nor the other of the two
incompatible statements is to be regarded as historical.




§ 47.

OPINION OF THE EVANGELISTS AND JESUS CONCERNING THE BAPTIST, WITH HIS
OWN JUDGMENT ON HIMSELF. RESULT OF THE INQUIRY INTO THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THESE TWO INDIVIDUALS.

The Evangelists apply to John, as the preparer of the Messiah’s
kingdom, several passages of the Old Testament.

The abode of the preacher of repentance in the wilderness, his activity
in preparing the way for the Messiah, necessarily recalled the passage
of Isaiah (xl. 3ff. LXX.): φωνὴ βοῶντος ἐν ἐρήμῳ· ἑτοιμάσατε τὴν ὁδὸν
Κυρίῳ κ.τ.λ. This passage, which in its original connection related not
to the Messiah and his forerunner, but to Jehovah, for whom a way was
to be prepared through the wilderness toward Judea, that he might
return with his people from exile, is quoted by the first three
Evangelists as a prophecy fulfilled by the appearance of the Baptist
(Matt. iii. 3; Mark i. 3; Luke iii. 4 ff.). This might be thought a
later and Christian application, but there is nothing to controvert the
statement of the fourth Evangelist, that the Baptist had himself
characterized his destination by those prophetic words.

As the synoptical gospels have unanimously borrowed this passage from
the Baptist himself, so Mark has borrowed the application of another
prophetic passage to the Baptist from Jesus. Jesus had said (Matt. xi.
10; Luke vii. 27): οὗ τος γάρ ἐστι περὶ οὗ γέγραπται· ἰδοὺ ἀποστέλλω
τὸν ἄγγελόν μου πρὸ προσώπου σου, ὃς κατασκευάσει τὴν ὁδόν σου
ἔμπροσθέν σου·. This is he of whom it is written, Behold I send my
messenger before thy face, to prepare thy way before thee; and Mark in
the introduction to his Gospel, applies these words of Malachi (iii.
1), together with the above passage from Isaiah, without distinguishing
their respective sources, to the forerunner, John. The text is a
messianic one; Jehovah, however, does not therein speak of sending a
messenger before the Messiah, but before himself: and it is only in the
New Testament citations in all these instances that the second person
(σου) is substituted for the first (‏לְפָנַי‎).

Another notable passage of the same prophet (iii. 23, LXX. iv. 4: καὶ
ἰδοὺ ἐγὼ ἀποστελῶ ὑμῖν Ἠλίαν τὸν Θεσβίτην, πρὶν ἐλθεῖν τὴν ἡμέραν
Κυρίου, κ.τ.λ.: Behold, I will send you Elijah the Tishbite before the
coming of the day of the Lord, etc.) suggested to the Evangelists the
assimilation of John the Baptist to Elias. That John, labouring for the
reformation of the people, in the spirit and power of Elias, should
prepare the way for the Divine visitation in the times of the Messiah,
was according to Luke i. 17, predicted before his birth. In John i. 21,
when the emissaries of the Sanhedrim ask, “Art thou Elias?” the Baptist
declines this dignity: according to the usual explanation, he only
extended his denial to the rude popular notion, that he was the ancient
seer corporeally resuscitated, whereas he would have admitted the view
of the synoptical gospels, that he had the spirit of Elias.
Nevertheless it appears improbable that if the fourth Evangelist had
been familiar with the idea of the Baptist as a second Elias, he would
have put into his mouth so direct a negative.

This scene, peculiar to the fourth gospel, in which John rejects the
title of Elias, with several others, demands a yet closer examination,
and must be compared with a narrative in Luke (iii. 15), to which it
has a striking similarity. In Luke, the crowd assembled round the
Baptist begin to think: Is not this the Christ? μήποτε αὐτὸς εἴη ὁ
Χριστός· in John, the deputies of the Sanhedrim [588] ask him, Who art
thou? σὺ τίς εἶ; which we infer from the Baptist’s answer to mean: “Art
thou, as is believed, the Messiah?” [589] According to Luke, the
Baptist answers, I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than
I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose.
According to John he gives a similar reply: I baptize with water; but
there standeth one among you whom ye know not; He it is who coming
after me is preferred before me, whose shoes’ latchet I am not worthy
to unloose: the latter Evangelist adding his peculiar propositions
concerning the pre-existence of Jesus, and deferring to another
occasion (v. 33) the mention of the Messiah’s spiritual baptism, which
Luke gives in immediate connexion with the above passage. In Luke, and
still more decidedly in John, this whole scene is introduced with a
design to establish the Messiahship of Jesus, by showing that the
Baptist had renounced that dignity, and attributed it to one who should
come after him. If at the foundation of two narratives so similar,
there can scarcely be more than one fact, [590] the question is, which
gives that fact the most faithfully? In Luke’s account there is no
intrinsic improbability; on the contrary it is easy to imagine, that
the people, congregated round the man who announced the Messiah’s
kingdom, and baptized with a view to it, should, in moments of
enthusiasm, believe him to be the Messiah. But that the Sanhedrim
should send from Jerusalem to John on the banks of the Jordan, for the
sake of asking him whether he were the Messiah, seems less natural.
Their object could only be what, on a later occasion, it was with
respect to Jesus (Matt. xxi. 23 ff.), namely, to challenge the
authority of John to baptize, as appears from v. 25. Moreover, from the
hostile position which John had taken towards the sects of the
Pharisees and Sadducees (Matt. iii. 7), to whom the members of the
Sanhedrim belonged, they must have prejudged that he was not the
Messiah, nor a prophet, and consequently, that he had no right to
undertake a βάπτισμα. But in that case, they could not possibly have so
put their questions as they are reported to have done in the fourth
gospel. In the passage from Mathew above cited, they asked Jesus, quite
consistently with their impression that he had no prophetic authority:
ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιεῖς; By what authority doest thou these
things? but in John, they question the Baptist precisely as if they
pre-supposed him to be the Messiah, and when he, apparently to their
consternation, has denied this, they tender him successively the
dignities of Elias, and of another prophetic forerunner, as if they
earnestly wished him to accept one of these titles. Searching opponents
will not thus thrust the highest honours on the man to whom they are
inimical;—this is the representation of a narrator who wishes to
exhibit the modesty of the man, and his subordination to Jesus, by his
rejection of those brilliant titles. To enable him to reject them, they
must have been offered; but this could in reality only be done by
well-wishers, as in Luke, where the conjecture that the Baptist was the
Messiah is attributed to the people.

Why then did not the fourth Evangelist attribute those questions
likewise to the people, from whom, with a slight alteration, they would
have seemed quite natural? Jesus, when addressing the unbelieving Jews
in Jerusalem, (John v. 33), appeals to their message to the Baptist,
and to the faithful testimony then given by the latter. Had John given
his declaration concerning his relation to Jesus before the common
people merely, such an appeal would have been impossible; for if Jesus
were to refer his enemies to the testimony of John, that testimony must
have been delivered before his enemies; if the assertions of the
Baptist were to have any diplomatic value, they must have resulted from
the official inquiry of a magisterial deputation. Such a remodelling of
the facts appears to have been aided by the above-mentioned narrative
from the synoptical traditions, wherein the high priests and scribes
ask Jesus, by what authority he does such things (as the casting out of
the buyers and sellers). Here also Jesus refers to John, asking for
their opinion as to the authority of his baptism, only, it is true,
with the negative view of repressing their further inquiries (Matt.
xxi. 23 ff. parall.); but how easily might this reference be made to
take an affirmative sense, and instead of the argument, “If ye know not
what powers were entrusted to John, ye need not know whence mine are
given,”—the following be substituted: “Since ye know what John has
declared concerning me, ye must also know what power and dignity belong
to me;” whereupon what was originally a question addressed to Jesus,
transformed itself into a message to the Baptist. [591]

The judgment of Jesus on the character of John is delivered on two
occasions in the synoptical gospels; first after the departure of
John’s messengers (Matt xi. 7 ff.); secondly, after the appearance of
Elias at the transfiguration (Matt. xvii. 12 ff.), in reply to the
question of a disciple. In the fourth gospel, after an appeal to the
Baptist’s testimony, Jesus pronounces an eulogium on him in the
presence of the Jews (v. 35), after referring, as above remarked, to
their sending to John. In this passage he calls the Baptist a burning
and a shining light, in whose beams the fickle people were for a season
willing to rejoice. In one synoptical passage, he declares John to be
the promised Elias; in the other, there are three points to be
distinguished. First, with respect to the character and agency of
John,—the severity and firmness of his mind, and the pre-eminence which
as the messianic forerunner, who with forcible hand had opened the
kingdom of heaven, he maintained even over the prophets, are extolled
(v. 7–14); secondly, in relation to Jesus and the citizens of the
kingdom of heaven, the Baptist, though exalted above all the members of
the Old Testament economy, is declared to be in the rear of every one
on whom, through Jesus, the new light had arisen (v. 11). We see how
Jesus understood this from what follows (v. 18), when we compare it
with Matt. ix. 16 f. In the former passage Jesus describes John as μήτε
ἐσθίων μήτε πίνων, neither eating nor drinking; and in the latter it is
this very asceticism which is said to liken him to the ἱματίοις and
ἀσκοῖς παλαιοῖς, the old garments and old bottles, with which the new,
introduced by Jesus, will not agree. What else then could it be, in
which the Baptist was beneath the children of the kingdom of Jesus, but
(in connexion with his non-recognition or only qualified acknowledgment
of Jesus as Messiah) the spirit of external observance, which still
clung to fasting and similar works, and his gloomy asceticism? And, in
truth, freedom from these is the test of transition from a religion of
bondage, to one of liberty and spirituality. [592] Thirdly, with
respect to the relation in which the agency of John and Jesus stood to
their cotemporaries, the same inaptitude to receive the ministrations
of both is complained of v. 16 ff., although in v. 12 it is observed,
that the violent zeal of some βιασταὶ had, under the guidance of John,
wrested for them an entrance into the kingdom of the Messiah. [593]

In conclusion, we must take a review of the steps by which tradition
has gradually annexed itself to the simple historical traits of the
relation between John and Jesus. Thus much seems to be historical: that
Jesus, attracted by the fame of the Baptist, put himself under the
tuition of that preacher, and that having remained some time among his
followers, and been initiated into his ideas of the approaching
messianic kingdom, he, after the imprisonment of John, carried on,
under certain modifications, the same work, never ceasing, even when he
had far surpassed his predecessor, to render him due homage.

The first addition to this in the Christian legend, was, that John had
taken approving notice of Jesus. During his public ministry, it was
known that he had only indefinitely referred to one coming after him;
but it behoved him, at least in a conjectural way, to point out Jesus
personally, as that successor. To this it was thought he might have
been moved by the fame of the works of Jesus, which, loud as it was,
might even penetrate the walls of his prison. Then was formed Matthew’s
narrative of the message from prison; the first modest attempt to make
the Baptist a witness for Jesus, and hence clothed in an interrogation,
because a categorical testimony was too unprecedented.

But this late and qualified testimony was not enough. It was a late
one, for prior to it there was the baptism which Jesus received from
John, and by which he, in a certain degree, placed himself in
subordination to the Baptist; hence those scenes in Luke, by which the
Baptist was placed, even before his birth, in a subservient relation to
Jesus.

Not only was it a late testimony which that message contained; it was
but half a one; for the question implied uncertainty, and ὁ ἐρχόμενος
conveyed indecision. Hence in the fourth gospel there is no longer a
question about the Messiahship of Jesus, but the most solemn
asseverations on that head, and we have the most pointed declarations
of the eternal, divine nature of Jesus, and his character as the
suffering Messiah.

In a narrative aiming at unity, as does the fourth gospel, these very
pointed declarations could not stand by the side of the dubious
message, which is therefore only found in this Gospel under a totally
reorganized form. Neither does this message accord with that which in
the synoptical gospels is made to occur at the baptism of Jesus, and
even earlier in his intercourse with John; but the first three
Evangelists, in their loose compositions, admitted, along with the more
recent form of the tradition, the less complete one, because they
attached less importance to the question of John than to the consequent
discourse of Jesus.




§ 48.

THE EXECUTION OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

We here take under our examination, by way of appendix, all that has
been transmitted to us concerning the tragic end of the Baptist.
According to the unanimous testimony of the synoptical Evangelists and
Josephus, [594] he was executed, after a protracted imprisonment, by
order of Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee; and in the New Testament
accounts he is said to have been beheaded. (Matt. xiv. 3 ff.; Mark vi.
17 ff.; Luke ix. 9.)

But Josephus and the Evangelists are at variance as to the cause of his
imprisonment and execution. According to the latter, the censure which
John had pronounced on the marriage of Herod with his (half) brother’s
[595] wife, was the cause of his imprisonment, and the revengeful
cunning of Herodias, at a court festival, of his death: Josephus gives
the fear of disturbances, which was awakened in Herod by the formidable
train of the Baptist’s followers, as the cause at once of the
imprisonment and the execution. [596] If these two accounts be
considered as distinct and irreconcilable, it may be doubted which of
the two deserves the preference. It is not here as in the case of Herod
Agrippa’s death, Acts xii. 23, viz., that the New Testament narrative,
by intermixing a supernatural cause where Josephus has only a natural
one, enables us to prejudge it as unhistorical; on the contrary, we
might here give the palm to the evangelical narrative, for the
particularity of its details. But on the other hand, it must be
considered that that very particularity, and especially the conversion
of a political into a personal motive, corresponds fully to the
development of the legendary spirit among the people, whose imagination
is more at home in domestic than in political circles. [597] Meanwhile
it is quite possible to reconcile the two narratives. This has been
attempted by conjecturing, that the fear of insurrection was the proper
cabinet motive for the imprisonment of the Baptist, while the
irreverent censure passed on the ruler was thrust forward as the
ostensible motive. [598] But I greatly doubt whether Herod would
designedly expose the scandalous point touched on by John; it is more
likely, if a distinction is to be here made between a private and
ostensible cause, that the censure of the marriage was the secret
reason, and the fear of insurrection disseminated as an excuse for
extreme severity. [599] Such a distinction, however, is not needed; for
Antipas might well fear, that John, by his strong censure of the
marriage and the whole course of the tetrarch’s life, might stir up the
people into rebellion against him.

But there is a diversity even between the evangelical narratives
themselves, not only in this, that Mark gives the scene at the feast
with the most graphic details, while Luke is satisfied with a concise
statement (iii. 18–20, ix. 9), and Matthew takes a middle course; but
Mark’s representation of the relation between Herod and the Baptist
differs essentially from that of Matthew. While according to the
latter, Herod wished to kill John, but was withheld by his dread of the
people, who looked on the Baptist as a prophet (v. 5); according to
Mark, it was Herodias who conspired against his life, but could not
attain her object, because her husband was in awe of John as a holy
man, sometimes heard him gladly, and not seldom followed his counsel
(v. 19). [600] Here, again, the individualizing characteristic of
Mark’s narrative has induced commentators to prefer it to that of
Matthew. [601] But in the finishing touches and alterations of Mark we
may detect the hand of tradition; especially as Josephus merely says of
the people, that they gave ear to the sound of his words, ἤρθησαν τῇ
ἀκροάσει τῶν λόγων, while he says of Herod, that having conceived fears
of John, he judged it expedient to put him to death, δείσας κρεῖττον
ἡγεῖται (τὸν Ἰωάννην) ἀναιρεῖν. How near lay the temptation to exalt
the Baptist, by representing the prince against whom he had spoken, and
by whom he was imprisoned, as feeling bound to venerate him, and only,
to his remorse, seduced into giving his death-warrant, by his
vindictive wife! It may be added, that the account of Matthew is not
inconsistent with the character of Antipas, as gathered from other
sources. [602]

The close of the evangelical narratives leaves the impression that the
dissevered head of John was presented at table, and that the prison was
consequently close at hand. But we learn from the passage in Josephus
above cited, that the Baptist was confined in Machærus, a fortress on
the southern border of Peræa, whereas the residence of Herod was in
Tiberias, [603] a day’s journey distant from Machærus. Hence the head
of John the Baptist could only be presented to Herod after two days’
journey, and not while he yet sat at table. The contradiction here
apparent is not to be removed by the consideration, that it is not
expressly said in the Gospels that John’s head was brought in during
the meal, for this is necessarily inferred from the entire narrative.
Not only are the commission of the executioner and his return with the
head, detailed in immediate connexion with the incidents of the meal;
but only thus has the whole dramatic scene its appropriate
conclusion;—only thus is the contrast complete, which is formed by the
death-warrant and the feast: in fine, the πίναξ, on which the
dissevered head is presented, marks it as the costliest viand which the
unnatural revenge of a woman could desire at table. But we have, as a
probable solution, the information of Josephus, [604] that Herod
Antipas was then at war with the Arabian king, Aretas, between whose
kingdom and his own lay the fortress of Machærus; and there Herod might
possibly have resided with his court at that period.

Thus we see that the life of John in the evangelical narratives is,
from easily conceived reasons, overspread with mythical lustre on the
side which is turned towards Jesus, while on the other its historical
lineaments are more visible.







