CHAPTER II.

BAPTISM AND TEMPTATION OF JESUS.

§ 49.

WHY DID JESUS RECEIVE BAPTISM FROM JOHN?

In conformity with the evangelical view of the fact, the customary
answer given by the orthodox to this question is, that Jesus, by his
submission to John’s baptism, signified his consecration to the
messianic office; an explanation which is supported by a passage in
Justin, according to which it was the Jewish notion, that the Messiah
would be unknown as such to himself and others, until Elias as his
forerunner should anoint him, and thereby make him distinguishable by
all. [605] The Baptist himself, however, as he is represented by the
first Evangelist, could not have partaken of this design; for had he
regarded his baptism as a consecration which the Messiah must
necessarily undergo, he would not have hesitated to perform it on the
person of Jesus (iii. 14).

Our former inquiries have shown that John’s baptism related partly εἰς
τὸν ἐρχόμενον, its recipients promising a believing preparation for the
expected Messiah; how then could Jesus, if he was conscious of being
himself the ἐρχόμενος, submit himself to this baptism? The usual answer
from the orthodox point of view is, that Jesus, although conscious of
his Messiahship, yet, so long as it was not publicly attested by God,
spoke and acted, not as Messiah, but merely as an Israelite, who held
himself bound to obey every divine ordinance relative to his nation.
[606] But, here, there is a distinction to be made. Negatively, it
became Jesus to refrain from performing any messianic deeds, or using
any of the Messiah’s prerogatives, before his title was solemnly
attested; even positively, it became him to submit himself to the
ordinances which were incumbent on every Israelite; but to join in a
new rite, which symbolized the expectation of another and a future
Messiah, could never, without dissimulation, be the act of one who was
conscious of being the actual Messiah himself. More recent theologians
have therefore wisely admitted, that when Jesus came to John for
baptism, he had not a decided conviction of his Messiahship. [607] They
indeed regard this uncertainty as only the struggle of modesty. Paulus,
for instance, observes that Jesus, notwithstanding he had heard from
his parents of his messianic destination, and had felt this first
intimation confirmed by many external incidents, as well as by his own
spiritual development, was yet not over eager to appropriate the
honour, which had been as it were thrust upon him. But, if the previous
narratives concerning Jesus be regarded as a history, and therefore, of
necessity, as a supernatural one; then must he, who was heralded by
angels, miraculously conceived, welcomed into the world by the homage
of magi and prophets, and who in his twelfth year knew the temple to be
his Father’s house, have long held a conviction of his Messiahship,
above all the scruples of a false modesty. If on the contrary it be
thought possible, by criticism, to reduce the history of the childhood
of Jesus to a merely natural one, there is no longer anything to
account for his early belief that he was the Messiah; and the position
which he adopted by the reception of John’s baptism becomes, instead of
an affected diffidence, a real ignorance of his messianic destiny.—Too
modest, continue these commentators, to declare himself Messiah on his
own authority, Jesus fulfilled all that the strictest self-judgment
could require, and wished to make the decisive experiment, whether the
Deity would allow that he, as well as every other, should dedicate
himself to the coming Messiah, or whether a sign would be granted, that
he himself was the ἐρχόμενος. But to do something seen to be
inappropriate, merely to try whether God will correct the mistake, is
just such a challenging of the divine power as Jesus, shortly after his
baptism, decidedly condemns. Thus it must be allowed that, the baptism
of John being a baptism εἰς τὸν ἐρχόμενον, if Jesus could submit
himself to it without dissimulation or presumption, he could not at the
time have held himself to be that ἐρχόμενος, and if he really uttered
the words οὕτω πρέπον ἐστὶ, κ.τ.λ., Suffer it to be so now, etc.
(which, however, could only be called forth by the refusal of the
Baptist—a refusal that stands or falls with his previous conviction of
the Messiahship of Jesus), he could only mean by them, that it became
him, with every pious Israelite, to devote himself by anticipation to
the expected Messiah, in baptism, although the Evangelist, instructed
by the issue, put on them a different construction.

But the relation hitherto discussed is only one aspect of John’s
baptism; the other, which is yet more strongly attested by history,
shows it as a βάπτισμα μετανοίας, a baptism of repentance. The
Israelites, we are told, Matt. iii. 6, were baptized of John,
confessing their sins: shall we then suppose that Jesus made such a
confession? They received the command to repent: did Jesus acknowledge
such a command? This difficulty was felt even in the early church. In
the Gospel of the Hebrews, adopted by the Nazarenes, Jesus asks his
mother and brother, when invited by them to receive John’s baptism,
wherein he had sinned, that this baptism was needful for him? [608] and
an heretical apocryphal work appears to have attributed to Jesus a
confession of his own sins at his baptism. [609]

The sum of what modern theologians have contributed towards the removal
of this difficulty, consists in the application to Jesus of the
distinction between what a man is as an individual, and what he is as a
member of the community. He needed, say they, no repentance on his own
behalf, but, aware of its necessity for all other men, the children of
Abraham not excepted, he wished to demonstrate his approval of an
institute which confirmed this truth, and hence he submitted to it. But
let the reader only take a nearer view of the facts. According to Matt.
iii. 6, John appears to have required a confession of sins previous to
baptism; such a confession Jesus, presupposing his impeccability, could
not deliver without falsehood; if he refused, John would hardly baptize
him, for he did not yet believe him to be the Messiah, and from every
other Israelite he must have considered a confession of sins
indispensable. The non-compliance of Jesus might very probably
originate the dispute to which Matthew gives a wholly different
character; but certainly, if the refusal of John had such a cause, the
matter could scarcely have been adjusted by a mere suffer it to be so
now, for no confession being given, the Baptist would not have
perceived that all righteousness was fulfilled. Even supposing that a
confession was not required of every baptized person, John would not
conclude the ceremony of baptism without addressing the neophyte on the
subject of repentance. Could Jesus tacitly sanction such an address to
himself, when conscious that he needed no regeneration? and would he
not, in so doing, perplex the minds which were afterwards to believe in
him as the sinless one? We will even abandon the position that John so
addressed the neophytes, and only urge that the gestures of those who
plunged into the purifying water must have been those of contrition;
yet if Jesus conformed himself to these even in silence, without
referring them to his own condition, he cannot be absolved from the
charge of dissimulation.

There is then no alternative but to suppose, that as Jesus had not, up
to the time of his baptism, thought of himself as the Messiah, so with
regard to the μετάνοια (repentance), he may have justly ranked himself
amongst the most excellent in Israel, without excluding himself from
what is predicated in Job iv. 18, xv. 15. There is little historical
ground for controverting this; for the words, which of you convinceth
me of sin? (John viii. 46) could only refer to open delinquencies, and
to a later period in the life of Jesus. The scene in his twelfth year,
even if historical, could not by itself prove a sinless development of
his powers.




§ 50.

THE SCENE AT THE BAPTISM OF JESUS CONSIDERED AS SUPERNATURAL AND AS
NATURAL.

At the moment that John had completed his baptism of Jesus, the
synoptical gospels tell us that the heavens were opened, the Holy
Spirit descended on Jesus in the form of a dove, and a voice from
heaven designated him the Son of God, in whom the Father was well
pleased. The fourth Evangelist (i. 32 ff.) makes the Baptist narrate
that he saw the Holy Spirit descend like a dove, and remain on Jesus;
but as in the immediate context John says of his baptism, that it was
destined for the manifestation of the Messiah, and as the description
of the descending dove corresponds almost verbally with the synoptical
accounts, it is not to be doubted that the same event is intended. The
old and lost Gospels of Justin and the Ebionites give, as concomitants,
a heavenly light, and a flame bursting out of the Jordan; [610] in the
dove and heavenly voice also, they have alterations, hereafter to be
noticed. For whose benefit the appearance was granted, remains doubtful
on a comparison of the various narratives. In John, where the Baptist
recites it to his followers, these seem not to have been eye-witnesses;
and from his stating that he who sent him to baptize, promised the
descent and repose of the Spirit as a mark of the Messiah, we gather
that the appearance was designed specially for the Baptist. According
to Mark it is Jesus, who, in ascending from the water, sees the heavens
open and the Spirit descend. Even in Matthew it is the most natural to
refer εἶδε, he saw, and ἀνεῴχθησαν αὐτῷ, were opened to him, to ὁ
Ἰησοῦς, Jesus, the subject immediately before; but as it is said, in
continuation, that he saw the Holy Spirit ἐρχόμενον ἐπ’ αὐτὸν, not εφ’
αὑτὸν (Mark’s ἐπ’ αὐτὸν, which does not agree with his construction, is
explained by his dependence on Matthew), the beholder seems not to be
the same as he on whom the Spirit descended, and we are obliged to
refer εἶδε and ἀνεῴχθησαν αὐτῷ to the more remote antecedent, namely
the Baptist, who, as the heavenly voice speaks of Jesus in the third
person, is most naturally to be regarded as also a witness. Luke
appears to give a much larger number of spectators to the scene, for
according to him, Jesus was baptized ἐν τῷ βαπτισθῆναι ἅπαντα τὸν λαὸν,
when all the people were baptized, and consequently he must have
supposed that the scene described occurred in their presence. [611]

The narrations directly convey no other meaning, than that the whole
scene was externally visible and audible, and thus they have been
always understood by the majority of commentators. But in endeavouring
to conceive the incident as a real one, a cultivated and reflecting
mind must stumble at no insignificant difficulties. First, that for the
appearance of a divine being on earth, the visible heavens must divide
themselves, to allow of his descent from his accustomed seat, is an
idea that can have no objective reality, but must be the entirely
subjective creation of a time when the dwelling-place of Deity was
imagined to be above the vault of heaven. Further, how is it
reconcilable with the true idea of the Holy Spirit as the divine,
all-pervading Power, that he should move from one place to another,
like a finite being, and embody himself in the form of a dove? Finally,
that God should utter articulate tones in a national idiom, has been
justly held extravagant. [612]

Even in the early church, the more enlightened fathers adopted the
opinion, that the heavenly voices spoken of in the biblical history
were not external sounds, the effect of vibrations in the air, but
inward impressions produced by God in the minds of those to whom he
willed to impart himself: thus of the appearance at the baptism of
Jesus, Origen and Theodore of Mopsuestia maintain that it was a vision,
and not a reality, ὀπτασία, οὐ φύσις. [613] To the simple indeed, says
Origen, in their simplicity, it is a light thing to set the universe in
motion, and to sever a solid mass like the heavens; but those who
search more deeply into such matters, will, he thinks, refer to those
higher revelations, by means of which chosen persons, even waking, and
still more frequently in their dreams, are led to suppose that they
perceive something with their bodily senses, while their minds only are
affected: so that consequently, the whole appearance in question should
be understood, not as an external incident, but as an inward vision
sent by God; an interpretation which has also met with much approbation
among modern theologians.

In the first two Gospels and in the fourth, this interpretation is
favoured by the expressions, were opened to him, ἀνεῴχθησαν αὐτῷ, he
saw, εἶδε, and I beheld, τεθέαμαι, which seem to imply that the
appearance was subjective, in the sense intended by Theodore, when he
observes that the descent of the Holy Spirit was not seen by all
present, but that, by a certain spiritual contemplation, it was visible
to John alone, οὐ πᾶσιν ὤφθη τοῖς παροῦσιν, ἀλλὰ κατά τινα πνευματικὴν
θεωρίαν ὤφθη μόνῳ τῷ Ἰωάννῃ: to John however we must add Jesus, who,
according to Mark, participated in the vision. But in opposition to
this stands the statement of Luke: the expressions which he uses,
ἐγένετο—ἀνεῳχθῆναι—καὶ καταβῆναι—καὶ φωνὴν—γενέσθαι, it came to
pass—was opened—and descended—and a voice came, bear a character so
totally objective and exterior, [614] especially if we add the words,
in a bodily form, σωματικῷ εἴδει, that (abiding by the notion of the
perfect truthfulness of all the evangelical records) the less explicit
narratives must be interpreted by the unequivocal one of Luke, and the
incident they recount must be understood as something more than an
inward revelation to John and Jesus. Hence it is prudent in Olshausen
to allow, in concession to Luke, that there was present on the occasion
a crowd of persons, who saw and heard something, yet to maintain that
this was nothing distinct or comprehensible. By this means, on the one
hand, the occurrence is again transferred from the domain of subjective
visions to that of objective phenomena; while on the other, the
descending dove is supposed visible, not to the bodily eye, but only to
the open spiritual one, and the words audible to the soul, not to the
bodily ear. Our understanding fails us in this pneumatology of
Olshausen, wherein there are sensible realities transcending the
senses; and we hasten out of this misty atmosphere into the clearer one
of those, who simply tell us, that the appearance was an external
incident, but one purely natural.

This party appeals to the custom of antiquity, to regard natural
occurrences as divine intimations, and in momentous crises, where a
bold resolution was to be taken, to adopt them as guides. To Jesus,
spiritually matured into the Messiah, and only awaiting an external
divine sanction, and to the Baptist who had already ceded the
superiority to the friend of his youth, in their solemn frame of mind
at the baptism of the former by the latter, every natural phenomenon
that happened at the time, must have been pregnant with meaning, and
have appeared as a sign of the divine will. But what the natural
appearance actually was, is a point on which the commentators are
divided in opinion. Some, with the synoptical writers, include a sound
as well as an appearance; others give, with John, an appearance only.
They interpret the opening of the heavens, as a sudden parting of the
clouds, or a flash of lightning; the dove they consider as a real bird
of that species, which by chance hovered over the head of Jesus; or
they assume that the lightning or some meteor was compared to a dove,
from the manner of its descent. They who include a sound as a part of
the machinery in the scene, suppose a clap of thunder, which was
imagined by those present to be a Bath Kol, and interpreted into the
words given by the first Evangelist. Others, on the contrary,
understand what is said of audible words, merely as an explanation of
the visible sign, which was regarded as an attestation that Jesus was
the Son of God. This last opinion sacrifices the synoptical writers,
who undeniably speak of an audible voice, to John, and thus contains a
critical doubt as to the historical character of the narratives, which,
consistently followed out, leads to quite other ground than that of the
naturalistic interpretation. If the sound was mere thunder, and the
words only an interpretation put upon it by the bystanders; then, as in
the synoptical accounts, the words are evidently supposed to have been
audibly articulated, we must allow that there is a traditional
ingredient in these records. So far as the appearance is concerned, it
is not to be denied that the sudden parting of clouds, or a flash of
lightning, might be described as an opening of heaven; but in nowise
could the form of a dove be ascribed to lightning or a meteor. The form
is expressly the point of comparison in Luke only, but it is doubtless
so intended by the other narrators; although Fritzsche contends that
the words like a dove, ὡσεὶ περιστερὰν, in Matthew refer only to the
rapid motion. The flight of the dove has nothing so peculiar and
distinctive, that, supposing this to be the point of comparison, there
would not be in any of the parallel passages a variation, a
substitution of some other bird, or an entirely new figure. As, instead
of this, the mention of the dove is invariable through all the four
gospels, the simile must turn upon something exclusively proper to the
dove, and this can apparently be nothing but its form. Hence those
commit the least violence on the text, who adopt the supposition of a
real dove. Paulus, however, in so doing, incurred the hard task of
showing by a multitude of facts from natural history and other sources,
that the dove might be tame enough to fly towards a man; [615] how it
could linger so long over one, that it might be said, ἔμεινεν ἐπ’
αὐτὸν, it abode upon him, he has not succeeded in explaining, and he
thus comes into collision with the narrative of John, by which he had
sustained his supposition of the absence of a voice. [616]




§ 51.

AN ATTEMPT AT A CRITICISM AND MYTHICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE
NARRATIVES.

If then a more intelligible representation of the scene at the baptism
of Jesus is not to be given, without doing violence to the evangelical
text, or without supposing it to be partially erroneous, we are
necessarily driven to a critical treatment of the accounts; and indeed,
according to De Wette and Schleiermacher, [617] this is the prevalent
course in relation to the above point in the evangelical history. From
the narrative of John, as the pure source, it is sought to derive the
synoptical accounts, as turbid streams. In the former, it is said,
there is no opening heaven, no heavenly voice; only the descent of the
Spirit is, as had been promised, a divine witness to John that Jesus is
the Messiah; but in what manner the Baptist perceived that the Spirit
rested on Jesus, he does not tell us, and possibly the only sign may
have been the discourse of Jesus.

One cannot but wonder at Schleiermacher’s assertion, that the manner in
which the Baptist perceived the descending Spirit is not given in the
fourth gospel, when here also the expression ὡσεὶ περιστερὰν, like a
dove, tells it plainly enough; and this particular marks the descent as
a visible one, and not a mere inference from the discourse of Jesus.
Usteri, indeed, thinks that the Baptist mentioned the dove, merely as a
figure, to denote the gentle, mild spirit which he had observed in
Jesus. But had this been all, he would rather have compared Jesus
himself to a dove, as on another occasion he did to a lamb, than have
suggested the idea of a sensible appearance by the picturesque
description, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove. It is
therefore not true in relation to the dove, that first in the more
remote tradition given by the synoptical writers, what was originally
figurative, was received in a literal sense; for in this sense it is
understood by John, and if he have the correct account, the Baptist
himself must have spoken of a visible dove-like appearance, as Bleek,
Neander, and others, acknowledge.

While the alleged distinction in relation to the dove, between the
first three evangelists and the fourth, is not to be found; with
respect to the voice, the difference is so wide, that it is
inconceivable how the one account could be drawn from the other. For it
is said that the testimony which John gave concerning Jesus, after the
appearance: This is the Son of God (John i. 34), taken in connexion
with the preceding words: He that sent me to baptize, the same said
unto me, etc., became, in the process of tradition, an immediate
heavenly declaration, such as we see in Matthew: This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. Supposing such a transformation
admissible, some instigation to it must be shown. Now in Isaiah xlii.
1, Jehovah says of his servant: ‏הֵן עַבְדִּי אֶתְמָךְ־בּוֹ בְּחִירִי רָצֲתָה נַפְשִׁי‎;
words which, excepting those between the parentheses, are almost
literally translated by the declaration of the heavenly voice in
Matthew. We learn from Matt. xii. 17 ff. that this passage was applied
to Jesus as the Messiah; and in it God himself is the speaker, as in
the synoptical account of the baptism. Here then was what would much
more readily prompt the fiction of a heavenly voice, than the
expressions of John. Since, therefore, we do not need a misapprehension
of the Baptist’s language to explain the story of the divine voice, and
since we cannot use it for the derivation of the allusion to the dove;
we must seek for the source of our narrative, not in one of the
evangelical documents, but beyond the New Testament,—in the domain of
cotemporary ideas, founded on the Old Testament, the total neglect of
which has greatly diminished the value of Schleiermacher’s critique on
the New Testament.

To regard declarations concerning the Messiah, put by poets into the
mouth of Jehovah, as real, audible voices from heaven, was wholly in
the spirit of the later Judaism, which not seldom supposed such vocal
communications to fall to the lot of distinguished rabbins, [618] and
of the messianic prejudices, which the early Christians both shared
themselves, and were compelled, in confronting the Jews, to satisfy. In
the passage quoted from Isaiah, there was a divine declaration, in
which the present Messiah was pointed to as it were with the finger,
and which was therefore specially adapted for a heavenly annunciation
concerning him. How could the spirit of Christian legend be slow to
imagine a scene, in which these words were audibly spoken from heaven
of the Messiah. But we detect a farther motive for such a
representation of the case by observing, that in Mark and Luke, the
heavenly voice addresses Jesus in the second person, and by comparing
the words which, according to the Fathers, were given in the old and
lost gospels as those of the voice. Justin, following his Memoirs of
the Apostles, ἀπομνημονεύματα τῶν ἀποστόλων, thus reports them: υἱός
μου εἶ σύ. ἐγὼ σήμερον γεγέννηκα σε; [619] Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. In the Gospel of the Hebrews, according to
Epiphanius; [620] this declaration was combined with that which our
Gospels contain. Clement of Alexandria [621] and Augustin [622] seem to
have read the words even in some copies of the latter; and it is at
least certain that some of our present manuscripts of Luke have this
addition. [623] Here were words uttered by the heavenly voice, drawn,
not from Isaiah, but from Psalm ii. 7, a passage considered messianic
by Jewish interpreters; [624] in Heb. i. 5, applied to Christ; and,
from their being couched in the form of a direct address, containing a
yet stronger inducement to conceive it as a voice sent to the Messiah
from heaven. If then the words of the psalm were originally attributed
to the heavenly voice, or if they were only taken in connexion with the
passage in Isaiah (as is probable from the use of the second person, σὺ
εἶ, in Mark and Luke, since this form is presented in the psalm, and
not in Isaiah), we have a sufficient indication that this text, long
interpreted of the Messiah, and easily regarded as an address from
heaven to the Messiah on earth, was the source of our narrative of the
divine voice, heard at the baptism of Jesus. To unite it with the
baptism, followed as a matter of course, when this was held to be a
consecration of Jesus to his office.

We proceed to the descent of the Spirit in the form of a dove. In this
examination we must separate the descent of the Spirit from the form of
the dove, and consider the two particulars apart. That the Divine
Spirit was to rest in a peculiar measure on the Messiah, was an
expectation necessarily resulting from the notion, that the messianic
times were to be those of the outpouring of the Spirit upon all flesh
(Joel iii. 1 ff.); and in Isaiah xi. 1 f. it was expressly said of the
stem of Jesse, that the spirit of the Lord would rest on it in all its
fulness, as the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, of might, and of
the fear of the Lord. The communication of the Spirit, considered as an
individual act, coincident with the baptism, had a type in the history
of David, on whom, when anointed by Samuel, the spirit of God came from
that day forward (1 Sam. xvi. 13). Further, in the Old Testament
phrases concerning the imparting of the Divine Spirit to men,
especially in that expression of Isaiah, ‏נוּחַ עִל־‎, which best
corresponds to the μένειν ἐπὶ of John, there already lay the germ of a
symbolical representation; for that Hebrew verb is applied also to the
halting of armies, or, like the parallel Arabic word, even of animals.
The imagination, once stimulated by such an expression, would be the
more strongly impelled to complete the picture by the necessity for
distinguishing the descent of the Spirit on the Messiah,—in the Jewish
view, from the mode in which it was imparted to the prophets (e.g.
Isaiah lxi. 1)—in the Christian view, from its ordinary communication
to the baptized (e.g. Acts xix. 1 ff). [625] The position being once
laid down that the Spirit was to descend on the Messiah, the question
immediately occurred: How would it descend? This was necessarily
decided according to the popular Jewish idea, which always represented
the Divine Spirit under some form or other. In the Old Testament, and
even in the New (Acts ii. 3), fire is the principal symbol of the Holy
Spirit; but it by no means follows that other sensible objects were not
similarly used. In an important passage of the Old Testament (Gen. i.
2), the Spirit of God is described as hovering (‏מְרַחֶפֶת‎), a word which
suggests, as its sensible representation, the movement of a bird,
rather than of fire. Thus the expression ‏רָחַף‎, Deut. xxxii. 11, is
used of the hovering of a bird over its young. But the imagination
could not be satisfied with the general figure of a bird; it must have
a specific image, and everything led to the choice of the dove.

In the East, and especially in Syria, the dove is a sacred bird, [626]
and it is so for a reason which almost necessitated its association
with the Spirit moving on the face of the primitive waters (Gen. i. 2).
The brooding dove was a symbol of the quickening warmth of nature;
[627] it thus perfectly represented the function which, in the Mosaic
cosmogony, is ascribed to the Spirit of God,—the calling forth of the
world of life from the chaos of the first creation. Moreover, when the
earth was a second time covered with water, it is a dove, sent by Noah,
which hovers over its waves, and which, by plucking an olive leaf, and
at length finally disappearing, announces the renewed possibility of
living on the earth. Who then can wonder that in Jewish writings, the
Spirit hovering over the primeval waters is expressly compared to a
dove, [628] and that, apart from the narrative under examination, the
dove is taken as a symbol of the Holy Spirit? [629] How near to this
lay the association of the hovering dove with the Messiah, on whom the
dove-like spirit was to descend, is evident, without our having
recourse to the Jewish writings, which designate the Spirit hovering
over the waters, Gen. i. 2, as the Spirit of the Messiah, [630] and
also connect with him its emblem, the Noachian dove. [631]

When, in this manner, the heavenly voice, and the Divine Spirit
down-hovering like a dove, gathered from the cotemporary Jewish ideas,
had become integral parts of the Christian legend concerning the
circumstances of the baptism of Jesus; it followed, of course, that the
heavens should open themselves, for the Spirit, once embodied, must
have a road before it could descend through the vault of heaven. [632]

The result of the preceding inquiries, viz., that the alleged
miraculous circumstances of the baptism of Jesus have merely a mythical
value, might have been much more readily obtained, in the way of
inference from the preceding chapter; for if, according to that, John
had not acknowledged Jesus to be the Messiah, there could have been no
appearances at the baptism of Jesus, demonstrative to John of his
Messiahship. We have, however, established the mythical character of
the baptismal phenomena, without presupposing the result of the
previous chapter; and thus the two independently obtained conclusions
may serve to strengthen each other.

Supposing all the immediate circumstances of the baptism of Jesus
unhistorical, the question occurs, whether the baptism itself be also a
mere mythus. Fritzsche seems not disinclined to the affirmative, for he
leaves it undecided whether the first Christians knew historically, or
only supposed, in conformity with their messianic expectations, that
Jesus was consecrated to his messianic office by John, as his
forerunner. This view may be supported by the observation, that in the
Jewish expectation, which originated in the history of David, combined
with the prophecy of Malachi, there was adequate inducement to assume
such a consecration of Jesus by the Baptist, even without historical
warrant; and the mention of John’s baptism in relation to Jesus (Acts
i. 22), in a narrative, itself traditional, proves nothing to the
contrary. Yet, on the other hand, it is to be considered that the
baptism of Jesus by John furnishes the most natural basis for an
explanation of the messianic project of Jesus. When we have two
cotemporaries, of whom one announces the proximity of the Messiah’s
kingdom, and the other subsequently assumes the character of Messiah;
the conjecture arises, even, without positive information, that they
stood in a relation to each other—that the latter owed his idea to the
former. If Jesus had the messianic idea excited in him by John, yet, as
is natural, only so far that he also looked forward to the advent of
the messianic individual, whom he did not, in the first instance,
identify with himself; he would most likely submit himself to the
baptism of John. This would probably take place without any striking
occurrences; and Jesus, in no way announced by it as the Baptist’s
superior, might, as above remarked, continue for some time to demean
himself as his disciple.

If we take a comparative retrospect of our evangelical documents, the
pre-eminence which has of late been sought for the fourth gospel
appears totally unmerited. The single historical fact, the baptism of
Jesus by John, is not mentioned by the fourth Evangelist, who is
solicitous about the mythical adjuncts alone, and these he in reality
gives no more simply than the synoptical writers, his omission of the
opening heaven excepted; for the divine speech is not wanting in his
narrative, if we read it impartially. In the words, i. 33: He that sent
me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt
see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, we have not only substantially the same
purport as that conveyed by the heavenly voice in the synoptical
gospels, but also a divine declaration; the only difference being, that
here John is addressed exclusively, and prior to the baptism of Jesus.
This difference originated partly in the importance which the fourth
Evangelist attached to the relation between the Baptist and Jesus, and
which required that the criteria of the messianic individual, as well
as the proximity of his kingdom, should have been revealed to John at
his call to baptize; and it might be partly suggested by the narrative
in 1 Sam. xvi., according to which Samuel, being sent by Jehovah to
anoint a king selected from the sons of Jesse, is thus admonished by
Jehovah on the entrance of David: Arise and anoint him, for this is he
(v. 12). The descent of the Spirit, which in David’s case follows his
consecration, is, by the fourth Evangelist, made an antecedent sign of
the Messiahship of Jesus.




§ 52.

RELATION OF THE SUPERNATURAL AT THE BAPTISM OF JESUS TO THE
SUPERNATURAL IN HIS CONCEPTION.

At the commencement of this chapter, we enquired into the subjective
views of Jesus in his reception of John’s baptism, or the idea which he
entertained of its relation to his own character. We close this
discussion with an inquiry into the objective purpose of the miracles
at the baptism of Jesus, or the mode in which they were to subserve the
manifestation of his messiahship.

The common answer to such an inquiry is, that Jesus was thereby
inducted to his public office, and declared to be the Messiah, [633]
i.e. that nothing was conferred on him, and that simply the character
which he already possessed was manifested to others. But, it may be
asked, is such an abstraction intended by our narrators? A consecration
to an office, effected by divine co-operation, was ever considered by
antiquity as a delegation of divine powers for its fulfilment; hence,
in the Old Testament, the kings, as soon as they are anointed, are
filled with the spirit of God (1 Sam. x. 6, 10, xvi. 13); and in the
New Testament also, the apostles, before entering on their vocation,
are furnished with supernatural gifts (Acts ii.). It may, therefore, be
beforehand conjectured, that according to the original sense of the
Gospels, the consecration of Jesus at his baptism was attended with a
supply of higher powers; and this is confirmed by an examination of our
narratives. For the synoptical writers all state, that after the
baptism, the Spirit led Jesus into the wilderness, obviously marking
this journey as the first effect of the higher principle infused at his
baptism: and in John, the words μένειν ἐπ’ αὐτὸν, applied to the
descending Spirit, seem to intimate, that from the time of the baptism
there was a relation not previously subsisting, between the πνεῦμα
ἅγιον and Jesus.

This interpretation of the marvels at the baptism of Jesus seems in
contradiction with the narratives of his conception. If Jesus, as
Matthew and Luke state, was conceived by the Holy Ghost; or if, as John
propounds, the divine λόγος, the word, was made flesh in him, from the
beginning of his earthly existence; why did he yet need, at his
baptism, a special intromission of the πνεῦμα ἅγιον? Several modern
expositors have seen, and sought to solve, this difficulty. Olshausen’s
explanation consists in the distinction between the potential and the
actual; but it is self-contradictory. [634] For if the character of the
Χριστὸς which was manifested actû, with the ripened manhood of Jesus,
at his baptism, was already present potentiâ in the child and youth;
there must have also been an inward principle of development, by means
of which his powers would gradually unfold themselves from within,
instead of being first awakened by a sudden illapse of the Spirit from
without. This, however, does not preclude the possibility that the
divine principle, existing in Jesus, as supernaturally conceived, from
the moment of his birth, might need, owing to the human form of its
development, some impulse from without; and Lücke [635] has more justly
proceeded on this contrast between external impulse and inward
development. The λόγος, present in Jesus from his birth, needed, he
thinks, however strong might be the inward bent, some external stimulus
and vivification, in order to arrive at full activity and manifestation
in the world; and that which awakens and guides the divine life-germ in
the world is, on apostolic showing, the πνεῦμα ἅγιον. Allowing this,
yet the inward disposition and the requisite force of the outward
stimulus stand in an inverse relation to each other; so that the
stronger the outward stimulus required, the weaker is the inward
disposition; but in a case where the inward disposition is
consummate,—as it must be supposed in Jesus, engendered by the Spirit,
or animated by the λόγος,—the exterior impulse ought to be a minimum,
that is, every circumstance, even the most common, might serve as a
determination of the inward tendency. But at the baptism of Jesus we
see the maximum of exterior impulse, in the visible descent of the
divine Spirit; and although we allow for the special nature of the
messianic task, for the fulfilment of which he must be qualified, [636]
yet the maximum of inward disposition, which fitted him to be the υἱὸς
Θεοῦ, cannot at the same time be supposed as existing in him from his
birth: a consequence which Lücke only escapes, by reducing the
baptismal scene to a mere inauguration, thus, as has been already
shown, contradicting the evangelical records.

We must here give a similar decision to that at which we arrived
concerning the genealogies; viz., that in that circle of the early
Christian church, in which the narrative of the descent of the πνεῦμα
on Jesus at his baptism was formed, the idea that Jesus was generated
by the same πνεῦμα cannot have prevailed; and while, at the present
day, the communication of the divine nature to Jesus is thought of as
cotemporary with his conception, those Christians must have regarded
his baptism as the epoch of such communication. In fact, those
primitive Christians whom, in a former discussion, we found to have
known nothing, or to have believed nothing, of the supernatural
conception of Jesus, were also those who connected the first
communication of divine powers to Jesus with his baptism in the Jordan.
For no other doctrine did the orthodox fathers of the church more
fiercely persecute the ancient Ebionites, [637] with their gnostic
fellow-believer Cerinthus, [638] than for this: that the Holy Spirit
first united himself with Jesus at his baptism. In the Gospel of the
Ebionites it was written that the πνεῦμα not only descended on Jesus in
the form of a dove, but entered into him; [639] and according to
Justin, it was the general expectation of the Jews, that higher powers
would first be granted to the Messiah, when he should be anointed by
his forerunner Elias. [640]

The development of these ideas seems to have been the following. When
the messianic dignity of Jesus began to be acknowledged among the Jews,
it was thought appropriate to connect his coming into possession of the
requisite gifts, with the epoch from which he was in some degree known,
and which, from the ceremony that marked it, was also best adapted to
represent that anointing with the Holy Spirit, expected by the Jews for
their Messiah: and from this point of view was formed the legend of the
occurrences at the baptism. But as reverence for Jesus was heightened,
and men appeared in the Christian church who were acquainted with more
exalted messianic ideas, this tardy manifestation of messiahship was no
longer sufficient; his relation with the Holy Spirit was referred to
his conception: and from this point of view was formed the tradition of
the supernatural conception of Jesus. Here too, perhaps, the words of
the heavenly voice, which might originally be those of Ps. ii. 7, were
altered after Isaiah xlii. 1. For the words, σήμερον γεγέννηκα σε, This
day have I begotten thee, were consistent with the notion that Jesus
was constituted the Son of God at his baptism; but they were no longer
suitable to that occasion, when the opinion had arisen that the origin
of his life was an immediate divine act. By this later representation,
however, the earlier one was by no means supplanted, but, on the
contrary, tradition and her recorders being large-hearted, both
narratives—that of the miracles at the baptism, and that of the
supernatural conception, or the indwelling of the λόγος in Jesus from
the commencement of his life, although, strictly, they exclude each
other, went forth peaceably side by side, and so were depicted by our
Evangelists, not excepting even the fourth. Just as in the case of the
genealogies: the narrative of the imparting of the Spirit at the
baptism could not arise after the formation of the idea that Jesus was
engendered by the Spirit; but it might be retained as a supplement,
because tradition is ever unwilling to renounce any of its acquired
treasures.




§ 53.

PLACE AND TIME OF THE TEMPTATION OF JESUS. DIVERGENCIES OF THE
EVANGELISTS ON THIS SUBJECT.

The transition from the baptism to the temptation of Jesus, as it is
made by the synoptical writers, is attended with difficulty in relation
both to place and time.

With respect to the former, it strikes us at once, that according to
all the synoptical gospels, Jesus after his baptism was led into the
wilderness to be tempted, implying that he was not previously in the
wilderness, although, according to Matt. iii. 1, John, by whom he was
baptized, exercised his ministry there. This apparent contradiction has
been exposed by the most recent critic of Matthew’s gospel, for the
sake of proving the statement that John baptized in the wilderness to
be erroneous. [641] But they who cannot resolve to reject this
statement on grounds previously laid down, may here avail themselves of
the supposition, that John delivered his preliminary discourses in the
wilderness of Judea, but resorted to the Jordan for the purpose of
baptizing; or, if the banks of the Jordan be reckoned part of that
wilderness, of the presumption that the Evangelists can only have
intended that the Spirit led Jesus farther into the recesses of the
wilderness, but have neglected to state this with precision, because
their description of the scene at the baptism had obliterated from
their imagination their former designation of the locality of John’s
agency.

But there is, besides, a chronological difficulty: namely, that while,
according to the synoptical writers, Jesus, in the plenitude of the
Spirit, just communicated to him at the Jordan, betakes himself, in
consequence of that communication, for forty days to the wilderness,
where the temptation occurs, and then returns into Galilee; John, on
the contrary, is silent concerning the temptation, and appears to
suppose an interval of a few days only, between the baptism of Jesus
and his journey into Galilee; thus allowing no space for a six weeks’
residence in the wilderness. The fourth Evangelist commences his
narrative with the testimony which the Baptist delivers to the
emissaries of the Sanhedrim (i. 19); the next day (τῇ ἐπαύριον) he
makes the Baptist recite the incident which in the synoptical gospels
is followed by the baptism (v. 29): again, the next day (τῇ ἐπαύριον)
he causes two of his disciples to follow Jesus (v. 35); farther, the
next day (τῇ ἐπαύριον, v. 44), as Jesus is on the point of journeying
into Galilee, Philip and Nathanael join him; and lastly, on the third
day, τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τρίτῃ (ii. 1), Jesus is at the wedding in Cana of
Galilee. The most natural inference is, that the baptism took place
immediately before John’s narrative of its attendant occurrences, and
as according to the synoptical gospels the temptation followed close on
the baptism, both these events must be inserted between v. 28 and 29,
as Euthymius supposed. But between that which is narrated down to v.
28, and the sequel from v. 29 inclusive, there is only the interval of
a morrow, ἐπαύριον, while the temptation requires a period of forty
days; hence, expositors have thought it necessary to give ἐπαύριον the
wider sense of ὕστερον afterwards; this however is inadmissible,
because the expression τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τρίτῃ, the third day, follows in
connexion with ἐπαύριον, and restricts its meaning to the morrow. We
might therefore be inclined, with Kuinöl, to separate the baptism and
the temptation, to place the baptism after v. 28, and to regard the
next day’s interview between Jesus and John (v. 29) as a parting visit
from the former to the latter: inserting after this the journey into
the wilderness and the temptation. But without insisting that the first
three Evangelists seem not to allow even of a day’s interval between
the baptism and the departure of Jesus into the wilderness, yet even
later we have the same difficulty in finding space for the forty days.
For it is no more possible to place the residence in the wilderness
between the supposed parting visit and the direction of the two
disciples to Jesus, that is between v. 34 and 35, as Kuinöl attempts,
than between v. 28 and 29, since the former as well as the latter
passages are connected by τῇ ἐπαύριον, on the morrow. Hence we must
descend to v. 43 and 44; but here also there is only the interval of a
morrow, and even chap. ii. 1, we are shut out by an ἡμέρα τρίτη, third
day, so that, proceeding in this way, the temptation would at last be
carried to the residence of Jesus in Galilee, in direct opposition to
the statement of the synoptical writers; while, in further
contradiction to them, the temptation is placed at a farther and
farther distance from the baptism. Thus neither at v. 29, nor below it,
can the forty days’ residence of Jesus in the wilderness with the
temptation be intercalated: and it must therefore be referred,
according to the plan of Lücke and others, [642] to the period before
v. 19, which seems to allow of as large an interpolation as can be
desired, inasmuch as the fourth Evangelist there commences his history.
Now it is true that what follows from v. 19 to 28 is not of a kind
absolutely to exclude the baptism and temptation of Jesus as earlier
occurrences; but from v. 29 to 34, the Evangelist is far from making
the Baptist speak as if there had been an interval of six weeks between
the baptism and his narrative of its circumstances. [643] That the
fourth Evangelist should have omitted, by chance merely, the history of
the temptation, important as it was in the view of the other
Evangelists, seems improbable: it is rather to be concluded, either
that it was dogmatically offensive to him, so that he omitted it
designedly, or that it was not current in the circle of tradition from
which he drew his materials.

The period of forty days is assigned by all three of the synoptical
writers for the residence of Jesus in the wilderness; but to this
agreement is annexed the not inconsiderable discrepancy, that,
according to Matthew, the temptation by the devil commences after the
lapse of the forty days, while, according to the others, it appears to
have been going forward during this time; for the words of Mark (i.
13), he was in the wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, ἦν ἐν τῇ
ἐρήμῳ ἡμέρας τεσσαράκοντα πειραζόμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ Σατανᾶ, and the similar
ones of Luke i. 2, can have no other meaning. Added to this, there is a
difference between the two latter evangelists; Mark only placing the
temptation generally within the duration of forty days, without naming
the particular acts of the tempter, which according to Matthew, were
subsequent to the forty days; while Luke mentions both the prolonged
temptation (πειράζεσθαι) of the forty days, and the three special
temptations (πειρασμοὶ) which followed. [644] It has been thought
possible to make the three accounts tally by supposing that the devil
tempted Jesus during the forty days, as Mark states; that after the
lapse of that time he approached him with the three temptations given
by Matthew; and that Luke’s narrative includes the whole. [645]
Further, the temptations have been distinguished into two kinds; that
which is only generally mentioned, as continued through the forty days,
being considered invisible, like the ordinary attempts of Satan against
men; and the three particularized temptations being regarded as
personal and visible assaults, resorted to on the failure of the first.
[646] But this distinction is evidently built on the air; moreover, it
is inconceivable why Luke should not specify one of the temptations of
the forty days, and should only mention the three subsequent ones
detailed by Matthew. We might conjecture that the three temptations
narrated by Luke did not occur after the six weeks, but were given by
way of specimen from among the many that took place during that time;
and that Matthew misunderstood them to be a sequel to the forty days’
temptation. [647] But the challenge to make stones bread must in any
case be placed at the end of that period, for it appealed to the hunger
of Jesus, arising from a forty days’ fast (a cause omitted by Mark
alone). Now in Luke also this is the first temptation, and if this
occurred at the close of the forty days, the others could not have been
earlier. For it is not to be admitted that the separate temptations
being united in Luke merely by καὶ, and not by τότε and πάλιν as in
Matthew, we are not bound to preserve the order of them, and that
without violating the intention of the third Evangelist we may place
the second and third temptation before the first. Thus Luke is
convicted of a want of historical fact; for after representing Jesus as
tempted by the devil forty days, he has no details to give concerning
this long period, but narrates later temptations; hence we are not
inclined, with the most recent critic of Matthew’s Gospel, to regard
Luke’s as the original, and Matthew’s as the traditional and
adulterated narrative. [648] Rather, as in Mark the temptation is
noticed without farther details than that it lasted forty days, and in
Matthew the particular cases of temptation are narrated, the hunger
which induced the first rendering it necessary to place them after the
forty days; Luke has evidently the secondary statement, for he unites
the two previous ones in a manner scarcely tolerable, giving the forty
days’ process of temptation, and then superfluously bringing forward
particular instances as additional facts. It is not on this account to
be concluded that Luke wrote after Mark, and in dependence on him; but
supposing, on the contrary, that Mark here borrowed from Luke, he
extracted only the first and general part of the latter Evangelist’s
narrative, having ready, in lieu of the farther detail of single
temptations, an addition peculiar to himself; namely, that Jesus,
during his residence in the wilderness was μετὰ τῶν θηρίων, with the
wild beasts.

What was Mark’s object in introducing the wild beasts, it is difficult
to say. The majority of expositors are of opinion that he intended to
complete the terrible picture of the wilderness; [649] but to this it
is not without reason objected, that the clause would then have been in
closer connexion with the words ἦν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, he was in the
wilderness, instead of being placed after πειραζόμενος, tempted. [650]
Usteri has hazarded the conjecture that this particularity may be
designed to mark Christ as the antitype of Adam, who, in Paradise, also
stood in a peculiar relation to the animals, [651] and Olshausen has
eagerly laid hold on this mystical notion; but it is an interpretation
which finds little support in the context. Schleiermacher, in
pronouncing this feature of Mark’s narrative extravagant, [652]
doubtless means that this Evangelist here, as in other instances of
exaggeration, borders on the style of the apocryphal gospels, for whose
capricious fictions we are not seldom unable to suggest a cause or an
object, and thus we must rest contented, for the present, to penetrate
no farther into the sense of his statement.

With respect to the difference between Matthew and Luke in the
arrangement of the several temptations, we must equally abide by
Schleiermacher’s criticism and verdict, namely, that Matthew’s order
seems to be the original, because it is founded on the relative
importance of the temptations, which is the main consideration,—the
invitation to worship Satan, which is the strongest temptation, being
made the final one; whereas the arrangement of Luke looks like a later
and not very happy transposition, proceeding from the
consideration—alien to the original spirit of the narrative—that Jesus
could more readily go with the devil from the wilderness to the
adjacent mountain and from thence to Jerusalem, than out of the
wilderness to the city and from thence back again to the mountain.
[653] While the first two Evangelists close their narrative of the
temptation with the ministering of angels to Jesus, Luke has a
conclusion peculiar to himself, namely, that the devil left Jesus for a
season, ἄχρι καιροῦ (v. 13), apparently intimating that the sufferings
of Jesus were a farther assault of the devil; an idea not resumed by
Luke, but alluded to in John xiv. 30.




§ 54.

THE HISTORY OF THE TEMPTATION CONCEIVED IN THE SENSE OF THE
EVANGELISTS.

Few evangelical passages have undergone a more industrious criticism,
or more completely run through the circle of all possible
interpretations, than the history in question. For the personal
appearance of the devil, which it seems to contain, was a thorn which
would not allow commentators to repose on the most obvious
interpretation, but incessantly urged them to new efforts. The series
of explanations hence resulting, led to critical comparisons, among
which those of Schmidt, [654] Fritzsche, [655] and Usteri, [656] seem
to have carried the inquiry to its utmost limits.

The first interpretation that suggests itself on an unprejudiced
consideration of the text is this; that Jesus was led by the Divine
Spirit received at his baptism into the wilderness, there to undergo a
temptation by the devil, who accordingly appeared to him visibly and
personally, and in various ways, and at various places to which he was
the conductor, prosecuted his purpose of temptation; but meeting with a
victorious resistance, he withdrew from Jesus, and angels appeared to
minister to him. Such is the simple exegesis of the narrative, but
viewed as a history it is encumbered with difficulties.

To take the portions of the narrative in their proper order: if the
Divine Spirit led Jesus into the wilderness with the design of exposing
him to temptation, as Matthew expressly says, ἀνήχθη εἰς τὴν ἔρημον ὑπὸ
τοῦ Πνεύματος, πειρασθῆναι (iv. 1), of what use was this temptation?
That it had a vicarious and redeeming value will hardly be maintained,
or that it was necessary for God to put Jesus to a trial; neither can
it be consistently shown that by this temptation Jesus was to be made
like us, and, according to Heb. iv. 15, tempted in all things like as
we are; for the fullest measure of trial fell to his share in after
life, and a temptation, effected by the devil in person, would rather
make him unlike us, who are spared such appearances.

The forty days’ fast, too, is singular. One does not understand how
Jesus could hunger after six weeks of abstinence from all food without
having hungered long before; since in ordinary cases the human frame
cannot sustain a week’s deprivation of nourishment. It is true,
expositors [657] console themselves by calling the forty days a round
number, and by supposing that the expression of Matthew, νηστεύσας, and
even that of Luke, οὐκ ἔφαγεν οὐδὲν, are not to be taken strictly, and
do not denote abstinence from all food, but only from that which is
customary, so that the use of roots and herbs is not excluded. On no
supposition, however, can so much be subtracted from the forty days as
to leave only the duration of a conceivable fast; and that nothing
short of entire abstinence from all nourishment was intended by the
Evangelists Fritzsche has clearly shown, by pointing out the parallel
between the fast of Jesus and that of Moses and Elias, the former of
whom is said to have eaten no bread and drunk no water for forty days
(Exod. xxxiv. 28; Deut. ix. 9, 18), and the latter to have gone for the
same period in the strength of a meal taken before his journey (1 Kings
xix. 8). But such a fast wants the credentials of utility, as well as
of possibility. From the context it appears, that the fast of Jesus was
prompted by the same Spirit which occasioned his journey to the
wilderness, and which now moved him to a holy self-discipline, whereby
men of God, under the old dispensation, purified themselves, and became
worthy of divine visions. But it could not be hidden from that Spirit,
that Satan, in attacking Jesus, would avail himself of this very fast,
and make the hunger thence arising an accomplice in his temptation. And
was not the fast, in this case, a kind of challenge to Satan, an act of
presumption, ill becoming even the best warranted self-confidence?
[658]

But the personal appearance of the devil is the great stumbling-block
in the present narrative. If, it is said, there be a personal devil, he
cannot take a visible form; and if that were possible, he would hardly
demean himself as he is represented to have done in the gospels. It is
with the existence of the devil as with that of angels—even the
believers in a revelation are perplexed by it, because the idea did not
spring up among the recipients of revelation, but was transplanted by
them, during exile, from a profane soil. [659] Moreover, to those who
have not quite shut out the lights of the present age, the existence of
a devil is become in the highest degree doubtful.

On this subject, as well as on that of angels, Schleiermacher may serve
as an interpreter of modern opinion. He shows that the idea of a being
such as the devil, is an assemblage of contradictions: that as the idea
of angels originated in a limited observation of nature, so that of the
devil originated in a limited observation of self, and as our knowledge
of human nature progresses, must recede farther into the background,
and the appeal to the devil be henceforth regarded as the resource of
ignorance and sloth. [660] Even admitting the existence of a devil, a
visible and personal appearance on his part, such as is here supposed,
has its peculiar difficulties. Olshausen himself observes, that there
is no parallel to it either in the Old or New Testament. Farther, if
the devil, that he might have some hope of deceiving Jesus, abandoned
his own form, and took that of a man, or of a good angel; it may be
reasonably asked whether the passage, 2 Cor. xi. 14, Satan is
transformed into an angel of light, be intended literally, and if so,
whether this fantastic conception can be substantially true? [661]

As to the temptations, it was early asked by Julian, how the devil
could hope to deceive Jesus, knowing, as he must, his higher nature?
[662] And Theodore’s answer that the divinity of Jesus was then unknown
to the devil, is contradicted by the observation, that had he not then
beheld a higher nature in Jesus, he would scarcely have taken the
trouble to appear specially to him in person. In relation to the
particular temptations, an assent cannot be withheld from the canon,
that, to be credible, the narrative must ascribe nothing to the devil
inconsistent with his established cunning. [663] Now the first
temptation, appealing to hunger, we grant, is not ill-conceived; if
this were ineffectual, the devil, as an artful tactician, should have
had a yet more alluring temptation at hand; but instead of this, we
find him, in Matthew, proposing to Jesus the neck-breaking feat of
casting himself down from the pinnacle of the temple—a far less
inviting experiment than the metamorphosis of the stones. This
proposition finding no acceptance, there follows, as a crowning effort,
a suggestion which, whatever might be the bribe, every true Israelite
would instantly reject with abhorrence—to fall down and worship the
devil. So indiscreet a choice and arrangement of temptations has thrown
most modern commentators into perplexity. [664] As the three
temptations took place in three different and distant places, the
question occurs: how did Jesus pass with the devil from one to the
other? Even the orthodox hold that this change of place was effected
quite naturally, for they suppose that Jesus set out on a journey, and
that the devil followed him. [665] But the expressions, the devil takes
him—sets him, παραλαμβάνει—ἵστησιν αὐτὸν ὁ διάβολος, in Matthew:
taking, ἀναγαγών, brought, ἤγαγεν, set, ἔστησεν, in Luke, obviously
imply that the transportation was effected by the devil, and moreover,
the particular given in Luke, that the devil showed Jesus all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment of time, points to something magical;
so that without doubt the Evangelists intended to convey the idea of
magical transportations, as in Acts viii. 29, a power of carrying away,
ἁρπάζειν, is attributed to the Spirit of the Lord. But it was early
found irreconcilable with the dignity of Jesus that the devil should
thus exercise a magical power over him, and carry him about in the air;
[666] an idea which seemed extravagant even to those who tolerated the
personal appearance of the devil. The incredibility is augmented, when
we consider the sensation which the appearance of Jesus on the roof of
the temple must have excited, even supposing it to be the roof of
Solomon’s Porch only, in which case the gilded spears on the holy of
holies, and the prohibition to laymen to tread its roof, would not be
an obstacle. [667] The well-known question suggested by the last
temptation, as to the situation of the mountain, from whose summit may
be seen all the kingdoms of the world, has been met by the information
that κόσμος here means no more than Palestine, and βασιλείας, its
several kingdoms and tetrarchies; [668] but this is a scarcely less
ludicrous explanation than the one that the devil showed Jesus all the
kingdoms of the world on a map! No answer remains but that such a
mountain existed only in the ancient idea of the earth as a plain, and
in the popular imagination, which can easily stretch a mountain up to
heaven, and sharpen an eye to penetrate infinity.

Lastly, the incident with which our narrative closes, namely, that
angels came and ministered to Jesus, is not without difficulty, apart
from the above-mentioned doubts as to the existence of such beings. For
the expression διηκόνουν can signify no other kind of ministering than
that of presenting food; and this is proved not only by the context,
according to which Jesus had need of such tendance, but by a comparison
of the circumstances with 1 Kings xix. 5, where an angel brings food to
Elijah. But of the only two possible suppositions, both are equally
incongruous: that ethereal beings like angels should convey earthly
material food, or that the human body of Jesus should be nourished with
heavenly substances, if any such exist.




§ 55.

THE TEMPTATION CONSIDERED AS A NATURAL OCCURRENCE EITHER INTERNAL OR
EXTERNAL; AND ALSO AS A PARABLE.

The impossibility of conceiving the sudden removals of Jesus to the
temple and the mountain, led some even of the ancient commentators to
the opinion, that at least the locality of the second and third
temptations was not present to Jesus corporeally and externally, but
merely in a vision; [669] while some modern ones, to whom the personal
appearance of the devil was especially offensive, have supposed that
the whole transaction with him passed from beginning to end within the
recesses of the soul of Jesus. Herewith they have regarded the forty
days’ fast either as a mere internal representation [670] (which,
however, is a most inadmissible perversion of the plainly historic
text: νηστεύσας ἡμέρας τεσσαράκοντα ὕστερον ἐπείνασε, Matt. iv. 2), or
as a real fact, in which case the formidable difficulties mentioned in
the preceding section remain valid. The internal representation of the
temptations is by some made to accompany a state of ecstatic vision,
for which they retain a supernatural cause, deriving it either from
God, or from the kingdom of darkness: [671] others ascribe to the
vision more of the nature of a dream, and accordingly seek a natural
cause for it, in the reflections with which Jesus was occupied during
his waking moments. [672] According to this theory, Jesus, in the
solemn mood which the baptismal scene was calculated to produce,
reviews his messianic plan, and together with the true means for its
execution, he recalls their possible abuses; an excessive use of
miracles and a love of domination, by which man, in the Jewish mode of
thinking, became, instead of an instrument of God, a promoter of the
plans of the devil. While surrendering himself to such meditations, his
finely organized body is overcome by their exciting influence; he sinks
for some time into deep exhaustion, and then into a dream-like state,
in which his mind unconsciously embodies his previous thoughts in
speaking and acting forms.

To support this transference of the whole scene to the inward nature of
Jesus, commentators think that they can produce some features of the
evangelical narrative itself. The expression of Matthew (iv. 1), ἀνήχθη
εἰς τὴν ἔρημον ὑπὸ τοῦ Πνεύματος, and still more that of Luke (iv. 1),
ἤγετο ἐν τῷ Πνεύματι, correspond fully to the forms: ἐγενόμην ἐν
πνεύματι, Rev. i. 10, ἀπήνενκέ με εἰς ἔρημον ἐν πνεύματι, xvii. 3, and
to similar ones in Ezekiel; and as in these passages inward intuition
is alone referred to, neither in the evangelical ones, it is said, can
any external occurrence be intended. But it has been with reason
objected, [673] that the above forms may be adapted either to a real
external abduction by the Divine Spirit (as in Acts viii. 39; 2 Kings
ii. 16), or to one merely internal and visionary, as in the quotation
from the Apocalypse, so that between these two possible significations
the context must decide; that in works replete with visions, as are the
Apocalypse and Ezekiel, the context indeed pronounces in favour of a
merely spiritual occurrence; but in an historical work such as our
gospels, of an external one. Dreams, and especially visions, are always
expressly announced as such in the historical books of the New
Testament: supposing, therefore, that the temptation was a vision, it
should have been introduced by the words εἶδεν ἐν ὁράματι, ἐν ἔκστάσει,
as in Acts ix. 12, x. 10; or ἐφάνη αὐτῷ κατ’ ὄναρ, as in Matt. i. 20,
ii. 13. Besides, if a dream had been narrated, the transition to a
continuation of the real history must have been marked by a διεγερθεὶς,
being awaked, as in Matt. i. 24, ii. 14, 21; whereby, as Paulus truly
says, much labour would have been spared to expositors.

It is further alleged against the above explanations, that Jesus does
not seem to have been at any other time subject to ecstasies, and that
he nowhere else attaches importance to a dream, or even recapitulates
one. [674] To what end God should have excited such a vision in Jesus,
it is difficult to conceive, or how the devil should have had power and
permission to produce it; especially in Christ. The orthodox, too,
should not forget that, admitting the temptation to be a dream,
resulting from the thoughts of Jesus, the false messianic ideas which
were a part of those thoughts, are supposed to have had a strong
influence on his mind. [675]

If, then, the history of the temptation is not to be understood as
confined to the soul of Jesus, and if we have before shown that it
cannot be regarded as supernatural; nothing seems to remain but to view
it as a real, yet thoroughly natural, event, and to reduce the tempter
to a mere man. After John had drawn attention to Jesus as the Messiah
(thinks the author of the Natural History of the Prophet of Nazareth),
[676] the ruling party in Jerusalem commissioned an artful Pharisee to
put Jesus to the test, and to ascertain whether he really possessed
miraculous powers, or whether he might not be drawn into the interest
of the priesthood, and be induced to give his countenance to an
enterprise against the Romans. This conception of the διάβολος is in
dignified consistency with that of the ἄγγελοι, who appeared after his
departure, to refresh Jesus, as an approaching caravan with provisions,
or as soft reviving breezes. [677] But this view, as Usteri says, has
so long completed its phases in the theological world, that to refute
it would be to waste words.

If the foregoing discussions have proved that the temptation, as
narrated by the synoptical Evangelists, cannot be conceived as an
external or internal, a supernatural or natural occurrence, the
conclusion is inevitable, that it cannot have taken place in the manner
represented.

The least invidious expedient is to suppose that the source of our
histories of the temptation was some real event in the life of Jesus,
so narrated by him to his disciples as to convey no accurate impression
of the fact. Tempting thoughts, which intruded themselves into his soul
during his residence in the wilderness, or at various seasons, and
under various circumstances, but which were immediately quelled by the
unimpaired force of his will, were, according to the oriental mode of
thought and expression, represented by him as a temptation of the
devil; and this figurative narrative was understood literally. [678]
The most prominent objection to this view, that it compromises the
impeccability of Jesus, [679] being founded on a dogma, has no
existence for the critic: we can, however, gather from the tenor of the
evangelical history, that the practical sense of Jesus was thoroughly
clear and just; but this becomes questionable, if he could ever feel an
inclination corresponding to the second temptation in Matthew, or even
if he merely chose such a form for communicating a more reasonable
temptation to his disciples. Further, in such a narrative Jesus would
have presented a confused mixture of fiction and truth out of his life,
not to be expected from an ingenuous teacher, as he otherwise appears
to be, especially if it be supposed that the tempting thoughts did not
really occur to him after his forty days’ sojourn in the wilderness,
and that this particular is only a portion of the fictitious
investiture; while if it be assumed, on the contrary, that the date is
historical, there remains the forty days’ fast, one of the most
insurmountable difficulties of the narrative. If Jesus wished simply to
describe a mental exercise in the manner of the Jews, who, tracing the
effect to the cause, ascribed evil thoughts to diabolical agency,
nothing more was requisite than to say that Satan suggested such and
such thoughts to his mind; and it was quite superfluous to depict a
personal devil and a journey with him, unless, together with the
purpose of narration, or in its stead, there existed a poetical and
didactic intention.

Such an intention, indeed, is attributed to Jesus by those who hold
that the history of the temptation was narrated by him as a parable,
but understood literally by his disciples. This opinion is not
encumbered with the difficulty of making some real inward experience of
Jesus the basis of the history; [680] it does not suppose that Jesus
himself underwent such temptations, but only that he sought to secure
his disciples from them, by impressing on them, as a compendium of
messianic and apostolic wisdom, the three following maxims: first to
perform no miracle for their own advantage even in the greatest
exigency; secondly, never to venture on a chimerical undertaking in the
hope of extraordinary divine aid; thirdly, never to enter into
fellowship with the wicked, however strong the enticement. [681] It was
long ago observed, in opposition to this interpretation, that the
narrative is not easily recognized as a parable, and that its moral is
hard to discern. [682] With respect to the latter objection, it is true
that the second temptation would be an ill-chosen image; but the former
remark is the more important one. To prove that this narrative has not
the characteristics of a parable, the following definition has been
recently given: a parable, being essentially historical in its form, is
only distinguishable from real history when its agents are of an
obviously fictitious character. [683] This is the case where the
subjects are mere generalizations, as in the parables of the sower, the
king, and others of a like kind; or when they are, indeed,
individualized, but so as to be at once recognized as unhistorical
persons, as mere supports for the drapery of fiction, of which even
Lazarus, in the parable of the rich man, is an example, though
distinguished by a name. In neither species of parable is it admissible
to introduce as a subject a person corporeally present, and necessarily
determinate and historical. Thus Jesus could not make Peter or any
other of his disciples the subject of a parable, still less himself,
for the reciter of a parable is pre-eminently present to his auditors;
and hence he cannot have delivered the history of the temptation, of
which he is the subject, to his disciples as a parable. To assume that
the history had originally another subject, for whom oral tradition
substituted Jesus, is inadmissible, because the narrative, even as a
parable, has no definite significance unless the Messiah be its
subject. [684]

If such a parable concerning himself or any other person, could not
have been delivered by Jesus, yet it is possible that it was made by
some other individual concerning Jesus; and this is the view taken by
Theile, who has recently explained the history of the temptation as a
parabolic admonition, directed by some partisan of Jesus against the
main features of the worldly messianic hope, with the purpose of
establishing the spiritual and moral view of the new economy. [685]
Here is the transition to the mythical point of view, which the above
theologian shuns, partly because the narrative is not sufficiently
picturesque (though it is so in a high degree); partly because it is
too pure (though he thus imputes false ideas to the primitive
Christians); and partly because the formation of the mythus was too
near the time of Jesus (an objection which must be equally valid
against the early misconstruction of the parable). If it can be shown,
on the contrary, that the narrative in question is formed less out of
instructive thoughts and their poetical clothing, as is the case with a
parable, than out of Old Testament passages and types, we shall not
hesitate to designate it a mythus.




§ 56.

THE HISTORY OF THE TEMPTATION AS A MYTHUS.

Satan, the evil being and enemy of mankind, borrowed from the Persian
religion, was by the Jews, whose exclusiveness limited all that was
good and truly human to the Israelitish people, viewed as the special
adversary of their nation, and hence as the lord of the heathen states
with whom they were in hostility. [686] The interests of the Jewish
people being centred in the Messiah, it followed that Satan was
emphatically his adversary; and thus throughout the New Testament we
find the idea of Jesus as the Messiah associated with that of Satan as
the enemy of his person and cause. Christ having appeared to destroy
the works of the devil (1 John iii. 8), the latter seizes every
opportunity of sowing tares among the good seed (Matt. xiii. 39), and
not only aims, though unsuccessfully, at obtaining the mastery over
Jesus himself (John xiv. 30), but continually assails the faithful
(Eph. vi. 11; 1 Pet. v. 8). As these attacks of the devil on the pious
are nothing else than attempts to get them into his power, that is, to
entice them to sin; and as this can only be done by the indirect
suggestion or immediate insinuation of evil, seductive thoughts, Satan
had the appellation of ὁ πειράζων, the tempter. In the prologue to the
book of Job, he seeks to seduce the pious man from God, by the
instrumentality of a succession of plagues and misfortunes: while the
ensnaring counsel which the serpent gave to the woman was early
considered an immediate diabolical suggestion. (Wisdom ii. 24; John
viii. 44; Rev. xii. 9.)

In the more ancient Hebrew theology, the idea was current that
temptation (‏נִסָּה‎, LXX. πειράζειν) was an act of God himself, who thus
put his favourites, as Abraham (Gen. xxii. 1), and the people of Israel
(Exod. xvi. 4, and elsewhere), to the test, or in just anger even
instigated men to pernicious deeds. But as soon as the idea of Satan
was formed, the office of temptation was transferred to him, and
withdrawn from God, with whose absolute goodness it began to be viewed
as incompatible (James i. 13). Hence it is Satan, who by his
importunity obtains the divine permission to put Job to the severest
trial through suffering; hence David’s culpable project of numbering
the people, which in the second book of Samuel was traced to the anger
of God, is in the later chronicles (1 Chron. xxii. 1) put directly to
the account of the devil; and even the well-meant temptation with
which, according to Genesis, God visited Abraham, in requiring from him
the sacrifice of his son, was in the opinion of the later Jews,
undertaken by God at the instigation of Satan. [687] Nor was this
enough—scenes were imagined in which the devil personally encountered
Abraham on his way to the place of sacrifice, and in which he tempted
the people of Israel during the absence of Moses. [688]

If the most eminent men of piety in Hebrew antiquity were thus tempted,
in the earlier view, by God, in the later one, by Satan, what was more
natural than to suppose that the Messiah, the Head of all the
righteous, the representative and champion of God’s people, would be
the primary object of the assaults of Satan? [689] And we find this
actually recorded as a rabbinical opinion, [690] in the material mode
of representation of the later Judaism, under the form of a bodily
appearance and a personal dialogue.

If a place were demanded where Satan might probably undertake such a
temptation of the Messiah, the wilderness would present itself from
more than one quarter. Not only had it been from Azazel (Lev. xvi.
8–10), and Asmodeus (Tobit viii. 3), to the demons ejected by Jesus
(Matt. xii. 43), the fearful dwelling-place of the infernal powers: it
was also the scene of temptation for the people of Israel, that filius
Dei collectivus. [691] Added to this, it was the habit of Jesus to
retire to solitary places for still meditation and prayer (Matt. xiv.
13; Mark i. 35; Luke vi. 12; John vi. 15); to which after his
consecration to the messianic office he would feel more than usually
disposed. It is hence possible that, as some theologians [692] have
supposed, a residence of Jesus in the wilderness after his baptism
(though not one of precisely forty days’ duration) served as the
historical foundation of our narrative; but even without this
connecting thread, both the already noticed choice of place and that of
time are to be explained by the consideration, that it seemed consonant
with the destiny of the Messiah that, like a second Hercules, he should
undergo such a trial on his entrance into mature age and the messianic
office.

But what had the Messiah to do in the wilderness? That the Messiah, the
second Saviour, should like his typical predecessor, Moses, on Mount
Sinai, submit himself to the holy discipline of fasting, was an idea
the more inviting, because it furnished a suitable introduction to the
first temptation which presupposed extreme hunger. The type of Moses
and that of Elias (1 Kings xix. 8), determined also the duration of
this fast in the wilderness, for they too had fasted forty days;
moreover, the number forty was held sacred in Hebrew antiquity. [693]
Above all, the forty days of the temptation of Jesus seem, as Olshausen
justly observes, a miniature image of the forty years’ trial in the
wilderness, endured by the Israelitish people as a penal emblem of the
forty days spent by the spies in the land of Canaan (Num. xiv. 34).
For, that in the temptations of Jesus there was a special reference to
the temptation of Israel in the wilderness, is shown by the
circumstance that all the passages cited by Jesus in opposition to
Satan are drawn from the recapitulatory description of the journeyings
of the Israelites in Deut. vi. and viii. The apostle Paul too, 1 Cor.
x. 6, enumerates a series of particulars from the behaviour of the
Israelites in the wilderness, with the consequent judgments of God, and
warns Christians against similar conduct, pronouncing, v. 6 and 11, the
punishments inflicted on the ancients to be types for the admonition of
the living, his cotemporaries, on whom the ends of the world were come;
wherefore, he adds, let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall. It is not probable that this was merely the private opinion of
the apostle—it seems rather to have been a current notion that the hard
trials of the people led by Moses, as well as of Moses individually,
were types of those which awaited the followers of the Messiah in the
catastrophe which he was to usher in, and still more emphatically the
Messiah himself, who here appears as the antitype of the people,
gloriously overcoming all the temptations under which they had fallen.

The Israelites were principally tempted by hunger during their
wanderings in the wilderness; [694] hence the first temptation of the
Messiah was determined beforehand. The rabbins, too, among the various
temptations of Abraham which they recount, generally reckon hunger.
[695] That Satan, when prompting Jesus to seek relief from his hunger
by an exertion of his own will instead of awaiting it in faith from
God, should make use of the terms given in our Evangelists, cannot be
matter of surprise if we consider, not only that the wilderness was
stony, but that to produce a thing from stones was a proverbial
expression, denoting the supply of an object altogether wanting (Matt.
iii. 9; Luke xix. 40), and that stone and bread formed a common
contrast (Matt. vii. 9). The reply of Jesus to this suggestion is in
the same train of ideas on which the entire first act of temptation is
constructed; for he quotes the lesson which, according to Deuteronomy
viii. 3, the people of Israel tardily learned from the temptation of
hunger (a temptation, however, under which they were not resigned, but
were provoked to murmur): namely, that man shall not live by bread
alone, etc.

But one temptation would not suffice. Of Abraham the rabbins enumerated
ten; but this number was too large for a dramatic narrative like that
in the gospels, and among lower numbers the sacred three must have the
preference. Thrice during his spiritual contest in Gethsemane Jesus
severed himself from his disciples (Matt. xxvi.); thrice Peter denied
his Lord, and thrice Jesus subsequently questioned his love (John
xxi.). In that rabbinical passage which represents Abraham as tempted
by the devil in person, the patriarch parries three thrusts from him;
in which particular, as well as in the manner in which Old Testament
texts are bandied by the parties, the scene is allied to the
evangelical one. [696]

The second temptation (in Matthew) was not determined by its relation
to the preceding; hence its presentation seems abrupt, and the choice
fortuitous or capricious. This may be true with respect to its form,
but its substantial meaning is in close connexion with the foregoing
temptation, since it also has reference to the conduct of the Jewish
people in the wilderness. To them the warning was given in Deut vi. 16
to tempt God no more as they had tempted him at Massah; a warning which
was reiterated 1 Cor. x. 9 to the members of the new covenant, though
more in allusion to Num. xxi. 4. To this crying sin, therefore, under
which the ancient people of God had fallen, must the Messiah be
incited, that by resisting the incitement he might compensate, as it
were, for the transgression of the people. Now the conduct which was
condemned in them as a tempting of the Lord, ἐκπειράζειν Κύριον, was
occasioned by a dearth of water, and consisted in their murmurs at this
deprivation. This, to later tradition, did not seem fully to correspond
to the terms; something more suitable was sought for, and from this
point of view there could hardly be a more eligible choice than the one
we actually find in our history of the temptation, for nothing can be
more properly called a tempting of God than so audacious an appeal to
his extraordinary succour, as that suggested by Satan in his second
temptation. The reason why a leap from the pinnacle of the temple was
named as an example of such presumption, is put into the mouth of Satan
himself.

It occurred to the originator of this feature in the narrative, that
the passage Ps. xci. 11 was capable of perversion into a motive for a
rash act. It is there promised to one dwelling under the protection of
Jehovah (a designation under which the Messiah was pre-eminently
understood), that angels should bear him up in their hands, lest at any
time he should dash his foot against a stone. Bearing up in their hands
to prevent a fall, seemed to imply a precipitation from some eminence,
and this might induce the idea that the divinely-protected Messiah
might hurl himself from a height with impunity. But from what height?
There could be no hesitation on this point. To the pious man, and
therefore to the head of all the pious, is appropriated, according to
Ps. xv. 1, xxiv. 3, the distinction of going up to Jehovah’s holy hill,
and standing within his holy place: hence the pinnacle of the temple,
in the presumptuous mode of inference supposed, might be regarded as
the height whence the Messiah could precipitate himself unhurt.

The third temptation which Jesus underwent—to worship the devil—is not
apparent among the temptations of God’s ancient people. But one of the
most fatal seductions by which the Israelites were led astray in the
wilderness was that of idolatry; and the apostle Paul adduces it as
admonitory to Christians. Not only is this sin derived immediately from
the devil in a passage above quoted; [697] but in the later Jewish
idea, idolatry was identical with the worship of the devil (Baruch iv.
7; 1 Cor. x. 20). How, then, could the worship of the devil be
suggested to the Messiah in the form of a temptation? The notion of the
Messiah as he who, being the King of the Jewish people, was destined to
be lord of all other nations, and that of Satan as the ruler of the
heathen world [698] to be conquered by the Messiah, were here combined.
That dominion over the world which, in the christianized imagination of
the period, the Messiah was to obtain by a long and painful struggle,
was offered him as an easy bargain if he would only pay Satan the
tribute of worship. This temptation Jesus meets with the maxim
inculcated on the Israelites, Deut. vi. 13, that God alone is to be
worshipped, and thus gives the enemy a final dismissal.

Matthew and Mark crown their history of the temptation with the
appearance of angels to Jesus, and their refreshing him with
nourishment after his long fast and the fatigues of temptation. This
incident was prefigured by a similar ministration to Elijah after his
forty days’ fast, and was brought nearer to the imagination by the
circumstance that the manna which appeased the hunger of the people in
the wilderness was named, ἄρτος ἀγγέλων, angels’ food (Ps. lxxviii. 25,
LXX.; Wisdom xvi. 20). [699]







