CHAPTER IX.

MIRACLES OF JESUS.

§ 91.

JESUS CONSIDERED AS A WORKER OF MIRACLES.

That the Jewish people in the time of Jesus expected miracles from the
Messiah is in itself natural, since the Messiah was a second Moses and
the greatest of the prophets, and to Moses and the prophets the
national legend attributed miracles of all kinds: by later Jewish
writings it is rendered probable; [1165] by our gospels, certain. When
Jesus on one occasion had (without natural means) cured a blind and
dumb demoniac, the people were hereby led to ask: Is not this the son
of David? (Matt. xii. 23), a proof that a miraculous power of healing
was regarded as an attribute of the Messiah. John the Baptist, on
hearing of the works of Jesus (ἔργα), sent to him with the inquiry, Art
thou he that should come (ἐρχόμενος)? Jesus, in proof of the
affirmative, merely appealed again to his miracles (Matt. xi. 2 ff.
parall.). At the Feast of Tabernacles, which was celebrated by Jesus in
Jerusalem, many of the people believed on him, saying, in justification
of their faith, When Christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these
which this man hath done? (John vii. 31).

But not only was it predetermined in the popular expectation that the
Messiah should work miracles in general,—the particular kinds of
miracles which he was to perform were fixed, also in accordance with
Old Testament types and declarations. Moses dispensed meat and drink to
the people in a supernatural manner (Exod. xvi. 17): the same was
expected, as the rabbins explicitly say, from the Messiah. At the
prayer of Elisha, eyes were in one case closed, in another, opened
supernaturally (2 Kings vi.): the Messiah also was to open the eyes of
the blind. By this prophet and his master, even the dead had been
raised (1 Kings xvii.; 2 Kings iv.): hence to the Messiah also power
over death could not be wanting. [1166] Among the prophecies, Isa.
xxxv. 5, 6 (comp. xlii. 7) was especially influential in forming this
portion of the messianic idea. It is here said of the messianic times:
Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened and the ears of the deaf
unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of
the dumb shall sing. These words, it is true, stand in Isaiah in a
figurative connexion, but they were early understood literally, as is
evident from the circumstance that Jesus describes his miracles to the
messengers of John (Matt. xi. 5) with an obvious allusion to this
prophetic passage.

Jesus, in so far as he had given himself out and was believed to be the
Messiah, or even merely a prophet, had to meet this expectation when,
according to several passages already considered (Matt. xii. 38, xvi.
1, parall.), his Pharisaic enemies required a sign from him; when,
after the violent expulsion of the traders and money-changers from the
temple, the Jews desired from him a sign that should legitimate such an
assumption of authority (John ii. 18); and when the people in the
synagogue at Capernaum, on his requiring faith in himself as the sent
of God, made it a condition of this faith that he should show them a
sign (John vi. 30).

According to the gospels, Jesus more than satisfied this demand made by
his cotemporaries on the Messiah. Not only does a considerable part of
the evangelical narratives consist of descriptions of his miracles; not
only did his disciples after his death especially call to their own
remembrance and to that of the Jews the δυνάμεις (miracles) σημεῖα
(signs) and τέρατα (wonders) wrought by him (Acts ii. 22; comp. Luke
xxiv. 19): but the people also were, even during his life, so well
satisfied with this aspect of his character that many believed on him
in consequence (John ii. 23; comp. vi. 2), contrasted him with the
Baptist who gave no sign (John x. 41), and even believed that he would
not be surpassed in this respect by the future Messiah (John vii. 31).
The above demands of a sign do not appear to prove that Jesus had
performed no miracles, especially as several of them occur immediately
after important miracles, e.g. after the cure of a demoniac, Matt. xii.
38; and after the feeding of the five thousand, John vi. 30. This
position indeed creates a difficulty, for how the Jews could deny to
these two acts the character of proper signs it is not easy to
understand; the power of expelling demons, in particular, being rated
very highly (Luke x. 17). The sign demanded on these two occasions must
therefore be more precisely defined according to Luke xi. 16 (comp.
Matt xvi. 1; Mark viii. 11), as a sign from heaven, σημεῖον ἐξ οὐρανοῦ,
and we must understand it to be the specifically messianic sign of the
Son of Man in heaven, σημεῖον τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ (Matt.
xxiv. 30). If however it be preferred to sever the connexion between
these demands of a sign and the foregoing miracles, it is possible that
Jesus may have wrought numerous miracles, and yet that some hostile
Pharisees, who had not happened to be eyewitnesses of any of them, may
still have desired to see one for themselves.

That Jesus censures the seeking for miracles (John iv. 48) and refuses
to comply with any one of the demands for a sign, does not in itself
prove that he might not have voluntarily worked miracles in other
cases, when they appeared to him to be more seasonable. When in
relation to the demand of the Pharisees, Mark viii. 12, he declares
that there shall be no sign given to this generation τῇ γενεᾷ ταύτῇ, or
Matt xii. 39 f., xvi. 4; Luke xi. 29 f., that there shall no sign be
given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet, it would appear that by
this generation, γενεὰ, which in Matthew and Luke he characterizes as
evil and adulterous, he could only mean the Pharisaic part of his
cotemporaries who were hostile to him, and that he intended to declare,
that to these should be granted either no sign at all, or merely the
sign of Jonas, that is, as he interprets it in Matthew, the miracle of
his resurrection, or as modern expositors think, the impressive
manifestation of his person and teaching. But if we take the words οὐ
δοθήσεται αὐτῇ in the sense that his enemies were to obtain no sign
from him, we encounter two difficulties: on the one hand, things must
have chanced singularly if among the many miracles wrought by Jesus in
the greatest publicity, not one fell under the observation of Pharisees
(moreover Matt. xii. 24 f. parall. contradicts this, for there
Pharisees are plainly supposed to be present at the cure of the blind
and dumb demoniac): on the other hand, if signs personally witnessed
are here intended, the enemies of Jesus certainly did not see his
resurrection, or his person after he was risen. Hence the above
declaration cannot well mean merely that his enemies should be excluded
from an actual sight of his miracles. There is yet another expedient,
namely, to suppose that the expression οὐ δοθήσεται αὐτῇ refers to a
sign which should conduce to the good of the subject of which it is
predicated: but all the miracles of Jesus happened equally with his
original mission and his resurrection at once for the benefit of that
subject and the contrary, namely, in their object for its benefit, in
their result not so. Nothing therefore remains but to understand the
γενεὰ of the cotemporaries of Jesus generally, and the δίδοσθαι to
refer to observation generally, mediate or immediate: so that thus
Jesus would appear to have here repudiated the working of miracles in
general.

This is not very consistent with the numerous narratives of miracles in
the gospels, but it accords fully with the fact that in the preaching
and epistles of the apostles, a couple of general notices excepted
(Acts ii. 22, x. 38 f.), the miracles of Jesus appear to be unknown,
and everything is built on his resurrection: on which the remark may be
ventured that it could neither have been so unexpected nor could it
have formed so definite an epoch, if Jesus had previously raised more
than one dead person, and had wrought the most transcendent miracles of
all kinds. This then is the question: Ought we, on account of the
evangelical narratives of miracles, to explain away that expression of
Jesus, or doubt its authenticity; or ought we not, rather, on the
strength of that declaration, and the silence of the apostolic
writings, to become distrustful of the numerous histories of miracles
in the gospels?

This can only be decided by a close examination of these narratives,
among which, for a reason that will be obvious hereafter, we give the
precedence to the expulsions of demons.




§ 92.

THE DEMONIACS, CONSIDERED GENERALLY.

While in the fourth gospel, the expressions δαιμόνιον ἔχειν to have a
demon, and δαιμονιζόμενος, being a demoniac, appear nowhere except in
the accusations of the Jews against Jesus, and as parallels to
μαίνεσθαι, to be mad (viii. 48 f., x. 20 f.; comp. Mark iii. 22, 30;
Matt. xi. 18), the synoptists may be said to represent demoniacs as the
most frequent objects of the curative powers of Jesus. When they
describe the commencement of his ministry in Galilee, they give the
demoniacs δαιμονιζομένους [1167] a prominent place among the sufferers
whom Jesus healed (Matt iv. 24; Mark i. 34), and in all their summary
notices of the ministry of Jesus in certain districts, demoniacs play a
chief part (Matt. viii. 16 f.; Mark i. 39, iii. 11 f.; Luke vi. 18).
The power to cast out devils is before anything else imparted by Jesus
to his disciples (Matt. x. 1, 8; Mark iii. 15, vi. 7; Luke ix. 1), who
to their great joy succeed in using it according to their wishes (Luke
x. 17, 20; Mark vi. 13).

Besides these summary notices, however, several cures of demoniacs are
narrated to us in detail, so that we can form a tolerably accurate idea
of their peculiar condition. In the one whose cure in the synagogue at
Capernaum is given by the Evangelists as the first of this kind (Mark
i. 23 ff.; Luke iv. 33 ff.), we find, on the one hand, a disturbance of
the self-consciousness, causing the possessed individuals to speak in
the person of the demon, which appears also in other demoniacs, as for
example, the Gadarenes (Matt. viii. 29 f. parall.); on the other hand,
spasms and convulsions with savage cries. This spasmodic state has, in
the demoniac who is also called a lunatic (Matt. xvii. 14 ff. parall.),
reached the stage of manifest epilepsy; for sudden falls, often in
dangerous places, cries, gnashing of the teeth, and foaming, are known
symptoms of that malady. [1168] The other aspect of the demoniacal
state, namely, the disturbance of the self-consciousness, amounts in
the demoniac of Gadara, by whose lips a demon, or rather a plurality of
these evil spirits, speaks as a subject, to misanthropic madness, with
attacks of maniacal fury against himself and others. [1169] Moreover,
not only the insane and epileptic, but the dumb (Matt. ix. 32; Luke xi.
14; Matt. xii. 22, the dumb demoniac is also blind) and those suffering
from a gouty contraction of the body (Luke xiii. 11 ff.), are by the
evangelists designated more or less precisely as demoniacs.

The idea of these sufferers presupposed in the gospels and shared by
their authors, is that a wicked, unclean spirit (δαιμόνιον, πνεῦμα
ἀκάθαρτον), or several have taken possession of them (hence their
condition is described by the expressions δαιμόνιον ἔχειν,
δαιμονίζεσθαι, to have a demon, to be a demoniac), speak through their
organs (thus Matt. viii. 31, οἱ δαίμονες παρεκάλουν αὐτὸν λέγοντες),
and put their limbs in motion at pleasure (thus Mark ix. 20, τὸ πνεῦμα
ἐσπάραξεν αὐτὸν), until, forcibly expelled by a cure, they depart from
the patient (ἐκβάλλειν, ἐξέρχεσθαι). According to the representation of
the Evangelists, Jesus also held this view of the matter. It is true
that when, as a means of liberating the possessed, he addresses the
demons within them (as in Mark ix. 25; Matt. viii. 32; Luke iv. 35), we
might with Paulus [1170] regard this as a mode of entering into the
fixed idea of these more or less insane persons, it being the part of a
physical physician, if he would produce any effect, to accommodate
himself to this idea, however strongly he may in reality be convinced
of its groundlessness. But this is not all; Jesus, even in his private
conversations with his disciples, not only says nothing calculated to
undermine the notion of demoniacal possession, but rather speaks
repeatedly on a supposition of its truth; as e.g. in Matt. x. 8, where
he gives the commission, Cast out devils; in Luke x. 18 ff.; and
especially in Matt. xvii. 21, parall., where he says, This kind goeth
not out but by prayer and fasting. Again, in a purely theoretical
discourse, perhaps also in the more intimate circle of his disciples,
Jesus gives a description quite accordant with the idea of his
cotemporaries of the departure of the unclean spirit, his wandering in
the wilderness, and his return with a reinforcement (Matt. xii. 43
ff.). With these facts before us, the attempt made by generally
unprejudiced inquirers, such as Winer, [1171] to show that Jesus did
not share the popular opinion on demoniacal possession, but merely
accommodated his language to their understanding, appears to us a mere
adjustment of his ideas by our own. A closer examination of the
last-mentioned passage will suffice to remove every thought of a mere
accommodation on the part of Jesus. It is true that commentators have
sought to evade all that is conclusive in this passage, by interpreting
it figuratively, or even as a parable, [1172] in every explanation of
which (if we set aside such as that given by Olshausen [1173] after
Calmet), the essential idea is, that superficial conversion to the
cause of Jesus is followed by a relapse into aggravated sin. [1174]
But, I would fain know, what justifies us in abandoning the literal
interpretation of this discourse? In the propositions themselves there
is no indication of a figurative meaning, nor is it rendered probable
by the general style of teaching used by Jesus, for he nowhere else
presents moral relations in the garb of demoniacal conditions; on the
contrary, whenever he speaks, as here, of the departure of evil
spirits, e.g. in Matt. xvii. 21, he evidently intends to be understood
literally. But does the context favour a figurative interpretation?
Luke (xi. 24 ff.) places the discourse in question after the defence of
Jesus against the Pharisaic accusation, that he cast out devils by
Beelzebub: a position which is undoubtedly erroneous, as we have seen,
but which is a proof that he at least understood Jesus to speak
literally—of real demons. Matthew also places the discourse near to the
above accusation and defence, but he inserts between them the demand of
a sign, together with its refusal, and he makes Jesus conclude with the
application, Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation. This
addition, it is true, gives the discourse a figurative application to
the moral and religious condition of his cotemporaries, but only thus:
Jesus intended the foregoing description of the expelled and returning
demon literally, though he made a secondary use of this event as an
image of the moral condition of his cotemporaries. At any rate Luke,
who has not the same addition, gives the discourse of Jesus, to use the
expression of Paulus, as a warning against demoniacal relapses. That
the majority of theologians in the present day, without decided support
on the part of Matthew, and in decided contradiction to Luke, advocate
the merely figurative interpretation of this passage, appears to be
founded in an aversion to ascribe to Jesus so strongly developed a
demonology, as lies in his words literally understood. But this is not
to be avoided, even leaving the above passage out of consideration. In
Matt. xii. 25 f. 29, Jesus speaks of a kingdom and household of the
devil, in a manner which obviously outsteps the domain of the merely
figurative: but above all, the passage already quoted, Luke x. 18–20,
is of such a nature as to compel even Paulus, who is generally so fond
of lending to the hallowed personages of primitive Christian history
the views of the present age, to admit that the kingdom of Satan was
not merely a symbol of evil to Jesus, and that he believed in actual
demoniacal possession. For he says very justly, that as Jesus here
speaks, not to the patient or to the people, but to those who
themselves, according to his instructions, cured demoniacs, his words
are not to be explained as a mere accommodation, when he confirms their
belief that the spirits are subject unto them, and describes their
capability of curing the malady in question, as a power over the power
of the enemy. [1175] In answer also to the repugnance of those with
whose enlightenment a belief in demoniacal possession is inconsistent,
to admit that Jesus held that belief, the same theologian justly
observes that the most distinguished mind may retain a false idea,
prevalent among his cotemporaries, if it happen to lie out of his
peculiar sphere of thought. [1176]

Some light is thrown on the evangelical conception of the demoniacs, by
the opinions on this subject which we find in writers more or less
cotemporary. The general idea that evil spirits had influence on men,
producing melancholy, insanity, and epilepsy, was early prevalent among
the Greeks [1177] as well as the Hebrews; [1178] but the more distinct
idea that evil spirits entered into the human body and took possession
of its members was not developed until a considerably later period, and
was a consequence of the dissemination of the Oriental, particularly
the Persian pneumatology among both Hebrews and Greeks. [1179] Hence we
find in Josephus the expressions δαιμόνια τοῖς ζῶσιν εἰσδυόμενα, [1180]
ἐνκαθεζόμενα [1181] (demons entering into the living, settling
themselves there), and the same ideas in Lucian [1182] and
Philostratus. [1183]

Of the nature and origin of these spirits nothing is expressly stated
in the gospels, except that they belong to the household of Satan
(Matt. xii. 26 ff. parall.), whence the acts of one of them are
directly ascribed to Satan (Luke xiii. 16). But from Josephus, [1184]
Justin Martyr, [1185] and Philostratus, [1186] with whom rabbinical
writings agree, [1187] we learn that these demons were the disembodied
souls of wicked men; and modern theologians have not scrupled to
attribute this opinion on their origin to the New Testament also.
[1188] Justin and the rabbins more nearly particularize, as spirits
that torment the living, the souls of the giants, the offspring of
those angels who allied themselves to the daughters of men; the rabbins
further add the souls of those who perished in the deluge, and of those
who participated in building the tower of Babel; [1189] and with this
agree the Clementine Homilies, for, according to them also, these souls
of the giants, having become demons, seek to attach themselves, as the
stronger, to human souls, and to inhabit human bodies. [1190] As,
however, in the continuation of the passage first cited, Justin
endeavours to convince the heathens of immortality from their own
ideas, the opinion which he there expresses, of demons being the souls
of the departed in general, can scarcely be regarded as his, especially
as his pupil Tatian expressly declares himself against it; [1191] while
Josephus affords no criterion as to the latent idea of the New
Testament, since his Greek education renders it very uncertain whether
he presents the doctrine of demoniacal possession in its original
Jewish, or in a Grecian form. If it must be admitted that the Hebrews
owed their doctrine of demons to Persia, we know that the Deves of the
Zend mythology were originally and essentially wicked beings, existing
prior to the human race; of these two characteristics, Hebraism as such
might be induced to expunge the former, which pertained to Dualism, but
could have no reason for rejecting the latter. Accordingly, in the
Hebrew view, the demons were the fallen angels of Gen. vi., the souls
of their offspring the giants, and of the great criminals before and
immediately after the deluge, whom the popular imagination gradually
magnified into superhuman beings. But in the ideas of the Hebrews,
there lay no motive for descending beyond the circle of these souls,
who might be conceived to form the court of Satan. Such a motive was
only engendered by the union of the Græco-roman culture with the
Hebraic: the former had no Satan, and consequently no retinue of
spirits devoted to his service, but it had an abundance of Manes,
Lemures, and the like,—all names for disembodied souls that disquieted
the living. Now, the combination of these Græco-roman ideas with the
above-mentioned Jewish ones, seems to have been the source of the
demonology of Josephus, of Justin, and also of the later rabbins; but
it does not follow that the same mixed view belongs to the New
Testament. Rather, as this Græcised form of the doctrine in question is
nowhere positively put forth by the evangelical writers, while on the
contrary the demons are in some passages represented as the household
of Satan: there is nothing to contravene the inference to be drawn from
the unmixedly Jewish character of thought which reigns in the
synoptical gospels on all other subjects (apart from Christian
modifications); namely, that we must attribute to them the pure and
original Jewish conception of the doctrine of demons.

It is well known that the older theology, moved by a regard for the
authority of Jesus and the Evangelists, espoused the belief in the
reality of demoniacal possession. The new theology, on the contrary,
especially since the time of Semler, [1192] in consideration of the
similarity between the condition of the demoniacs in the New Testament
and many naturally diseased subjects of our own day, has begun to refer
the malady of the former also to natural causes, and to ascribe the
evangelical supposition of supernatural causes to the prejudices of
that age. In modern days, on the occurrence of epilepsy, insanity, and
even a disturbance of the self-consciousness resembling the condition
of the possessed described in the New Testament, it is no longer the
custom to account for them by the supposition of demoniacal influence:
and the reason of this seems to be, partly that the advancement in the
knowledge of nature and of mind has placed at command a wider range of
facts and analogies, which may serve to explain the above conditions
naturally: partly that the contradiction, involved in the idea of
demoniacal possession, is beginning to be at least dimly perceived.
For—apart from the difficulties which the notion of the existence of a
devil and demons entails—whatever theory may be held as to the relation
between the self-consciousness and the bodily organs, it remains
absolutely inconceivable how the union between the two could be so far
dissolved, that a foreign self-consciousness could gain an entrance,
thrust out that which belonged to the organism, and usurp its place.
Hence for every one who at once regards actual phenomena with
enlightened eyes, and the New Testament narratives with orthodox ones,
there results the contradiction, that what now proceeds from natural
causes, must in the time of Jesus have been caused supernaturally.

In order to remove this inconceivable difference between the conditions
of one age and another, avoiding at the same time any imputation on the
New Testament, Olshausen, whom we may fairly take as the representative
of the mystical theology and philosophy of the present day, denies both
that all states of the kind in question have now a natural cause, and
that they had in the time of Jesus invariably a supernatural cause.
With respect to our own time he asks, if the apostles were to enter our
mad-houses, how would they name many of the inmates? [1193] We answer,
they would to a certainty name many of them demoniacs, by reason of
their participation in the ideas of their people and their age, not by
reason of their apostolic illumination; and the official who acted as
their conductor would very properly endeavour to set them right:
whatever names therefore they might give to the inmates of our asylums,
our conclusions as to the naturalness of the disorders of those inmates
would not be at all affected. With respect to the time of Jesus, this
theologian maintains that the same forms of disease were, even by the
Jews, in one case held demoniacal, in another not so, according to the
difference in their origin: for example, one who had become insane
through an organic disorder of the brain, or dumb through an injury of
the tongue, was not looked on as a demoniac, but only those, the cause
of whose condition was more or less psychical. Of such a distinction in
the time of Jesus, Olshausen is manifestly bound to give us instances.
Whence could the Jews of that age have acquired their knowledge of the
latent natural causes of these conditions—whence the criterion by which
to distinguish an insanity or imbecility originating in a malformation
of the brain, from one purely psychical? Was not their observation
limited to outward phenomena, and those of the coarsest character? The
nature of their distinctions seems to be this: the state of an
epileptic with his sudden falls and convulsions, or of a maniac in his
delirium, especially if, from the reaction of the popular idea
respecting himself he speaks in the person of another, seems to point
to an external influence which governs him; and consequently, so soon
as the belief in demoniacal possession existed among the people, all
such states were referred to this cause, as we find them to be in the
New Testament: whereas in dumbness and gouty contraction or lameness,
the influence of an external power is less decidedly indicated, so that
these afflictions were at one time ascribed to a possessing demon, at
another not so. Of the former case we find an example in the dumb
persons already mentioned, Matt. ix. 32, xii. 22, and in the woman, who
was bowed down, Luke xiii. 11; of the latter, in the man who was deaf
and had an impediment in his speech, Mark vii. 32 ff., and in the many
paralytics mentioned in the gospels. The decision for the one opinion
or the other was however certainly not founded on an investigation into
the origin of the disease, but solely on its external symptoms. If then
the Jews, and with them the Evangelists, referred the two chief classes
of these conditions to demoniacal influence, there remains for him who
believes himself bound by their opinion, without choosing to shut out
the lights of modern science, the glaring inconsistency of considering
the same diseases as in one age natural, in another supernatural.

But the most formidable difficulty for Olshausen, in his attempted
mediation between the Judaical demonology of the New Testament and the
intelligence of our own day, arises from the influence of the latter on
his own mind—an influence which renders him adverse to the idea of
personal demons. This theologian, initiated in the philosophy of the
present age, endeavours to resolve the host of demons, which in the New
Testament are regarded as distinct individuals, into a system of
emanations, forming the continuity of a single substance, which indeed
sends forth from itself separate powers, not, however, to subsist as
independent individuals, but to return as accidents into the unity of
the substance. This cast of thought we have already observed in the
opinions of Olshausen concerning angels, and it appears still more
decidedly in his demonology. Personal demons are too repugnant, and as
Olshausen himself expresses it, [1194] the comprehension of two
subjects in one individual is too inconceivable to find a ready
acceptation. Hence it is everywhere with vague generality that a
kingdom of evil and darkness is spoken of; and though a personal prince
is given to it, its demons are understood to be mere effluxes and
operations, by which the evil principle manifests itself. But the most
vulnerable point of Olshausen’s opinion concerning demons is this: it
is too much for him to believe that Jesus asked the name of the demon
in the Gadarene; since he himself doubts the personality of those
emanations of the kingdom of darkness, it cannot, he thinks, have been
thus decidedly supposed by Christ;—hence he understands the question,
What is thy name? (Mark v. 9) to be addressed, not to the demon, but to
the man, [1195] plainly in opposition to the whole context, for the
answer, Legion, appears to be in no degree the result of a
misunderstanding, but the right answer—the one expected by Jesus.

If, however, the demons are, according to Olshausen’s opinion,
impersonal powers, that which guides them and determines their various
functions is the law which governs the kingdom of darkness in relation
to the kingdom of light. On this theory, the worse a man is morally,
the closer must be the connexion between him and the kingdom of evil,
and the closest conceivable connexion—the entrance of the power of
darkness into the personality of the man, i.e. possession—must always
occur in the most wicked. But historically this is not so: the
demoniacs in the gospels appear to be sinners only in the sense that
all sick persons need forgiveness of sins; and the greatest sinners
(Judas for example) are spared the infliction of possession. The common
opinion, with its personal demons, escapes this contradiction. It is
true that this opinion also, as we find for instance, in the Clementine
Homilies, firmly maintains it to be by sin only that man subjects
himself to the ingress of the demon; [1196] but here there is yet scope
for the individual will of the demon, who often, from motives not to be
calculated, passes by the worst, and holds in chase the less wicked.
[1197] On the contrary, if the demons are considered, as by Olshausen,
to be the actions of the power of evil in its relation to the power of
goodness; this relation being regulated by laws, everything arbitrary
and accidental is excluded. Hence it evidently costs that theologian
some pains to disprove the consequence, that according to his theory
the possessed must always be the most wicked. Proceeding from the
apparent contest of two powers in the demoniacs, he adopts the position
that the state of demoniacal possession does not appear in those who
entirely give themselves up to evil, and thus maintain an internal
unity of disposition, but only in those in whom there exists a struggle
against sin. [1198] In that case, however, the above state, being
reduced to a purely moral phenomenon, must appear far more frequently;
every violent inward struggle must manifest itself under this form, and
especially those who ultimately give themselves up to evil must, before
arriving at this point, pass through a period of conflict, that is of
possession. Olshausen therefore adds a physical condition, namely, that
the preponderance of evil in the man must have weakened his corporeal
organization, particularly the nervous system, before he can become
susceptible of the demoniacal state. But since such disorders of the
nervous system may occur without any moral fault, who does not see that
the state which it is intended to ascribe to demoniacal power as its
proper source, is thus referred chiefly to natural causes, and that
therefore the argument defeats its own object? Hence Olshausen quickly
turns away from this side of the question, and lingers on the
comparison of the δαιμονιζόμενος (demoniac) with the πονηρὸς (wicked);
whereas he ought rather to compare the former with the epileptic and
insane, for it is only by this means that any light can be thrown on
the nature of possession. This shifting of the question from the ground
of physiology and psychology to that of morality and religion, renders
the discussion concerning the demoniacs one of the most useless which
Olshausen’s work contains. [1199]

Let us then relinquish the ungrateful attempt to modernize the New
Testament conception of the demoniacs, or to judaize our modern
ideas;—let us rather, in relation to this subject, understand the
statements of the New Testament as simply as they are given, without
allowing our investigations to be restricted by the ideas therein
presented, which belonged to the age and nation of its writers. [1200]

The method adopted for the cure of the demoniacal state was, especially
among the Jews, in conformity with what we have ascertained to have
been the idea of its nature. The cause of the malady was not supposed
to be, as in natural diseases, an impersonal object or condition, such
as an impure fluid, a morbid excitement or debility, but a
self-conscious being; hence it was treated, not mechanically or
chemically, but logically, i.e. by words. The demon was enjoined to
depart; and to give effect to this injunction, it was coupled with the
names of beings who were believed to have power over demons. Hence the
main instrument against demoniacal possession was conjuration, [1201]
either in the name of God, or of angels, or of some other potent being,
e.g. the Messiah (Acts xix. 13), with certain forms which were said to
be derived from Solomon. [1202] In addition to this, certain roots,
[1203] stones, [1204] fumigations and amulets [1205] were used, in
obedience to traditions likewise believed to have been handed down from
Solomon. Now as the cause of the malady was not seldom really a
psychical one, or at least one lying in the nervous system, which may
be acted on to an incalculable extent by moral instrumentality, this
psychological treatment was not altogether illusory! for by exciting in
the patient the belief that the demon by which he was possessed, could
not retain his hold before a form of conjuration, it might often effect
the removal of the disorder. Jesus himself admits that the Jewish
exorcists sometimes succeeded in working such cures (Matt. xii. 27).
But we read of Jesus that without conjuration by any other power, and
without the appliance of any further means, he expelled the demons by
his word. The most remarkable cures of this kind, of which the gospels
inform us, we are now about to examine.




§ 93.

CASES OF THE EXPULSION OF DEMONS BY JESUS, CONSIDERED SINGLY.

Among the circumstantial narratives which are given us in the three
first gospels of cures wrought by Jesus on demoniacs, three are
especially remarkable: the cure of a demoniac in the synagogue at
Capernaum, that of the Gadarenes possessed by a multitude of demons,
and lastly, that of the lunatic whom the disciples were unable to cure.

In John the conversion of water into wine is the first miracle
performed by Jesus after his return from the scene of his baptism into
Galilee; but in Mark (i. 23 ff.) and Luke (iv. 33 ff.) the cure of a
demoniac in the synagogue of Capernaum has this position. Jesus had
produced a deep impression by his teaching, when suddenly, a demoniac
who was present, cried out in the character of the demon that possessed
him, that he would have nothing to do with him, that he knew him to be
the Messiah who was come to destroy them—the demons; whereupon Jesus
commanded the demon to hold his peace and come out of the man, which
happened amid cries and convulsions on the part of the demoniac, and to
the great astonishment of the people at the power thus exhibited by
Jesus.

Here we might, with rationalistic commentators, represent the case to
ourselves thus: the demoniac, during a lucid interval, entered the
synagogue, was impressed by the powerful discourse of Jesus, and
overhearing one of the audience speak of him as the Messiah, was seized
with the idea that the unclean spirit by which he was possessed, could
not maintain itself in the presence of the holy Messiah; whence he fell
into a paroxysm, and expressed his awe of Jesus in the character of the
demon. When Jesus perceived this, what was more natural than that he
should make use of the man’s persuasion of his power, and command the
demon to come out of him, thus laying hold of the maniac by his fixed
idea; which according to the laws of mental hygiene, might very
probably have a favourable effect. It is under this view that Paulus
regards the occasion as that on which the thought of using his
messianic fame as a means of curing such sufferers, first occurred to
Jesus. [1206]

But many difficulties oppose themselves to this natural conception of
the case. The demoniac is supposed to learn that Jesus was the Messiah
from the people in the synagogue. On this point the text is not merely
silent, but decidedly contradicts such an opinion. The demon, speaking
through the man, evidently proclaims his knowledge of the Messiahship
of Jesus, in the words, οἶδά δε τίς εἶ κ.τ.λ., not as information
casually imparted by man, but as an intuition of his demoniacal nature.
Further, when Jesus cries, Hold thy peace! he refers to what the demon
had just uttered concerning his messiahship; for it is related of Jesus
that he suffered not the demons to speak because they knew him (Mark i.
34; Luke iv. 41), or because they made him known (Mark iii. 12). If
then Jesus believed that by enjoining silence on the demon he could
hinder the promulgation of his messiahship, he must have been of
opinion, not that the demoniac had heard something of it from the
people in the synagogue, but contrariwise that the latter might learn
it from the demoniac; and this accords with the fact, that at the time
of the first appearance of Jesus, in which the Evangelists place the
occurrence, no one had yet thought of him as the Messiah.

If it be asked, how the demoniac could discover that Jesus was the
Messiah, apart from any external communication, Olshausen presses into
his service the preternaturally heightened activity of the nervous
system, which, in demoniacs as in somnambules, sharpens the presentient
power, and produces a kind of clear-sightedness, by means of which such
a man might very well discern the importance of Jesus as regarded the
whole realm of spirits. The evangelical narrative, it is true, does not
ascribe that knowledge to a power of the patient, but of the demon
dwelling within him, and this is the only view consistent with the
Jewish ideas of that period. The Messiah was to appear, in order to
overthrow the demoniacal kingdom (ἀπολέσαι ἡμᾶς, comp. 1 John iii. 8;
Luke x. 18 f.) [1207] and to cast the devil and his angels into the
lake of fire (Matt. xxv. 41; Rev. xx. 10) [1208]: it followed of course
that the demons would recognize him who was to pass such a sentence on
them. [1209] This however might be deducted as an admixture of the
opinion of the narrator, without damage to the rest of the narrative;
but it must first be granted admissible to ascribe so extensive a
presentient power to demoniacal subjects. Now, as it is in the highest
degree improbable that a nervous patient, however intensely excited,
should recognize Jesus as the Messiah, at a time when he was not
believed to be such by any one else, perhaps not even by himself; and
as on the other hand this recognition of the Messiah by the demon so
entirely agrees with the popular ideas;—we must conjecture that on this
point the evangelical tradition is not in perfect accordance with
historical truth, but has been attuned to those ideas. [1210] There was
the more inducement to this, the more such a recognition of Jesus on
the part of the demons would redound to his glory. As when adults
disowned him, praise was prepared for him out of the mouth of babes
(Matt. xxi. 16)—as he was convinced that if men were silent, the very
stones would cry out (Luke xix. 40): so it must appear fitting, that
when his people whom he came to save would not acknowledge him, he
should have the involuntary homage of demons, whose testimony, since
they had only ruin to expect from him, must be impartial, and from
their higher spiritual nature was to be relied on.

In the above history of the cure of a demoniac, we have a case of the
simplest kind; the cure of the possessed Gadarenes on the contrary
(Matt. viii. 28 ff.; Mark v. 1 ff.; Luke viii. 26 ff.) is a very
complex one, for in this instance we have, together with several
divergencies of the Evangelists, instead of one demon, many, and
instead of a simple departure of these demons, their entrance into a
herd of swine.

After a stormy passage across the sea of Galilee to its eastern shore,
Jesus meets, according to Mark and Luke, a demoniac who lived among the
tombs, [1211] and was subject to outbreaks of terrific fury against
himself [1212] and others; according to Matthew, there were two. It is
astonishing how long harmonists have resorted to miserable expedients,
such as that Mark and Luke mention only one because he was particularly
distinguished by wildness, or Matthew two, because he included the
attendant who guarded the maniac, [1213] rather than admit an essential
difference between the two narratives. Since this step has been gained,
the preference has been given to the statement of the two intermediate
Evangelists, from the consideration that maniacs of this class are
generally unsociable; and the addition of a second demoniac by Matthew
has been explained by supposing that the plurality of the demons spoken
of in the narratives became in his apprehension a plurality of
demoniacs. [1214] But the impossibility that two maniacs should in
reality associate themselves, or perhaps be associated merely in the
original legend, is not so decided as to furnish in itself a ground for
preferring the narrative in Mark and Luke to that in Matthew. At least
if it be asked, which of the two representations could the most easily
have been formed from the other by tradition, the probability on both
sides will be found equal. For if according to the above supposition,
the plurality of demons might give rise to the idea of a plurality of
demoniacs, it may also be said, conversely: the more accurate
representation of Matthew, in which a plurality of demoniacs as well as
of demons was mentioned, did not give prominence to the specifically
extraordinary feature in the case, namely, that one man was possessed
by many demons; and as, in order to exhibit this, the narrative when
reproduced must be so expressed as to make it clear that many demons
inhabited one man, this might easily occasion by degrees the opposition
of the demoniac in the singular to the plural number of the demons. For
the rest, the introduction of Matthew’s narrative is concise and
general, that of the two others circumstantially descriptive; another
difference from which the greater originality of the latter has been
deduced. [1215] But it is quite as probable that the details which Luke
and Mark have in common, namely, that the possessed would wear no
clothing, broke all fetters, and wounded himself with stones, are an
arbitrary enlargement on the simple characteristic, exceeding fierce,
which Matthew gives, with the consequence that no one could pass by
that way,—as that the latter is a vague abridgment of the former.

This scene between Jesus and the demoniac or demoniacs opens, like the
other, with a cry of terror from the latter, who, speaking in the
person of the possessing demon, exclaims that he wishes to have nothing
to do with Jesus, the Messiah, from whom he has to expect only torment.
Two hypotheses have been framed, to explain how the demoniac came at
once to recognize Jesus as the Messiah: according to one, Jesus was
even then reputed to be the Messiah on the Peræan shore; [1216]
according to the other, some of those who had come across the sea with
Jesus had said to the man (whom on account of his fierceness no one
could come near!) that the Messiah had just landed at such a spot:
[1217] but both are alike groundless, for it is plain that in this
narrative, as in the former, the above feature is a product of the
Jewish-Christian opinion respecting the relation of the demons to the
Messiah. [1218] Here, however, another difference meets us. According
to Matthew, the possessed, when they see Jesus, cry: What have we to do
with thee? Art thou come to torment us?—according to Luke, the demoniac
falls at the feet of Jesus and says beseechingly, Torment me not; and
lastly, according to Mark, he runs from a distance to meet Jesus, falls
at his feet and adjures him by God not to torment him. Thus we have
again a climax: in Matthew, the demoniac, stricken with terror,
deprecates the unwelcome approach of Jesus; in Luke, he accosts Jesus,
when arrived, as a suppliant; in Mark, he eagerly runs to meet Jesus,
while yet at a distance. Those commentators who here take Mark’s
narrative as the standard one, are obliged themselves to admit, that
the hastening of a demoniac towards Jesus whom he all the while
dreaded, is somewhat of a contradiction; and they endeavour to relieve
themselves of the difficulty, by the supposition that the man set off
to meet Jesus in a lucid moment, when he wished to be freed from the
demon, but being heated by running, [1219] or excited by the words of
Jesus, [1220] he fell into the paroxysm in which, assuming the
character of the demon, he entreated that the expulsion might be
suspended. But in the closely consecutive phrases of Mark, Seeing—he
ran—and worshipped—and cried—and said, ἰδὼν—ἔδραμε—καὶ προσεκύνησε—καὶ
κράξας—εἶπε· there is no trace of a change in the state of the
demoniac, and the improbability of his representation subsists, for one
really possessed, if he had recognized the Messiah at a distance, would
have anxiously avoided, rather than have approached him; and even
setting this aside, it is impossible that one who believed himself to
be possessed by a demon inimical to God, should adjure Jesus by God, as
Mark makes the demoniac do. [1221] If then his narrative cannot be the
original one, that of Luke, which is only so far the simpler that it
does not represent the demoniac as running towards Jesus and adjuring
him, is too closely allied to it to be regarded as the nearest to the
fact. That of Matthew is without doubt the purest, for the
terror-stricken question, Art thou come to destroy us before the time?
is better suited to a demon, who, as the enemy of the Messiah’s
kingdom, could expect no forbearance from the Messiah than the entreaty
for clemency in Mark and Luke; though Philostratus, in a narrative
which might be regarded as an imitation of this evangelical one, has
chosen the latter form. [1222]

From the course of the narratives hitherto, it would appear that the
demons, in this as in the first narrative, addressed Jesus in the
manner described, before anything occurred on his part; yet the two
intermediate Evangelists go on to state, that Jesus had commanded the
unclean spirit to come out of the man. When did Jesus do this? The most
natural answer would be: before the man spoke to him. Now in Luke the
address of the demoniac is so closely connected with the word
προσέπεσε, he fell down, and then again with ἀνακράξας, having cried
out, that it seems necessary to place the command of Jesus before the
cry and the prostration, and hence to consider it as their cause. Yet
Luke himself rather gives the mere sight of Jesus as the cause of those
demonstrations on the part of the demoniac, so that his representation
leaves us in perplexity as to where the command of Jesus should find
its place. The case is still worse in Mark, for here a similar
dependence of the successive phrases thrusts back the command of Jesus
even before the word ἔδραμε, he ran, so that we should have to imagine
rather strangely that Jesus cried to the demon, ἔξελθε, Come out, from
a distance. Thus the two intermediate Evangelists are in an error with
regard either to the consecutive particulars that precede the command
or to the command itself, and our only question is, where may the error
be most probably presumed to lie? Here Schleiermacher himself admits,
that if in the original narrative an antecedent command of Jesus had
been spoken of, it would have been given in its proper place, before
the prayer of the demons, and as a quotation of the precise words of
Jesus; whereas the supplementary manner in which it is actually
inserted, with its abbreviated and indirect form (in Luke; Mark changes
it after his usual style, into a direct address), is a strong
foundation for the opinion that it is an explanatory addition furnished
by the narrator from his own conjecture. [1223] And it is an extremely
awkward addition, for it obliges the reader to recast his conception of
the entire scene. At first the pith of the incident seems to be, that
the demoniac had instantaneously recognized and supplicated Jesus; but
the narrator drops this original idea, and reflecting that the prayer
of the demon must have been preceded by a severe command from Jesus, he
corrects his previous omission, and remarks that Jesus had given his
command in the first instance.

To their mention of this command, Mark and Luke annex the question put
by Jesus to the demon: What is thy name? In reply, a multitude of
demons make known their presence, and give as their name, Legion. Of
this episode Matthew has nothing. In the above addition we have found a
supplementary explanation of the former part of the narrative: what if
this question and answer were an anticipatory introduction to the
sequel, and likewise the spontaneous production of the legend or the
narrator? Let us examine the reasons that render it probable: the wish
immediately expressed by the demons to enter the herd of swine, does
not in Matthew presuppose a multitude of demons in each of the two
possessed, since we cannot know whether the Hebrews were not able to
believe that even two demons only could possess a whole herd of swine:
but a later writer might well think it requisite to make the number of
the evil spirits equal the number of the swine. Now, what a herd is in
relation to animals, an army or a division of an army is in relation to
men and superior beings, and as it was required to express a large
division, nothing could more readily suggest itself than the Roman
legion, which term in Matt. xxvi. 53, is applied to angels, as here to
demons. But without further considering this more precise estimate of
the Evangelists, we must pronounce it inconceivable that several demons
had set up their habitation in one individual. For even if we had
attained so far as to conceive how one demon by a subjection of the
human consciousness could possess himself of a human organization,
imagination would still fail us to conceive that many personal demons
could at once possess one man. For as possession means nothing else,
than that the demon constitutes himself the subject of the
consciousness, and as consciousness can in reality have but one focus,
one central point: it is under every condition absolutely inconceivable
that several demons should at the same time take possession of one man.
Manifold possession could only exist in the sense of an alternation of
possession by various demons, and not as here in that of a whole army
of them dwelling at once in one man, and at once departing from him.

All the narratives agree in this, that the demons (in order, as Mark
says, not to be sent out of the country, or according to Luke, into the
deep) entreated of Jesus permission to enter into the herd of swine
feeding near; that this was granted them by Jesus; and that forthwith,
owing to their influence, the whole herd of swine (Mark, we must not
ask on what authority, fixes their number at about two thousand) were
precipitated into the sea and drowned. If we adopt here the point of
view taken in the gospel narratives, which throughout suppose the
existence of real demons, it is yet to be asked: how can demons,
admitting even that they can take possession of men,—how, we say, can
they, being at all events intelligent spirits, have and obtain the wish
to enter into brutal forms? Every religion and philosophy which rejects
the transmigration of souls, must, for the same reason, also deny the
possibility of this passage of the demons into swine; and Olshausen is
quite right in classing the swine of Gadara in the New Testament with
Balaam’s ass in the Old, as a similar scandal and stumbling block.
[1224] This theologian, however, rather evades than overcomes the
difficulty, by the observation that we are here to suppose, not an
entrance of the individual demons into the individual swine, but merely
an influence of all the evil spirits on the swine collectively. For the
expression, εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τοὺς χοίρους, to enter into the swine, as it
stands opposed to the expression, ἐξελθεῖν ἐκ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, to go out
of the man, cannot possibly mean otherwise than that the demons were to
assume the same relation to the swine which they had borne to the
possessed man; besides, a mere influence could not preserve them from
banishment out of the country or into the deep, but only an actual
habitation of the bodies of the animals: so that the scandal and
stumbling block remain. Thus the prayer in question cannot possibly
have been offered by real demons, though it might by Jewish maniacs,
sharing the ideas of their people. According to these ideas it is a
torment to evil spirits to be destitute of a corporeal envelopment,
because without a body they cannot gratify their sensual desires;
[1225] if therefore they were driven out of men they must wish to enter
into the bodies of brutes, and what was better suited to an impure
spirit πνεῦμα ἀκάθαρτον, than an impure animal ζῶον ἀκάθαρτον, like a
swine? [1226] So far, therefore, it is possible that the Evangelists
might correctly represent the fact, only, in accordance with their
national ideas, ascribing to the demons what should rather have been
referred to the madness of the patient. But when it is further said
that the demons actually entered the swine, do not the Evangelists
affirm an evident impossibility? Paulus thinks that the Evangelists
here as everywhere else identify the possessed men with the possessing
demons, and hence attribute to the latter the entrance into the swine,
while in fact it was only the former, who, in obedience to their fixed
idea, rushed upon the herd. [1227] It is true that Matthew’s expression
ἀπῆλθον εἰς τοὺς χοίρους, taken alone, might be understood of a mere
rushing towards the swine; not only however, as Paulus himself must
admit, does the word εἰσελθόντες in the two other Evangelists
distinctly imply a real entrance into the swine; but also Matthew has
like them before the word ἀπῆλθον, they entered, the expression
ἐξελθόντες οἱ δαίμονες, the demons coming out (sc. ἐκ τῶν ἀνθρώπων out
of the men): thus plainly enough distinguishing the demons who entered
the swine from the men. [1228] Thus our Evangelists do not in this
instance merely relate what actually happened, in the colours which it
took from the false lights of their age; they have here a particular,
which cannot possibly have happened in the manner they allege.

A new difficulty arises from the effect which the demons are said to
have produced in the swine. Scarcely had they entered them, when they
compelled the whole herd to precipitate themselves into the sea. It is
reasonably asked, what then did the demons gain by entering into the
animals, if they immediately destroyed the bodies of which they had
taken possession, and thus robbed themselves of the temporary abode for
which they had so earnestly entreated? [1229] The conjecture, that the
design of the demons in destroying the swine, was to incense the minds
of their owners against Jesus, which is said to have been the actual
result, [1230] is too far-fetched; the other conjecture that the
demoniacs, rushing with cries on the herd, together with the flight of
their keepers, terrified the swine and chased them into the water,
[1231]—even if it were not opposed as we have seen to the text,—would
not suffice to explain the drowning of a herd of swine amounting to
2,000, according to Mark; or only a numerous herd, according to the
general statement of Matthew. The expedient of supposing that in truth
it was only a part of the herd that was drowned, [1232] has not the
slightest foundation in the evangelical narrative. The difficulties
connected with this point are multiplied by the natural reflection that
the drowning of the herd would involve no slight injury to the owners,
and that of this injury Jesus was the mediate author. The orthodox,
bent on justifying Jesus, suppose that the permission to the demons to
enter into the swine was necessary to render the cure of the demoniac
possible, and, they argue, brutes are assuredly to be killed that man
may live; [1233] but they do not perceive that they thus, in a manner
most inconsistent with their point of view, circumscribe the power of
Jesus over the demoniacal kingdom. Again, it is supposed, that the
swine probably belonged to Jews, and that Jesus intended to punish them
for their covetous transgression of the law, [1234] that he acted with
divine authority, which often sacrifices individual good to higher
objects, and by lightning, hail and inundations causes destruction to
the property of many men, [1235] in which case, to accuse God of
injustice would be absurd. [1236] But to adopt this expedient is to
confound, in a way the most inadmissible on the orthodox system,
Christ’s state of humiliation with his state of exaltation: it is to
depart, in a spirit of mysticism, from the wise doctrine of Paul, that
he was made under the law, γενόμενος ὑπὸ νόμον (Gal. iv. 4), and that
he made himself of no reputation ἑαυτόν ἐκένωσε (Phil. ii. 7): it is to
make Jesus a being altogether foreign to us, since in relation to the
moral estimate of his actions, it lifts him above the standard of
humanity. Nothing remains, therefore, but to take the naturalistic
supposition of the rushing of the demoniacs among the swine, and to
represent the consequent destruction of the latter as something
unexpected by Jesus, for which therefore he is not responsible: [1237]
in the plainest contradiction to the evangelical account, which makes
Jesus, even if not directly cause the issue, foresee it in the most
decided manner. [1238] Thus there appears to attach to Jesus the charge
of an injury done to the property of another, and the opponents of
Christianity have long ago made this use of the narrative. [1239] It
must be admitted that Pythagoras in a similar case acted far more
justly, for when he liberated some fish from the net, he indemnified
the fishermen who had taken them. [1240]

Thus the narrative before us is a tissue of difficulties, of which
those relating to the swine are not the slightest. It is no wonder
therefore that commentators began to doubt the thorough historical
truth of this anecdote earlier than that of most others in the public
life of Jesus, and particularly to sever the connexion between the
destruction of the swine and the expulsion of the demons by Jesus. Thus
Krug thought that tradition had reversed the order of these two facts.
The swine according to him were precipitated into the sea before the
landing of Jesus, by the storm which raged during his voyage, and when
Jesus subsequently wished to cure the demoniac, either he himself or
one of his followers persuaded the man that his demons were already
gone into those swine and had hurled them into the sea; which was then
believed and reported to be the fact. [1241] K. Ch. L. Schmidt makes
the swine-herds go to meet Jesus on his landing; during which interim
many of the untended swine fall into the sea; and as about this time
Jesus had commanded the demon to depart from the man, the bystanders
imagine that the two events [1242] stood in the relation of cause and
effect. The prominent part which is played in these endeavours at
explanation, by the accidental coincidence of many circumstances,
betrays that maladroit mixture of the mythical system of interpretation
with the natural which characterizes the earliest attempts, from the
mythical point of view. Instead of inventing a natural foundation, for
which we have nowhere any warrant, and which in no degree explains the
actual narrative in the gospels, adorned as it is with the miraculous;
we must rather ask, whether in the probable period of the formation of
the evangelical narratives, there are not ideas to be found from which
the story of the swine in the history before us might be explained?

We have already adduced one opinion of that age bearing on this point,
namely, that demons are unwilling to remain without bodies, and that
they have a predilection for impure places, whence the bodies of swine
must be best suited to them: this does not however explain why they
should have precipitated the swine into the water. But we are not
destitute of information that will throw light on this also. Josephus
tells us of a Jewish conjuror who cast out demons by forms and means
derived from Solomon, that in order to convince the bystanders of the
reality of his expulsions, he set a vessel of water in the
neighbourhood of the possessed person, so that the departing demon must
throw it down and thus give ocular proof to the spectators that he was
out of the man. [1243] In like manner it is narrated of Apollonius of
Tyana, that he commanded a demon which possessed a young man, to depart
with a visible sign, whereupon the demon entreated that he might
overturn a statue that stood near at hand; which to the great
astonishment of the spectators actually ensued in the very moment that
the demon went out of the youth. [1244] If then the agitation of some
near object, without visible contact, was held the surest proof of the
reality of an expulsion of demons: this proof could not be wanting to
Jesus; nay, while in the case of Eleazar, the object being only a
little (μικρὸν) removed from the exorciser and the patient, the
possibility of deception was not altogether excluded, Matthew notices
in relation to Jesus, more emphatically than the two other Evangelists,
the fact that the herd of swine was feeding a good way off (μακρὰν),
thus removing the last remnant of such a possibility. That the object
to which Jesus applied this proof, was from the first said to be a herd
of swine, immediately proceeded from the Jewish idea of the relation
between unclean spirits and animals, but it furnished a welcome
opportunity for satisfying another tendency of the legend. Not only did
it behove Jesus to cure ordinary demoniacs, such as the one in the
history first considered; he must have succeeded in the most difficult
cures of this kind. It is the evident object of the present narrative,
from the very commencement, with its startling description of the
fearful condition of the Gadarene, to represent the cure as one of
extreme difficulty. But to make it more complicated, the possession
must be, not simple, but manifold, as in the case of Mary Magdalene,
out of whom were cast seven demons (Luke viii. 2), or in the demoniacal
relapse in which the expelled demon returns with seven worse than
himself (Matt. xii. 45); whence the number of the demons was here made,
especially by Mark, to exceed by far the probable number of a herd. As
in relation to an inanimate object, as a vessel of water or a statue,
the influence of the expelled demons could not be more clearly
manifested by any means, than by its falling over contrary to the law
of gravity; so in animals it could not be more surely attested in any
way, than by their drowning themselves contrary to their instinctive
desire of life. Only by this derivation of our narrative from the
confluence of various ideas and interests of the age, can we explain
the above noticed contradiction, that the demons first petition for the
bodies of the swine as a habitation, and immediately after of their own
accord destroy this habitation. The petition grew, as we have said, out
of the idea that demons shunned incorporeality, the destruction, out of
the ordinary test of the reality of an exorcism;—what wonder if the
combination of ideas so heterogeneous produced two contradictory
features in the narrative?

The third and last circumstantially narrated expulsion of a demon has
the peculiar feature, that in the first instance the disciples in vain
attempt the cure, which Jesus then effects with ease. The three
synoptists (Matt. xvii. 14 ff.; Mark ix. 14 ff.; Luke ix. 37 ff.)
unanimously state that Jesus having descended with his three most
confidential disciples from the Mount of the Transfiguration, found his
other disciples in perplexity, because they were unable to cure a
possessed boy, whom his father had brought to them.

In this narrative also there is a gradation from the greatest
simplicity in Matthew, to the greatest particularity of description in
Mark; and here again this gradation has led to the conclusion that the
narrative of Matthew is the farthest from the fact, and must be made
subordinate to that of the two other Evangelists. [1245] In the
introduction of the incident in Matthew, Jesus, having descended from
the mountain, joins the multitude (ὄχλος), whereupon the father of the
boy approaches, and on his knees entreats Jesus to cure his child; in
Luke, the multitude (ὄχλος) meet Jesus; lastly, in Mark, Jesus sees
around the disciples a great multitude, among whom were scribes
disputing with them; the people, when they see him, run towards him and
salute him, he inquires what is the subject of dispute, and on this the
father of the boy begins to speak. Here we have a climax in relation to
the conduct of the people; in Matthew, Jesus appears to join them by
accident; in Luke, they come to meet him; and in Mark, they run towards
him to salute him. The last Evangelist has the singular remark: And
straightway all the people, when they saw him, were greatly amazed.
What could there possibly be so greatly to amaze the people in the
arrival of Jesus with some disciples? This remains, in spite of all the
other means of explanation that have been devised, so thorough a
mystery, that I cannot find so absurd as Fritzsche esteems it, the idea
of Euthymius, that Jesus having just descended from the Mount of
Transfiguration, some of the heavenly radiance which had there shone
around him was still visible, as on Moses when he came down from Sinai
(Exod. xxxiv. 29 f.). That among this throng of people there were
scribes who arraigned the disciples on the ground of their failure, and
involved them in a dispute, is in and by itself quite natural; but
connected as it is with the exaggerations concerning the behaviour of
the multitude, this feature also becomes suspicious, especially as the
other two Evangelists have it not; so that if it can be shown how the
narrator might be led to insert it by a mental combination of his own,
we shall have sufficient warrant for renouncing it. Shortly before
(viii. 11), on the occasion of the demand of a sign from Jesus by the
Pharisees, Mark says, ἥρξαντο συζητεῖν αὐτῷ, they began to question
with him, apparently on the subject of his ability to work miracles;
and so here when the disciples show themselves unable to perform a
miracle, he represents the scribes (the majority of whom belonged to
the Pharisaic sect), as συζητοῦντας τοῖς μαθηταῖς, questioning with the
disciples. In the succeeding description of the boy’s state there is
the same gradation as to particularity, except that Matthew is the one
who alone has the expression σεληνιάζεται (is lunatic), which it is
unfair to make a reproach to him, [1246] since the reference of
periodical disorders to the moon was not uncommon in the time of Jesus.
[1247] Mark alone calls the spirit that possessed the dumb boy (v. 17),
and deaf (v. 25). The emission of inarticulate sounds by epileptics
during their fits, might be regarded as the dumbness of the demon, and
their incapability of noticing any words addressed to them, as his
deafness.

When the father has informed Jesus of the subject of dispute and of the
inability of the disciples to relieve the boy, Jesus breaks forth into
the exclamation, O faithless and perverse generation, etc. On a
comparison of the close of the narrative in Matthew, where Jesus, when
his disciples ask him why they could not cast out the demon, answers;
Because of your unbelief, and proceeds to extol the power of faith,
even though no larger than a grain of mustard seed, as sufficient to
remove mountains (v. 19 ff.): it cannot be doubted that in this
expression of dissatisfaction Jesus apostrophizes his disciples, in
whose inability to cast out the demon, he finds a proof of their still
deficient faith. [1248] This concluding explanation of the want of
power in the disciples, by their unbelief, Luke omits: and Mark not
only imitates him in this, but also interweaves (v. 21–24), a by-scene
between Jesus and the father, in which he first gives an amplified
description of the symptoms of the child’s malady, drawn partly from
Matthew, partly from his own resources, and then represents the father,
on being required to believe, as confessing with tears the weakness of
his faith, and his desire that it may be strengthened. Taking this
together with the mention of the disputative scribes, we cannot err in
supposing the speech of Jesus, O faithless generation, etc., in Mark
and also in Luke to refer to the people, as distinguished from the
disciples; in Mark, more particularly to the father, whose unbelief is
intimated to be an impediment to the cure, as in another case (Matt.
ix. 2), the faith of relatives appears to further the desired object.
As however both the Evangelists give this aspect to the circumstances,
because they do not here give the explanation of the inefficiency of
the disciples by their unbelief, together with the declaration
concerning the power of faith to remove mountains: we must inquire
whether the connexion in which they place these discourses is more
suitable than this in which they are inserted by Matthew. In Luke the
declaration: If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, etc. (neither
he nor Mark has, Because of your unbelief), occurs xvii. 5, 6, with
only the slight variation, that instead of the mountain a tree is
named; but it is here destitute of any connexion either with the
foregoing or the following context, and has the appearance of a short
stray fragment, with an introduction, no doubt fictitious (of the same
kind as Luke xi. 1, xiii. 23), in the form of an entreaty from the
disciples: Lord, increase our faith. Mark gives the sentence on the
faith which removes mountains as the moral of the history of the cursed
fig tree, where Matthew also has it a second time. But to this history
the declaration is totally unsuitable, as we shall presently see; and
if we are unwilling to content ourselves with ignorance of the occasion
on which it was uttered, we must accept its connexion in Matthew as the
original one, for it is perfectly appropriate to a failure of the
disciples in an attempted cure. Mark has sought to make the scene more
effective by other additions, beside this episode with the father; he
tells us that the people ran together that they might observe what was
passing, that after the expulsion of the demon the boy was as one dead,
insomuch that many said, he is dead; but that Jesus, taking him by the
hand, as he does elsewhere with the dead (Matt. ix. 25), lifts him up
and restores him to life.

After the completion of the cure, Luke dismisses the narrative with a
brief notice of the astonishment of the people; but the two first
synoptists pursue the subject by making the disciples, when alone with
Jesus, ask him why they were not able to cast out the demon? In Matthew
the immediate reply of Jesus accounts for their incapability by their
unbelief; but in Mark, his answer is, This kind goeth not out but by
prayer and fasting, which Matthew also adds after the discourse on
unbelief and the power of faith. This seems to be an unfortunate
connexion of Matthew’s; for if fasting and praying were necessary for
the cure, the disciples, in case they had not previously fasted, could
not have cast out the demon even if they had possessed the firmest
faith. [1249] Whether these two reasons given by Jesus for the
inability of the disciples can be made consistent by the observation,
that fasting and prayer are means of strengthening faith; [1250] or
whether we are to suppose with Schleiermacher an association of two
originally unrelated passages, we will not here attempt to decide. That
such a spiritual and corporeal discipline on the part of the exorcist
should have effect on the possessed, has been held surprising: it has
been thought with Porphyry, [1251] that it would rather be to the
purpose that the patient should observe this discipline, and hence it
has been supposed that the προσευχὴ καὶ νηστεία, prayer and fasting,
were prescribed to the demoniac as a means of making the cure radical.
[1252] But this is evidently in contradiction to the text. For if
fasting and praying on the part of the patient were necessary for the
success of the cure, it must have been gradual and not sudden, as all
cures are which are attributed to Jesus in the gospels, and as this is
plainly enough implied to be by the words, καὶ ἐθεραπεύθη ὁ παῖς ἀπὸ
τῆς ὥρας ἐκείνης, and the child was cured from that very hour, in
Matthew, and the word ἰάσατο, he cured, placed between ἐπετίμησε κ.τ.λ.
Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and ἀπέδωκε κ.τ.λ. delivered him
again to his father, in Luke. It is true Paulus turns the above
expression of Matthew to his advantage, for he understands it to mean
that from that time forward the boy, by the application of the
prescribed discipline, gradually recovered. But we need only observe
the same form of expression where it elsewhere occurs as the final
sentence in narratives of cures, to be convinced of the impossibility
of such an interpretation. When, for example, the story of the woman
who had an issue of blood closes with the remark (Matt. ix. 22) καὶ
ἐσώθη ἡ γυνὴ ἀπὸ ὥρας ἐκείνης, this will hardly be translated, et
exinde mulier paulatim servabatur: it can only mean: servata est (et
servatam se præbuit) ab illo temporis momento. Another point to which
Paulus appeals as a proof that Jesus here commenced a cure which was to
be consummated by degrees, is the expression of Luke, ἀπέδωκεν αὐτὸν τῷ
πατρὶ αὐτοῦ, he delivered him again to his father, which, he argues,
would have been rather superfluous, if it were not intended to imply a
recommendation to special care. But the more immediate signification of
ἀποδίδωμι is not to deliver or give up, but to give back; and therefore
in the above expression the only sense is: puerum, quem sanandum
acceperat, sanatum reddidit, that is, the boy who had fallen into the
hands of a strange power—of the demon—was restored to the parents as
their own. Lastly, how arbitrary is it in Paulus to take the expression
ἐκπορεύεται, goeth out (Matt. v. 21), in the closer signification of a
total departure, and to distinguish this from the preliminary departure
which followed on the bare word of Jesus (v. 18)! Thus in this case, as
in every other, the gospels present to us, not a cure which was
protracted through days and weeks, but a cure which was instantaneously
completed by one miracle: hence the fasting and prayer cannot be
regarded as a prescription for the patient.

With this whole history must be compared an analogous narrative in 2
Kings iv. 29 ff. Here the prophet Elisha attempts to bring a dead child
to life, by sending his staff by the hands of his servant Gehazi, who
is to lay it on the face of the child; but this measure does not
succeed, and Elisha is obliged in his own person to come and call the
boy to life. The same relation that exists in this Old Testament story
between the prophet and his servant, is seen in the New Testament
narrative between the Messiah and his disciples: the latter can do
nothing without their master, but what was too difficult for them, he
effects with certainty. Now this feature is a clue to the tendency of
both narratives, namely, to exalt their master by exhibiting the
distance between him and his most intimate disciples; or, if we compare
the evangelical narrative before us with that of the demoniacs of
Gadara, we may say: the latter case was made to appear one of extreme
difficulty in itself; the former, by the relation in which the power of
Jesus, which is adequate to the occasion, is placed to the power of the
disciples, which, however great in other instances, was here
insufficient.

Of the other more briefly narrated expulsions of demons, the cure of a
dumb demoniac and of one who was blind also, has been already
sufficiently examined in connexion with the accusation of a league with
Beelzebub: as also the cure of the woman who was bowed down, in our
general considerations on the demoniacs. The cure of the possessed
daughter of the Canaanitish woman (Matt. xv. 22 ff.; Mark vii. 25 ff.)
has no further peculiarity than that it was wrought by the word of
Jesus at a distance: a point of which we shall speak later.

According to the evangelical narratives, the attempt of Jesus to expel
the demon succeeded in every one of these cases. Paulus remarks that
cures of this kind, although they contributed more than anything else
to impress the multitude with veneration for Jesus, were yet the
easiest in themselves, and even De Wette sanctions a psychological
explanation of the cures of demoniacs, though of no others. [1253] With
these opinions we cannot but agree; for if we regard the real character
of the demoniacal state as a species of madness accompanied by a
convulsive tendency of the nervous system, we know that psychical and
nervous disorders are most easily wrought upon by psychical
influence;—an influence to which the surpassing dignity of Jesus as a
prophet, and eventually even as the Messiah himself, presented all the
requisite conditions. There is, however, a marked gradation among these
states, according as the psychical derangement has more or less fixed
itself corporeally, and the disturbance of the nervous system has
become more or less habitual, and shared by the rest of the
organization. We may therefore lay down the following rule: the more
strictly the malady was confined to mental derangement, on which the
word of Jesus might have an immediate moral influence, or in a
comparatively slight disturbance of the nervous system, on which he
would be able to act powerfully through the medium of the mind, the
more possible was it for Jesus by his word λόγῳ (Matt. viii. 16), and
instantly παραχρῆμα (Luke xiii. 13), to put an end to such states: on
the other hand, the more the malady had already confirmed itself, as a
bodily disease, the more difficult is it to believe that Jesus was able
to relieve it in a purely psychological manner and at the first moment.
From this rule results a second: namely, that to any extensive
psychological influence on the part of Jesus the full recognition of
his dignity as a prophet was requisite; whence it follows that at times
and in districts where he had long had that reputation, he could effect
more in this way than where he had it not.

If we apply these two measures to the cures in the gospels, we shall
find that the first, viz., that of the demoniac in the synagogue at
Capernaum, is not, so soon as we cease to consider the Evangelist’s
narrative of it circumstantially correct, altogether destitute of
probability. It is true that the words attributed to the demon seem to
imply an intuitive knowledge of Jesus; but this may be probably
accounted for by the supposition that the widely-spread fame of Jesus
in that country, and his powerful discourse in the synagogue, had
impressed the demoniac with the belief, if not that Jesus was the
Messiah, as the Evangelists say, at least that he must be a prophet: a
belief that would give effect to his words. As regards the state of
this demoniac we are only told of his fixed idea (that he was
possessed), and of his attacks of convulsions; his malady may therefore
have been of the less rooted kind, and accessible to psychological
influence. The cure of the Gadarenes is attended with more difficulty
in both points of view. Firstly, Jesus was comparatively little known
on the eastern shore; and secondly, the state of these demoniacs is
described as so violent and deep-seated a mania, that a word from Jesus
could hardly suffice to put an end to it. Here therefore the natural
explanation of Paulus will not suffice, and if we are to regard the
narrative as having any foundation in fact, we must suppose that the
description of the demoniac’s state, as well as other particulars, has
been exaggerated by the legend. The same judgment must be passed in
relation to the cure of the boy who was lunatic, since an epilepsy
which had existed from infancy (Mark v. 21) and the attacks of which
were so violent and regular, must be too deeply rooted in the system
for the possibility of so rapid and purely psychological a cure to be
credible. That even dumbness and a contraction of many years’ duration,
which we cannot with Paulus explain as a mere insane imagination that
speech or an erect carriage was not permitted, [1254]—that these
afflictions should disappear at a word, no one who is not committed to
dogmatical opinions can persuade himself. Lastly, least of all is it to
be conceived, that even without the imposing influence of his presence,
the miracle-worker could effect a cure at a distance, as Jesus is said
to have done on the daughter of the Canaanitish woman.

Thus in the nature of things there is nothing to prevent the admission,
that Jesus cured many persons who suffered from supposed demoniacal
insanity or nervous disorder, in a psychical manner, by the ascendancy
of his manner and words (if indeed Venturini [1255] and Kaiser [1256]
are not right in their conjecture, that patients of this class often
believed themselves to be cured, when in fact the crisis only of their
disorder had been broken by the influence of Jesus; and that the
Evangelists state them to have been cured because they learned nothing
further of them, and thus knew nothing of their probable relapse). But
while granting the possibility of many cures, it is evident that in
this field the legend has not been idle, but has confounded the easier
cases, which alone could be cured psychologically, with the most
difficult and complicated, to which such a treatment was totally
inapplicable. [1257] Is the refusal of a sign on the part of Jesus
reconcilable with such a manifestation of power as we have above
defined,—or must even such cures as can be explained psychologically,
but which in his age must have seemed miracles, be denied in order to
make that refusal comprehensible? We will not here put this alternative
otherwise than as a question.

If in conclusion we cast a glance on the gospel of John, we find that
it does not even mention demoniacs and their cure by Jesus. This
omission has not seldom been turned to the advantage of the Apostle
John, the alleged author, as indicating a superior degree of
enlightenment. [1258] If however this apostle did not believe in the
reality of possession by devils, he must have had, as the author of the
fourth gospel, according to the ordinary view of his relation to the
synoptical writers, the strongest motives for rectifying their
statements, and preventing the dissemination of what he held to be a
false opinion, by setting the cures in question in a true light. But
how could the Apostle John arrive at the rejection of the opinion that
the above diseases had their foundation in demoniacal possession?
According to Josephus it was at that period a popular Jewish opinion,
from which a Jew of Palestine who, like John, did not visit a foreign
land until late in life, would hardly be in a condition to liberate
himself; it was, according to the nature of things and the synoptical
accounts, the opinion of Jesus himself, John’s adored master, from whom
the favourite disciple certainly would not be inclined to swerve even a
hair’s breadth. But if John shared with his cotemporaries and with
Jesus himself the notion of real demoniacal possession, and if the cure
of demoniacs formed the principal part, nay, perhaps the true
foundation of the alleged miraculous powers of Jesus: how comes it that
the Apostle nevertheless makes no mention of them in his gospel? That
he passed over them because the other Evangelists had collected enough
of such histories, is a supposition that ought by this time to be
relinquished, since he repeats more than one history of a miracle which
they had already given; and if it be said that he repeated these
because they needed correction,—we have seen, in our examination of the
cures of demoniacs, that in many a reduction of them to their simple
historical elements would be very much in place. There yet remains the
supposition that, the histories of demoniacs being incredible or
offensive to the cultivated Greeks of Asia Minor, among whom John is
said to have written, he left them out of his gospel for the sake of
accommodating himself to their ideas. But we must ask, could or should
an apostle, out of mere accommodation to the refined ears of his
auditors, withhold so essential a feature of the agency of Jesus?
Certainly this silence, supposing the authenticity of the three first
gospels, rather indicates an author who had not been an eye-witness of
the ministry of Jesus; or, according to our view, at least one who had
not at his command the original tradition of Palestine, but only a
tradition modified by Hellenistic influence, in which the expulsions of
demons, being less accordant with the higher culture of the Greeks,
were either totally suppressed or kept so far in the background that
they might have escaped the notice of the author of the gospel.




§ 94.

CURES OF LEPERS.

Among the sufferers whom Jesus healed, the leprous play a prominent
part, as might have been anticipated from the tendency of the climate
of Palestine to produce cutaneous disease. When, according to the
synoptical writers, Jesus directs the attention of the Baptist’s
messengers to the actual proofs which he had given of his Messiahship
(Matt. ix. 5), he adduces among these, the cleansing of lepers; when,
on the first mission of the disciples, he empowers them to perform all
kinds of miracles, the cleansing of lepers is numbered among the first
(Matt. x. 8), and two cases of such cures are narrated to us in detail.

One of these cases is common to all the synoptical writers, but is
placed by them in two different connexions: namely, by Matthew,
immediately after the delivery of the Sermon on the Mount (viii. 1
ff.); by the other Evangelists, at some period, not precisely marked,
at the beginning of the ministry of Jesus in Galilee (Mark i. 40 ff.;
Luke v. 12 ff.). According to the narratives, a leper comes towards
Jesus, and falling on his knees, entreats that he may be cleansed; this
Jesus effects by a touch, and then directs the leper to present himself
to the priest in obedience to the law, that he may be pronounced clean
(Lev. xiv. 2 ff.). The state of the man is in Matthew and Mark
described simply by the word λεπρὸς, a leper; but in Luke more
strongly, by the words, πλήρης λέπρας, full of leprosy. Paulus, indeed,
regards the being thus replete with leprosy as a symptom that the
patient was curable (the eruption and peeling of the leprosy on the
entire skin being indicative of the healing crisis); and accordingly,
that commentator represents the incident to himself in the following
manner. The leper applied to Jesus in his character of Messiah for an
opinion on his state, and, the result being favourable, for a
declaration that he was clean (εἰ θέλεις, δύνασαί με καθαρίσαι), which
might either spare him an application to the priest, or at all events
give him a consolatory hope in making that application. Jesus
expressing himself ready to make the desired examination (θέλω),
stretched out his hand, in order to feel the patient, without allowing
too near an approach while he was possibly still capable of
communicating contagion; and after a careful examination, he expressed,
as its result, the conviction that the patient was no longer in a
contagious state (καθαρίσθητι), whereupon quickly and easily (εὐθέως)
the leprosy actually disappeared. [1259]

Here, in the first place, the supposition that the leper was precisely
at the crisis of healing is foreign to the text, which in the two first
Evangelists speaks merely of leprosy, while the πλήρης λέπρας of the
third can mean nothing else than the Old Testament expression ‏מְצֹרָע
כַּשָּׁלֶג‎ (Exod. iv. 6, Num. xii. 10; 2 Kings v. 27), which, according to
the connexion in every instance, signifies the worst stage of leprosy.
That the word καθαρίζειν in the Hebraic and Hellenistic use of the
Greek language, might also mean merely to pronounce clean is not to be
denied, only it must retain the signification throughout the passage.
But that after having narrated that Jesus had said, Be thou clean,
καθαρίσθητι, Matthew should have added καὶ εὐθέως ἐκαθαρίσθη κ.τ.λ. in
the sense that thus the sick man was actually pronounced clean by
Jesus, is, from the absurd tautology such an interpretation would
introduce, so inconceivable, that we must here, and consequently
throughout the narrative, understand the word καθαρίζεσθαι of actual
cleansing. It is sufficient to remind the reader of the expressions
λεπροὶ καθαρίζονται, the lepers are cleansed (Matt. xi. 5), and λεπροὺς
καθαρίζετε, cleanse the lepers (Matt. x. 8), where neither can the
latter word signify merely to pronounce clean, nor can it have another
meaning than in the narrative before us. But the point in which the
natural interpretation the most plainly betrays its weakness, is the
disjunction of θέλω, I will, from καθαρίσθητι, be thou clean. Who can
persuade himself that these words, united as they are in all the three
narratives, were separated by a considerable pause—that θέλω was spoken
during or more properly before the manipulation, καθαρίσθητι after,
when all the Evangelists represent the two words as having been uttered
by Jesus without separation whilst he touched the leper? Surely, if the
alleged sense had been the original one, at least one of the
Evangelists, instead of the words ἥψατο αὐτοῦ ὁ Ἰησοῦς λέγων· θέλω,
καθαρίσθητι, Jesus touched him, saying, I will, be thou clean, would
have substituted the more accurate expression, ὁ Ἰ. ἀπεκρίνατο· θέλω,
καὶ ἁψάμενος αὐτοῦ εἶπε· καθαρίσθητι, Jesus answered, I will; and
having touched him, said: be thou clean. But if καθαρίσθητι was spoken
in one breath with θέλω, so that Jesus announces the cleansing simply
as a result of his will without any intermediate examination, the
former word cannot possibly signify a mere declaration of cleanness, to
which a previous examination would be requisite, and it must signify an
actual making clean. It follows, therefore, that the word ἅπτεσθαι in
this connexion is not to be understood of an exploratory manipulation,
but, as in all other narratives of the same class, of a curative touch.

In support of his natural explanation of this incident, Paulus appeals
to the rule, that invariably the ordinary and regular is to be
presupposed in a narrative where the contrary is not expressly
indicated. [1260] But this rule shares the ambiguity which is
characteristic of the entire system of natural interpretation, since it
leaves undecided what is ordinary and regular in our estimation, and
what was so in the ideas of the author whose writings are to be
explained. Certainly, if I have a Gibbon before me, I must in his
narratives presuppose only natural causes and occurrences when he does
not expressly convey the contrary, because to a writer of his
cultivation, the supernatural is at the utmost only conceivable as a
rare exception. But the case is altered when I take up an Herodotus, in
whose mode of thought the intervention of higher powers is by no means
unusual and out of rule; and when I am considering a collection of
anecdotes which are the product of Jewish soil, and the object of which
is to represent an individual as a prophet of the highest rank—as a man
in the most intimate connexion with the Deity, to meet with the
supernatural is so completely a thing of course, that the rule of the
rationalists must here be reversed, and we must say: where, in such
narratives, importance is attached to results which, regarded as
natural, would have no importance whatever,—there, supernatural causes
must be expressly excluded, if we are not to presuppose it the opinion
of the narrator that such causes were in action. Moreover, in the
history before us, the extraordinary character of the incident is
sufficiently indicated by the statement, that the leprosy left the
patient immediately on the word of Jesus. Paulus, it is true,
contrives, as we have already observed, to interpret this statement as
implying a gradual, natural healing, on the ground that εὐθέως, the
word by which the Evangelists determine the time of the cure,
signifies, according to the different connexions in which it may occur,
in one case immediately, in another merely soon, and unobstructedly.
Granting this, are we to understand the words εὐθέως ἐξέβαλεν αὐτὸν,
which follow in close connexion in Mark (v. 43), as signifying that
soon and without hindrance Jesus sent the cleansed leper away? Or is
the word to be taken in a different sense in two consecutive verses?

We conclude, then, that in the intention of the evangelical writers the
instantaneous disappearance of the leprosy in consequence of the word
and touch of Jesus, is the fact on which their narratives turn. Now to
represent the possibility of this to one’s self is quite another task
than to imagine the instantaneous release of a man under the grasp of a
fixed idea, or a permanently invigorating impression on a nervous
patient. Leprosy, from the thorough derangement of the animal fluids of
which it is the symptom, is the most obstinate and malignant of
cutaneous diseases; and that a skin corroded by this malady should by a
word and touch instantly become pure and healthy, is, from its
involving the immediate effectuation of what would require a long
course of treatment, so inconceivable, [1261] that every one who is
free from certain prejudices (as the critic ought always to be) must
involuntarily be reminded by it of the realm of fable. And in the
fabulous region of Oriental and more particularly of Jewish legend, the
sudden appearance and disappearance of leprosy presents itself the
first thing. When Jehovah endowed Moses, as a preparation for his
mission into Egypt, with the power of working all kinds of signs,
amongst other tokens of this gift he commanded him to put his hand into
his bosom, and when he drew it out again, it was covered with leprosy;
again he was commanded to put it into his bosom, and on drawing it out
a second time it was once more clean (Exod. iv. 6, 7). Subsequently, on
account of an attempt at rebellion against Moses, his sister Miriam was
suddenly stricken with leprosy, but on the intercession of Moses was
soon healed (Num. xii. 10 ff.). Above all, among the miracles of the
prophet Elisha the cure of a leper plays an important part, and to this
event Jesus himself refers (Luke iv. 27.). The Syrian general, Naaman,
who suffered from leprosy, applied to the Israelitish prophet for his
aid; the latter sent to him the direction to wash seven times in the
river Jordan, and on Naaman’s observance of this prescription the
leprosy actually disappeared but was subsequently transferred by the
prophet to his deceitful servant Gehazi (2 Kings v.). I know not what
we ought to need beyond these Old Testament narratives to account for
the origin of the evangelical anecdotes. What the first Goël was
empowered to do in the fulfilment of Jehovah’s commission, the second
Goël must also be able to perform and the greatest of prophets must not
fall short of the achievements of any one prophet. If then, the cure of
leprosy was without doubt included in the Jewish idea of the Messiah;
the Christians, who believed the Messiah to have really appeared in the
person of Jesus, had a yet more decided inducement to glorify his
history by such traits, taken from the Mosaic and prophetic legend;
with the single difference that, in accordance with the mild spirit of
the New Covenant (Luke ix. 55 f.) they dropped the punitive side of the
old miracles.

Somewhat more plausible is the appeal of the rationalists to the
absence of an express statement, that a miraculous cure of the leprosy
is intended in the narrative of the ten lepers, given by Luke alone
(xvii. 12 ff.). Here neither do the lepers expressly desire to be
cured, their words being only, Have mercy on us; nor does Jesus utter a
command directly referring to such a result, for he merely enjoins them
to show themselves to the priests: and the rationalists avail
themselves of this indirectness in his reply, as a help to their
supposition, that Jesus, after ascertaining the state of the patients,
encouraged them to subject themselves to the examination of the
priests, which resulted in their being pronounced clean, and the
Samaritan returned to thank Jesus for His encouraging advice. [1262]
But mere advice does not call forth so ardent a demonstration of
gratitude as is here described by the words ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον, he
fell down on his face; still less could Jesus desire that because his
advice had had a favourable issue, all the ten should have returned,
and returned to glorify God—for what? that he had enabled Jesus to give
them such good advice? No: a more real service is here presupposed; and
this the narrative itself implies, both in attributing the return of
the Samaritan to his discovery that he was healed (ἰδὼν ὅτι ἰάθη), and
in making Jesus indicate the reason why thanks were to be expected from
all, by the words: οὐχὶ οἱ δέκα ἐκαθαρίσθησαν; Were there not ten
cleansed? Both these expressions can only by an extremely forced
interpretation be made to imply, that because the lepers saw the
correctness of the judgment of Jesus in pronouncing them clean, one of
them actually returned to thank him, and the others ought to have
returned. But that which is most decisive against the natural
explanation is this sentence: And as they went they were cleansed, ἐν
τῷ ὑπάγειν αὐτοὺς ἐκαθαρίσθησαν. If the narrator intended, according to
the above interpretation, merely to say: the lepers having gone to the
priest, and showed themselves to him, were pronounced clean: he must at
least have said: πορευθέντες ἐκαθαρίσθησαν, having made the journey
they were cleansed, whereas the deliberate choice of the expression ἐν
τῷ ὑπάγειν (while in the act of going), incontestibly shows that a
healing effected during the journey is intended. Thus here also we have
a miraculous cure of leprosy, which is burdened with the same
difficulties as the former anecdote; the origin of which is, however,
as easily explained.

But in this narrative there is a peculiarity which distinguishes it
from the former. Here there is no simple cure, nay, the cure does not
properly form the main object of the narrative: this lies rather in the
different conduct of the cured, and the question of Jesus, were there
not ten cleansed, etc. (v. 17), forms the point of the whole, which
thus closes altogether morally, and seems to have been narrated for the
sake of the instruction conveyed. [1263] That the one who appears as a
model of thankfulness happens to be a Samaritan, cannot pass without
remark, in the narrative of the Evangelist who alone has the parable of
the Good Samaritan. As there two Jews, a priest and a Levite, show
themselves pitiless, while a Samaritan, on the contrary, proves
exemplarily compassionate: so here, nine unthankful Jews stand
contrasted with one thankful Samaritan. May it not be then (in so far
as the sudden cure of these lepers cannot be historical) that we have
here, as well as there, a parable pronounced by Jesus, in which he
intended to represent gratitude, as in the other case compassion, in
the example of a Samaritan? It would then be with the present narrative
as some have maintained it to be with the history of the temptation.
But in relation to this we have both shown, and given the reason, that
Jesus never made himself immediately figure in a parable, and this he
must have done if he had given a narrative of ten lepers once healed by
him. If then we are not inclined to relinquish the idea that something
originally parabolic is the germ of our present narrative, we must
represent the case to ourselves thus: from the legends of cures
performed by Jesus on lepers, on the one hand; and on the other, from
parables in which Jesus (as in that of the compassionate Samaritan)
presented individuals of this hated race as models of various virtues,
the Christian legend wove this narrative, which is therefore partly an
account of a miracle and partly a parable.




§ 95.

CURES OF THE BLIND.

One of the first places among the sufferers cured by Jesus is filled
(also agreeably to the nature of the climate [1264]) by the blind, of
whose cure again we read not only in the general descriptions which are
given by the Evangelists (Matt. xv. 30 f.; Luke vii. 21), and by Jesus
himself (Matt. xi. 5), of his messianic works, but also in some
detailed narratives of particular cases. We have indeed more of these
cures than of the kind last noticed, doubtless because blindness, as a
malady affecting the most delicate and complicated of organs, admitted
a greater diversity of treatment. One of these cures of the blind is
common to all the synoptical writers; the others (with the exception of
the blind and dumb demoniac in Matthew, whom we need not here
reconsider) are respectively peculiar to the first, second, and fourth
Evangelists.

The narrative common to all the three synoptical writers is that of a
cure of blindness wrought by Jesus at Jericho, on his last journey to
Jerusalem (Matt. xx. 29 parall.): but there are important differences
both as to the object of the cure, Matthew having two blind men, the
two other Evangelists only one; and also as to its locality, Luke
making it take place on the entrance of Jesus into Jericho, Matthew and
Mark on his departure out of Jericho. Moreover the touching of the
eyes, by which, according to the first evangelist, Jesus effected the
cure, is not mentioned by the two other narrators. Of these differences
the latter may be explained by the observation, that though Mark and
Luke are silent as to the touching, they do not therefore deny it: the
first, relative to the number cured, presents a heavier difficulty. To
remove this it has been said by those who give the prior authority to
Matthew, that one of the two blind men was possibly more remarkable
than the other, on which account he alone was retained in the first
tradition; but Matthew, as an eye-witness, afterwards supplied the
second blind man. On this supposition Luke and Mark do not contradict
Matthew, for they nowhere deny that another besides their single blind
man was healed; neither does Matthew contradict them, for where there
are two, there is also one. [1265] But when the simple narrator speaks
of one individual in whom something extraordinary has happened, and
even, like Mark, mentions his name, it is plain that he tacitly
contradicts the statement that it happened in two individuals—to
contradict it expressly there was no occasion. Let us turn then to the
other side and, taking the singular number of Mark and Luke as the
original one, conjecture that the informant of Matthew (the latter
being scarcely on this hypothesis an eye-witness) probably mistook the
blind man’s guide for a second blind man. [1266] Hereby a decided
contradiction is admitted, while to account for it an extremely
improbable cause is superfluously invented. The third difference
relates to the place; Matthew and Mark have ἐκπορευομένων ἀπὸ, as they
departed from, Luke, ἐν τῷ ἐγγίζειν εἰς Ἱεριχὼ, as they came nigh to
Jericho. If there be any whom the words themselves fail to convince
that this difference is irreconcilable, let them read the forced
attempts to render these passages consistent with each other, which
have been made by commentators from Grotius down to Paulus.

Hence it was a better expedient which the older harmonists [1267]
adopted, and which has been approved by some modern critics. [1268] In
consideration of the last-named difference, they here distinguished two
events, and held that Jesus cured a blind man first on his entrance
into Jericho (according to Luke), and then again on his departure from
that place (according to Matthew and Luke). Of the other divergency,
relative to the number, these harmonists believed that they had
disencumbered themselves by the supposition that Matthew connected in
one event the two blind men, the one cured on entering and the other on
leaving Jericho, and gave the latter position to the cure of both. But
if so much weight is allowed to the statement of Matthew relative to
the locality of the cure, as to make it, in conjunction with that of
Mark, a reason for supposing two cures, one at each extremity of the
town, I know not why equal credit should not be given to his numerical
statement, and Storr appears to me to proceed more consistently when,
allowing equal weight to both differences, he supposes that Jesus on
his entrance into Jericho, cured one blind man (Luke) and subsequently
on his departure two (Matthew). [1269] The claim of Matthew is thus
fully vindicated, but on the other hand that of Mark is denied. For if
the latter be associated with Matthew, as is here the case, for the
sake of his locality, it is necessary to do violence to his numerical
statement, which taken alone would rather require him to be associated
with Luke; so that to avoid impeaching either of his statements, which
on this system of interpretation is not admissible, his narrative must
be equally detached from that of both the other Evangelists. Thus we
should have three distinct cures of the blind at Jericho: 1st, the cure
of one blind man on the entrance of Jesus, 2nd, that of another on his
departure, and 3rd, the cure of two blind men, also during the
departure; in all, of four blind men. Now to separate the second and
third cases is indeed difficult. For it will not be maintained that
Jesus can have gone out by two different gates at the same time, and it
is nearly as difficult to imagine that having merely set out with the
intention of leaving Jericho, he returned again into the town, and not
until afterwards took his final departure. But, viewing the case more
generally, it is scarcely an admissible supposition, that three
incidents so entirely similar thus fell together in a group. The
accumulation of cures of the blind is enough to surprise us; but the
behaviour of the companions of Jesus is incomprehensible; for after
having seen in the first instance, on entering Jericho, that they had
acted in opposition to the designs of Jesus by rebuking the blind man
for his importunity, since Jesus called the man to him, they
nevertheless repeated this conduct on the second and even on the third
occasion. Storr, it is true, is not disconcerted by this repetition in
at least two incidents of this kind, for he maintains that no one knows
whether those who had enjoined silence on going out of Jericho were not
altogether different persons from those who had done the like on
entering the town: indeed, supposing them to be the same, such a
repetition of conduct which Jesus had implicitly disapproved, however
unbecoming, was not therefore impossible, since even the disciples who
had been present at the first miraculous feeding, yet asked, before the
second, whence bread could be had for such a multitude?—but this is
merely to argue the reality of one impossibility from that of another,
as we shall presently see when we enter on the consideration of the two
miraculous feedings. Further, not only the conduct of the followers of
Jesus, but also almost every feature of the incident must have been
repeated in the most extraordinary manner. In the one case as in the
other, the blind men cry, Have mercy upon us, (or me,) thou son of
David; then (after silence has been enjoined on them by the spectators)
Jesus commands that they should be brought to him: he next asks what
they will that he should do to them; they answer, that we may receive
our sight; he complies with their wish, and they gratefully follow him.
That all this was so exactly repeated thrice, or even twice, is an
improbability amounting to an impossibility; and we must suppose,
according to the hypothesis adopted by Sieffert in such cases, a
legendary assimilation of different facts, or a traditionary variation
of a single occurrence. If, in order to arrive at a decision, it be
asked: what could more easily happen, when once the intervention of the
legend is presupposed, than that one and the same history should be
told first of one, then of several, first of the entrance, then of the
departure? it will not be necessary to discuss the other possibility,
since this is so incomparably more probable that there cannot be even a
momentary hesitation in embracing it as real. But in thus reducing the
number of the facts, we must not with Sieffert stop short at two, for
in that case not only do the difficulties with respect to the
repetition of the same incident remain, but we fall into a want of
logical sequency in admitting one divergency (in the number) as
unessential, for the sake of removing another (in the locality). If it
be further asked, supposing only one incident to be here narrated,
which of the several narratives is the original one? the statements as
to the locality will not aid us in coming to a decision; for Jesus
might just as well meet a blind man on entering as on leaving Jericho.
The difference in the number is more likely to furnish us with a basis
for a decision, and it will be in favour of Mark and Luke, who have
each only one blind man; not, it is true, for the reason alleged by
Schleiermacher, [1270] namely, that Mark, by his mention of the blind
man’s name, evinces a more accurate acquaintance with the
circumstances; for Mark, from his propensity to individualize out of
his own imagination, ought least of all to be trusted with respect to
names which are given by him alone. Our decision is founded on another
circumstance.

It seems probable that Matthew was led to add a second blind man by his
recollection of a previous cure of two blind men narrated by him alone
(ix. 27 ff.). Here, likewise, when Jesus is in the act of
departure,—from the place, namely, where he had raised the ruler’s
daughter,—two blind men follow him (those at Jericho are sitting by the
way side), and in a similar manner cry for mercy of the Son of David,
who here also, as in the other instance, according to Matthew,
immediately cures them by touching their eyes. With these similarities
there are certainly no slight divergencies; nothing is here said of an
injunction to the blind men to be silent, on the part of the companions
of Jesus; and, while at Jericho Jesus immediately calls the blind men
to him, in the earlier case, they come in the first instance to him
when he is again in the house; further, while there he asks them, what
they will have him to do to them? here he asks, if they believe him
able to cure them? Lastly, the prohibition to tell what had happened,
is peculiar to the earlier incident. The two narratives standing in
this relation to each other, an assimilation of them might have taken
place thus: Matthew transferred the two blind men and the touch of
Jesus from the first anecdote to the second; the form of the appeal
from the blind men, from the second to the first.

The two histories, as they are given, present but few data for a
natural explanation. Nevertheless the rationalistic commentators have
endeavoured to frame such an explanation. When Jesus in the earlier
occurrence asked the blind men whether they had confidence in his
power, he wished, say they, to ascertain whether their trust in him
would remain firm during the operation, and whether they would
punctually observe his further prescriptions; [1271] having then
entered the house, in order to be free from interruption, he examined,
for the first time, their disease, and when he found it curable
(according to Venturini [1272] it was caused by the fine dust of that
country), he assured the sufferers that the result should be according
to the measure of their faith. Hereupon Paulus merely says briefly,
that Jesus removed the obstruction to their vision; but he also must
have imagined to himself something similar to what is described in
detail by Venturini, who makes Jesus anoint the eyes of the blind men
with a strong water prepared beforehand, and thus cleanse them from the
irritating dust, so that in a short time their sight returned. But this
natural explanation has not the slightest root in the text; for neither
can the faith (πίστις) required from the patient imply anything else
than, as in all similar cases, trust in the miraculous power of Jesus,
nor can the word ἥψατο, he touched, signify a surgical operation, but
merely that touch which appears in so many of the evangelical curative
miracles, whether as a sign or a conductor of the healing power of
Jesus; of further prescriptions for the completion of the cure there is
absolutely nothing. It is not otherwise with the cure of the blind at
Jericho, where, moreover, the two middle Evangelists do not even
mention the touching of the eyes.

If then, according to the meaning of the narrators, the blind
instantaneously receive their sight as a consequence of the simple word
or touch of Jesus, there are the same difficulties to be encountered
here as in the former case of the lepers. For a disease of the eyes,
however slight, as it is only engendered gradually by the reiterated
action of the disturbing cause, is still less likely to disappear on a
word or a touch; it requires very complicated treatment, partly
surgical, partly medical, and this must be pre-eminently the case with
blindness, supposing it to be of a curable kind. How should we
represent to ourselves the sudden restoration of vision to a blind eye
by a word or a touch? as purely miraculous and magical? That would be
to give up thinking on the subject. As magnetic? There is no precedent
of magnetism having influence over a disease of this nature. Or,
lastly, as psychical? But blindness is something so independent of the
mental life, so entirely corporeal, that the idea of its removal at
all, still less of its sudden removal by means of a mental operation,
is not to be entertained. We must therefore acknowledge that an
historical conception of these narratives is more than merely difficult
to us; and we proceed to inquire whether we cannot show it to be
probable that legends of this kind should arise unhistorically.

We have already quoted the passage in which, according to the first and
third gospels, Jesus in reply to the messengers of the Baptist who had
to ask him whether he were the ἐρχόμενος (he that should come), appeals
to his works. Now he here mentions in the very first place the cure of
the blind, a significant proof that this particular miracle was
expected from the Messiah, his words being taken from Isa. xxxv. 5, a
prophecy interpreted messianically; and in a rabbinical passage above
cited, among the wonders which Jehovah is to perform in the messianic
times, this is enumerated, that he oculos cæcorum aperiet, id quod per
Elisam fecit. [1273] Now Elisha did not cure a positive blindness, but
merely on one occasion opened the eyes of his servant to a perception
of the supersensual world, and on another, removed a blindness which
had been inflicted on his enemies in consequence of his prayer (2 Kings
vi. 17–20). That these deeds of Elisha were conceived, doubtless with
reference to the passage of Isaiah, as a real opening of the eyes of
the blind, is proved by the above rabbinical passage, and hence cures
of the blind were expected from the Messiah. [1274] Now if the
Christian community, proceeding as it did from the bosom of Judaism,
held Jesus to be the messianic personage, it must manifest the tendency
to ascribe to him every messianic predicate, and therefore the one in
question.



The narrative of the cure of a blind man at Bethsaida, and that of the
cure of a man that was deaf and had an impediment in his speech, which
are both peculiar to Mark (viii. 22 ff., vii. 32 ff.), and which we
shall therefore consider together, are the especial favourites of all
rationalistic commentators. If, they exclaim, in the other evangelical
narratives of cures, the accessory circumstances by which the facts
might be explained were but preserved as they are here, we could prove
historically that Jesus did not heal by his mere word, and profound
investigators might discover the natural means by which his cures were
effected! [1275] And in fact chiefly on the ground of these narratives,
in connexion with particular features in other parts of the second
gospel, Mark has of late been represented, even by theologians who do
not greatly favour this method of interpretation, as the patron of the
naturalistic system. [1276]

In the two cures before us, it is at once a good augury for the
rationalistic commentators that Jesus takes both the patients apart
from the multitude, for no other purpose, as they believe, than that of
examining their condition medically, and ascertaining whether it were
susceptible of relief. Such an examination is, according to these
commentators, intimated by the Evangelist himself, when he describes
Jesus as putting his fingers into the ears of the deaf man, by which
means he discovered that the deafness was curable, arising probably
from the hardening of secretions in the ear, and hereupon, also with
the finger, he removed the hindrance to hearing. Not only are the
words, he put his fingers into his ears, ἔβαλε τοὺς δακτύλους εἰς τὰ
ὦτα, interpreted as denoting a surgical operation, but the words, he
touched his tongue, ἥψατο τῆς γλώσσης, are supposed to imply that Jesus
cut the ligament of the tongue in the degree necessary to restore the
pliancy which the organ had lost. In like manner, in the case of the
blind man, the words, when he had put his hands upon him, ἐπιθεὶς τὰς
χεῖρας αὐτῷ, are explained as probably meaning that Jesus by pressing
the eyes of the patient removed the crystalline lens which had become
opaque. A further help to this mode of interpretation is found in the
circumstance that both to the tongue of the man who had an impediment
in his speech, and to the eyes of the blind man, Jesus applied spittle.
Saliva has in itself, particularly in the opinion of ancient
physicians, [1277] a salutary effect on the eyes; as, however, it in no
case acts so rapidly as instantaneously to cure blindness and a defect
in the organs of speech, it is conjectured, with respect to both
instances, that Jesus used the saliva to moisten some medicament,
probably a caustic powder; that the blind man only heard the spitting
and saw nothing of the mixture of the medicaments, and that the deaf
man, in accordance with the spirit of the age, gave little heed to the
natural means, or that the legend did not preserve them. In the
narrative of the deaf man the cure is simply stated, but that of the
blind man is yet further distinguished, by its representing the
restoration of his sight circumstantially, as gradual. After Jesus had
touched the eyes of the patient as above mentioned, he asked him if he
saw aught; not at all, observes Paulus, in the manner of a
miracle-worker, who is sure of the result, but precisely in the manner
of a physician, who after performing an operation endeavours to
ascertain if the patient is benefited. The blind man answers that he
sees, but first indistinctly, so that men seem to him like trees. Here
apparently the rationalistic commentator may triumphantly ask the
orthodox one: if divine power for the working of cures stood at the
command of Jesus, why did he not at once cure the blind man perfectly?
If the disease presented an obstacle which he was not able to overcome,
is it not clear from thence that his power was a finite, ordinarily
human power? Jesus once more puts his hands on the eyes of the blind
man, in order to aid the effect of the first operation, and only then
is the cure completed. [1278]

The complacency of the rationalistic commentators in these narratives
of Mark, is liable to be disturbed by the frigid observation, that,
here also, the circumstances which are requisite to render the natural
explanation possible are not given by the Evangelists themselves, but
are interpolated by the said commentators. For in both cures Mark
furnishes the saliva only; the efficacious powder is infused by Paulus
and Venturini: it is they alone who make the introduction of the
fingers into the ears first a medical examination and then an
operation; and it is they alone who, contrary to the signification of
language, explain the words ἐπιτιθέναι τὰς χεῖρας ἐπὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς,
to lay the hands upon the eyes, as implying a surgical operation on
those organs. Again, the circumstance that Jesus takes the blind man
aside, is shown by the context (vii. 36, viii. 26) to have reference to
the design of Jesus to keep the miraculous result a secret, not to the
desire to be undisturbed in the application of natural means: so that
all the supports of the rationalistic explanation sink beneath it, and
the orthodox one may confront it anew. This regards the touch and the
spittle either as a condescension towards the sufferers, who were
thereby made more thoroughly sensible to whose power they owed their
cure; or as a conducting medium for the spiritual power of Christ, a
medium with which he might nevertheless have dispensed. [1279] That the
cure was gradual, is on this system accounted for by the supposition,
that Jesus intended by means of the partial cure to animate the faith
of the blind man, and only when he was thus rendered worthy was he
completely cured; [1280] or it is conjectured that, owing to the malady
being deep-seated, a sudden cure would perhaps have been dangerous.
[1281]

But by these attempts to interpret the evangelical narratives,
especially in the last particular, the supernaturalistic theologians,
who bring them forward, betake themselves to the same ground as the
rationalists, for they are equally open to the charge of introducing
into the narratives what is not in the remotest degree intimated by the
text. For where, in the procedure of Jesus towards the blind man, is
there a trace that his design in the first instance was to prove and to
strengthen the faith of the patient? In that case, instead of the
expression, He asked him if he saw aught, which relates only to his
external condition, we must rather have read, as in Matt. ix. 28,
Believe ye that I am able to do this? But what shall we say to the
conjecture that a sudden cure might have been injurious! The curative
act of a worker of miracles is (according to Olshausen’s own opinion)
not to be regarded as the merely negative one of the removal of a
disease, but also as the positive one of an impartation of new and
fresh strength to the organ affected, whence the idea of danger from an
instantaneous cure when wrought by miraculous agency, is not to be
entertained. Thus no motive is to be discovered which could induce
Jesus to put a restraint on the immediate action of his miraculous
power, and it must therefore have been restricted, independently of his
volition, by the force of the deep-seated malady. This, however, is
entirely opposed to the idea of the gospels, which represent the
miraculous power of Jesus as superior to death itself; it cannot
therefore have been the meaning of our Evangelists. If we take into
consideration the peculiar characteristics of Mark as an author, it
will appear that his only aim is to give dramatic effect to the scene.
Every sudden result is difficult to bring before the imagination: he
who wishes to give to another a vivid idea of a rapid movement, first
goes through it slowly, and a quick result is perfectly conceivable
only when the narrator has shown the process in detail. Consequently a
writer whose object it is to assist as far as may be the imagination of
his reader, will wherever it is possible exhibit the propensity to
render the immediate mediate, and when recording a sudden result, still
to bring forward the successive steps that led to it. [1282] So here
Mark, or his informant, supposed that he was contributing greatly to
the dramatic effect, when he inserted between the blindness of the man
and the entire restoration of his sight, the partial cure, or the
seeing men as trees, and every reader will say, from his own feeling,
that this object is fully achieved. But herein, as others also have
remarked, [1283] Mark is so far from manifesting an inclination to the
natural conception of such miracles, that he, on the contrary, not
seldom labours to aggrandize the miracle, as we have partly seen in the
case of the Gadarene, and shall yet have frequent reason to remark. In
a similar manner may also be explained why Mark in these narratives
which are peculiar to him (and elsewhere also, as in vi. 13, where he
observes that the disciples anointed the sick with oil), mentions the
application of external means and manifestations in miraculous cures.
That these means, the saliva particularly, were not in the popular
opinion of that age naturally efficacious causes of the cure, we may be
convinced by the narrative concerning Vespasian quoted above, as also
by passages of Jewish and Roman authors, according to which saliva was
believed to have a magical potency, especially against diseases of the
eye. [1284] Hence Olshausen perfectly reproduces the conception of that
age when he explains the touch, saliva, and the like, to be conductors
of the superior power resident in the worker of miracles. We cannot
indeed make this opinion ours, unless with Olshausen we proceed upon
the supposition of a parallelism between the miraculous power of Jesus
and the agency of animal magnetism: a supposition which, for the
explanation of the miracles of Jesus, especially of the one before us,
is inadequate and therefore superfluous. Hence we put this means merely
to the account of the Evangelist. To him also we may then doubtless
refer the taking aside of the blind man, the exaggerated description of
the astonishment of the people, (ὑπερπερισσῶς ἐξπλήσσοντο ἅπαντες, vii.
37,) and the strict prohibition to tell any man of the cure. This
secrecy gave the affair a mysterious aspect, which, as we may gather
from other passages, was pleasing to Mark. We have another trait
belonging to the mysterious in the narratives of the cure of the deaf
man, where Mark says, And looking up to heaven he sighed (vii. 34).
What cause was there for sighing at that particular moment? Was it the
misery of the human race, [1285] which must have been long known to
Jesus from many melancholy examples? Or shall we evade the difficulty
by explaining the expression as implying nothing further than silent
prayer or audible speech? [1286] Whoever knows Mark will rather
recognise the exaggerating narrator in the circumstance that he
ascribes to Jesus a deep emotion, on an occasion which could not indeed
have excited it, but which, being accompanied by it, had a more
mysterious appearance. But above all, there appears to me to be an air
of mystery in this, that Mark gives the authoritative word with which
Jesus opened the ears of the deaf man in its original Syriac form,
ἐφφαθὰ, as on the resuscitation of the daughter of Jairus, this
Evangelist alone has the words ταλιθὰ κοῦμι (v. 41). It is indeed said
that these expressions are anything rather than magical forms; [1287]
but that Mark chooses to give these authoritative words in a language
foreign to his readers, to whom he is obliged at the same time to
explain them, nevertheless proves that he must have attributed to this
original form a special significance, which, as it appears from the
context, can only have been a magical one. This inclination to the
mysterious we may now retrospectively find indicated in the application
of those outward means which have no relation to the result; for the
mysterious consists precisely in the presentation of infinite power
through a finite medium, in the combination of the strongest effect
with apparently inefficacious means.

If we have been unable to receive as historical the simple narrative
given by all the synoptical writers of the cure of the blind man at
Jericho, we are still less prepared to award this character to the
mysterious description, given by Mark alone, of the cure of a blind man
at Bethsaida, and we must regard it as a product of the legend, with
more or less addition from the evangelical narrator. The same judgment
must be pronounced on his narrative of the cure of the deaf man who had
an impediment in his speech κωφὸς μογιλάλος; for, together with the
negative reasons already adduced against its historical credibility,
there are not wanting positive causes for its mythical origin, since
the prophecy relating to the messianic times, τότε ὦτα κωφῶν
ἀκούσονται—τρανὴ δὲ ἔσται γλῶσσα μογιλάλων, the ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped, the tongue of the dumb shall sing (Isa. xxxv. 5, 6), was
in existence, and according to Matt. xi. 5, was interpreted literally.

If the narratives of Mark which we have just considered, seem at the
first glance to be favourable to the natural explanation, the narrative
of John, chap. ix., must, one would think, be unfavourable and
destructive to it; for here the question is not concerning a blind man,
whose malady having originated accidentally, might be easier to remove,
but concerning a man born blind. Nevertheless, as the expositors of
this class are sharp-sighted, and do not soon lose courage, they are
able even here to discover much in their favour. In the first place,
they find that the condition of the patient is but vaguely described,
however definite the expression, blind from his birth, τυφλὸν ἐκ
γενετῆς may seem to sound. The statement of time which this expression
includes, Paulus, it is true, refrains from overthrowing (though his
forbearance is unwilling and in fact incomplete): hence he has the more
urgent necessity for attempting to shake the statement as to quality.
Τυφλὸς is not to signify total blindness, and as Jesus tells the man to
go to the pool of Siloam, not to get himself led thither, he must have
still had some glimmering of eye-sight, by means of which he could
himself find the way thither. Still more help do the rationalistic
commentators find for themselves in the mode of cure adopted by Jesus.
He says beforehand (v. 4) he must work the works of him that sent him
while it is day, ἕως ἡμέρα ἐστὶν, for in the night no man can work; a
sufficient proof that he had not the idea of curing the blind man by a
mere word, which he might just as well have uttered in the night—that,
on the contrary, he intended to undertake a medical or surgical
operation, for which certainly daylight was required. Further, the
clay, πηλὸς, which Jesus made with his spittle, and with which he
anointed the eyes of the blind man, is still more favourable to the
natural explanation than the expression πτύσας having spit, in a former
case, and hence it is a fertile source of questions and conjectures.
Whence did John know that Jesus took nothing more than spittle and dust
to make his eye-salve? Was he himself present, or did he understand it
merely from the narrative of the cured blind man? The latter could not:
with his then weak glimmering of sight, correctly see what Jesus took:
perhaps Jesus while he mixed a salve out of other ingredients
accidentally spat upon the ground, and the patient fell into the error
of supposing that the spittle made part of the salve. Still more: while
or before Jesus put something on the eyes, did he not also remove
something by extraction or friction, or otherwise effect a change in
the state of these organs? This would be an essential fact which might
easily be mistaken by the blind man and the spectators for a merely
accessory circumstance. Lastly, the washing in the pool of Siloam which
was prescribed to the patient was perhaps continued many days—was a
protracted cure by means of the bath—and the words ἦλθε βλέπων he came
seeing, do not necessarily imply that he came thus after his first
bath, but that at a convenient time after the completion of his cure,
he came again seeing. [1288]

But, to begin at the beginning, the meaning here given to ἡμέρα and νὺξ
is too shallow even for Venturini, [1289] and especially clashes with
the context (v. 5), which throughout demands an interpretation of the
words with reference to the speedy departure of Jesus. [1290] As to the
conjecture that the clay was made of medicinal ingredients of some kind
or other, it is the more groundless, since it cannot be said here, as
in the former case, that only so much is stated as the patient could
learn by his hearing or by a slight glimmering of light, for, on this
occasion, Jesus undertook the cure, not in private, but in the presence
of his disciples. Concerning the further supposition of previous
surgical operations, by which the anointing and washing, alone
mentioned in the text, are reduced to mere accessories, nothing more is
to be said, than that by this example we may see how completely the
spirit of natural explanation despises all restraints, not scrupling to
pervert the clearest words of the text in support of its arbitrary
combinations. Further, when, from the circumstance that Jesus ordered
the blind man to go to the pool of Siloam, it is inferred that he must
have had a share of light, we may remark, in opposition to this, that
Jesus merely told the patient whither he should go (ὑπάγεν); how he was
to go, whether alone or with a guide, he left to his own discretion.
Lastly, when the closely connected words he went his way, therefore,
and washed and came seeing, ἀπῆλθεν οὖν καὶ ἐνίψατο καὶ ἦλθε βλέπων (v.
7; comp. v. 11) are stretched out into a process of cure lasting
several weeks, it is just as if the words veni, vidi, vici, were
translated thus: After my arrival I reconnoitred for several days,
fought battles at suitable intervals, and finally remained conqueror.

Thus here also the natural explanation will not serve us, and we have
still before us the narrative of a man born blind, miraculously cured
by Jesus. That the doubts already expressed as to the reality of the
cures of the blind, apply with increased force to the case of a man
born blind, is self-evident. And they are aided in this instance by
certain special critical reasons. Not one of three first Evangelists
mentions this cure. Now, if in the formation of the apostolic
tradition, and in the selection which it made from among the miracles
of Jesus, any kind of reason was exercised, it must have taken the
shape of the two following rules: first, to choose the greater miracles
before those apparently less important; and secondly, those with which
edifying discourses were connected, before those which were not thus
distinguished. In the first respect, it is plain that the cure of a man
blind from his birth, as the incomparably more difficult miracle, was
by all means to be chosen rather than that of a man in whom blindness
had supervened, and it is not to be conceived why, if Jesus really gave
sight to a man born blind, nothing of this should have entered into the
evangelical tradition, and from thence into the synoptical gospels. It
is true that with this consideration of the magnitude of the miracles,
a regard to the edifying nature of the discourses connected with them
might not seldom come into collision, so that a less striking, but from
the conversations which it caused, a more instructive miracle, might be
preferred to one more striking, but presenting less of the latter kind
of interest. But the cure of the blind man in John is accompanied by
very remarkable conversations, first, of Jesus with the disciples,
then, of the cured man with the magistrates, and lastly of Jesus with
the cured man, such as there is no trace of in the synoptical cures of
the blind; conversations in which, if not the entire course of the
dialogue, at least some aphoristic pearls (as v. 4, 5, 39), were
admirably suited to the purpose of three first Evangelists. These
writers, therefore, could not have failed to introduce the cure of the
man born blind into their histories, instead of their less remarkable
and less edifying cures of the blind, if the former had made a part of
the evangelical tradition whence they drew. It might possibly have
remained unknown to the general Christian tradition, if it had taken
place at a time and under circumstances which did not favour its
promulgation—if it had been effected in a remote corner of the country,
without further witnesses. But Jesus performed this miracle in
Jerusalem, in the circle of his disciples; it made a great sensation in
the city, and was highly offensive to the magistracy, hence the affair
must have been known if it had really occurred; and as we do not find
it in the common evangelical tradition, the suspicion arises that it
perhaps never did occur.

But it will be said, the writer who attests it is the Apostle John.
This, however, is too improbable, not only on account of the incredible
nature of the contents of the narrative, which could thus hardly have
proceeded from an eyewitness, but also from another reason. The
narrator interprets the name of the pool, Siloam, by the Greek
ἀπεσταλμένος (v. 7); a false explanation, for one who is sent is called
‏שָׁלוּחַ‎, whereas ‏שִּׁלחַ‎ according to the most probable interpretation
signifies a waterfall. [1291] The Evangelist, however, chose the above
interpretation, because he sought for some significant relation between
the name of the pool, and the sending thither of the blind man, and
thus seems to have imagined that the pool had by a special providence
received the name of Sent, because at a future time the Messiah, as a
manifestation of his glory, was to send thither a blind man. [1292]
Now, we grant that an apostle might give a grammatically incorrect
explanation, in so far as he is not held to be inspired, and that even
a native of Palestine might mistake the etymology of Hebrew words, as
the Old Testament itself shows; nevertheless, such a play upon words
looks more like the laboured attempt of a writer remote from the event,
than of an eye-witness. The eye-witness would have had enough of
important matters in the miracle which he had beheld, and the
conversation to which he had listened; only a remote narrator could
fall into the triviality of trying to extort a significant meaning from
the smallest accessory circumstance. Tholuck and Lücke are highly
revolted by this allegory, which, as the latter expresses himself,
approaches to absolute folly, hence they are unwilling to admit that it
proceeded from John, and regard it as a gloss. As, however, all
critical authorities, except one of minor importance, present this
particular, such a position is sheer arbitrariness, and the only choice
left us is either with Olshausen, to edify ourselves by this
interpretation as an apostolic one, [1293] or, with the author of the
Probabilia, to number it among the indications that the fourth gospel
had not an apostolic origin. [1294]

The reasons which might prevent the author of the fourth gospel, or the
tradition whence he drew, from resting contented with the cures of the
blind narrated by the synoptical writers, and thus induce the one or
the other to frame the history before us, are already pointed out by
the foregoing remarks. The observation has been already made by others,
that the fourth Evangelist has fewer miracles than the synoptical
writers, but that this deficiency in number is compensated by a
superiority in magnitude. [1295] Thus while the other Evangelists have
simple paralytics cured by Jesus, the fourth gospel has one who had
been lame thirty-eight years; while, in the former, Jesus resuscitates
persons who had just expired, in the latter, he calls back to life one
who had lain in the grave four days, in whom therefore it might be
presumed that decomposition had begun; and so here, instead of a cure
of simple blindness, we have that of a man born blind,—a heightening of
the miracle altogether suited to the apologetic and dogmatic tendency
of this gospel. In what way the author, or the particular tradition
which he followed, might be led to depict the various details of the
narrative, is easily seen. The act of spitting, πτύειν, was common in
magical cures of the eyes; clay, πηλὸς, was a ready substitute for an
eye-salve, and elsewhere occurs in magical proceedings; [1296] the
command to wash in the pool of Siloam may have been an imitation of
Elisha’s order, that the leper Naaman should bathe seven times in the
river Jordan. The conversations connected with the cure partly proceed
from the tendency of the Gospel of John already remarked by Storr,
namely, to attest and to render as authentic as possible both the cure
of the man, and the fact of his having been born blind, whence the
repeated examination of the cured man, and even of his parents; partly
they turn upon the symbolical meaning of the expressions, blind and
seeing, day and night,—a meaning which it is true is not foreign to the
synoptical writers, but which specifically belongs to the circle of
images in favour with John.




§ 96.

CURES OF PARALYTICS. DID JESUS REGARD DISEASES AS PUNISHMENTS?

An important feature in the history of the cure of the man born blind
has been passed over, because it can only be properly estimated in
connexion with a corresponding one in the synoptical narratives of the
cure of a paralytic (Matt. ix. 1 ff.; Mark ii. 1 ff.; Luke v. 17 ff.),
which we have in the next place to consider. Here Jesus first declares
to the sick man: ἀφέωνταί σοί αἱ ἁμαρτίαι σου, thy sins are forgiven
thee, and then as a proof that he had authority to forgive sins, he
cures him. It is impossible not to perceive in this a reference to the
Jewish opinion, that any evil befalling an individual, and especially
disease, was a punishment of his sins; an opinion which, presented in
its main elements in the Old Testament (Lev. xxvi. 14 ff.; Deut.
xxviii. 15 ff.; 2 Chron. xxi. 15, 18 f.) was expressed in the most
definite manner by the later Jews. [1297] Had we possessed that
synoptical narrative only, we must have believed that Jesus shared the
opinion of his cotemporary fellow-countrymen on this subject, since he
proves his authority to forgive sins (as the cause of disease) by an
example of his power to cure disease (the consequence of sin). But, it
is said, there are other passages where Jesus directly contradicts this
Jewish opinion; whence it follows, that what he then says to the
paralytic was a mere accommodation to the ideas of the sick man,
intended to promote his cure. [1298]

The principal passage commonly adduced in support of this position, is
the introduction to the history of the man born blind, which was last
considered (John ix. 1–3). Here the disciples, seeing on the road the
man whom they knew to have been blind from his birth, put to Jesus the
question, whether his blindness was the consequence of his own sins, or
of those of his parents? The case was a peculiarly difficult one on the
Jewish theory of retribution. With respect to diseases which attach
themselves to a man in his course through life, an observer who has
once taken a certain bias, may easily discover or assume some peculiar
delinquencies on the part of this man as their cause. With respect to
inborn diseases, on the contrary, though the old Hebraic opinion (Exod.
xx. 5; Deut. v. 9; 2 Sam. iii. 29), it is true, presented the
explanation that by these the sins of the fathers were visited on their
posterity: yet as, for human regulations, the Mosaic law itself
ordained that each should suffer for his own sins alone (Deut. xxiv.
16; 2 Kings xiv. 6); and as also, in relation to the penal justice of
the Divine Being, the prophets predicted a similar dispensation (Jer.
xxxi. 30; Ezek. xviii. 19 f.); rabbinical acumen resorted to the
expedient of supposing, that men so afflicted might probably have
sinned in their mother’s womb, [1299] and this was doubtless the notion
which the disciples had in view in their question, v. 2. Jesus says, in
answer, that neither for his own sin nor for that of his parents, did
this man come into the world blind; but in order that by the cure which
he, as the Messiah, would effect in him, he might be an instrument in
manifesting the miraculous power of God. This is generally understood
as if Jesus repudiated the whole opinion, that disease and other evils
were essentially punishments of sin. But the words of Jesus are
expressly limited to the case before him; he simply says, that this
particular misfortune had its foundation, not in the guilt of the
individual, but in higher providential designs. The supposition that
his expressions had a more general sense, and included a repudiation of
the entire Jewish opinion, could only be warranted by other more
decided declarations from him to that effect. As, on the contrary,
according to the above observations, a narrative is found in the
synoptical gospels which, simply interpreted, implies the concurrence
of Jesus in the prevalent opinion, the question arises: which is
easier, to regard the expression of Jesus in the synoptical narratives
as an accommodation, or that in John as having relation solely to the
case immediately before him?—a question which will be decided in favour
of the latter alternative by every one who, on the one hand, knows the
difficulties attending the hypothesis of accommodation as applied to
the expressions of Jesus in the gospels, and on the other, is
clear-sighted enough to perceive, that in the passage in question in
the fourth gospel, there is not the slightest intimation that the
declaration of Jesus had a more general meaning.

It is true that according to correct principles of interpretation, one
Evangelist ought not to be explained immediately by another, and in the
present case it is very possible that while the synoptical writers
ascribe to Jesus the common opinion of his age, the more highly
cultivated author of the fourth gospel may make him reject it: but that
he also confined the rejection of the current opinion on the part of
Jesus to that single case, is proved by the manner in which he
represents Jesus as speaking on another occasion. When, namely, Jesus
says to the man who had been lame thirty-eight years (John v.) and had
just been cured, μηκέτι ἁμάρτανε, ἵνα μὴ χεῖρόν τί σοι γένηται (v. 14),
Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; this is equivalent to
his saying to the paralytic whom he was about to cure, ἀφέωνταί σοι αἱ
ἁμαρτίαι σου, thy sins are forgiven thee: in the one case disease is
removed, in the other threatened, as a punishment of sin. But here
again the expositors, to whom it is not agreeable that Jesus should
hold an opinion which they reject, find a means of evading the direct
sense of the words. Jesus, say they, perceived that the particular
disease of this man was a natural consequence of certain excesses, and
warned him from a repetition of these as calculated to bring on a more
dangerous relapse. [1300] But an insight into the natural connexion
between certain excesses and certain diseases as their consequence, is
far more removed from the mode of thinking of the age in which Jesus
lived, than the notion of a positive connexion between sin in general
and disease as its punishment; hence, if we are nevertheless to ascribe
the former sense to the words of Jesus, it must be very distinctly
conveyed in the text. But the fact is that in the whole narrative there
is no intimation of any particular excess on the part of the man; the
words μηκέτι ἁμάρτανε relate only to sin in general, and to supply a
conversation of Jesus with the sick man, in which he is supposed to
have acquainted the former with the connexion between his sufferings
and a particular sin, [1301] is the most arbitrary fiction. What
exposition! for the sake of evading a result which is dogmatically
unwelcome, to extend the one passage (John ix.) to a generality of
meaning not really belonging to it, to elude the other (Matt. ix.) by
the hypothesis of accommodation, and forcibly to affix to a third (John
v.) a modern idea; whereas if the first passage be only permitted to
say no more than it actually says, the direct meaning of the other two
may remain unviolated!

But another passage, and that a synoptical one, is adduced in
vindication of the superiority of Jesus to the popular opinion in
question. This passage is Luke xiii. 1 ff., where Jesus is told of the
Galileans whom Pilate had caused to be slain while they were in the act
of sacrificing, and of others who were killed by the falling of a
tower. From what follows, we must suppose the informants to have
intimated their opinion that these calamities were to be regarded as a
divine visitation for the peculiar wickedness of the parties so
signally destroyed. Jesus replied that they must not suppose those men
to have been especially sinful; they themselves were in no degree
better, and unless they repented would meet with a similar destruction.
Truly it is not clear how in these expressions of Jesus a repudiation
of the popular notion can be found. If Jesus wished to give his voice
in opposition to this, he must either have said: you are equally great
sinners, though you may not perish bodily in the same manner; or: do
you believe that those men perished on account of their sins? No! the
contrary may be seen in you, who, notwithstanding your wickedness, are
not thus smitten with death. On the contrary, the expressions of Jesus
as given by Luke can only have the following sense: that those men have
already met with such calamities is no evidence of their peculiar
wickedness, any more than the fact that you have been hitherto spared
the like, is an evidence of your greater worth, on the contrary,
earlier or later, similar judgments falling on you will attest your
equal guilt:—whereby the supposed law of the connexion between the sin
and misfortune of every individual is confirmed, not overthrown. This
vulgar Hebrew opinion concerning sickness and evil, is indeed in
contradiction with that esoteric view, partly Essene, partly Ebionite,
which we have found in the introduction to the Sermon on the Mount, the
parable of the rich man, and elsewhere, and according to which the
righteous in this generation are the suffering, the poor and the sick;
but both opinions are clearly to be seen in the discourses of Jesus by
an unprejudiced exegesis, and the contradiction, which we find between
them authorizes us neither to put a forced construction on the one
class of expressions, nor to deny them to have really come from Jesus,
since we cannot calculate how he may have solved for himself the
opposition between two ideas of the world, presented to him by
different sides of the Jewish culture of that age.

As regards the above-mentioned cure, the synoptical writers make Jesus
in his reply to the messengers of the Baptist, appeal to the fact that
the lame walked (Matt. xi. 5), and at another time the people wonder
when, among other miracles, they see the maimed to be whole and the
lame to walk (Matt. xv. 31). In the place of the lame, χωλοὶ,
paralytics, παραλυτικοὶ are elsewhere brought forward (Matt. iv. 24),
and especially in the detailed histories of cures relating to this kind
of sufferers (as Matt. ix. 1 ff. parall., viii. 5, parall.),
παραλυτικοὶ, and not χωλοὶ, are named. The sick man at the pool of
Bethesda (John v. 5) belongs probably to the χωλοῖς spoken of in v. 3;
there also ξηροὶ, withered, are mentioned, and in Matt. xii. 9 ff.
parall. we find the cure of a man who had a withered hand. As however
the three last named cures will return to us under different heads, all
that remains here for our examination is the cure of the paralytic
Matt. ix. 1 ff. parall.

As the definitions which the ancient physicians give of paralysis,
though they all show it to have been a species of lameness, yet leave
it undecided whether the lameness was total or partial; [1302] and as,
besides, no strict adherence to medical technicalities is to be
expected from the Evangelists, we must gather what they understand by
paralytics from their own descriptions of such patients. In the present
passage, we read of the paralytic that he was borne on a bed κλίνη, and
that to enable him to arise and carry his bed was an unprecedented
wonder παράδοξον, whence we must conclude that he was lame, at least in
the feet. While here there is no mention of pains, or of an acute
character of disease, in another narrative (Matt. viii. 6) these are
evidently presupposed when the centurion says that his servant is sick
of the palsy, grievously tormented, βέβληται—παραλυτικὸς, δεινως
βασανιζόμενος; so that under paralytics in the gospels we have at one
time to understand a lameness without pain, at another a painful, gouty
disease of the limbs. [1303]

In the description of the scene in which the paralytic (Matt. ix. 1 ff.
parall.) is brought to Jesus, there is a remarkable gradation in the
three accounts. Matthew says simply, that as Jesus, after an excursion
to the opposite shore, returned to Capernaum, there was brought to him
a paralytic, stretched on a bed. Luke describes particularly how Jesus,
surrounded by a great multitude, chiefly Pharisees and scribes, taught
and healed in a certain house, and how the bearers, because on account
of the press they could not reach Jesus, let the sick man down to him
through the roof. If we call to mind the structure of oriental houses,
which had a flat roof, to which an opening led from the upper story;
[1304] and if we add to this the rabbinical manner of speaking, in
which to the via per portum (‏דרך פתחים‎) was opposed the via per
tectum (‏דרך נגיך‎) as a no less ordinary way for reaching the ὑπερῳον
upper story or chamber, [1305] we cannot under the expression καθιέναι
διὰ τῶν κεράμων, to let down through the tiling, understand anything
else than that the bearers—who, either by means of stairs leading
thither directly from the street, or from the roof of a neighbouring
house, gained access to the roof of the house in which Jesus was,—let
down the sick man with his bed, apparently by cords, through the
opening already existing in the roof. Mark, who, while with Matthew he
places the scene at Capernaum, agrees with Luke in the description of
the great crowd and the consequent ascent to the roof, goes yet further
than Luke, not only in determining the number of the bearers to be
four, but also in making them, regardless of the opening already
existing, uncover the roof and let down the sick man through an
aperture newly broken.

If we ask here also in which direction, upwards or downwards, the
climax may most probably have been formed, the narrative of Mark, which
stands at the summit, has so many difficulties that it can scarcely be
regarded as nearest the truth. For not only have opponents asked, how
could the roof be broken open without injury to those beneath? [1306]
but Olshausen himself admits that the disturbance of the roof, covered
with tiles, partakes of the extravagant. [1307] To avoid this, many
expositors suppose that Jesus taught either in the inner court, [1308]
or in the open air in front of the house, [1309] and that the bearers
only broke down a part of the parapet in order to let down the sick man
more conveniently. But both the phrase, διὰ τῶν κεράμων, in Luke, and
the expressions of Mark, render this conception of the thing
impossible, since here neither can στέγῃ mean parapet, nor ἀποστεγάζω
the breaking of the parapet, while ἐξορύττω can only mean the breaking
of a hole. Thus the disturbance of the roof subsists, but this is
further rendered improbable on the ground that it was altogether
superfluous, inasmuch as there was a door in every roof. Hence help has
been sought in the supposition that the bearers indeed used the door
previously there, but because this was too narrow for the bed of the
patient, they widened it by the removal of the surrounding tiles.
[1310] Still, however, there remains the danger to those below, and the
words imply an opening actually made, not merely widened.

But dangerous and superfluous as such a proceeding would be in reality,
it is easy to explain how Mark, wishing further to elaborate the
narrative of Luke, might be led to add such a feature. Luke had said
that the sick man was let down, so that he descended in the midst
before Jesus, ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. How could the people precisely hit
upon this place, unless Jesus accidentally stood under the door of the
roof, except by breaking open the roof above the spot where they knew
him to be (ἀπεστέγασαν τὴν στέγην ὅπου ἦν)? [1311] This trait Mark the
more gladly seized because it was adapted to place in the strongest
light the zeal which confidence in Jesus infused into the people, and
which was to be daunted by no labour. This last interest seems to be
the key also to Luke’s departure from Matthew. In Matthew, who makes
the bearers bring the paralytic to Jesus in the ordinary way, doubtless
regarding the laborious conveyance of the sick man on his bed as itself
a proof of their faith, it is yet less evident wherein Jesus sees their
faith. If the original form of the history was that in which it appears
in the first gospel, the temptation might easily arise to make the
bearers devise a more conspicuous means of evincing their faith, which,
since the scene was already described as happening in a great crowd,
might appear to be most suitably found in the uncommon way in which
they contrived to bring their sick man to Jesus.

But even the account of Matthew we cannot regard as a true narrative of
a fact. It has indeed been attempted to represent the result as a
natural one, by explaining the state of the man to be a nervous
weakness, the worst symptom of which was the idea of the sick man that
his disease must continue as a punishment of his sin; [1312] reference
has been made to analogous cases of a rapid psychical cure of lameness;
[1313] and a subsequent use of long-continued curative means has been
supposed. [1314] But the first and last expedients are purely
arbitrary; and if in the alleged analogies there may be some truth, yet
it is always incomparably more probable that histories of cures of the
lame and paralytic in accordance with messianic expectation, should be
formed by the legend, than that they should really have happened. In
the passage of Isaiah already quoted (xxxv. 6), it was promised in
relation to the messianic time: then shall the lame man leap as a hart,
τότε ἁλεῖται ὡς ἕλαφος ὁ χωλὸς, and in the same connexion, v. 3, the
prophet addresses to the feeble knees γόνατα παραλελυμένα the
exhortation, Be strong, ἰσχύσατε, which, with the accompanying
particulars, must have been understood literally, of a miracle to be
expected from the Messiah, since Jesus, as we have already mentioned,
among other proofs that he was the ἐρχόμενος adduced this: χωλοὶ
περιπατοῦσι, the lame walk.




§ 97.

INVOLUNTARY CURES.

Occasionally in their general statements concerning the curative power
of Jesus, the synoptical writers remark, that all kinds of sick people
only sought to touch Jesus, or to lay hold on the hem of his garment,
in order to be healed, and that immediately on this slight contact, a
cure actually followed (Matt. xiv. 36; Mark iii. 10, vi. 56; Luke vi.
19). In these cases Jesus operated, not, as we have hitherto always
seen, with a precise aim towards any particular sufferer, but on entire
masses, without taking special notice of each individual; his power of
healing appears not here, as elsewhere, to reside in his will, but in
his body and its coverings; he does not by his own voluntary act
dispense its virtues, but is subject to have them drawn from him
without his consent.

Of this species of cure again a detailed example is preserved to us, in
the history of the woman who had an issue of blood, which all the
synoptical writers give, and interweave in a peculiar manner with the
history of the resuscitation of the daughter of Jairus, making Jesus
cure the woman on his way to the ruler’s house (Matt. ix. 20 ff.; Mark
v. 25 ff.; Luke viii. 43 ff.). On comparing the account of the incident
in the several Evangelists, we might in this instance be tempted to
regard that of Luke as the original, because it seems to offer an
explanation of the uniform connexion of the two histories. As, namely,
the duration of the woman’s sufferings is fixed by all the narrators at
twelve years, so Luke, whom Mark follows, gives twelve years also as
the age of the daughter of Jairus; a numerical similarity which might
be a sufficient inducement to associate the two histories in the
evangelical tradition. But this reason is far too isolated by itself to
warrant a decision, which can only proceed from a thorough comparison
of the three narratives in their various details. Matthew describes the
woman simply as γυνὴ αἱμοῤῥοοῦσα δώδεκα ἔτη, which signifies that she
had for twelve years been subject to an important loss of blood,
probably in the form of excessive menstruation. Luke, the reputed
physician, shows himself here in no degree favourable to his
professional brethren, for he adds that the woman had spent all her
living on physicians without obtaining any help from them. Mark, yet
more unfavourable, says that she had suffered many things of many
physicians, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse. Those who
surround Jesus when the woman approaches him are, according to Matthew,
his disciples, according to Mark and Luke, a thronging multitude. After
all the narrators have described how the woman, as timid as she was
believing, came behind Jesus and touched the hem of his garment, Mark
and Luke state that she was immediately healed, but that Jesus, being
conscious of the egress of curative power, asked who touched me? The
disciples, astonished, ask in return, how he can distinguish a single
touch amidst so general a thronging and pressure of the crowd.
According to Luke, he persists in his assertion; according to Mark, he
looks inquiringly around him in order to discover the party who had
touched him: then, according to both these Evangelists, the woman
approaches trembling, falls at His feet and confesses all, whereupon
Jesus gives her the tranquillizing assurance that her faith has made
her whole. Matthew has not this complex train of circumstances; he
merely states that after the touch Jesus looked round, discovered the
woman, and announced to her that her faith had wrought her cure.

This difference is an important one, and we need not greatly wonder
that it induced Storr to suppose two separate cures of women afflicted
in the same manner. [1315] To this expedient he was yet more decidedly
determined by the still wider divergencies in the narrative of the
resuscitation of the daughter of Jairus, a narrative which is
interlaced with the one before us; it is, however, this very
interlacement which renders it totally impossible to imagine that
Jesus, twice, on both occasions when he was on his way to restore to
life the daughter of a Jewish ruler (ἄρχων), cured a woman who had had
an issue of blood twelve years. While, on this consideration, criticism
has long ago decided for the singleness of the fact on which the
narratives are founded, it has at the same time given the preference to
those of Mark and Luke as the most vivid and circumstantial. [1316]
But, in the first place, if it be admitted that Mark’s addition ἀλλὰ
μᾶλλον εἰς τὸ χεῖρον ἐλθοῦσα, but rather grew worse, is merely a
finishing touch from his own imagination to the expression οὐκ ἴσχυσεν
ὑπ’ οὐδενὸς θεραπευθῆναι neither could be healed of any, which he found
in Luke; there seems to be the same reason for regarding this
particular of Luke’s as an inference of his own by which he has
amplified the simple statement αἱμοῤῥοοῦσα δώδεκα ἔτη, which Matthew
gives without any addition. If the woman had been ill twelve years, she
must, it was thought, during that period have frequently had recourse
to physicians: and as, when contrasted with the inefficiency of the
physicians, the miraculous power of Jesus, which instantaneously
wrought a cure, appeared in all the more brilliant a light; so in the
legend, or in the imagination of the narrators, there grew up these
additions. What if the same observation applied to the other
differences? That the woman according to Matthew also, only touched
Jesus from behind, implied the effort and the hope to remain concealed;
that Jesus immediately looked round after her, implied that he was
conscious of her touch. This hope on the part of the woman became the
more accountable, and this consciousness on the part of Jesus the more
marvellous, the greater the crowd that surrounded Jesus and pressed
upon him; hence the companionship of the disciples in Matthew is by the
other two Evangelists changed into a thronging of the multitude
(βλέπεις τὸν ὄχλον συνθλίβοντά σε). Again, Matthew mentions that Jesus
looked round after the woman touched him; on this circumstance the
supposition might be founded that he had perceived her touch in a
peculiar manner; hence the scene was further worked up, and we are
shown how Jesus, though pressed on all sides, had yet a special
consciousness of that particular touch by the healing power which it
had drawn from him; while the simple feature ἐπιστραφεὶς καὶ ἰδὼν
αὐτὴν, he turned him about, and when he saw her, in Matthew, is
transformed into an inquiry and a searching glance around upon the
crowd to discover the woman, who then is represented as coming forward,
trembling, to make her confession. Lastly, on a comparison of Matt xiv.
36, the point of this narrative, even as given in the first gospel,
appears to lie in the fact that simply to touch the clothes of Jesus
had in itself a healing efficacy. Accordingly, in the propagation of
this history, there was a continual effort to make the result follow
immediately on the touch, and to represent Jesus as remaining, even
after the cure, for some time uncertain with respect to the individual
who had touched him, a circumstance which is in contradiction with that
superior knowledge elsewhere attributed to Jesus. Thus, under every
aspect, the narrative in the first gospel presents itself as the
earlier and more simple, that of the second and third as a later and
more embellished formation of the legend.

As regards the common substance of the narratives, it has in recent
times been a difficulty to all theologians, whether orthodox or
rationalistic, that the curative power of Jesus should have been
exhibited apart from his volition. Paulus and Olshausen agree in the
opinion, [1317] that the agency of Jesus is thus reduced too completely
into the domain of physical nature; that Jesus would then be like a
magnetiser who in operating on a nervous patient is conscious of a
diminution of strength, or like a charged electrical battery, which a
mere touch will discharge. Such an idea of Christ, thinks Olshausen, is
repugnant to the Christian consciousness, which determines the fulness
of power resident in Jesus to have been entirely under the governance
of his will; and this will to have been guided by a knowledge of the
moral condition of the persons to be healed. It is therefore supposed
that Jesus fully recognized the woman even without seeing her, and
considering that she might be spiritually won over to him by this
bodily succour, he consciously communicated to her an influx of his
curative power; but in order to put an end to her false shame and
constrain her to a confession, he behaved as if he knew not who had
touched him. But the Christian consciousness, in cases of this kind,
means nothing else than the advanced religious culture of our age,
which cannot appropriate the antiquated ideas of the Bible. Now this
consciousness must be neutral where we are concerned, not with the
dogmatical appropriation, but purely with the exegetical discovery of
the biblical ideas. The interference of this alleged Christian
consciousness is the secret of the majority of exegetical errors, and
in the present instance it has led the above named commentators astray
from the evident sense of the text. For the question of Jesus in both
the more detailed narratives τίς ὁ ἁψάμενός μου; who touched me?
repeated as it is in Luke, and strengthened as it is in Mark by a
searching glance around, has the appearance of being meant thoroughly
in earnest; and indeed it is the object of these two Evangelists to
place the miraculous nature of the curative power of Jesus in a
particularly clear light by showing that the mere touching of his
clothes accompanied by faith, no previous knowledge on his part of the
person who touched, nor so much as a word from him, being requisite,
was sufficient to obtain a cure. Nay, even originally, in the more
concise account of Matthew, the expressions προσελθοῦσα ὄπισθεν ἥφατο
having come behind him, she touched, and ἐπιστραθεὶς καὶ ἰδὼν αὐτὴν he
turned him about, and when he saw her, clearly imply that Jesus knew
the woman only after she had touched him. If then, it is not to be
proved that Jesus had a knowledge of the woman previous to her cure and
a special will to heal her; nothing remains for those who will not
admit an involuntary exhibition of curative power in Jesus, but to
suppose in him a constant general will to cure, with which it was only
necessary that faith on the part of the diseased person should concur,
in order to produce an actual cure. But that, notwithstanding the
absence of a special direction of the will to the cure of this woman on
the part of Jesus, she was restored to health, simply by her faith,
without even touching his clothes, is assuredly not the idea of the
Evangelists. On the contrary, it is their intention to substitute for
an individual act of the will on the part of Jesus, the touch on the
part of the sick person; this it is which, instead of the former,
brings into action the latent power of Jesus: so that the materialistic
character of the representation is not in this way to be avoided.

A step further was necessary to the rationalistic interpretation, which
not only with modern supranaturalism regards as incredible the
unconscious efflux of curative power from Jesus, but also denies in
general any efflux of such power, and yet wishes to preserve
unattainted the historical veracity of the Evangelists. According to
this system, Jesus was led to ask who touched him, solely because he
felt himself held back in his progress; the assertion that
consciousness of a departure of power, δύναμις ἐξελθοῦσα, was the cause
of his question, is a mere inference of the two narrators, of whom the
one, Mark, actually gives it as his own observation; and it is only
Luke who incorporates it with the question of Jesus. The cure of the
woman was effected by means of her exalted confidence, in consequence
of which when she touched the hem of Jesus she was seized with a
violent shuddering in her whole nervous system, which probably caused a
sudden contraction of the relaxed vessels; at the first moment she
could only believe, not certainly know that she was cured, and only by
degrees, probably after the use of means recommended to her by Jesus,
did the malady entirely cease. [1318] But who can represent to himself
the timid touch of a sick woman whose design was to remain concealed,
and whose faith rendered her certain of obtaining a cure by the
slightest touch, as a grasp which arrested the progress of Jesus,
pressed upon as he was, according to Mark and Luke, by the crowd?
Further, what a vast conception of the power of confidence is demanded
by the opinion, that it healed a disease of twelve years’ duration
without the concurrence of any real force on the part of Jesus! Lastly,
if the Evangelists are supposed to have put into the mouth of Jesus an
inference of their own (that healing efficacy had gone out of him)—if
they are supposed to have described a gradual cure as an instantaneous
one; then, with the renunciation of these particulars all warrant for
the historical reality of the entire narrative falls to the ground, and
at the same time all necessity for troubling ourselves with the natural
interpretation.

In fact, if we only examine the narrative before us somewhat more
closely, and compare it with kindred anecdotes, we cannot remain in
doubt as to its proper character. As here and in some other passages it
is narrated of Jesus, that the sick were cured by the bare touch of his
clothes: so in the Acts we are told that the handkerchiefs σουδάρια and
aprons σιμικίνθια of Paul cured all kinds of sick persons to whom they
were applied (xix. 11 f.), and that the very shadow of Peter was
believed to have the same efficacy (v. 15); while the apocryphal
gospels represent a mass of cures to have been wrought by means of the
swaddling bands of the infant Jesus, and the water in which he was
washed. [1319] In reading these last histories, every one knows that he
is in the realm of fiction and legend; but wherein are the cures
wrought by the pocket-handkerchiefs of Paul to be distinguished from
those wrought by the swaddling bands of Jesus, unless it be that the
latter proceeded from a child, the former from a man? It is certain
that if the story relative to Paul were not found in a canonical book,
every one would deem it fabulous, and yet the credibility of the
narratives should not be concluded from the assumed origin of the book
which contains them, but on the contrary, our judgment of the book must
be founded on the nature of its particular narratives. But again,
between these cures by the pocket-handkerchiefs and those by the touch
of the hem of the garment, there is no essential distinction. In both
cases we have the contact of objects which are in a merely external
connexion with the worker of the miracle; with the single difference,
that this connexion is with regard to the pocket-handkerchiefs an
interrupted one, with regard to the clothes a continuous one; in both
cases again, results which, even according to the orthodox view, are
only derived from the spiritual nature of the men in question, and are
to be regarded as acts of their will in virtue of its union with the
divine, are reduced to physical effects and effluxes. The subject thus
descends from the religious and theological sphere to the natural and
physical, because a man with a power of healing resident in his body,
and floating as an atmosphere around him, would belong to the objects
of natural science, and not of religion. But natural science is not
able to accredit such a healing power by sure analogies or clear
definitions; hence these cures, being driven from the objective to the
subjective region, must receive their explanation from psychology. Now
psychology, taking into account the power of imagination and of faith,
will certainly allow the possibility that without a real curative power
in the reputed miracle-worker, solely by the strong confidence of the
diseased person that he possesses this power, bodily maladies which
have a close connexion with the nervous system may be cured: but when
we seek for historical vouchers for this possibility, criticism, which
must here be called to aid, will soon show that a far greater number of
such cures has been invented by the faith of others, than has been
performed by the parties alleged to be concerned. Thus it is in itself
by no means impossible, that through strong faith in the healing power
residing even in the clothes and handkerchiefs of Jesus and the
apostles, many sick persons on touching these articles were conscious
of real benefit; but it is at least equally probable, that only after
the death of these men, when their fame in the church was ever on the
increase, anecdotes of this kind were believingly narrated, and it
depends on the nature of the accounts, for which of the two
alternatives we are to decide. In the general statement in the Gospels
and the Acts, which speak of whole masses having been cured in the
above way, this accumulation at any rate is traditional. As to the
detailed history which we have been examining, in its representation
that the woman had suffered twelve years from a very obstinate disease,
and one the least susceptible of merely psychical influence, and that
the cure was performed by power consciously emitted from Jesus, instead
of by the imagination of the patient: so large a portion betrays itself
to be mythical that we can no longer discern any historical elements,
and must regard the whole as legendary.

It is not difficult to see what might give rise to this branch of the
evangelical miraculous legend, in distinction from others. The faith of
the popular mind, dependent on the senses, and incapable of
apprehending the divine through the medium of thought alone, strives
perpetually to draw it down into material existence. Hence, according
to a later opinion, the saint must continue to work miracles when his
bones are distributed as relics, and the body of Christ must be present
in the transubstantiated host; hence also, according to an idea
developed much earlier, the curative power of the men celebrated in the
New Testament must be attached to their body and its coverings. The
less the church retained of the words of Jesus, the more tenaciously
she clung to the efficacy of his mantle, and the further she was
removed from the free spiritual energy of the apostle Paul, the more
consolatory was the idea of carrying home his curative energy in a
pocket-handkerchief.




§ 98.

CURES AT A DISTANCE.

The cures performed at a distance are, properly speaking, the opposite
of these involuntary cures. The latter are effected by mere corporeal
contact without a special act of the will; the former solely by the act
of the will without corporeal contact, or even local proximity. But
there immediately arises this objection: if the curative power of Jesus
was so material that it dispensed itself involuntarily at a mere touch,
it cannot have been so spiritual that the simple will could convey it
over considerable distances; or conversely, if it was so spiritual as
to act apart from bodily presence, it cannot have been so material as
to dispense itself independently of the will. Since we have pronounced
the purely physical mode of influence in Jesus to be improbable, free
space is left to us for the purely spiritual, and our decision on the
latter will therefore depend entirely on the examination of the
narratives and the facts themselves.

As proofs that the curative power of Jesus acted thus at a distance,
Matthew and Luke narrate to us the cure of the sick servant of a
centurion at Capernaum, John that of the son of a nobleman βασιλικὸς,
at the same place (Matt. viii. 5 ff.; Luke vii. 1 ff.; John iv. 46
ff.); and again Matthew (xv. 22 ff.), and Mark (vii. 25 ff.), that of
the daughter of the Canaanitish woman. Of these examples, as in the
summary narration of the last there is nothing peculiar, we have here
to consider the two first only. The common opinion is, that Matthew and
Luke do indeed narrate the same fact, but John one distinct from this,
since his narrative differs from that of the two others in the
following particulars: firstly, the place from which Jesus cures, is in
the synoptical gospels the place where the sick man resides,
Capernaum,—in John a different one, namely, Cana; secondly, the time at
which the synoptists lay the incident, namely, when Jesus is in the act
of returning home after his Sermon on the Mount, is different from that
assigned to it in the fourth gospel, which is immediately after the
return of Jesus from the first passover and his ministry in Samaria;
thirdly, the sick person is according to the former the slave,
according to the latter the son of the suppliant; but the most
important divergencies are those which relate, fourthly, to the
suppliant himself, for in the first and third gospels he is a military
person (an ἑκατόνταρχος), in the fourth a person in office at court
(βασιλικὸς), according to the former (Matt. v. 10 ff.), a Gentile,
according to the latter without doubt a Jew; above all, the synoptists
make Jesus eulogize him as a pattern of the most fervent, humble faith,
because, in the conviction that Jesus could cure at a distance, he
prevented him from going to his house; whereas in John, on the
contrary, he is blamed for his weak faith which required signs and
wonders, because he thought the presence of Jesus in his house
necessary for the purpose of the cure. [1320]

These divergencies are certainly important enough to be a reason, with
those who regard them from a certain point of view, for maintaining the
distinction of the fact lying at the foundation of the synoptical
narratives from that reported by John: only this accuracy of
discrimination must be carried throughout, and the diversities between
the two synoptical narratives themselves must not be overlooked. First,
even in the designation of the person of the patient they are not
perfectly in unison; Luke calls him δοῦλος ἔντιμος, a servant who was
dear to the centurion; in Matthew, the latter calls him ὁ παῖς μοῦ,
which may equally mean either a son or a servant, and as the centurion
when speaking (v. 9) of his servant, uses the word δοῦλος, while the
cured individual is again (v. 13) spoken of as ὁ παῖς αὐτοῦ, it seems
most probable that the former sense was intended. With respect to his
disease, the man is described by Matthew as παραλυτικὸς δεινῶς
βασανιζόμενος a paralytic grievously tormented; Luke is not only silent
as to this species of disease, but he is thought by many to presuppose
a different one, since after the indefinite expression κακῶς ἔχων,
being ill, he adds, ἤμελλε τελευτᾶν, was ready to die, and paralysis is
not generally a rapidly fatal malady. [1321] But the most important
difference is one which runs through the entire narrative, namely, that
all which according to Matthew the centurion does in his own person, is
in Luke done by messengers, for here in the first instance he makes the
entreaty, not personally, as in Matthew, but through the medium of the
Jewish elders, and when he afterwards wishes to prevent Jesus from
entering his house, he does not come forward himself, but commissions
some friends to act in his stead. To reconcile this difference, it is
usual to refer to the rule: quod quis per alium facit, etc. [1322] If
then it be said, and indeed no other conception of the matter is
possible to expositors who make such an appeal,—Matthew well knew that
between the centurion and Jesus everything was transacted by means of
deputies, but for the sake of brevity, he employed the figure of speech
above alluded to, and represented him as himself accosting Jesus: Storr
is perfectly right in his opposing remark, that scarcely any historian
would so perseveringly carry that metonymy through an entire narrative,
especially in a case where, on the one hand, the figure of speech is by
no means so obvious as when, for example, that is ascribed to a general
which is done by his soldiers; and where, on the other hand, precisely
this point, whether the person acted for himself or through others, is
of some consequence to a full estimate of his character. [1323] With
laudable consistency, therefore, Storr, as he believed it necessary to
refer the narrative of the fourth gospel to a separate fact from that
of the first and third, on account of the important differences; so, on
account of the divergencies which he found between the two last,
pronounces these also to be narratives of two separate events. If any
one wonder that at three different times so entirely similar a cure
should have happened at the same place (for according to John also, the
patient lay and was cured at Capernaum), Storr on his side wonders how
it can be regarded as in the least improbable that in Capernaum at two
different periods two centurions should have had each a sick servant,
and that again at another time a nobleman should have had a sick son at
the same place; that the second centurion (Luke) should have heard the
history of the first, have applied in a similar manner to Jesus, and
sought to surpass his example of humility, as the first centurion
(Matthew), to whom the earlier history of the nobleman (John) was
known, wished to surpass the weak faith of the latter; and lastly, that
Jesus cured all the three patients in the same manner at a distance.
But the incident of a distinguished official person applying to Jesus
to cure a dependent or relative, and of Jesus at a distance operating
on the latter in such a manner, that about the time in which Jesus
pronounced the curative word, the patient at home recovered, is so
singular in its kind that a threefold repetition of it may be regarded
as impossible, and even the supposition that it occurred twice only,
has difficulties; hence it is our task to ascertain whether the three
narratives may not be traced to a single root.

Now the narrative of the fourth Evangelist which is most generally held
to be distinct, has not only an affinity with the synoptical narratives
in the outline already given; but in many remarkable details either one
or the other of the synoptists agrees more closely with John than with
his fellow synoptist. Thus, while in designating the patient as παῖς,
Matthew may be held to accord with the υἱὸς of John, at least as
probably as with the δοῦλος of Luke; Matthew and John decidedly agree
in this, that according to both the functionary at Capernaum applies in
his own person to Jesus, and not as in Luke by deputies. On the other
hand, the account of John agrees with that of Luke in its description
of the state of the patient; in neither is there any mention of the
paralysis of which Matthew speaks, but the patient is described as near
death, in Luke by the words ἤμελλε τελευτᾷν, in John by ἤμελλεν
ἀποθνήσκειν, in addition to which it is incidentally implied in the
latter, v. 52, that the disease was accompanied by a fever, πυρετὸς. In
the account of the manner in which Jesus effected the cure of the
patient, and in which his cure was made known, John stands again on the
side of Matthew in opposition to Luke. While namely, the latter has not
an express assurance on the part of Jesus that the servant was healed,
the two former make him say to the officer, in very similar terms, the
one, ὕπαγε, καὶ ὡς ἐπίστευσας γενηθήτω σοι, Go thy way, and as thou
hast believed so shall it be done unto thee, the other, πορεύου, ὁ υἱὸς
σου ζῇ, Go thy way, thy son liveth; and the conclusion of Matthew also,
καὶ ἰάθη ὁ παῖς αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ ὥρᾳ ἐκείνῃ, has at least in its form more
resemblance to the statement of John, that by subsequent inquiry the
father ascertained it to be ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ, at the same hour in which
Jesus had spoken the word that his son had begun to amend, than to the
statement of Luke, that the messengers when they returned found the
sick man restored to health. In another point of this conclusion,
however, the agreement with John is transferred from Matthew again to
Luke. In both Luke and John, namely, a kind of embassy is spoken of,
which towards the close of the narrative comes out of the house of the
officer; in the former it consists of the centurion’s friends, whose
errand it is to dissuade Jesus from giving himself unnecessary trouble;
in the latter, of servants who rejoicingly meet their master and bring
him the news of his son’s recovery. Unquestionably where three
narratives are so thoroughly entwined with each other as these, we
ought not merely to pronounce two of them identical and allow one to
stand for a distinct fact, but must rather either distinguish all, or
blend all into one. The latter course was adopted by Semler, after
older examples, [1324] and Tholuck has at least declared it possible.
But with such expositors the next object is so to explain the
divergencies of the three narratives, that no one of the Evangelists
may seem to have said anything false. With respect to the rank of the
applicant, they make the βασιλικὸς in John a military officer, for whom
the ἑκατόνταρχος of the two others would only be a more specific
designation; as regards the main point, however, namely, the conduct of
the applicant, it is thought that the different narrators may have
represented the event in different periods of its progress; that is,
John may have given the earlier circumstance, that Jesus complained of
the originally weak faith of the suppliant, the synoptists only the
later, that he praised its rapid growth. We have already shown how it
has been supposed possible, in a yet easier manner, to adjust the chief
difference between the two synoptical accounts relative to the mediate
or immediate entreaty. But this effort to explain the contradictions
between the three narratives in a favourable manner is altogether vain.
There still subsist these difficulties: the synoptists thought of the
applicant as a centurion, the fourth Evangelist as a courtier; the
former as strong, the latter as weak in faith; John and Matthew
imagined that he applied in his own person to Jesus; Luke, that out of
modesty he sent deputies. [1325]

Which then represents the fact in the right way, which in the wrong? If
we take first the two synoptists by themselves, expositors with one
voice declare that Luke gives the more correct account. First of all,
it is thought improbable that the patient should have been, as Matthew
says, a paralytic, since in the case of a disease so seldom fatal the
modest centurion would scarcely have met Jesus to implore his aid
immediately on his entrance into the city: [1326] as if a very painful
disease such as is described by Matthew did not render desirable the
quickest help, and as if there were any want of modesty in asking Jesus
before he reached home to utter a healing word. Rather, the contrary
relation between Matthew and Luke seems probable from the observation,
that the miracle, and consequently also the disease of the person cured
miraculously, is never diminished in tradition but always exaggerated;
hence the tormented paralytic would more probably be heightened into
one ready to die, μέλλων τελευτᾲν, than the latter reduced to a mere
sufferer. But especially the double message in Luke is, according to
Schleiermacher, a feature very unlikely to have been invented. How if,
on the contrary, it very plainly manifested itself to be an invention?
While in Matthew the centurion, on the offer of Jesus to accompany him,
seeks to prevent him by the objection: Lord, I am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof, in Luke he adds by the mouth of his
messenger, wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee,
by which we plainly discover the conclusion on which the second embassy
was founded. If the man declared himself unworthy that Jesus should
come to him, he cannot, it was thought, have held himself worthy to
come to Jesus; an exaggeration of his humility by which the narrative
of Luke again betrays its secondary character. The first embassy seems
to have originated in the desire to introduce a previous recommendation
of the centurion as a motive for the promptitude with which Jesus
offered to enter the house of a Gentile. The Jewish elders, after
having informed Jesus of the case of disease, add that he was worthy
for whom he should do this, for he loveth our nation and has built us a
synagogue: a recommendation the tenor of which is not unlike what Luke
(Acts x. 22) makes the messengers of Cornelius say to Peter to induce
him to return with them, namely, that the centurion was a just man, and
one that feareth God, and in good report among all the nation of the
Jews. That the double embassy cannot have been original, appears the
most clearly from the fact, that by it the narrative of Luke loses all
coherence. In Matthew all hangs well together: the centurion first
describes to Jesus the state of the sufferer, and either leaves it to
Jesus to decide what he shall next do, or before he prefers his request
Jesus anticipates him by the offer to go to his house, which the
centurion declines in the manner stated. Compare with this his strange
conduct in Luke: he first sends to Jesus by the Jewish elders the
request that he will come and heal his servant, but when Jesus is
actually coming, repents that he has occasioned him to do so, and asks
only for a miraculous word from Jesus. The supposition that the first
request proceeded solely from the elders and not from the centurion
[1327] runs counter to the express words of the Evangelist, who by the
expressions: ἀπέστειλε—πρεσβυτέρους—ἐρωτῶν αὐτὸν, he sent—the
elders—beseeching him, represents the prayer as coming from the
centurion himself; and that the latter by the word ἐλθὼν meant only
that Jesus should come into the neighbourhood of his house, but when he
saw that Jesus intended actually to enter his house, declined this as
too great a favour,—is too absurd a demeanour to attribute to a man who
otherwise appears sensible, and of whom for this reason so capricious a
change of mind as is implied in the text of Luke, was still less to be
expected. The whole difficulty would have been avoided, if Luke had put
into the mouth of the first messengers, as Matthew in that of the
centurion, only the entreaty, direct or indirect, for a cure in
general; and then after Jesus had offered to go to the house where the
patient lay, had attributed to the same messengers the modest rejection
of this offer. But on the one hand, he thought it requisite to furnish
a motive for the resolution of Jesus to go into the Gentile’s house;
and on the other, tradition presented him with a deprecation of this
personal trouble on the part of Jesus: he was unable to attribute the
prayer and the deprecation to the same persons, and he was therefore
obliged to contrive a second embassy. Hereby, however, the
contradiction was only apparently avoided, since both embassies are
sent by the centurion. Perhaps also the centurion who was unwilling
that Jesus should take the trouble to enter his house, reminded Luke of
the messenger who warned Jairus not to trouble the master to enter his
house, likewise after an entreaty that he would come into the house;
and as the messenger says to Jairus, according to him and Mark, μὴ
σκύλλε τὸν διδάσκαλον, trouble not the master (Luke viii. 49), so here
he puts into the mouth of the second envoys, the words, κύριε μὴ
σκύλλον, Lord, trouble not thyself, although such an order has a reason
only in the case of Jairus, in whose house the state of things had been
changed since the first summons by the death of his daughter, and none
at all in that of the centurion whose servant still remained in the
same state.

Modern expositors are deterred from the identification of all the three
narratives, by the fear that it may present John in the light of a
narrator who has not apprehended the scene with sufficient accuracy,
and has even mistaken its main drift. [1328] Were they nevertheless to
venture on a union, they would as far as possible vindicate to the
fourth gospel the most original account of the facts; a position of
which we shall forthwith test the security, by an examination of the
intrinsic character of the narratives. That the suppliant is according
to the fourth Evangelist a βασιλικὸς, while according to the two others
he is an ἑκατόνταρχος, is an indifferent particular from which we can
draw no conclusion on either side; and it may appear to be the same
with the divergency as to the relation of the diseased person to the
one who entreats his cure. If, however, it be asked with reference to
the last point, from which of the three designations the other two
could most easily have arisen? it can scarcely be supposed that the
υἱὸς of John became in a descending line, first the doubtful term παῖς,
and then δοῦλος; and even the reverse ascending order is here less
probable than the intermediate alternative, that out of the ambiguous
παῖς (= ‏כַעַר‎) there branched off in one direction the sense of
servant, as in Luke; in the other, of son, as in John. We have already
remarked, that the description of the patient’s state in John, as well
as in Luke, is an enhancement on that in Matthew, and consequently of
later origin. As regards the difference in the locality, from the point
of view now generally taken in the comparative criticism of the
gospels, the decision would doubtless be, that in the tradition from
which the synoptical writers drew, the place from which Jesus performed
the miracles was confounded with that in which the sick person lay, the
less noted Cana being absorbed in the celebrated Capernaum; whereas
John, being an eye-witness, retained the more correct details. But the
relation between the Evangelists appears to stand thus only when John
is assumed to have been an eye-witness; if the critic seeks, as he is
bound to do, to base his decision solely on the intrinsic character of
the narratives, he will arrive at a totally different result. Here is a
narrative of a cure performed at a distance, in which the miracle
appears the greater, the wider the distance between the curer and the
cured. Would oral tradition, in propagating this narrative, have the
tendency to diminish that distance, and consequently the miracle, so
that in the account of John, who makes Jesus perform the cure at a
place from which the nobleman does not reach his son until the
following day, we should have the original narrative, in that of the
synoptists on the contrary, who represent Jesus as being in the same
town with the sick servant, the one modified by tradition? Only the
converse of this supposition can be held accordant with the nature of
the legend, and here again the narrative of John manifests itself to be
a traditional one. Again, the preciseness with which the hour of the
patient’s recovery is ascertained in the fourth gospel has a highly
fictitious appearance. The simple expression of Matthew, usually found
at the conclusion of histories of cures: he was healed in the self-same
hour, is dilated into an inquiry on the part of the father as to the
hour in which the son began to amend, an answer from the servants that
yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him, and lastly the
result, that in the very hour in which Jesus had said, Thy son liveth,
the recovery took place. This is a solicitous accuracy, a tediousness
of calculation, that seems to bespeak the anxiety of the narrator to
establish the miracle, rather than to show the real course of the
event. In representing the βασιλικὸς as conversing personally with
Jesus, the fourth gospel has preserved the original simplicity of the
narrative better than the third; though as has been remarked, the
servants who come to meet their master in the former seem to be
representatives of Luke’s second embassy. But in the main point of
difference, relative to the character of the applicant, it might be
thought that, even according to our own standard, the preference must
be given to John before the two other narrators. For if that narrative
is the more legendary, which exhibits an effort at aggrandizement or
embellishment, it might be said that the applicant whose faith is in
John rather weak, is in Luke embellished into a model of faith. It is
not, however, on embellishment in general that legend or the inventive
narrator is bent, but on embellishment in subservience to their grand
object, which in the gospels is the glorification of Jesus; and viewed
in this light, the embellishment will in two respects be found on the
side of John. First, as this Evangelist continually aims to exhibit the
pre-eminence of Jesus, by presenting a contrast to it in the weakness
of all who are brought into communication with him, so here this
purpose might be served by representing the suppliant as weak rather
than strong in faith. The reply, however, which he puts into the mouth
of Jesus, Unless ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe, has
proved too severe, for which reason it reduces most of our commentators
to perplexity. Secondly, it might seem unsuitable that Jesus should
allow himself to be diverted from his original intention of entering
the house in which the patient was, and thus appear to be guided by
external circumstances; it might be regarded as more consistent with
his character that he should originally resolve to effect the cure at a
distance instead of being persuaded to this by another. If then, as
tradition said, the suppliant did nevertheless make a kind of
remonstrance, this must have had an opposite drift to the one in the
synoptical gospels, namely, to induce Jesus to a journey to the house
where the patient lay.

In relation to the next question, the possibility and the actual course
of the incident before us, the natural interpretation seems to find the
most pliant material in the narrative of John. Here, it is remarked,
Jesus nowhere says that he will effect the patient’s cure, he merely
assures the father that his son is out of danger (ὁ υἱός σου ζῇ), and
the father, when he finds that the favourable turn of his son’s malady
coincides with the time at which he was conversing with Jesus, in no
way draws the inference that Jesus had wrought the cure at a distance.
Hence, this history is only a proof that Jesus by means of his profound
acquaintance with semeiology, was able, on receiving a description of
the patient’s state, correctly to predict the course of his disease;
that such a description is not here given is no proof that Jesus had
not obtained it; while further this proof of knowledge is called a
σημεῖον (v. 54) because it was a sign of a kind of skill in Jesus which
John had not before intimated, namely, the ability to predict the cure
of one dangerously ill. [1329] But, apart from the misinterpretation of
the word σημεῖον, and the interpolation of a conversation not intimated
in the text; this view of the matter would place the character and even
the understanding of Jesus in the most equivocal light. For if we
should pronounce a physician imprudent, who in the case of a patient
believed to be dying of fever, should even from his own observation of
the symptoms, guarantee a cure, and thus risk his reputation: how much
more rashly would Jesus have acted, had he, on the mere description of
a man who was not a physician, given assurance that a disease was
attended with no danger? We cannot ascribe such conduct to him, because
it would be in direct contradiction with his general conduct, and the
impression which he left on his cotemporaries. If then Jesus merely
predicted the cure without effecting it, he must have been assured of
it in a more certain manner than by natural reasoning,—he must have
known it in a supernatural manner. This is the turn given to the
narrative by one of the most recent commentators on the gospel of John.
He puts the question, whether we have here a miracle of knowledge or of
power; and as there is no mention of an immediate effect from the words
of Jesus, while elsewhere in the fourth gospel the superior knowledge
of Jesus is especially held up to our view, he is of opinion that
Jesus, by means of his higher nature, merely knew that at that moment
the dangerous crisis of the disease was past. [1330] But if our gospel
frequently exhibits the superior knowledge of Jesus, this proves
nothing to the purpose, for it just as frequently directs our attention
to his superior power. Further, where the supernatural knowledge of
Jesus is concerned, this is plainly stated (as i. 49, ii. 25, vi. 64),
and hence if a supernatural cognizance of the already effected cure of
the boy had been intended, John would have made Jesus speak on this
occasion as he did before to Nathanael, and tell the father that he
already saw his son on his bed in an ameliorated state. On the
contrary, not only is there no intimation of the exercise of superior
knowledge, but we are plainly enough given to understand that there was
an exercise of miraculous power. When the sudden cure of one at the
point of death is spoken of, the immediate question is, What brought
about this unexpected change? and when a narrative which elsewhere
makes miracles follow on the word of its hero, puts into his mouth an
assurance that the patient lives, it is only the mistaken effort to
diminish the marvellous, which can prevent the admission, that in this
assurance the author means to give the cause of the cure.

In the case of the synoptical narratives, the supposition of a mere
prediction will not suffice, since here the father (Matt. v. 8)
entreats the exercise of healing power, and Jesus (v. 13), accedes to
this entreaty. Hence every way would seem to be closed to the natural
interpretation (for the distance of Jesus from the patient made all
physical or psychical influence impossible), if a single feature in the
narrative had not presented unexpected help. This feature is the
comparison which the centurion institutes between himself and Jesus. As
he need only speak a word in order to see this or that command
performed by his soldiers and servants, so, he concludes, it would cost
Jesus no more than a word to restore his servant to health. Out of this
comparison it has been found possible to extract an intimation that as
on the side of the centurion, so on that of Jesus, human proxies were
thought of. According to this, the centurion intended to represent to
Jesus, that he need only speak a word to one of his disciples, and the
latter would go with him and cure his servant, which is supposed to
have forthwith happened. [1331] But as this would be the first instance
in which Jesus had caused a cure to be wrought by his disciples, and
the only one in which he commissions them immediately to perform a
particular cure, how could this peculiar circumstance be silently
presupposed in the otherwise detailed narrative of Luke? Why, since
this narrator is not sparing in spinning out the rest of the
messenger’s speech, does he stint the few words which would have
explained all—the simple addition after εἰπὲ λόγῳ, speak the word, of
ἑνὶ τῶν μαθητῶν, to one of thy disciples, or something similar? But,
above all, at the close of the narrative, where the result is told,
this mode of interpretation falls into the greatest perplexity, not
merely through the silence of the narrator, but through his positive
statement. Luke, namely, concludes with the information that when the
friends of the centurion returned into the house, they found the
servant already recovered. Now, if Jesus had caused the cure by sending
with the messengers one or more of his disciples, the patient could
only begin gradually to be better after the disciples had come into the
house with the messengers; he could not have been already well on their
arrival. Paulus indeed supposes that the messengers lingered for some
time listening to the discourse of Jesus, and that thus the disciples
arrived before them; but how the former could so unnecessarily linger,
and how the Evangelist could have been silent on this point as well as
on the commission of the disciples, he omits to explain. Whether
instead of the disciples, we hold that which corresponds on the side of
Jesus to the soldiers of the centurion to be demons of disease, [1332]
ministering angels, [1333] or merely the word and the curative power of
Jesus; [1334] in any case there remains to us a miracle wrought at a
distance.

This kind of agency on the part of Jesus is, according to the admission
even of such commentators as have not generally any repugnance to the
miraculous, attended with special difficulty, because from the want of
the personal presence of Jesus, and its beneficial influence on the
patient, we are deprived of every possibility of rendering the cure
conceivable by means of an analogy observable in nature. [1335]
According to Olshausen, indeed, this distant influence has its
analogies; namely, in animal magnetism. [1336] I will not directly
contest this, but only point out the limits within which, so far as my
knowledge extends, this phenomenon confines itself in the domain of
animal magnetism. According to our experience hitherto, the cases in
which one person can exert an influence over another at a distance are
only two: first, the magnetizer or an individual in magnetic relation
to him can act thus on the somnambule, but this distant action must
always be preceded by immediate contact,—a preliminary which is not
supposed in the relation of Jesus to the patient in our narrative;
secondly, such an influence is found to exist in persons who are
themselves somnambules, or otherwise under a disordered state of the
nerves: neither of which descriptions can apply to Jesus. If thus such
a cure of distant persons as is ascribed to Jesus in our narratives,
far outsteps the extreme limits of natural causation, as exhibited in
magnetism and the kindred phenomena; then must Jesus have been, so far
as the above narratives can lay claim to historical credit, a
supernatural being. But before we admit him to have been so really, it
is worth our while as critical inquirers, ta examine whether the
narrative under consideration could not have arisen without any
historical foundation; especially as by the very fact of the various
forms which it has taken in the different gospels it shows itself to
contain legendary ingredients. And here it is evident that the
miraculous cures of Jesus by merely touching the patient, such as we
have examples of in that of the leper, Matt. viii. 3, and in that of
the blind men, Matt. ix. 29, might by a natural climax rise, first into
the cure of persons when in his presence, by a mere word, as in the
case of the demoniacs, of the lepers, Luke xvii. 14, and other
sufferers; and then into the cure even of the absent by a word; of
which there is a strongly marked precedent in the Old Testament. In 2
Kings v. 9 ff. we read that when the Syrian general Naaman came before
the dwelling of the prophet Elisha that he might be cured of his
leprosy, the prophet came not out to meet him, but sent to him by a
servant the direction to wash himself seven times in the river Jordan.
At this the Syrian was so indignant that he was about to return home
without regarding the direction of the prophet. He had expected, he
said, that the prophet would come to him, and calling on his God,
strike his hand over the leprous place; that without any personal
procedure of this kind, the prophet merely directed him to go to the
river Jordan and wash, discouraged and irritated him, since if water
were the thing required, he might have had it better at home than here
in Israel. By this Old Testament history we see what was ordinarily
expected from a prophet, namely, that he should be able to cure when
present by bodily contact; that he could do so without contact, and at
a distance, was not presupposed. Elisha effected the cure of the
leprous general in the latter manner (for the washing was not the cause
of cure here, any more than in John ix., but the miraculous power of
the prophet, who saw fit to annex its influence to this external act),
and hereby proved himself a highly distinguished prophet: ought then
the Messiah in this particular to fall short of the prophet? Thus our
New Testament narrative is manifested to be a necessary reflection of
that Old Testament story. As, there, the sick person will not believe
in the possibility of his cure unless the prophet comes out of his
house; so here according to one edition of the story the applicant
likewise doubts the possibility of a cure, unless Jesus will come in to
his house; according to the other editions, he is convinced of the
power of Jesus to heal even without this; and all agree that Jesus,
like the prophet, succeeded in the performance of this especially
difficult miracle.




§ 99.

CURES ON THE SABBATH.

Jesus, according to the gospels, gave great scandal to the Jews by not
seldom performing his curative miracles on the sabbath. One example of
this is common to the three synoptical writers, two are peculiar to
Luke, and two to John.

In the narrative common to the three synoptical writers, two cases of
supposed desecration of the sabbath are united; the plucking of the
ears of corn by the disciples (Matt. xii. 1 parall.), and the cure of
the man with the withered hand by Jesus (v. 9 ff. parall.). After the
conversation which was occasioned by the plucking of the corn, and
which took place in the fields, the two first Evangelists continue as
if Jesus went from this scene immediately into the synagogue of the
same place, to which no special designation is given, and there, on the
occasion of the cure of the man with the withered hand, again held a
dispute on the observance of the sabbath. It is evident that these two
histories were originally united only on account of the similarity in
their tendency; hence it is to the credit of Luke, that he has
expressly separated them chronologically by the words ἐν ἑτέρῳ σαββάτῳ,
on another Sabbath. [1337] The further inquiry, which narrative is here
the more original? we may dismiss with the observation, that if the
question which Matthew puts into the mouth of the Pharisees, Is it
lawful to heal on the sabbath days? is held up as a specimen of
invented dialogue; [1338] we may with equal justice characterize in the
same way the question lent to Jesus by the two intermediate
Evangelists; while their much praised [1339] description of Jesus
calling to the man to stand forth in the midst, and then casting
reproving glances around, may be accused of having the air of dramatic
fiction.

The narratives all agree in representing the affliction under which the
patient laboured, as a χεὶρ ξηρὰ, or ἐξηραμμένη. Indefinite as this
expression is, it is treated too freely when it is understood, as by
Paulus, to imply only that the hand was injured by heat, [1340] or even
by a sprain, according to Venturini’s supposition. [1341] For when, in
order to determine the signification in which this term is used in the
New Testament we refer, as it is proper to do, to the Old Testament, we
find (1 Kings xiii. 4) a hand which, on being stretched out, ἐξηράνθη
(‏וַתִּיבַשׁ‎), described as incapable of being drawn back again, so that we
must understand a lameness and rigidity of the hand; and on a
comparison of Mark ix. 18, where the expression ξηραίνεσθαι to be
withered or wasted away is applied to an epileptic, a drying up and
shrinking of that member. [1342] Now from the narrative before us a
very plausible argument may be drawn in favour of the supposition, that
Jesus employed natural means in the treatment of this and other
diseases. Only such cures, it is said, were prohibited on the sabbath
as were attended with any kind of labour; thus, if the Pharisees, as it
is here said, expected Jesus to transgress the sabbatical laws by
effecting a cure, they must have known that he was not accustomed to
cure by his mere word, but by medicaments and surgical operations.
[1343] As, however, a cure merely by means of a conjuration otherwise
lawful, was forbidden on the sabbath, a fact which Paulus himself
elsewhere adduces; [1344] as moreover there was a controversy between
the schools of Hillel and Schammai, whether it were permitted even to
administer consolation to the sick on the sabbath; [1345] and as again,
according to an observation of Paulus, the more ancient rabbins were
stricter on the point of sabbatical observance than those whose
writings on this subject have come down to us; [1346] so the cures of
Jesus, even supposing that he used no natural means, might by captious
Pharisees be brought under the category of violations of the sabbath.
The principal objection to the rationalistic explanation, namely, the
silence of the Evangelists as to natural means, Paulus believes to be
obviated in the present case by conceiving the scene thus: at that
time, and in the synagogue, there was indeed no application of such
means; Jesus merely caused the hand to be shown to him, that he might
see how far the remedies hitherto prescribed by him (which remedies
however are still a bare assumption) had been serviceable, and he then
found that it was completely cured; for the expression ἀποκατεστάθη,
used by all the narrators, implies a cure completed previously, not one
suddenly effected in the passing moment. It is true that the context
seems to require this interpretation, since the outstretching of the
hand prior to the cure would appear to be as little possible, as in 1
Kings xiii. 4, the act of drawing it back: nevertheless the Evangelists
give us only the word of Jesus as the source of the cure; not natural
means, which are the gratuitous addition of expositors. [1347]

Decisive evidence, alike for the necessity of viewing this as a
miraculous cure, and for the possibility of explaining the origin of
the anecdote, is to be obtained by a closer examination of the Old
Testament narrative already mentioned, 1 Kings xiii. 1 ff.. A prophet
out of Judah threatened Jeroboam, while offering incense on his
idolatrous altar, with the destruction of the altar and the overthrow
of his false worship; the king with outstretched hand commanded that
this prophet of evil should be seized, when suddenly his hand dried up
so that he could not draw it again towards him, and the altar was rent.
On the entreaty of the king, however, the prophet besought Jehovah for
the restoration of the hand, and its full use was again granted. [1348]
Paulus also refers to this narrative in the same connexion, but only
for the purpose of applying to it his natural method of explanation; he
observes that Jeroboam’s anger may have produced a transient convulsive
rigidity of the muscles and so forth, in the hand just stretched out
with such impetuosity. But who does not see that we have here a legend
designed to glorify the monotheistic order of prophets, and to hold up
to infamy the Israelitish idolatry in the person of its founder
Jeroboam? The man of God denounces on the idolatrous altar quick and
miraculous destruction; the idolatrous king impiously stretches forth
his hand against the man of God; the hand is paralyzed, the idolatrous
altar falls asunder into the dust, and only on the intercession of the
prophet is the king restored. Who can argue about the miraculous and
the natural in what is so evidently a mythus? And who can fail to
perceive in our evangelical narrative an imitation of this Old
Testament legend, except that agreeably to the spirit of Christianity
the withering of the hand appears, not as a retributive miracle, but as
a natural disease, and only its cure is ascribed to Jesus; whence also
the outstretching of the hand is not, as in the case of Jeroboam, the
criminal cause of the infliction, continued as a punishment, and the
drawing of it back again a sign of cure; but, on the contrary, the hand
which had previously been drawn inwards, owing to disease, can after
the completion of the cure be again extended. That, in other instances,
about that period, the power of working cures of this kind was in the
East ascribed to the favourites of the gods, may be seen from a
narrative already adduced, in which, together with the cure of
blindness, the restoration of a diseased hand is attributed to
Vespasian. [1349]

But this curative miracle does not appear independently and as an
object by itself: the history of it hinges on the fact that the cure
was wrought on the Sabbath, and the point of the whole lies in the
words by which Jesus vindicates his activity in healing on the Sabbath
against the Pharisees. In Luke and Mark this defence consists in the
question, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil,
to save life or to destroy it? in Matthew, in a part of this question,
together with the aphorism on saving the sheep which might fall into
the pit on the sabbath. Luke, who has not this saying on the present
occasion, places it (varied by the substitution of ὄνος ἢ βοῦς, an ass
or an ox for πρόβατον sheep, and of φρέαρ, well or pit for βόθυνος,
ditch) in connexion with the cure of an ὑδρωπικὸς a man who had the
dropsy (xiv. 5); a narrative which has in general a striking similarity
to the one under consideration. Jesus takes food in the house of one of
the chief Pharisees, where, as in the other instance in the synagogue,
he is watched (here, ἦσαν παρατηρούμενοι, there, παρετήρουν). A
dropsical person is present; as, there, a man with a withered hand. In
the synagogue, according to Matthew, the Pharisees ask Jesus, εἰ ἔξεστι
τοῖς σάββασι θεραπεύειν; Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?
According to Mark and Luke, Jesus asks them whether it be lawful to
save life, etc.: so, here, he asks them, εἰ ἔξεστι τῷ σαββατῷ
θεραπερύειν; Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath? whereupon in both
histories the interrogated parties are silent (in that of the withered
hand, Mark: οἱ δέ ἐσιώπων; in that of the dropsical patient, Luke: οἱ
δὲ ἡσύχασαν). Lastly, in both histories we have the saying about the
animal fallen into a pit, in the one as an epilogue to the cure, in the
other (that of Matthew) as a prologue. A natural explanation, which has
not been left untried even with this cure of the dropsy, [1350] seems
more than usually a vain labour, where, as in this case, we have before
us no particular narrative, resting on its own historical basis, but a
mere variation on the theme of the sabbath cures, and the text on the
endangered domestic animal, which might come to one (Matthew) in
connexion with the cure of a withered hand, to another (Luke) with the
cure of a dropsical patient, and to a third in a different connexion
still; for there is yet a third Story of a miraculous cure with which a
similar saying is associated. Luke, namely, narrates (xiii. 10 ff.) the
cure of a woman bowed down by demoniacal influence, as having been
performed by Jesus on the sabbath; when to the indignant remonstrance
of the ruler of the synagogue, Jesus replies by asking, whether every
one does not loose his ox or ass from the stall on the sabbath, and
lead him away to watering? a question which is undeniably a variation
of the one given above. So entirely identical does this history appear
with the one last named, that Schleiermacher comes to this conclusion:
since in the second there is no reference to the first, and since
consequently the repetition is not excused by confession, the two
passages Luke xiii. 10, and xiv. 5, cannot have been written one after
the other by the same author. [1351]

Thus we have here, not three different incidents, but only three
different frames in which legend has preserved the memorable and
thoroughly popular aphorism on the domestic animal, to be rescued or
tended on the sabbath. Yet, unless we would deny to Jesus so original
and appropriate an argument, there must lie at the foundation a cure of
some kind actually performed by him on the sabbath; not, however, a
miraculous one. We have seen that Luke unites the saying with the cure
of a demoniacal patient: now it might have been uttered by Jesus on the
occasion of one of those cures of demoniacs of which, under certain
limitations, we have admitted the natural possibility. Or, when Jesus
in cases of illness among his followers applied the usual medicaments
without regard to the sabbath, he may have found this appeal to the
practical sense of men needful for his vindication. Or lastly, if there
be some truth in the opinion of rationalistic commentators that Jesus,
according to the oriental and more particularly the Essene custom,
occupied himself with the cure of the body as well as of the soul, he
may, when complying with a summons to the former work on the sabbath,
have had occasion for such an apology. But in adopting this last
supposition, we must not, with these commentators, seek in the
particular supernatural cures which the gospels narrate, the natural
reality; on the contrary, we must admit that this is totally lost to
us, and that the supernatural has usurped its place. [1352] Further, it
cannot have been cures in general with which that saying of Jesus was
connected; but any service performed by him or his disciples which
might be regarded as a rescuing or preservation of life, and which was
accompanied by external labour, might in his position with respect to
the Pharisaic party, furnish an occasion for such a defence.

Of the two cures on the sabbath narrated in the fourth gospel, one has
already been considered with the cures of the blind; the other (v. 1
ff.) might have been numbered among the cures of paralytics, but as the
patient is not so designated, it was admissible to reserve it for our
present head. In the porches of the pool of Bethesda in Jerusalem,
Jesus found a man who, as it subsequently appears, had been lame for
thirty-eight years; this sufferer he enables by a word to stand up and
carry home his bed, but, as it was the sabbath, he thus draws down on
himself the hostility of the Jewish hierarchy. Woolston [1353] and many
later writers have thought to get clear of this history in a singular
manner, by the supposition that Jesus here did not cure a real sufferer
but merely unmasked a hypocrite. [1354] The sole reason which can with
any plausibility be urged in favour of this notion, is that the cured
man points out Jesus to his enemies as the one who had commanded him to
carry his bed on the sabbath (v. 15; comp. 11 ff.), a circumstance
which is only to be explained on the ground that Jesus had enjoined
what was unwelcome. But that notification to the Pharisees might
equally be given, either with a friendly intention, as in the case of
the man born blind (John ix. 11, 25), or at least with the innocent one
of devolving the defence of the alleged violation of the sabbath on a
stronger than himself. [1355] The Evangelist at least gives it as his
opinion that the man was really afflicted, and suffered from a
wearisome disease, when he describes him as having had an infirmity
thirty-eight years, τριάκοντα καὶ ὀκτὼ ἔτη ἔχων ἐν τῇ ἀσθενίᾳ (v. 5):
for the forced interpretation once put on this passage by Paulus,
referring the thirty-eight years to the man’s age, and not to the
duration of his disease, he has not even himself ventured to reproduce.
[1356] On this view of the incident it is also impossible to explain
what Jesus says to the cured man on a subsequent meeting (v. 14):
Behold thou art made whole; sin no more lest a worse thing come unto
thee. Even Paulus is compelled by these words to admit that the man had
a real infirmity, though only a trifling one:—in other words he is
compelled to admit the inadequacy of the idea on which his explanation
of the incident is based, so that here again we retain a miracle, and
that not of the smallest.

In relation to the historical credibility of the narrative, it may
certainly be held remarkable that so important a sanative institution
as Bethesda is described to be by John, is not mentioned either by
Josephus or the rabbins, especially if the popular belief connected a
miraculous cure with this pool: [1357] but this affords nothing
decisive. It is true that in the description of the pool there lies a
fabulous popular notion, which appears also to have been received by
the writer (for even if v. 4 be spurious, something similar is
contained in the words κίνησις τοῦ ὕδατος, v. 3, and ταραχθῇ, v. 7).
But this proves nothing against the truth of the narrative, since even
an eye-witness and a disciple of Jesus may have shared a vulgar error.
To make credible, however, such a fact as that a man who had been lame
eight-and-thirty years, so that he was unable to walk, and completely
bed-ridden, should have been perfectly cured by a word, the supposition
of psychological influence will not suffice, for the man had no
knowledge whatever of Jesus, v. 13; nor will any physical analogy, such
as magnetism and the like, serve the purpose: but if such a result
really happened, we must exalt that by which it happened above all the
limits of the human and the natural. On the other hand, it ought never
to have been thought a difficulty [1358] that from among the multitude
of the infirm waiting in the porches of the pool, Jesus selected one
only as the object of his curative power, since the cure of him whose
sufferings had been of the longest duration was not only particularly
adapted, but also sufficient, to glorify the miraculous power of the
Messiah. Nevertheless, it is this very trait which suggests a suspicion
that the narrative has a mythical character. On a great theatre of
disease, crowded with all kinds of sufferers, Jesus, the exalted and
miraculously gifted physician, appears and selects the one who is
afflicted with the most obstinate malady, that by his restoration he
may present the most brilliant proof of his miraculous power. We have
already remarked that the fourth gospel, instead of extending the
curative agency of Jesus over large masses and to a great variety of
diseases, as the synoptical gospels do, concentrates it on a few cases
which proportionately gain in intensity: thus here, in the narrative of
the cure of a man who had been lame thirty-eight years, it has far
surpassed all the synoptical accounts of cures performed on persons
with diseased limbs, among whom the longest sufferer is described in
Luke xiii. 11, only as a woman who had had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years. Without doubt the fourth Evangelist had received some
intimation (though, as we have gathered from other parts of his
history, it was far from precise) of cures of this nature performed by
Jesus, especially of that wrought on the paralytic, Matt. ix. 2 ff.
parall., for the address to the patient, and the result of the cure are
in this narrative in John almost verbally the same as in that case,
especially according to Mark’s account. [1359] There is even a vestige
in this history of John, of the circumstance that in the synoptical
narrative the cure appears in the light of a forgiveness of sins: for
as Jesus in the latter consoles the patient, before the cure, with the
assurance, thy sins are forgiven thee, so in the former, he warns him,
after the cure, in the words, sin no more, etc. For the rest, this
highly embellished history of a miraculous cure was represented as
happening on the sabbath, probably because the command to take up the
bed which it contained appeared the most suitable occasion for the
reproach of violating the sabbath.




§ 100.

RESUSCITATIONS OF THE DEAD.

The Evangelists tell us of three instances in which Jesus recalled the
dead to life. One of these is common to the three synoptists, one
belongs solely to Luke, and one to John.

The instance which is common to the three first Evangelists is the
resuscitation of a girl, and is in all the three gospels united with
the narrative of the woman who had an issue of blood (Matt. ix. 18 f.;
23–26; Mark v. 22 ff.; Luke viii. 41 ff.). In the more precise
designation of the girl and her father, the synoptical writers vary.
Matthew introduces the father generally as ἄρχων εἷς a certain ruler,
without any name; the two others as a ruler of the synagogue named
Jairus: the latter moreover describe the girl as being twelve years
old, and Luke states that she was the only child of her father;
particulars of which Matthew is ignorant. A more important difference
is, that according to Matthew the ruler in the first instance speaks of
his daughter to Jesus as being dead, and intreats him to restore her to
life; whereas according to the two other Evangelists, he left her while
yet living, though on the point of death, that he might fetch Jesus to
avert her actual decease, and first when Jesus was on the way with him,
people came out of his house with the information that his daughter had
in the meantime expired, so that to trouble Jesus further was in vain.
The circumstances of the resuscitation also are differently described,
for Matthew knows not that Jesus, as the other Evangelists state, took
with him only his three most confidential disciples as witnesses. Some
theologians, Storr for example, have thought these divergencies so
important, that they have supposed two different cases in which, among
other similar circumstances, the daughter, in one case of a civil ruler
(Matthew), in the other, of a ruler of the synagogue named Jairus (Mark
and Luke), was raised from the dead by Jesus. [1360] But that, as Storr
supposes, and as it is inevitable to suppose on his view, Jesus not
only twice resuscitated a girl, but also on both these occasions,
healed a woman with an issue immediately before, is a coincidence which
does not at all gain in probability by the vague observation of Storr,
that it is quite possible for very similar things to happen at
different times. If then it must be admitted that the Evangelists
narrate only one event, the weak attempt to give perfect agreement to
their narratives should be forborne. For neither can the expression of
Matthew ἄρτι ἐτελεύτησε mean, as Kuinöl maintains, [1361] est morti
proxima, nor can that of Mark, ἐσχάτως ἔχει, or of Luke ἀπέθνησκε,
imply that death had already taken place: not to mention that according
to both, the fact of the death is subsequently announced to the father
as something new. [1362]

Our more modern critics have wisely admitted a divergency between the
accounts in doing which they have unanimously given the palm of
superior accuracy to the intermediate Evangelists. Some are lenient
towards Matthew, and only attribute to his mode of narration a brevity
which might belong even to the representation of an eye-witness; [1363]
while others regard this want of particularity as an indication that
the first gospel had not an apostolic origin. [1364] Now that Mark and
Luke give the name of the applicant, on which Matthew is silent, and
also that they determine his rank more precisely than the latter, will
just as well bear an unfavourable construction for them, as the usual
favourable one; since the designation of persons by name, as we have
before remarked, is not seldom an addition of the later legend. For
example, the woman with the issue first receives the name of Veronica
in the tradition of John Malala; [1365] the Canaanitish woman that of
Justa in the Clementine Homilies: [1366] and the two thieves crucified
with Jesus, the names of Gestas and Demas in the Gospel of Nicodemus.
[1367] Luke’s μονογενὴς (one only daughter) only serves to make the
scene more touching, and the ἐτῶν δώδεκα twelve years of age, he, and
after him Mark, might have borrowed from the history of the woman with
the issue. The divergency that, according to Matthew, the maiden is
spoken of in the first instance as dead, according to the two others as
only dying, must have been considered very superficially by those who
have thought it possible to turn it in accordance with our own rule to
the disadvantage of Matthew, on the ground that his representation
serves to aggrandize the miracle. For in both the other gospels the
death of the girl is subsequently announced, and its being supposed in
Matthew to have occurred a few moments earlier is no aggrandizement of
the miracle. Nay, it is the reverse; for the miraculous power of Jesus
appears greater in the former, not indeed objectively, but
subjectively, because it is heightened by contrast and surprise. There,
where Jesus is in the first instance intreated to restore the dead to
life, he does no more than what was desired of him; here, on the
contrary, where supplicated only for the cure of a sick person, he
actually brings that person to life again, he does more than the
interested parties seek or understand. There, where the power of
awaking the dead is presupposed by the father to belong to Jesus, the
extraordinary nature of such a power is less marked than here, where
the father at first only presupposes the power of healing the sick, and
when death has supervened, is diverted from any further hope. In the
description of the arrival and the conduct of Jesus in the house where
the corpse lay, Matthew’s brevity is at least clearer than the diffuse
accounts of the two other Evangelists. Matthew tells us that Jesus,
having reached the house, put forth the minstrels already assembled for
the funeral, together with the rest of the crowd, on the ground that
there would be no funeral there; this is perfectly intelligible. But
Mark and Luke tell us besides that he excluded his disciples also, with
the exception of three, from the scene about to take place, and for
this it is difficult to discover a reason. That a greater number of
spectators would have been physically or psychologically an impediment
to the resuscitation, can only be said on the supposition that the
event was a natural one. Admitting the miracle, the reason for the
exclusion can only be sought in the want of fitness in the excluded
parties, whom, however, the sight of such a miracle would surely have
been the very means to benefit. But we must not omit to observe that
the two later synoptists, in opposition to the concluding statement of
Matthew that the fame of this event went abroad in the whole land,
represent Jesus as enjoining the strictest silence on the witnesses: so
that on the whole it rather appears that Mark and Luke regarded the
incident as a mystery, to which only the nearest relatives and the most
favoured disciples were admitted. Lastly, the difference on which
Schulz insists as favourable to the second and third Evangelists,
namely, that while Matthew makes Jesus simply take the maiden by the
hand, they have preserved to us the words which he at the same time
uttered, the former even in the original language;—can either have no
weight at all, or it must fall into the opposite scale. For that Jesus,
if he said anything when recalling a girl to life, made use of some
such words as ἡ παῖς ἐγείρον, maiden, I say unto thee, arise, the most
remote narrator might imagine, and to regard the ταλιθὰ κοῦμι of Mark
as an indication that this Evangelist drew from a peculiarly original
source, is to forget the more simple supposition that he translated
these words from the Greek of his informant for the sake of presenting
the life giving word in its original foreign garb, and thus enhancing
its mysteriousness, as we have before observed with reference to the
ἐφφαθὰ in the cure of the deaf man. After what we have seen we shall
willingly abstain from finding out whether the individual who
originally furnished the narrative in Luke were one of the three
confidential disciples, and whether the one who originally related it,
also put it into writing: a task to which only the acumen of
Schleiermacher is equal. [1368]

In relation to the facts of the case, the natural interpretation speaks
with more than its usual confidence, under the persuasion that it has
on its side the assurance of Jesus himself, that the maiden was not
really dead, but merely in a sleep-like swoon; and not only
rationalists, like Paulus, and semi-rationalists, like Schleiermacher,
but also decided supranaturalists, like Olshausen, believe, on the
strength of that declaration of Jesus, that this was no resuscitation
of the dead. [1369] The last-named commentator attaches especial
importance to the antithesis in the speech of Jesus, and because the
words οὐκ ἀπέθανε, is not dead, are followed by ἀλλὰ καθεύδει, but
sleepeth, is of opinion that the former expression cannot be
interpreted to mean merely, she is not dead, since I have resolved to
restore her to life; strange criticism,—for it is precisely this
addition which shows that she was only not dead, in so far as it was in
the power of Jesus to recall her to life. Reference is also made to the
declaration of Jesus concerning Lazarus, John xi. 14, Λάζαρος ἀπέθανε,
Lazarus is dead, which is directly the reverse of the passage in
question, οὐκ ἀπέθανε τὸ κοράσιον, the damsel is not dead. But Jesus
had before said of Lazarus, αὕτη ἡ ἀσθένεια οὐκ ἔστι πρὸς θάνατον, this
sickness is not unto death (v. 4), and Λάζαρος ὁ φίλος ἡμῶν κεκοίμηται,
our friend Lazarus sleepeth (v. 11). Thus in the case of Lazarus also,
who was really dead, we have just as direct a denial of death, and
affirmation of mere sleep, as in the narrative before us. Hence
Fritzsche is undoubtedly right when he paraphrases the words of Jesus
in our passage as follows: puellam ne pro mortua habetote, sed dormire
existimatote quippe in vitam mox redituram. Moreover, Matthew
subsequently (xi. 5) makes Jesus say, νεκροὶ ἐγείρονται, the dead are
raised up; and as he mentions no other instance of resuscitation by
Jesus, he must apparently have had this in his mind. [1370]

But apart from the false interpretation of the words of Jesus, this
view of the subject has many difficulties. That in many diseases
conditions may present themselves which have a deceptive resemblance to
death, or that in the indifferent state of medical science among the
Jews of that age especially, a swoon might easily be mistaken for death
is not to be denied. But how was Jesus to know that there was such a
merely apparent death in this particular case? However minutely the
father detailed to him the course of the disease, nay, even if Jesus
were acquainted beforehand with the particular circumstances of the
girl’s illness (as the natural explanation supposes): we must still
ask, how could he build so much on this information as, without having
seen the girl, and in contradiction to the assurance of the
eye-witnesses, decidedly to declare that she was not dead, according to
the rationalistic interpretation of his words? This would have been
rashness and folly to boot, unless Jesus had obtained certain knowledge
of the true state of the case in a supernatural way: [1371] to admit
which, however, is to abandon the naturalistic point of view. To return
to the explanation of Paulus; between the expressions, ἐκράτησε τῆς
χειρὸς αὐτῆς, he took her by the hand, and ἠγέρθη τὸ κοράσιον, the maid
arose, expressions which are closely enough connected in Matthew, and
are still more inseparably linked by the words εὐθέως and παραχρῆμα in
the other two gospels, he inserts a course of medical treatment, and
Venturini can even specify the different restoratives which were
applied. [1372] Against such arbitrary suppositions, Olshausen justly
maintains that in the opinion of the evangelical narrator the
life-giving word of Jesus (and we might add, the touch of his hand,
furnished with divine power) was the means of restoring the girl to
life.

In the case of resuscitation narrated by Luke alone (vii. 11 ff.) the
natural explanation has not such a handle as was presented by the
declaration of Jesus in the narrative just considered. Nevertheless,
the rationalistic commentators take courage, and rest their hopes
mainly on the circumstance that Jesus speaks to the young man lying in
the coffin (v. 14). Now, say they, no one would speak to a dead person,
but only to such an one as is ascertained or guessed to be capable of
hearing. [1373] But this rule would prove that all the dead whom Christ
will raise at the last day are only apparently dead, as otherwise they
could not hear his voice, which it is expressly said they will do (John
v. 28; comp. 1 Thess. iv. 16); it would therefore prove too much.
Certainly one who is spoken to must be supposed to hear, and in a
certain sense to be living; but in the present instance this holds only
in so far as the voice of him who quickens the dead can penetrate even
to the ears from which life has departed. We must indeed admit the
possibility that with the bad custom which prevailed among the Jews of
burying their dead a few hours after their decease, a merely apparent
corpse might easily be carried to the grave; [1374] but all by which it
is attempted to show that this possibility was here a reality, is a
tissue of fictions. In order to explain how Jesus, even without any
intention to perform a miracle, came to join the funeral procession,
and how the conjecture could occur to him that the individual about to
be buried was not really dead, it is first imagined that the two
processions, that of the funeral and that of the companions of Jesus,
met precisely under the gate of the city, and as they impeded each
other, halted for a while:—directly in opposition to the text, which
makes the bearers first stand still when Jesus touches the bier.
Affected by the peculiar circumstances of the case, which he had
learned during the pause in his progress, Jesus, it is said, approached
the mother, and not with any reference to a resurrection which he
intended to effect, but merely as a consolatory address, said to her,
Weep not. [1375] But what an empty, presuming comforter would he be,
who, when a mother was about to consign her only son to the grave,
should forbid her even the relief of tears, without offering to her
either real help by recalling the departed one, or ideal, by suggesting
grounds for consolation! Now the latter Jesus does not attempt: hence
unless we would allow him to appear altogether heartless, he must be
supposed to have resolved on the former, and for this he in fact makes
every preparation, designedly touching the bier, and causing the
bearers to stand still. Here, before the reanimating word of Jesus, the
natural explanation inserts the circumstance that Jesus observed some
sign of life in the youth, and on this, either immediately or after a
previous application of medicaments, [1376] spoke the words, which
helped completely to awake him. But setting aside the fact that those
intervening measures are only interpolated into the text, and that the
strong words: νεανίσκε, σοὶ λέγω, ἐγέρθητι, Young man, I say unto thee
arise! resemble rather the authoritative command of a miracle worker
than the attempt of a physician to restore animation; how, if Jesus
were conscious that the youth was alive when he met him, and was not
first recalled to life by himself, could he with a good conscience
receive the praise which, according to the narrative, the multitude
lavished on him as a great prophet on account of this deed? According
to Paulus, he was himself uncertain how he ought to regard the result;
but if he were not convinced that he ought to ascribe the result to
himself, it was his duty to disclaim all praise on account of it; and
if he omitted to do this, his conduct places him in an equivocal light,
in which he by no means appears in the other evangelical histories, so
far as they are fairly interpreted. Thus here also we must acknowledge
that the Evangelist intends to narrate to us a miraculous resuscitation
of the dead, and that according to him, Jesus also regarded his deed as
a miracle. [1377]

In the third history of a resurrection, which is peculiar to John
(chap. xi.), the resuscitated individual is neither just dead nor being
carried to his grave, but has been already buried several days. Here
one would have thought there was little hope of effecting a natural
explanation; but the arduousness of the task has only stimulated the
ingenuity and industry of the rationalists in developing their
conception of this narrative. We shall also see that together with the
rigorously consequent mode of interpretation of the
rationalists,—which, maintaining the historical integrity of the
evangelical narrative throughout, assumes the responsibility of
explaining every part naturally, there has appeared another system,
which distinguishes certain features of the narrative as additions
after the event, and is thus an advance towards the mythical
explanation.

The rationalistic expositors set out here from the same premises as in
the former narrative, namely, that it is in itself possible for a man
who has lain in a tomb four days to come to life again, and that this
possibility is strengthened in the present instance by the known custom
of the Jews; propositions which we shall not abstractedly controvert.
From this they proceed to a supposition which we perhaps ought not to
let pass so easily, [1378] namely, that from the messenger whom the
sisters had sent with the news of their brother’s illness, Jesus had
obtained accurate information of the circumstances of the disease; and
the answer which he gave to the messenger, This sickness is not unto
death (v. 4), is said to express, merely as an inference which he had
drawn from the report of the messenger, his conviction that the disease
was not fatal. Such a view of his friend’s condition would certainly
accord the best with his conduct in remaining two days in Peræa after
the reception of the message (v. 6); since, according to that
supposition, he could not regard his presence in Bethany as a matter of
urgent necessity. But how comes it that after the lapse of these two
days, he not only resolves to journey thither (v. 8), but also has
quite a different opinion of the state of Lazarus, nay, certain
knowledge of his death, which he first obscurely (v. 10) and then
plainly (v. 14) announces to his disciples? Here the thread of the
natural explanation is lost, and the break is only rendered more
conspicuous by the fiction of a second messenger, [1379] after the
lapse of two days, bringing word to Jesus that Lazarus had expired in
the interim. For the author of the gospel at least cannot have known of
a second messenger, otherwise he must have mentioned him, since the
omission to do so gives another aspect to the whole narrative, obliging
us to infer that Jesus had obtained information of the death of Lazarus
in a supernatural manner. Jesus, when he had resolved to go to Bethany,
said to the disciples, Lazarus sleepeth, but I go that I may awake him
out of sleep (κεκοίμηται—ἐξυπνίσω—v. 11); this the naturalists explain
by the supposition that Jesus must in some way have gathered from the
statements of the messengers who announced the death of Lazarus, that
the latter was only in a state of lethargy. But we can as little here
as in the former case impute to Jesus the foolish presumption of
giving, before he had even seen the alleged corpse, the positive
assurance that he yet lived. [1380] From this point of view, it is also
a difficulty that Jesus says to his disciples (v. 15) I am glad for
your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe (ἵνα
πιστεύσητε). Paulus explains these words to imply that Jesus feared
lest the death, had it happened in his presence, might have shaken
their faith in him; but, as Gabler [1381] has remarked, πιστεύω cannot
mean merely the negative: not to lose faith, which would rather have
been expressed by a phrase such as: ἵνα μὴ ἐκλείπῃ ἡ πίστις ὑμῶν, that
your faith fail not (see Luke xxii. 32); and moreover we nowhere find
that the idea which the disciples formed of Jesus as the Messiah was
incompatible with the death of a man, or, more correctly, of a friend,
in his presence.

From the arrival of Jesus in Bethany the evangelical narrative is
somewhat more favourable to the natural explanation. It is true that
Martha’s address to Jesus (v. 21 f.), Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died, but I know that even now, whatsoever thou wilt
ask of God, he will give it thee, ἀλλὰ καὶ νῦν οἶδα, ὅτι, ὅσα ἂν αἰτήσῃ
τὸν θεὸν, δώσει σοι ὁ θεὸς, appears evidently to express the hope that
Jesus may be able even to recall the dead one to life. However, on the
assurance of Jesus which follows, Thy brother shall rise again,
ἀναστήσεται ὁ ἀδελφός σου, she answers despondingly, Yes, at the last
day. This is certainly a help to the natural explanation, for it seems
retrospectively to give to the above declaration of Martha (v. 22) the
general sense, that even now, although he has not preserved the life of
her brother, she believes Jesus to be him to whom God grants all that
he desires, that is, the favourite of the Deity, the Messiah. But the
expression which Martha there uses is not πιστεύω but οἶδα, and the
turn of phrase: I know that this will happen if thou only willest it to
be so, is a common but indirect form of petition, and is here the more
unmistakable, because the object of the entreaty is clearly indicated
by the foregoing antithesis. Martha evidently means, Thou hast not
indeed prevented the death of our brother, but even now it is not too
late, for at thy prayer God will restore him to thee and us. Martha’s
change of mind, from the hope which is but indirectly expressed in her
first reply (v. 24) to its extinction in the second, cannot be held
very surprising in a woman who here and elsewhere manifests a very
hasty disposition, and it is in the present case sufficiently explained
by the form of the foregoing assurance of Jesus (v. 23). Martha had
expected that Jesus would reply to her indirect prayer by a decided
promise of its fulfilment, and when he answers quite generally and with
an expression which it was usual to apply to the resurrection at the
last day (ἀναστήσεται), she gives a half-impatient half-desponding
reply. [1382] But that general declaration of Jesus, as well as the yet
more indefinite one (v. 25 f.), I am the resurrection and the life, is
thought favourable to the rationalistic view: Jesus, it is said, was
yet far from the expectation of an extraordinary result, hence he
consoles Martha merely with the general hope that he, the Messiah,
would procure for those who believed in him a future resurrection and a
life of blessedness. As however Jesus had before (v. 11) spoken
confidently to his disciples of awaking Lazarus, he must then have
altered his opinion in the interim—a change for which no cause is
apparent. Further, when (v. 40) Jesus is about to awake Lazarus, he
says to Martha, Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldst believe thou
shouldst see the glory of God? evidently alluding to v. 23, in which
therefore he must have meant to predict the resurrection which he was
going to effect. That he does not declare this distinctly, and that he
again veils the scarcely uttered promise in relation to the brother (v.
25) in general promises for the believing, is the effect of design, the
object of which is to try the faith of Martha, and extend her sphere of
thought. [1383]

When Mary at length comes out of the house with her companions, her
weeping moves Jesus himself to tears. To this circumstance the natural
interpretation appeals with unusual confidence, asking whether if he
were already certain of his friend’s resurrection, he would not have
approached his grave with the most fervent joy, since he was conscious
of being able to call him again living from the grave in the next
moment? In this view the words ἐνεβριμήσατο (v. 33) and ἐμβριμώμενος
(v. 38) are understood of a forcible repression of the sorrow caused by
the death of his friend, which subsequently found vent in tears
(ἐδάκρυσεν). But both by its etymology, according to which it signifies
fremere in aliquem or in se, and by the analogy of its use in the New
Testament, where it appears only in the sense of increpare aliquem
(Matt. ix. 30; Mark i. 43, xiv. 5), ἐμβριμᾶσθαι is determined to imply
an emotion of anger, not of sorrow; where it is united, not with the
dative of another person, but with τῷ πνεύματι and ἐν ἑαυτῷ, it must be
understood of a silent, suppressed displeasure. This sense would be
very appropriate in v. 38, where it occurs the second time; for in the
foregoing observation of the Jews, Could not this man, who opened the
eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?
there lies an intimation that they were scandalized, the prior conduct
of Jesus perplexing them as to his present demeanour, and vice versâ.
But where the word ἐμβριμᾶσθαι is first used v. 33, the general weeping
seems to have been likely to excite in Jesus a melancholy, rather than
an angry emotion: yet even here a strong disapproval of the want of
faith (ὀλιγοπιστία) which was manifested was not impossible. That Jesus
then himself broke out into tears, only proves that his indignation
against the faithless generation around him dissolved into melancholy,
not that melancholy was his emotion from the beginning. Lastly, that
the Jews (v. 36) in relation to the tears which Jesus shed, said among
themselves, Behold, how he loved him! appears to be rather against than
for those who regard the emotion of Jesus as sorrow for the death of
his friend, and sympathy with the sisters; for, as the character of the
narrative of John in general would rather lead us to expect an
opposition between the real import of the demeanour of Jesus, and the
interpretation put upon it by the spectators, so in particular the Jews
in this gospel are always those who either misunderstand or pervert the
words and actions of Jesus. It is true that the mild character of Jesus
is urged, as inconsistent with the harshness which displeasure on his
part at the very natural weeping of Mary and the rest would imply;
[1384] but such a mode of thinking is by no means foreign to the Christ
of John’s gospel. He who gave to the βασιλικὸς, when preferring the
inoffensive request that he would come to his house and heal his son,
the rebuke, Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe; he
who, when some of his disciples murmured at the hard doctrines of the
sixth chapter, assailed them with the cutting question, Doth this
offend you? and Will ye also go away? (vi. 61, 67); he who repulsed his
own mother, when at the wedding at Cana she complained to him of the
want of wine, with the harsh reply, What have I to do with thee, Woman?
(ii. 4)—who thus was always the most displeased when men, not
comprehending his higher mode of thought or action, showed themselves
desponding or importunate,—would here find peculiar reason for this
kind of displeasure. If this be the true interpretation of the passage,
and if it be not sorrow for the death of Lazarus which Jesus here
exhibits, there is an end to the assistance which the natural
explanation of the entire event is thought to derive from this
particular feature; meanwhile, even on the other interpretation, a
momentary emotion produced by sympathy with the mourners is quite
reconcilable with the foreknowledge of the resurrection. [1385] And how
could the words of the Jews v. 37, serve, as rationalistic commentators
think, to excite in Jesus the hope that God would now perhaps perform
something extraordinary for him? The Jews did not express the hope that
he could awake the dead, but only the conjecture that he might perhaps
have been able to preserve his friend’s life; Martha therefore had
previously said more when she declared her belief that even now the
Father would grant him what he asked; so that if such hopes were
excited in Jesus from without, they must have been excited earlier, and
especially before the weeping of Jesus, to which it is customary to
appeal as the proof that they did not yet exist.

Even supranaturalists admit that the expression of Martha when Jesus
commanded that the stone should be taken away from the grave, Κύριε,
ἤδη ὄζει (v. 39), is no proof at all that decomposition had really
commenced, nor consequently that a natural resuscitation was
impossible, since it may have been a mere inference from the length of
time since the burial. [1386] But more weight must be attached to the
words with which Jesus, repelling the objections of Martha, persists in
having the tomb opened (v. 40): Said I not unto thee that if thou
wouldst believe thou shouldst see the glory of God? How could he say
this unless he was decidedly conscious of his power to resuscitate
Lazarus? According to Paulus, this declaration only implied generally
that those who have faith will, in some way or other, experience a
glorious manifestation of the divinity. But what glorious manifestation
of the divinity was to be seen here, on the opening of the grave of one
who had been buried four days, unless it were his restoration to life?
and what could be the sense of the words of Jesus, as opposed to the
observation of Martha, that her brother was already within the grasp of
decay, but that he was empowered to arrest decay? But in order to learn
with certainty the meaning of the words τὴν δόξαν τοῦ θεοῦ in our
present passage we need only refer to v. 4, where Jesus had said that
the sickness of Lazarus was not unto death, πρὸς θάνατον, but for the
glory of God, ὑπὲρ τῆς δόξης τοῦ θεοῦ. Here the first member of the
antithesis, not unto death, clearly shows that the δόξα τοῦ θεοῦ
signifies the glorification of God by the life of Lazarus, that is,
since he was now dead, by his resurrection: a hope which Jesus could
not venture to excite in the most critical moment, without having a
superior assurance that it would be fulfilled. [1387] After the opening
of the grave, and before he says to the dead man, Come forth! he thanks
the Father for having heard his prayer. This is adduced, in the
rationalistic point of view, as the most satisfactory proof that he did
not first recall Lazarus to life by those words, but on looking into
the grave found him already alive again. Truly, such an argument was
not to be expected from theologians who have some insight into the
character of John’s gospel. These ought to have remembered how common
it is in this gospel, as for example in the expression glorify thy son,
to represent that which is yet to be effected or which is only just
begun, as already performed; and in the present instance it is
especially suited to mark the certainty of obtaining fulfilment, that
it is spoken of as having already happened. And what invention does it
further require to explain, both how Jesus could perceive in Lazarus
the evidences of returning life, and how the latter could have come to
life again! Between the removal of the stone, says Paulus, and the
thanksgiving of Jesus, lies the critical interval when the surprising
result was accomplished; then must Jesus, yet some steps removed from
the grave, have discerned that Lazarus was living. By what means? and
how so quickly and unhesitatingly? and why did he and no one else
discern it? He may have discerned it by the movements of Lazarus, it is
conjectured. But how easily might he deceive himself with respect to a
dead body lying in a dark cavern; how precipitate was he, if without
having examined more nearly, he so quickly and decidedly declared his
conviction that Lazarus lived! Or, if the movements of the supposed
corpse were strong and not to be mistaken, how could they escape the
notice of the surrounding spectators? Lastly, how could Jesus in his
prayer represent the incident about to take place as a sign of his
divine mission, if he was conscious that he had not effected, but only
discovered, the resuscitation of Lazarus? As arguments for the natural
possibility of a return of life in a man who had been interred four
days, the rationalistic explanation adduces our ignorance of the
particular circumstances of the supposed death, the rapidity of
interment among the Jews, afterwards the coolness of the cave, the
strong fragrance of the spices, and lastly, the reanimating draught of
warm air, which on the rolling away of the stone streamed into the
cave. But all these circumstances do not produce more than the lowest
degree of possibility, which coincides with the highest degree of
improbability: and with this the certainty with which Jesus predicts
the result must remain irreconcilable. [1388]

These decided predictions are indeed the main hindrance to the natural
interpretation of this chapter; hence it has been sought to neutralize
them, still from the rationalistic position, by the supposition that
they did not proceed from Jesus, but may have been added ex eventu by
the narrator. Paulus himself found the words ἐξυπνίσω αὐτὸν (v. 11)
quite too decided, and therefore ventured the conjecture that the
narrator, writing with the result in his mind, had omitted a qualifying
perhaps, which Jesus had inserted. [1389] This expedient has been more
extensively adopted by Gabler. Not only does he partake the opinion of
Paulus as to the above expression, but already in v. 4, he is inclined
to lay the words ὑπὲρ τῆς δόξης τοῦ θεοῦ for the glory of God, to the
account of the Evangelist: again v. 15, he conjectures that in the
words χαίρω δι’ ὑμᾶς, ἵνα πιστεύσητε, ὅτι οὐκ ἤμην ἐκεῖ, I am glad for
your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe, there is
a slight exaggeration resulting from John’s knowledge of the issue;
lastly, even in relation to the words of Martha v. 22, ἀλλὰ καὶ νῦν
οἶδα κ.τ.λ. he admits the idea of an addition from the pen of the
writer. [1390] By the adoption of this expedient, the natural
interpretation avows its inability by itself to cope with the
difficulties in John’s narrative. For if, in order to render its
application possible, it is necessary to expunge the most significant
passages, it is plain that the narrative in its actual state does not
admit of a natural explanation. It is true that the passages, the
incompatibility of which with the rationalistic mode of explanation is
confessed by their excision, are very sparingly chosen; but from the
above observations it is clear, that if all the features in this
narrative which are really opposed to the natural view of the entire
event were ascribed to the Evangelist, it would in the end be little
short of the whole that must be regarded as his invention. Thus, what
we have done with the two first narratives of resuscitations, is with
the last and most remarkable history of this kind, effected by the
various successive attempts at explanation themselves, namely, to
reduce the subject to the alternative: that we either receive the event
as supernatural, according to the representation of the evangelical
narrative; or, if we find it incredible as such, deny that the
narrative has an historical character.

In order, in this dilemma, to arrive at a decision, with respect to all
the three narratives, we must refer to the peculiar character of the
kind of miracles which we have now before us. We have hitherto been
ascending a ladder of miracles; first, cures of mental disorders, then,
of all kinds of bodily maladies, in which, however, the organization of
the sufferer was not so injured as to cause the cessation of
consciousness and life; and now, the revivification of bodies, from
which the life has actually departed. This progression in the
marvellous is, at the same time, a gradation in inconceivability. We
have indeed been able to represent to ourselves how a mental
derangement, in which none of the bodily organs were attacked beyond
the nervous system, which is immediately connected with mental action,
might have been removed, even in a purely psychical manner, by the mere
word, look, and influence of Jesus: but the more deeply the malady
appeared to have penetrated into the entire corporeal system, the more
inconceivable to us was a cure of this kind. Where in insane persons
the brain was disturbed to the extent of raging madness, or where in
nervous patients the disorder was so confirmed as to manifest itself in
periodical epilepsy; there we could scarcely imagine how permanent
benefit could be conferred by that mental influence; and this was yet
more difficult where the disease had no immediate connection with the
mind, as in leprosy, blindness, lameness, etc. And yet, up to this
point, there was always something present, to which the miraculous
power of Jesus could apply itself; there was still a consciousness in
the objects, on which to make an impression—a nervous life to be
stimulated. Not so with the dead. The corpse from which life and
consciousness have flown has lost the last fulcrum for the power of the
miracle worker; it perceives him no longer—receives no impression from
him; for the very capability of receiving impressions must be conferred
on him anew. But to confer this, that is, to give life in the proper
sense, is a creative act, and to think of this as being exercised by a
man, we must confess to be beyond our power.

But even within the limits of our three histories of resurrections,
there is an evident climax. Woolston has remarked with justice, that it
seems as if each of these narratives were intended to supply what was
wanting in the preceding. [1391] The daughter of Jairus is restored to
life on the same bed on which she had just expired; the youth of Nain,
when already in his coffin, and on his way to interment; lastly,
Lazarus, after four days’ abode in the tomb. In the first history, a
word was the only intimation that the maiden had fallen under the
powers of the grave; in the second, the fact is imprinted on the
imagination also, by the picture of the young man being already carried
out of the city towards his grave; but in the third, Lazarus, who had
been some time inclosed in the grave, is depicted in the strongest
manner as an inhabitant of the nether world: so that, if the reality of
the death could be doubted in the first instance, this would become
more difficult in the second, and in the third, as good as impossible.
[1392] With this gradation, there is a corresponding increase in the
difficulty of rendering the three events conceivable; if, indeed, when
the fact itself is inconceivable, there can exist degrees of
inconceivableness between its various modifications. If, however, the
resurrection of a dead person in general were possible, it must rather
be possible in the case of one just departed, and yet having some
remains of vital warmth, than in that of a corpse, cold and being
carried to the grave; and again, in this, rather than in the case of
one who had already lain four days in the grave, and in which decay is
supposed to have commenced, nay, with respect to which, this
supposition, if not confirmed, is at least not denied.

But, setting aside the miraculous part of the histories in question,
each succeeding one is both intrinsically more improbable, and
externally less attested, than the foregoing. As regards the internal
improbability, one element of this, which indeed lies in all, and
therefore also in the first, is especially conspicuous in the second.
As a motive by which Jesus was induced to raise the young man at Nain,
the narrative mentions compassion for the mother (v. 13). Together with
this we are to include, according to Olshausen, a reference to the
young man himself. For, he observes, man as a conscious being can never
be treated as a mere instrument, which would be the case here, if the
joy of the mother were regarded as the sole object of Jesus in raising
the youth. [1393] This remark of Olshausen demands our thanks, not that
it removes the difficulty of this and every other resuscitation of the
dead, but that it exhibits that difficulty in the clearest light. For
the conclusion, that what in itself, or according to enlightened ideas,
is not allowable or fitting, cannot be ascribed to Jesus by the
Evangelists, is totally inadmissible. We should rather (presupposing
the purity of the character of Jesus) conclude that when the
evangelical narratives ascribe to him what is not allowable, they are
incorrect. Now that Jesus, in his resuscitations of the dead, made it a
consideration whether the persons to be restored to life might, from
the spiritual condition in which they died, derive advantage from the
restoration or the contrary, we find no indication; that, as Olshausen
supposes, the corporeal awakening was attended with a spiritual
awakening, or that such a result was expected, is nowhere said. These
resuscitated individuals, not excepting even Lazarus, recede altogether
from our observation after their return to life, and hence Woolston was
led to ask why Jesus rescued from the grave precisely these
insignificant persons, and not rather John the Baptist, or some other
generally useful man. Is it said, he knew it to be the will of
Providence that these men, once dead, should remain so? But then, it
should seem, he must have thought the same of all who had once died,
and to Woolston’s objection there remains no answer but this: as it was
positively known concerning celebrated men, that the breach which their
deaths occasioned was never filled up by their restoration to life,
legend could not annex the resurrections which she was pleased to
narrate to such names, but must choose unknown subjects, in relation to
which she was not under the same control.

The above difficulty is common to all the three narratives, and is only
rendered more prominent in the second by an accidental expression: but
the third narrative is full of difficulties entirely peculiar to
itself, since the conduct of Jesus throughout, and, to a considerable
extent, that of the other parties, is not easily to be conceived. When
Jesus receives the information of the death of Lazarus, and the request
of the sisters implied therein, that he would come to Bethany, he
remains still two days in the same place, and does not set out toward
Judea till after he is certain of the death. Why so? That it was not
because he thought the illness attended with no danger, has been
already shown; on the contrary, he foresaw the death of Lazarus. That
indifference was not the cause of the delay, is expressly remarked by
the Evangelist (v. 5). What then? Lücke conjectures that Jesus was then
occupied with a particularly fruitful ministry in Peræa, which he was
not willing to interrupt for the sake of Lazarus, holding it his duty
to postpone his less important call as a worker of miracles and a
succouring friend, to his higher call as a teacher. [1394] But he might
here have very well done the one, and not have left the other undone;
he might either have left some disciples to carry forward his work in
that country, or remaining there himself, have still cured Lazarus,
whether through the medium of a disciple, or by the power of his will
at a distance. Moreover, our narrator is entirely silent as to such a
cause for the delay of Jesus. This view of it, therefore, can be
listened to only on the supposition that no other motive for the delay
is intimated by the Evangelist, and even then as nothing more than a
conjecture. Now another motive is clearly indicated, as Olshausen has
remarked, in the declaration of Jesus, v. 15, that he is glad he was
not present at the death of Lazarus, because, for the object of
strengthening the faith of the disciples, the resurrection of his
friend would be more effectual than his cure. Thus Jesus had designedly
allowed Lazarus to die, that by his miraculous restoration to life, he
might procure so much the more faith in himself. Tholuck and Olshausen
on the whole put the same construction on this declaration of Jesus;
but they confine themselves too completely to the moral point of view,
when they speak of Jesus as designing, in his character of teacher, to
perfect the spiritual condition of the family at Bethany and of his
disciples; [1395] since, according to expressions, such as ἵνα δοξασθῇ
ὁ υἱὸς τ. θ. (v. 4), his design was rather the messianic one of
spreading and confirming faith in himself as the Son of God, though
principally, it is true, within that narrow circle. Here Lücke
exclaims: by no means! never did the Saviour of the needy, the noblest
friend of man, act thus arbitrarily and capriciously; [1396] and De
Wette also observes, that Jesus in no other instance designedly brings
about or increases his miracles. [1397] The former, as we have seen,
concludes that something external, preoccupation elsewhere, detained
Jesus; a supposition which is contrary to the text, and which even De
Wette finds inadequate, though he points out no other expedient. If
then these critics are correct in maintaining that the real Jesus
cannot have acted thus; while, on the other hand, they are incorrect in
denying that the author of the fourth gospel makes his Jesus act thus:
nothing remains but with the author of the Probabilia, [1398] from this
incongruity of the Christ in John’s gospel with the Christ alone
conceivable as the real one, to conclude that the narrative of the
fourth Evangelist is unhistorical.



The alleged conduct of the disciples also, v. 12 f., is such as to
excite surprise. If Jesus had represented to them, or at least to the
three principal among them, the death of the daughter of Jairus as a
mere sleep, how could they, when he said of Lazarus, he sleeps, I will
awake him, κεκοίμηται, ἐξυπνίσω αὐτὸν think that he referred to a
natural sleep? One would not awake a patient out of a healthy sleep;
hence it must have immediately occurred to the disciples that here
sleep (κοίμησις) was spoken of in the same sense as in the case of the
maiden. That, instead of this, the disciples understand the deep
expressions of Jesus quite superficially, is entirely in the fourth
Evangelist’s favourite manner, which we have learned to recognise by
many examples. If tradition had in any way made known to him, that to
speak of death as a sleep was part of the customary phraseology of
Jesus, there would immediately spring up in his imagination, so fertile
in this kind of antithesis, a misunderstanding corresponding to that
figure of speech. [1399]

The observation of the Jews, v. 37, is scarcely conceivable,
presupposing the truth of the synoptical resuscitations of the dead.
The Jews appeal to the cure of the man born blind (John ix.), and draw
the inference, that he who had restored sight to this individual, must
surely have been able to avert the death of Lazarus. How came they to
refer to this heterogeneous and inadequate example, if there lay before
them, in the two resuscitations of the dead, miracles more analogous,
and adapted to give hope even in this case of actual death? It is
certain that the Galilean resuscitations were prior to this of Lazarus,
since Jesus after this period went no more into Galilee; neither could
those events remain unknown in the capital, [1400] especially as we are
are expressly told that the fame of them went abroad into all that
land, throughout all Judæa, and throughout all the country round about.
To the real Jews therefore these cases must have been well known; and
as the fourth Evangelist makes his Jews refer to something less to the
point, it is probable that he knew nothing of the above events: for
that the reference belongs to him, and not to the Jews themselves, is
evident from the fact, that he makes them refer to the very cure which
he had last narrated.

A formidable difficulty lies also in the prayer which is put into the
mouth of Jesus, v. 41 f. After thanking the Father for hearing his
prayer, he adds, that for himself he knew well that the Father heard
him always, and that he uttered this special thanksgiving only for the
sake of the people around him, in order to obtain their belief in his
divine mission. Thus he first gives his address a relation to God, and
afterwards reduces this relation to a feigned one, intended to exist
only in the conceptions of the people. Nor is the sense of the words
such as Lücke represents it, namely, that Jesus for his own part would
have prayed in silence, but for the benefit of the people uttered his
prayer aloud (for in the certainty of fulfilment there lies no motive
for silent prayer); they imply that for himself he had no need to thank
the Father for a single result, as if surprised, since he was sure
beforehand of having his wish granted, so that the wish and the thanks
were coincident; that is, to speak generally, his relation to the
Father did not consist in single acts of prayer, fulfilment, and
thanks, but in a continual and permanent interchange of these
reciprocal functions, in which no single act of gratitude in and by
itself could be distinguished in this manner. If it may be admitted
that in relation to the necessities of the people, and out of sympathy
with them, such an isolated act could have taken place on the part of
Jesus; yet, if there be any truth in this explanation, Jesus must have
been entirely borne away by sympathy, must have made the position of
the people his own, and thus in that moment have prayed from his own
impulse, and on his own behalf. [1401] But, here, scarcely has he begun
to pray when the reflection arises that he does this from no need of
his own; he prays therefore from no lively feeling, but out of cold
accommodation, and this must be felt difficult to conceive, nay, even
revolting. He who in this manner prays solely for the edification of
others, ought in no case to tell them that he prays from their point of
view, not from his own; since an audible prayer cannot make any
impression on the hearers, unless they suppose the speaker’s whole soul
to be engaged. How then could Jesus make his prayer ineffective by this
addition? If he felt impelled to lay before God a confession of the
true state of the case, he might have done this in silence; that he
uttered the confession aloud, and that we in consequence read it, could
only happen on a calculation of advantage to later Christendom, to the
readers of the gospel. While the thanksgiving was, for obvious reasons,
needful to awake the faith of the spectators, the more developed faith
which the fourth gospel presupposes, might regard it as a difficulty;
because it might possibly appear to proceed from a too subordinate, and
more particularly, a too little constant relation between the Father
and the Son. Consequently the prayer which was necessary for the
hearers, must be annulled for readers of a later period, or its value
restricted to that of a mere accommodation. But this consideration
cannot have been present in the mind of Jesus: it could belong only to
a Christian who lived later. This has been already felt by one critic,
who has hence proposed to throw v. 42 out of the text, as an
unauthenticated addition by a latter hand. [1402] But as this judgment
is destitute of any external reason, if the above passage could not
have been uttered by Jesus, we must conclude that the Evangelist only
lent the words to Jesus in order to explain the preceding, v. 41; and
to this opinion Lücke has shown himself not altogether disinclined.
[1403] Assuredly we have here words, which are only lent to Jesus by
the Evangelist: but if it be so with these words, what is our security
that it is so only with these? In a gospel in which we have already
detected many discourses to be merely lent to the alleged speakers—in a
narrative which presents historical improbabilities at all points,—the
difficulty contained in a single verse is not a sign that that verse
does not belong to the rest, but that the whole taken together does not
belong to the class of historical compositions. [1404]

As regards the gradation in the external testimony to the three
narratives, it has already been justly observed by Woolston, that only
the resurrection of the daughter of Jairus, in which the miraculous is
the least marked, appears in three Evangelists; the two others are each
related by one Evangelist only: [1405] and as it is far less easy to
understand the omission in the other gospels in relation to the
resurrection of Lazarus, than in relation to the raising of the youth
at Nain, there is here again a complete climax.

That the last-named event is mentioned by the author of Luke’s gospel
alone;—especially that Matthew and Mark have it not instead of the
resuscitation of the daughter of Jairus, or together with that
narrative,—is a difficulty in more than one respect. [1406] Even viewed
generally as a resuscitation of a dead person, one would have thought,
as there were few of such miracles according to our gospels, and as
they are highly calculated to carry conviction, it could not have been
too much trouble to the Evangelists to recount it as a second instance;
especially as Matthew has thought it worth while, for example, to
narrate three cures of blindness, which nevertheless were of far less
importance, and of which, therefore, he might have spared two,
inserting instead of them either one or the other of the remaining
resuscitations of the dead. But admitting that the two first
Evangelists had some reason, no longer to be discovered, for not giving
more than one history of a resurrection, they ought, one must think, to
have chosen that of the youth at Nain far rather than that of the
daughter of Jairus, because the former, as we have above observed, was
a more indubitable and striking resurrection. As nevertheless they give
only the latter, Matthew at least can have known nothing of the others;
Mark, it is true, probably had it before him in Luke, but he had, as
early as iii. 7, or 20, leaped from Luke vi. 12 (17) to Matt. xii. 15;
and only at iv. 35 (21 ff.) returns to Luke viii. 22 (16 ff.); [1407]
thus passing over the resurrection of the youth (Luke vii. 11 ff.). But
now arises the second question: how can the resurrection of the youth,
if it really happened, have remained unknown to the author of the first
gospel? Even apart from the supposition that this gospel had an
apostolic origin, this question is fraught with no less difficulty than
the former. Besides the people, there were present many of his
disciples, μαθηταὶ ἱκανοὶ; the place, Nain, according to the account
which Josephus gives of its position relative to Mount Tabor, cannot
have been far from the ordinary Galilean theatre of the ministry of
Jesus; [1408] lastly, the fame of the event, as was natural, was widely
disseminated (v. 17). Schleiermacher is of opinion that the authors of
the first sketches from the life of Jesus, not being within the
apostolic circle, did not generally venture to apply to the much
occupied apostles, but rather sought the friends of Jesus of the second
order, and in doing so they naturally turned to those places where they
might hope for the richest harvests,—to Capernaum and Jerusalem; events
which, like the resuscitation in question, occurred in other places,
could not so easily become common property. But first, this conception
of the case is too subjective, making the promulgation of the most
important deeds of Jesus, dependent on the researches of amateurs and
collectors of anecdotes, who went about gleaning, like Papias, at a
later period; secondly, (and these two objections are essentially
connected,) there lies at its foundation the erroneous idea that such
histories were fixed, like inert bodies once fallen to the ground, in
the places to which they belonged, guarded there as lifeless treasures,
and only exhibited to those who took the trouble to resort to the spot:
instead of which, they were rather like the light-winged inhabitants of
the air, flying far away from the place which gave them birth, roaming
everywhere, and not seldom losing all association with their original
locality. We see the same thing happen daily; innumerable histories,
both true and false, are represented as having occurred at the most
widely different places. Such a narrative, once formed, is itself the
substance, the alleged locality, the accident: by no means can the
locality be the substance, to which the narrative is united as the
accident, as it would follow from Schleiermacher’s supposition. Since
then it cannot well be conceived that an incident of this kind, if it
really happened, could remain foreign to the general tradition, and
hence unknown to the author of the first gospel: the fact of this
author’s ignorance of the incident gives rise to a suspicion that it
did not really happen.

But this ground of doubt falls with incomparably greater weight, on the
narrative of the resurrection of Lazarus in the fourth gospel. If the
authors or collectors of the three first gospels knew of this, they
could not, for more than one reason, avoid introducing it into their
writings. For, first, of all the resuscitations effected by Jesus, nay,
of all his miracles, this resurrection of Lazarus, if not the most
wonderful, is yet the one in which the marvellous presents itself the
most obviously and strikingly, and which therefore, if its historical
reality can be established, is a pre-eminently strong proof of the
extraordinary endowments of Jesus as a divine messenger; [1409] whence
the Evangelists, although they had related one or two other instances
of the kind, could not think it superfluous to add this also. But,
secondly, the resurrection of Lazarus had, according to the
representation of John, a direct influence in the development of the
fate of Jesus; for we learn from xi. 47 ff., that the increased resort
to Jesus, and the credit which this event procured him, led to that
consultation of the Sanhedrim in which the sanguinary counsel of
Caiaphas was given and approved. Thus the event had a double
importance—pragmatical as well as dogmatical; consequently, the
synoptical writers could not have failed to narrate it, had it been
within their knowledge. Nevertheless, theologians have found out all
sorts of reasons why those Evangelists, even had the fact been known to
them, should refrain from its narration. Some have been of opinion that
at the time of the composition of the three first gospels, the history
was still in every mouth, so that to make a written record of it was
superfluous; [1410] others, on the contrary, have conjectured that it
was thought desirable to guard against its further publication, lest
danger should accrue to Lazarus and his family, the former of whom,
according to John xii. 10, was persecuted by the Jewish hierarchy on
account of the miracle which had been preformed in him; a caution for
which there was no necessity at the later period at which John wrote
his gospel. [1411] It is plain that these two reasons nullify each
other, and neither of them is in itself worthy of a serious refutation;
yet as similar modes of evading a difficulty are still more frequently
resorted to than might be supposed, we ought not to think some
animadversion on them altogether thrown away. The proposition, that the
resurrection of Lazarus was not recorded by the synoptists because it
was generally known in their circle, proves too much; since on this
rule, precisely the most important events in the life of Jesus, his
baptism, death, and resurrection, must have remained unwritten.
Moreover, writings, which like our gospels, originate in a religious
community, do not serve merely to make known the unknown; it is their
office also to preserve what is already known. In opposition to the
other explanation, it has been remarked by others, that the publication
of this history among those who were not natives of Palestine, as was
the case with those for whom Mark and Luke wrote, could have done no
injury to Lazarus; and even the author of the first gospel, admitting
that he wrote in and for Palestine, could hardly have withheld a fact
in which the glory of Christ was so peculiarly manifested, merely out
of consideration to Lazarus, who, supposing the more improbable case
that he was yet living at the time of the composition of the first
gospel, ought not, Christian as he doubtless was, to refuse to suffer
for the name of Christ; and the same observation would apply to his
family. The most dangerous time for Lazarus according to John xii. 10,
was that immediately after his resurrection, and a narrative which
appeared so long after, could scarcely have heightened or renewed this
danger; besides, in the neighbourhood of Bethany and Jerusalem whence
danger was threatened to Lazarus, the event must have been so
well-known and remembered that nothing was to be risked by its
publication. [1412]

It appears then that the resurrection of Lazarus, since it is not
narrated by the synoptists, cannot have been known to them; and the
question arises, how was this ignorance possible? Hase gives the
mysterious answer, that the reason of this omission lies hid in the
common relations under which the synoptists in general were silent
concerning all the earlier incidents in Judæa; but this leaves it
uncertain, at least so far as the expressions go, whether we ought to
decide to the disadvantage of the fourth gospel or of its predecessors.
The latest criticism of the gospel of Matthew has cleared up the
ambiguity in Hase’s answer after its usual manner, determining the
nature of those common relations which he vaguely adduces, thus: Every
one of the synoptists, by his ignorance of a history which an apostle
must have known, betrays himself to be no apostle. [1413] But this
renunciation of the apostolic origin of the first gospel, does not by
any means enable us to explain the ignorance of its author and his
compeers of the resurrection of Lazarus. For besides the remarkable
character of the event, its occurrence in the very heart of Judæa, the
great attention excited by it, and its having been witnessed by the
apostles,—all these considerations render it incomprehensible that it
should not have entered into the general tradition, and from thence
into the synoptical gospels. It is argued that these gospels are
founded on Galilean legends, i.e. oral narratives and written notices
by the Galilean friends and companions of Jesus; that these were not
present at the resurrection of Lazarus, and therefore did not include
it in their memoirs; and that the authors of the first gospels,
strictly confining themselves to the Galilean sources of information,
likewise passed over the event. [1414] But there was not such a wall of
partition between Galilee and Judæa, that the fame of an event like the
resurrection of Lazarus could help sounding over from the one to the
other. Even if it did not happen during a feast time, when (John iv.
45) many Galileans might be eye-witnesses, yet the disciples, who were
for the greater part Galileans, were present (v. 16), and must, so soon
as they returned into Galilee after the resurrection of Jesus, have
spread abroad the history throughout this province, or rather, before
this, the Galileans who kept the last passover attended by Jesus, must
have learned the event, the report of which was so rife in the city.
Hence even Lücke finds this explanation of Gabler’s unsatisfactory; and
on his own side attempts to solve the enigma by the observation, that
the original evangelical tradition, which the synoptists followed, did
not represent the history of the Passion mainly in a pragmatical light,
and therefore gave no heed to this event as the secret motive of the
murderous resolve against Jesus, and that only John, who was initiated
into the secret history of the Sanhedrim, was in a condition to supply
this explanatory fact. [1415] This view of the case would certainly
appear to neutralize one reason why the synoptists must have noticed
the event in question, namely, that drawn from its pragmatical
importance; but when it is added, that as a miracle regarded in itself,
apart from its more particular circumstances, it might easily be lost
among the rest of those narratives from which we have in the three
first gospels a partly accidental selection,—we must reply, that the
synoptical selection of miracles appears to be an accidental one only
when that is at once assumed which ought first to be proved: namely,
that the miracles in the fourth gospel are historical: and unless the
selection be casual to a degree inconsistent with the slightest
intelligence in the compilers, such a miracle cannot have been
overlooked. [1416]

It has doubtless been these and similar considerations, which have led
the latest writers on the controversy concerning the first gospel, to
complain of the one-sidedness with which the above question is always
answered to the disadvantage of the synoptists, especially Matthew, as
if it were forgotten that an answer dangerous to the fourth gospel lies
just as near at hand. [1417] For our own part, we are not so greatly
alarmed by the fulminations of Lücke, as to be deterred from the
expression of our opinion on the subject. This theologian, even in his
latest editions, reproaches those who, from the silence of the
synoptical writers, conclude that this narrative is a fiction and the
gospel of John not authentic, with an unparalleled lack of discernment,
and a total want of insight into the mutual relations of our gospels
(that is, into those relations viewed according to the professional
conviction of theologians, which is unshaken even by the often
well-directed attacks of the author of the Probabilia). We,
nevertheless, distinctly declare that we regard the history of the
resurrection of Lazarus, not only as in the highest degree improbable
in itself, but also destitute of external evidence; and this whole
chapter, in connexion with those previously examined, as an indication
of the unauthenticity of the fourth gospel.

If it is thus proved that all the three evangelical histories of
resuscitations are rendered more or less doubtful by negative reasons:
all that is now wanting to us is positive proof, that the tradition of
Jesus having raised the dead might easily be formed without historical
foundation. According to rabbinical, [1418] as well as New Testament
passages (e.g. John v. 28 f., vi. 40, 44; 1 Cor. xv.; 1 Thess. iv. 16),
the resuscitation of the dead was expected of the Messiah at his
coming. Now the παρουσία, the appearance of the Messiah Jesus on earth,
was in the view of the early church broken by his death into two parts;
the first comprised his preparatory appearance, which began with his
human birth, and ended with the resurrection and ascension; the second
was to commence with his future advent on the clouds of heaven, in
order to open the αἰὼν μέλλων, the age to come. As the first appearance
of Jesus had wanted the glory and majesty expected in the Messiah, the
great demonstrations of messianic power, and in particular the general
resurrection of the dead, were assigned to his second, and as yet
future appearance on earth. Nevertheless, as an immediate pledge of
what was to be anticipated, even in the first advent some
fore-splendours of the second must have been visible in single
instances; Jesus must, even in his first advent, by awaking some of the
dead, have guaranteed his authority one day to awake all the dead; he
must, when questioned as to his messiahship, have been able to adduce
among other criteria the fact that the dead were raised up by him
(Matt. xi. 5), and he must have imparted the same power to his
disciples (Matt. xi. 8, comp. Acts ix. 40, xx. 10); but especially as a
close prefiguration of the hour in which all that are in their graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth (John v. 28 f.), he must
have cried with a loud voice, Come forth! to one who had lain in the
grave four days (John xi. 17, 43). For the origination of detailed
narratives of single resuscitations, there lay, besides, the most
appropriate types in the Old Testament. The prophets Elijah and Elisha
(1 Kings xvii. 17 ff.; 2 Kings iv. 18 ff.) had awaked the dead, and to
these instances Jewish writings appealed as a type of the messianic
time. [1419] The object of the resuscitation was with both these
prophets a child, but a boy, while in the narrative common to the
synoptists we have a girl; the two prophets revived him while he lay on
the bed, as Jesus does the daughter of Jairus; both entered alone into
the chamber of death, as Jesus excludes all save a few confidential
friends; only, as it is fitting, the Messiah needs not the laborious
manipulations by which the prophets attained their object. Elijah in
particular raised the son of a widow, as Jesus did at Nain; he met the
widow of Zarephath at the gate (but before the death of her son) as
Jesus met the widow of Nain, under the gate of the city (after the
death of her son); lastly, it is in both instances told in the same
words how the miracle-worker restored the son to the mother. [1420]
Even one already laid in his grave, like Lazarus, was restored to life
by the prophet Elisha; with this difference, however, that the prophet
himself had been long dead, and the contact of his bones reanimated a
corpse which was accidentally thrown upon them (2 Kings xiii. 21).
There is yet another point of similarity between the resuscitations of
the dead in the Old Testament and that of Lazarus; it is that Jesus,
while in his former resuscitation he utters the authoritative word
without any preliminary, in that of Lazarus offers a prayer to God, as
Elisha, and more particularly Elijah, are said to have done. While
Paulus extends to these narratives in the Old Testament, the natural
explanation which he has applied to those in the New, theologians of
more enlarged views have long ago remarked, that the resurrections in
the New Testament are nothing more than mythi, which had their origin
in the tendency of the early Christian church, to make her Messiah
agree with the type of the prophets, and with the messianic ideal.
[1421]




§ 101.

ANECDOTES HAVING RELATION TO THE SEA.

As in general, at least according to the representations of the three
first Evangelists the country around the Galilean sea was the chief
theatre of the ministry of Jesus; so a considerable number of his
miracles have an immediate reference to the sea. One of this class, the
miraculous draught of fishes granted to Peter, has already presented
itself for our consideration; besides this, there are the miraculous
stilling of the storm which had arisen on the sea while Jesus slept, in
the three synoptists; Matthew, Mark, and John; the summary of most of
those, the walking of Jesus on the sea, likewise during a storm, in
incidents which the appendix to the fourth gospel places after the
resurrection; and lastly, the anecdote of the coin that was to be
angled for by Peter, in Matthew.

The first-named narrative (Matt. viii. 23 ff. parall.) is intended,
according to the Evangelist’s own words, to represent Jesus to us as
him whom the winds and the sea obey, οἱ ἄνεμοι καὶ ἡ θάλασσα
ὑπακούουσιν. Thus, to follow out the gradation in the miraculous which
has been hitherto observed, it is here presupposed, not merely that
Jesus could act on the human mind and living body in a psychological
and magnetic manner; or with a revivifying power on the human organism
when it was forsaken by vitality; nay, not merely as in the history of
the draught of fishes earlier examined, that he could act immediately
with determinative power, on irrational yet animated existences, but
that he could act thus even on inanimate nature. The possibility of
finding a point of union between the alleged supernatural agency of
Jesus, and the natural order of phenomena, here absolutely ceases:
here, at the latest, there is an end to miracles in the wider and now
more favoured sense; and we come to those which must be taken in the
narrowest sense, or to the miracle proper. The purely supranaturalistic
view is therefore the first to suggest itself. Olshausen has justly
felt, that such a power over external nature is not essentially
connected with the destination of Jesus for the human race and for the
salvation of man; whence he was led to place the natural phenomenon
which is here controlled by Jesus in a relation to sin, and therefore
to the office of Jesus. Storms, he says, are the spasms and convulsions
of nature, and as such the consequences of sin, the fearful effects of
which are seen even on the physical side of existence. [1422] But it is
only that limited observation of nature which in noting the particular
forgets the general, that can regard storms, tempests, and similar
phenomena (which in connexion with the whole have their necessary place
and beneficial influence) as evils and departure from original law: and
a theory of the world in which it is seriously upheld, that before the
fall there were no storms and tempests, as, on the other hand, no
beasts of prey and poisonous plants, partakes—one does not know whether
to say, of the fanatical, or of the childish. But to what purpose, if
the above explanation will not hold, could Jesus be gifted with such a
power over nature? As a means of awakening faith in him, it was
inadequate and superfluous: because Jesus found individual adherents
without any demonstration of a power of this kind, and general
acceptance even this did not procure him. As little can it be regarded
as a type of the original dominion of man over external nature, a
dominion which he is destined to reattain; for the value of this
dominion consists precisely in this, that it is a mediate one, achieved
by the progressive reflection and the united efforts of ages, not an
immediate and magical dominion, which costs no more than a word. Hence
in relation to that part of nature of which we are here speaking the
compass and the steam-vessel are an incomparably truer realization of
man’s dominion over the ocean, than the allaying of the waves by a mere
word. But the subject has another aspect, since the dominion of man
over nature is not merely external and practical, but also immanent or
theoretical, that is, man even when externally he is subjected to the
might of the elements, yet is not internally conquered by them; but, in
the conviction that the powers of physical nature can only destroy in
him that which belongs to his physical existence, is elevated in the
self-certainty of the spirit above the possible destruction of the
body. This spiritual power, it is said, was exhibited by Jesus, for he
slept tranquilly in the midst of the storm, and when awaked by his
trembling disciples, inspired them with courage by his words. But for
courage to be shown, real danger must be apprehended: now for Jesus,
supposing him to be conscious of an immediate power over nature, danger
could in no degree exist: therefore he could not here give any proof of
this theoretical power.

In both respects the natural explanation would find only the
conceivable and the desirable attributed to Jesus in the evangelical
narrative; namely, on the one hand, an intelligent observation of the
state of the weather, and on the other, exalted courage in the presence
of real peril. When we read that Jesus commanded the winds ἐπιτιμᾷν
τοῖς ἀνέμοις, we are to understand simply that he made some remark on
the storm, or some exclamations at its violence: and his calming of the
sea we are to regard only as a prognostication, founded on the
observation of certain signs, that the storm would soon subside. His
address to the disciples is said to have proceeded, like the celebrated
saying of Cæsar, from the confidence that a man who was to leave an
impress on the world’s history, could not so lightly be cut short in
his career by an accident. That those who were in the ship regarded the
subsidence of the storm as the effect of the words of Jesus, proves
nothing, for Jesus nowhere confirms their inference. [1423] But neither
does he disapprove it, although he must have observed the impression
which, in consequence of that inference, the result had made on the
people; [1424] he must therefore, as Venturini actually supposes, have
designedly refrained from shaking their high opinion of his miraculous
power, in order to attach them to him the more firmly. But, setting
this altogether aside, was it likely that the natural presages of the
storm should have been better understood by Jesus, who had never been
occupied on the sea, than by Peter, James, and John, who had been at
home on it from their youth upwards? [1425]

It remains then that, taking the incident as it is narrated by the
Evangelists, we must regard it as a miracle; but to raise this from an
exegetical result to a real fact, is, according to the above remarks
extremely difficult: whence there arises a suspicion against the
historical character of the narrative. Viewed more nearly however, and
taking Matthew’s account as the basis, there is nothing to object to
the narrative until the middle of v. 26. It might really have happened
that Jesus in one of his frequent passages across the Galilean sea, was
sleeping when a storm arose; that the disciples awaked him with alarm,
while he, calm and self-possessed, said to them, Why are ye fearful, O
ye of little faith? What follows—the commanding of the waves, which
Mark, with his well-known fondness for such authoritative words,
reproduces as if he were giving the exact words of Jesus in a Greek
translation (σιώπα, πεφίμωσο!)—might have been added in the propagation
of the anecdote from one to another. There was an inducement to
attribute to Jesus such a command over the winds and the sea, not only
in the opinion entertained of his person, but also in certain features
of the Old Testament history. Here, in poetical descriptions of the
passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea, Jehovah is designated as
he who rebuked the Red Sea, ἐπετίμησε τῇ ἐρυθρᾷ θαλάσσῇ (Psa. cvi. 9;
LXX. comp. Nahum i. 4), so that it retreated. Now, as the instrument in
this partition of the Red Sea was Moses, it was natural to ascribe to
his great successor, the Messiah, a similar function; accordingly we
actually find from rabbinical passages, that a drying up of the sea was
expected to be wrought by God in the messianic times, doubtless through
the agency of the Messiah, as formerly through that of Moses. [1426]
That instead of drying up the sea Jesus is said only to produce a calm,
may be explained, on the supposition that the storm and the composure
exhibited by Jesus on the occasion were historical, as a consequence of
the mythical having combined itself with this historical element; for,
as according to this, Jesus and his disciples were on board a ship, a
drying up of the sea would have been out of place.

Still it is altogether without any sure precedent, that a mythical
addition should be engrafted on the stem of a real incident, so as to
leave the latter totally unmodified. And there is one feature, even in
the part hitherto assumed to be historical, which, more narrowly
examined, might just as probably have been invented by the legend as
have really happened. That Jesus, before the storm breaks out, is
sleeping, and even when it arises, does not immediately awake, is not
his voluntary deed, but chance; [1427] it is this very chance, however,
which alone gives the scene its full significance, for Jesus sleeping
in the storm is by the contrast which he presents, a not less
emblematical image than Ulysses sleeping when, after so many storms, he
was about to land on his island home. Now that Jesus really slept at
the time that a storm broke out, may indeed have happened by chance in
one case out of ten; but in the nine cases also, when this did not
happen, and Jesus only showed himself calm and courageous during the
storm, I am inclined to think that the legend would so far have
understood her interest, that, as she had represented the contrast of
the tranquillity of Jesus with the raging of the elements to the
intellect, by means of the words of Jesus, so she would depict it for
the imagination, by means of the image of Jesus sleeping in the ship
(or as Mark has it, [1428] on a pillow in the hinder part of the ship).
If then that which may possibly have happened in a single case, must
certainly have been invented by the legend in nine cases; the expositor
must in reason prepare himself for the undeniable possibility, that we
have before us one of the nine cases, instead of that single case.
[1429] If then it be granted that nothing further remains as an
historical foundation for our narrative, than that Jesus exhorted his
disciples to show the firm courage of faith in opposition to the raging
waves of the sea, it is certainly possible that he may once have done
this in a storm at sea; but just as he said: if ye have faith as a
grain of mustard seed, ye may say to this mountain, Be thou removed,
and cast into the sea (Matt. xxi. 21), or to this tree, Be thou plucked
up by the root, and be thou planted in the sea (Luke xvii. 6), and both
shall be done (καὶ ὑπήκουσεν ἂν ὑμῖν, Luke): so he might, not merely on
the sea, but in any situation, make use of the figure, that to him who
has faith, winds and waves shall be obedient at a word (ὅτι καὶ τοῖς
ἀνέμοις ἐπιτάσσει καὶ τῷ ὕδατι, καὶ ὑπακούουσιν αὐτῷ, Luke). If we now
take into account what even Olshausen remarks, and Schneckenburger has
shown, [1430] that the contest of the kingdom of God with the world was
in the early times of Christianity commonly compared to a voyage
through a stormy ocean; we see at once, how easily legend might come to
frame such a narrative as the above, on the suggestions afforded by the
parallel between the Messiah and Moses, the expressions of Jesus, and
the conception of him as the pilot who steers the little vessel of the
kingdom of God through the tumultuous waves of the world. Setting this
aside, however, and viewing the matter only generally, in relation to
the idea of a miracle-worker, we find a similar power over storms and
tempests, ascribed, for example, to Pythagoras. [1431]

We have a more complicated anecdote connected with the sea, wanting in
Luke, but contained in John vi. 16 ff., as well as in Matt. xiv. 22
ff., and Mark vi. 45 ff., where a storm overtakes the disciples when
sailing by night, and Jesus appears to their rescue, walking towards
them on the sea. Here, again, the storm subsides in a marvellous manner
on the entrance of Jesus into the ship; but the peculiar difficulty of
the narrative lies in this, that the body of Jesus appears so entirely
exempt from a law which governs all other human bodies without
exception, namely, the law of gravitation, that he not only does not
sink under the water, but does not even dip into it; on the contrary,
he walks erect on the waves as on firm land. If we are to represent
this to ourselves, we must in some way or other, conceive the body of
Jesus as an ethereal phantom, according to the opinion of the Docetæ; a
conception which the Fathers of the Church condemned as irreligious,
and which we must reject as extravagant. Olshausen indeed says, that in
a superior corporeality, impregnated with the powers of a higher world,
such an appearance need not create surprise: [1432] but these are words
to which we can attach no definite idea. If the spiritual activity of
Jesus which refined and perfected his corporeal nature, instead of
being conceived as that which more and more completely emancipated his
body from the psychical laws of passion and sensuality, is understood
as if by its means the body was exempted from the physical law of
gravity:—this is a materialism of which, as in a former case, it is
difficult to decide whether it be more fantastical or childish. If
Jesus did not sink in the water, he must have been a spectre, and the
disciples in our narrative would not have been wrong in taking him for
one. We must also recollect that on his baptism in the river Jordan,
Jesus did not exhibit this property, but was submerged like an ordinary
man. Now had he at that time also the power of sustaining himself on
the surface of the water, and only refrained from using it? and did he
thus increase or reduce his specific gravity by an act of his will? or
are we to suppose, as Olshausen would perhaps say, that at the time of
his baptism he had not attained so far in the process of subtilizing
his body, as to be freely borne up by the water, and that he only
reached this point at a later period? These are questions which
Olshausen justly calls absurd: nevertheless they serve to open a
glimpse into the abyss of absurdities in which we are involved by the
supranaturalistic interpretation, and particularly by that which this
theologian gives of the narrative before us.

To avoid these, the natural explanation has tried many expedients. The
boldest is that of Paulus, who maintains that the text does not state
that Jesus walked on the water; and that the miracle in this passage is
nothing but a philological mistake, since περιπατεῖν ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης
is analogous to the expression στρατοπεδεύειν ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης, Exod.
xiv. 2, and signifies to walk, as the other to encamp, over the sea,
that is, on the elevated sea-shore. [1433] According to the meaning of
the words taken separately, this explanation is possible: its real
applicability in this particular instance, however, must be determined
by the context. Now this represents the disciples as having rowed
twenty-five or thirty furlongs (John), or as being in the midst of the
sea (Matthew and Mark), and then it is said that Jesus came towards the
ship, and so near that he could speak to them, περιπατῶν ἐπὶ τῆς
θαλάσσης. How could he do this if he remained on the shore? To obviate
this objection, Paulus conjectures that the disciples in that stormy
night probably only skirted the shore; but the words ἐν μέσῳ τῆς
θαλάσσης, in the midst of the sea, though not, we grant, to be
construed with mathematical strictness, yet, even taken according to
the popular mode of speaking, are too decidedly opposed to such a
supposition for it to be worth our further consideration. But this mode
of interpretation encounters a fatal blow in the passage where Matthew
says of Peter, that having come down out of the ship he walked on the
water, καταβὰς ἀπὸ τοῦ πλοίου περιεπάτησεν ἐπὶ τὰ ὕδατα (v. 29); for as
it is said shortly after that Peter began to sink (καταποντίζεσθαι),
walking merely on the shore cannot have been intended here; and if not
here, neither can it have been intended in the former instance relating
to Jesus, the expressions being substantially the same. [1434]

But if Peter, in his attempt to walk upon the waters, περιπατεῖν ἐπὶ τὰ
ὕδατα, began to sink, may we not still suppose that both he and Jesus
merely swam in the sea, or waded through its shallows? Both these
suppositions have actually been advanced. [1435] But the act of wading
must have been expressed by περιπατεῖν διὰ τῆς θαλάσσης, and had that
of swimming been intended, one or other of the parallel passages would
certainly have substituted the precise expression for the ambiguous
one: besides, it must be alike impossible either to swim from
twenty-five to thirty furlongs in a storm, or to wade to about the
middle of the sea, which certainly was beyond the shallows; a swimmer
could not easily be taken for a spectre; and, lastly, the prayer of
Peter for special permission to imitate Jesus, and his failure in it
from want of faith, point to something supernatural. [1436]

The reasoning on which the natural mode of interpretation rests here,
as elsewhere, has been enunciated by Paulus in connexion with this
passage in a form which reveals its fundamental error in a particularly
happy manner. The question, he says, in such cases is always this:
which is more probable, that the evangelical writer should use an
expression not perfectly exact, or that there should be a departure
from the course of nature? It is evident that the dilemma is falsely
stated, and should rather be put thus: Is it more probable that the
author should express himself inaccurately (rather, in direct
contradiction to the supposed sense), or that he should mean to narrate
a departure from the course of nature? For only what he means to
narrate is the immediate point of inquiry; what really happened is,
even according to the distinction of the judgment of a writer from the
fact that he states, on which Paulus everlastingly insists, an
altogether different question. Because according to our views a
departure from the course of nature cannot have taken place, it by no
means follows, that a writer belonging to the primitive age of
Christianity could not have credited and narrated such a case; [1437]
and therefore to abolish the miraculous, we must not explain it away
from the narrative, but rather inquire whether the narrative itself,
either in whole or in part, must not be excluded from the domain of
history. In relation to this inquiry, first of all, each of our three
accounts has peculiar features which in an historical light are
suspicious.

The most striking of these features is found in Mark v. 48, where he
says of Jesus that he came walking on the sea towards the disciples,
and would have passed by them, καὶ ἤθελε παρελθεῖν αὐτούς, but that he
was constrained by their anxious cries to take notice of them. With
justice Fritzsche interprets Mark’s meaning to be, that it was the
intention of Jesus, supported by divine power, to walk across the whole
sea as on firm land. But with equal justice Paulus asks, Could anything
have been more useless and extravagant than to perform so singular a
miracle without any eye to witness it? We must not however on this
account, with the latter theologian, interpret the words of Mark as
implying a natural event, namely, that Jesus, being on the land, was
going to pass by the disciples who were sailing in a ship not far from
the shore, for the miraculous interpretation of the passage is
perfectly accordant with the spirit of our Evangelist. Not contented
with the representation of his informant, that Jesus, on this one
occasion, adopted this extraordinary mode of progress with special
reference to his disciples, he aims by the above addition to convey the
idea of walking on the water being so natural and customary with Jesus,
that without any regard to the disciples, whenever a sheet of water lay
in his road, he walked across it as unconcernedly as if it had been dry
land. But such a mode of procedure, if habitual with Jesus, would
presuppose most decidedly a subtilization of his body such as Olshausen
supposes; it would therefore presuppose what is inconceivable. Hence
this particular of Mark’s presents itself as one of the most striking
among those by which the second Evangelist now and then approaches to
the exaggerations of the apocryphal gospels. [1438]

In Matthew, the miracle is in a different manner, not so much
heightened as complicated; for there, not only Jesus, but Peter also
makes an experiment in walking on the sea, not indeed altogether
successful. This trait is rendered suspicious by its intrinsic
character, as well as by the silence of the two other narrators.
Immediately on the word of Jesus, and in virtue of the faith which he
has in the beginning, Peter actually succeeds in walking on the water
for some time, and only when he is assailed by fear and doubt does he
begin to sink. What are we to think of this? Admitting that Jesus, by
means of his etherealized body, could walk on the water, how could he
command Peter, who was not gifted with such a body, to do the same? or
if by a mere word he could give the body of Peter a dispensation from
the law of gravitation, can he have been a man? and if a God, would he
thus lightly cause a suspension of natural laws at the caprice of a
man? or, lastly, are we to suppose that faith has the power
instantaneously to lessen the specific gravity of the body of a
believer? Faith is certainly said to have such a power in the
figurative discourse of Jesus just referred to, according to which the
believer is able to remove mountains and trees into the sea,—and why
not also himself to walk on the sea? The moral that as soon as faith
falters, power ceases, could not be so aptly presented by either of the
two former figures as by the latter, in the following form: as long as
a man has faith he is able to walk unharmed on the unstable sea, but no
sooner does he give way to doubt than he sinks, unless Christ extend to
him a helping hand. The fundamental thought, then, of Matthew’s
episodical narrative is, that Peter was too confident in the firmness
of his faith, that by its sudden failure he incurred great danger, but
was rescued by Jesus; a thought which is actually expressed in Luke
xxii. 31 f., where Jesus says to Simon: Satan hath desired to have you
that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not. These words of Jesus have reference to Peter’s coming
denial; this was the occasion when his faith, on the strength of which
he had just before offered to go with Jesus to prison and to death,
would have wavered, had not the Lord by his intercession, procured him
new strength. If we add to this the above-mentioned habit of the early
Christians to represent the persecuting world under the image of a
turbulent sea, we cannot fail, with one of the latest critics, to
perceive in the description of Peter courageously volunteering to walk
on the sea, soon, however, sinking from faintheartedness, but borne up
by Jesus, an allegorical and mythical representation of that trial of
faith which this disciple who imagined himself so strong, met so
weakly, and which higher assistance alone enabled him to surmount.
[1439]

But the account of the fourth gospel also is not wanting in peculiar
features, which betray an unhistorical character. It has ever been a
cross to harmonists, that while according to Matthew and Mark, the ship
was only in the middle of the sea when Jesus reached it: according to
John, it immediately after arrived at the opposite shore; that while,
according to the former, Jesus actually entered into the ship, and the
storm thereupon subsided: according to John, on the contrary, the
disciples did indeed wish to take him into the ship, but their actually
doing so was rendered superfluous by their immediate arrival at the
place of disembarkation. It is true that here also abundant methods of
reconciliation have been found. First, the word ἔθελον, they wished,
added to λαβεῖν, to receive, is said to be a mere redundancy of
expression; then, to signify simply the joyfulness of the reception, as
if it had been said, ἐθέλοντες ἔλαβον; then, to describe the first
impression which the recognition of Jesus made on the disciples, his
reception into the ship, which really followed, not being mentioned.
[1440] But the sole reason for such an interpretation lies in the
unauthorized comparison with the synoptical accounts: in the narrative
of John, taken separately, there is no ground for it, nay, it is
excluded. For the succeeding sentence: εὐθέως τὸ πλοῖον ἐγένετο ἐπὶ τῆς
γῆς, εἰς ὑπῆγον, immediately the ship was at the land whither they
went, though it is united, not by δὲ but by καὶ, can nevertheless only
be taken antithetically, in the sense that the reception of Jesus into
the ship, notwithstanding the readiness of the disciples, did not
really take place, because they were already at the shore. In
consideration of this difference, Chrysostom held that there were two
occasions on which Jesus walked on the sea. He says that on the second
occasion, which John narrates, Jesus did not enter into the ship, in
order that the miracle might be greater ἵνα τὸ θᾶυμα μεῖζον ἐργάσηται.
[1441] This view we may transfer to the Evangelist, and say: if Mark
has aggrandized the miracle, by implying that Jesus intended to walk
past the disciples across the entire sea; so John goes yet farther, for
he makes him actually accomplish this design, and without being taken
into the ship, arrive at the opposite shore. [1442] Not only, however,
does the fourth Evangelist seek to aggrandize the miracle before us,
but also to establish and authenticate it more securely. According to
the synoptists, the sole witnesses were the disciples, who saw Jesus
come towards them, walking on the sea: John adds to these few immediate
witnesses, a multitude of mediate ones, namely, the people who were
assembled when Jesus performed the miracle of the loaves and fishes.
These, when on the following morning they no longer find Jesus on the
same spot, make the calculation, that Jesus cannot have crossed the sea
by ship, for he did not get into the same boat with the disciples, and
no other boat was there (v. 22); while, that he did not go by land, is
involved in the circumstance that the people when they have forthwith
crossed the sea, find him on the opposite shore (v. 25), whither he
could hardly have arrived by land in the short interval. Thus in the
narrative of the fourth gospel, as all natural means of passage are cut
off from Jesus, there remains for him only a supernatural one, and this
consequence is in fact inferred by the multitude in the astonished
question which they put to Jesus, when they find him on the opposite
shore: Rabbi, when camest thou hither? As this chain of evidence for
the miraculous passage of Jesus depends on the rapid transportation of
the multitude, the Evangelist hastens to procure other boats ἄλλα
πλοιάρια for their service (v. 23). Now the multitude who take ship (v.
22, 26 ff.) are described as the same whom Jesus had miraculously fed,
and these amounted (according to v. 10) to about 5000. If only a fifth,
nay, a tenth of these passed over, there needed for this, as the author
of the Probabilia has justly observed, a whole fleet of ships,
especially if they were fishing boats; but even if we suppose them
vessels of freight, these would not all have been bound for Capernaum,
or have changed their destination for the sake of accommodating the
crowd. This passage of the multitude, therefore, appears only to have
been invented, [1443] on the one hand, to confirm by their evidence the
walking of Jesus on the sea; on the other, as we shall presently see,
to gain an opportunity for making Jesus, who according to the tradition
had gone over to the opposite shore immediately after the
multiplication of the loaves, speak yet further with the multitude on
the subject of this miracle.

After pruning away these offshoots of the miraculous which are peculiar
to the respective narratives, the main stem is still left, namely, the
miracle of Jesus walking on the sea for a considerable distance, with
all its attendant improbabilities as above exposed. But the solution of
these accessory particulars, as it led us to discover the causes of
their unhistorical origin, has facilitated the discovery of such causes
for the main narrative, and has thereby rendered possible the solution
of this also. We have seen, by an example already adduced, that it was
usual with the Hebrews and early Christians, to represent the power of
God over nature, a power which the human spirit when united to him was
supposed to share, under the image of supremacy over the raging waves
of the sea. In the narrative of the Exodus this supremacy is manifested
by the sea being driven out of its place at a sign, so that a dry path
is opened to the people of God in its bed; in the New Testament
narrative previously considered, the sea is not removed out of its
place, but only so far laid to rest that Jesus and his disciples can
cross it in safety in their ship: in the anecdote before us, the sea
still remains in its place as in the second, but there is this point of
similarity to the first, that the passage is made on foot, not by ship,
yet as a necessary consequence of the other particular, on the surface
of the sea, not in its bed. Still more immediate inducements to develop
in such a manner the conception of the power of the miracle-worker over
the waves, may be found both in the Old Testament, and in the opinions
prevalent in the time of Jesus. Among the miracles of Elisha, it is not
only told that he divided the Jordan by a stroke of his mantle, so that
he could go through it dry shod (2 Kings ii. 14), but also that he
caused a piece of iron which had fallen into the water to swim (2 Kings
vi. 6); an ascendancy over the law of gravitation which it would be
imagined the miracle-worker might be able to evince in relation to his
own body also, and thus to exhibit himself, as it is said of Jehovah,
Job ix. 8, LXX., περιπατῶν ὡς ἐπ’ ἐδάφους ἐπὶ θαλάσσης, walking upon
the sea as upon a pavement. In the time of Jesus much was told of
miracle-workers who could walk on the water. Apart from conceptions
exclusively Grecian, [1444] the Greco-oriental legend feigned that the
hyperborean Abaris possessed an arrow, by means of which he could bear
himself up in the air, and thus traverse rivers, seas, and abysses,
[1445] and popular superstition attributed to many wonder-workers the
power of walking on water. [1446] Hence the possibility that with all
these elements and inducements existing, a similar legend should be
formed concerning Jesus, appears incomparably stronger, than that a
real event of this kind should have occurred:—and with this conclusion
we may dismiss the subject.

The manifestation φανέρωσις of Jesus at the sea of Tiberias ἐπὶ τῆς
θαλάσσης τῆς Τιβεριάδος narrated John xxi. has so striking a
resemblance to the sea anecdotes hitherto considered, that although the
fourth gospel places it in the period after the resurrection, we are
induced, as in an earlier instance we brought part of it under notice
in connexion with the narrative of Peter’s draught of fishes, so here
to institute a comparison between its other features, and the narrative
of Jesus walking on the sea. In both cases, Jesus is perceived by the
disciples in the twilight of early morning; only in the latter instance
he does not, as in the former, walk on the sea, but stands on the
shore, and the disciples are in consternation, not because of a storm,
but because of the fruitlessness of their fishing. In both instances
they are afraid of him; in the one, they take him for a spectre, in the
other, not one of them ventures to ask him who he is, knowing that it
is the Lord. But especially the scene with Peter, peculiar to the first
gospel, has its corresponding one in the present passage. As, there,
when Jesus walking on the sea makes himself known to his disciples,
Peter entreats permission to go to him on the water: so here, as soon
as Jesus is recognized standing on the shore, Peter throws himself into
the water that he may reach him the shortest way by swimming. Thus,
that which in the earlier narrative was the miraculous act of walking
on the sea, becomes in the one before us, in relation to Jesus, the
simple act of standing on the shore, in relation to Peter, the natural
act of swimming; so that the latter history sounds almost like a
rationalistic paraphrase of the former: and there have not been wanting
those who have maintained that at least the anecdote about Peter in the
first gospel, is a traditional transformation of the incident in John
xxi. 7 into a miracle. [1447] Modern criticism is restrained from
extending this conjecture to the anecdote of Jesus walking on the sea,
by the fact that the supposed apostolic fourth gospel itself has this
feature in the earlier narrative (vi. 16 ff.). But from our point of
view it appears quite possible, that the history in question either
came to the author of this gospel in the one form, and to the author of
the appendix in the other; or that it came to the one author of both in
a double form, and was inserted by him in separate parts of his
narrative. Meanwhile, if the two histories are to be compared, we ought
not at once to assume that the one, John xxi., is the original, the
other, Matt. xiv. parall., the secondary; we must first ask which of
the two bears intrinsic marks of one or the other character. Now
certainly if we adhere to the rule that the more miraculous narrative
is the later, that in John xxi. appears, in relation to the manner in
which Jesus approaches the disciples, and in which Peter reaches Jesus,
to be the original. But this rule is connected in the closest manner
with another; namely, that the more simple narrative is the earlier,
the more complex one the later, as the conglomerate is a later
formation than the homogeneous stone; and according to this rule, the
conclusion is reversed, and the narrative in John xxi. is the more
traditional, for in it the particulars mentioned above are interwoven
with the miraculous draught of fishes, while in the earlier narrative
they form in themselves an independent whole. It is indeed true, that a
greater whole may be broken up into smaller parts; but such fragments
have not at all the appearance of the separate narratives of the
draught of fishes and the walking on the sea, since these, on the
contrary, leave the impression of being each a finished whole. From
this interweaving with the miracle of the draught of fishes,—to which
we must add the circumstance that the entire circle of events turns
upon the risen Jesus, who is already in himself a miracle,—it is
apparent how, contrary to the general rule, the oft-named particulars
could lose their miraculous character, since by their combination with
other miracles they were reduced to mere accessories, to a sort of
natural scaffolding. If then the narrative in John xxi. is entirely
secondary, its historical value has already been estimated with that of
the narratives which furnished its materials.

If, before we proceed further, we take a retrospect of the series of
sea-anecdotes hitherto examined, we find, it is true, that the two
extreme anecdotes are altogether dissimilar, the one relating mainly to
fishing, the other to a storm; nevertheless, on a proper arrangement,
each of them appears to be connected with the preceding by a common
feature. The narrative of the call of the fishers of men (Matt. iv. 18
ff. par.) opens the series; that of Peter’s draught of fishes (Luke v.
1 ff.) has in common with this the saying about the fishers of men, but
the fact of the draught of fishes is peculiar to it; this fact
reappears in John xxi., where the circumstances of Jesus standing on
the shore in the morning twilight, and the swimming of Peter towards
him, are added; these two circumstances are in Matt. xiv. 22 ff.
parall. metamorphosed into the act of walking on the sea on the part of
Jesus and of Peter, and at the same time a storm, and its cessation on
the entrance of Jesus into the ship, are introduced; lastly, in Matt.
viii. 23 ff. parall., we have an anecdote single in its kind, namely,
that of the stilling of the storm by Jesus.

We come to a history for which a place is less readily found in the
foregoing series, in Matt. xvii. 24 ff. It is true that here again
there is a direction of Jesus to Peter to go and fish, to which,
although it is not expressly stated, we must suppose that the issue
corresponded: but first, it is only one fish which is to be caught, and
with an angle; and secondly, the main point is, that in its mouth is to
be found a piece of gold to serve for the payment of the temple tribute
for Jesus and Peter, from the latter of whom this tax had been
demanded. This narrative as it is here presented has peculiar
difficulties, which Paulus well exhibits, and which Olshausen does not
deny. Fritzsche justly remarks, that there are two miraculous
particulars presupposed: first, that the fish had a coin in its mouth;
secondly, that Jesus had a foreknowledge of this. On the one hand, we
must regard the former of these particulars as extravagant, and
consequently the latter also; and on the other, the whole miracle
appears to have been unnecessary. Certainly, that metals and other
valuables have been found in the bodies of fish is elsewhere narrated,
[1448] and is not incredible; but that a fish should have a piece of
money in its mouth, and keep it there while it snapped at the bait—this
even Dr. Schnappinger [1449] found inconceivable. Moreover, the motive
of Jesus for performing such a miracle could not be want of money, for
even if at that time there was no store in the common fund, still Jesus
was in Capernaum, where he had many friends, and where consequently he
could have obtained the needful money in a natural way. To exclude this
possibility, we must with Olshausen confound borrowing with begging,
and regard it as inconsistent with the decorum divinum which must have
been observed by Jesus. Nor after so many proofs of his miraculous
power, could Jesus think this additional miracle necessary to
strengthen Peter’s belief in his messiahship.

Hence we need not wonder that rationalistic commentators have attempted
to free themselves at any cost from a miracle which even Olshausen
pronounces to be the most difficult in the evangelical history, and we
have only to see how they proceed in this undertaking. The pith of the
natural explanation of the fact lies in the interpretation of the word
εὑρήσεις, thou shalt find, in the command of Jesus, not of an immediate
discovery of a stater in the fish, but of a mediate acquisition of this
sum by selling what was caught. [1450] It must be admitted that the
above word may bear this signification also; but if we are to give it
this sense instead of the usual one, we must in the particular instance
have a clear intimation to this effect in the context. Thus, if it were
said in the present passage: Take the first fine fish, carry it to the
market, κἀκεῖ εὑρήσεις στατῆρα, and there thou shall find a stater,
this explanation would be in place; as however instead of this, the
word εὑρήσεις is preceded by ἀνοίξας τὸ στόμα αὐτοῦ, when thou hast
opened his mouth,—as, therefore, no place of sale, but a place inside
the fish, is mentioned, as that on the opening of which the coin is to
be obtained,—we can only understand an immediate discovery of the piece
of money in this part of the fish. [1451] Besides, to what purpose
would the opening of the fish’s mouth be mentioned, unless the
desideratum were to be found there? Paulus sees in this only the
injunction to release the fish from the hook without delay, in order to
keep it alive, and thus to render it more saleable. The order to open
the mouth of the fish might indeed, if it stood alone, be supposed to
have the extraction of the hook as its object and consequence; but as
it is followed by εὑρήσεις στατῆρα, thou shalt find a stater, it is
plain that this is the immediate end of opening the mouth. The
perception that, so long as the opening of the fish’s mouth is spoken
of in this passage, it will be inferred that the coin was to be found
there, has induced the rationalistic commentators to try whether they
could not refer the word στόμα, mouth, to another subject than the
fish, and no other remained than the fisher, Peter. But as στόμα
appeared to be connected with the fish by the word αὐτοῦ, which
immediately followed it, Dr. Paulus, moderating or exaggerating the
suggestion of a friend, who proposed to read ἀνθευρήσεις instead
of—αὐτοῦ, εὑρήσεις—allowed αὐτοῦ to remain, but took it adverbially,
and translated the passage thus: thou hast then only to open thy mouth
to offer the fish for sale, and thou wilt on the spot (αὐτοῦ) receive a
stater as its price. But, it would still be asked, how could a single
fish fetch so high a price in Capernaum, where fish were so abundant?
Hence Paulus understands the words, τὸν ἀναβάντα πρῶτον ἰχθὺν ἆρον,
take up the fish that first cometh up, collectively thus: continue time
after time to take the fish that first comes to thee, until thou hast
caught as many as will be worth a stater.

If the series of strained interpretations which are necessary to a
natural explanation of this narrative throw us back on that which
allows it to contain a miracle; and if this miracle appear to us,
according to our former decision, both extravagant and useless, nothing
remains but to presume that here also there is a legendary element.
This view has been combined with the admission, that a real but natural
fact was probably at the foundation of the legend: namely, that Jesus
once ordered Peter to fish until he had caught enough to procure the
amount of the temple tribute; whence the legend arose that the fish had
the tribute money in its mouth. [1452] But, in our opinion, a more
likely source of this anecdote is to be found in the much-used theme of
a catching of fish by Peter, on the one side, and on the other, the
well-known stories of precious things having been found in the bodies
of fish. Peter, as we learn from Matt. iv., Luke v., John xxi., was the
fisher in the evangelical legend ta whom Jesus in various forms, first
symbolically, and then literally, granted the rich draught of fishes.
The value of the capture appears here in the shape of a piece of money,
which, as similar things are elsewhere said to have been found in the
belly of fishes, is by an exaggeration of the marvel said to be found
in the mouth of the fish. That it is the stater, required for the
temple tribute, might be occasioned by a real declaration of Jesus
concerning his relation to that tax; or conversely, the stater which
was accidentally named in the legend of the fish angled for by Peter,
might bring to recollection the temple tribute, which amounted to that
sum for two persons, and the declaration of Jesus relative to this
subject.

With this tale conclude the sea anecdotes.




§ 102.

THE MIRACULOUS MULTIPLICATION OF THE LOAVES AND FISHES.

As, in the histories last considered, Jesus determined and mitigated
the motions of irrational and even of inanimate existences; so, in the
narratives which we are about to examine, he exhibits the power of
multiplying not only natural objects, but also productions of nature
which had been wrought upon by art.

That Jesus miraculously multiplied prepared articles of food, feeding a
great multitude of men with a few loaves and fishes, is narrated to us
with singular unanimity by all the Evangelists (Matt. xiv. 13 ff.; Mark
vi. 30 ff.; Luke ix. 10 ff.; John vi. 1 ff.). And if we believe the two
first, Jesus did not do this merely once; for in Matt. xv. 32 ff.; Mark
viii. 1 ff. we read of a second multiplication of loaves and fishes,
the circumstances of which are substantially the same as those of the
former. It happens somewhat later; the place is rather differently
described, and the length of time during which the multitude stayed
with Jesus is differently stated; moreover, and this is a point of
greater importance, the proportion between the stock of food and the
number of men is different, for, on the first occasion, five thousand
men are satisfied with five loaves and two fishes, and, on the second,
four thousand with seven loaves and a few fishes; on the first twelve
baskets are filled with the fragments, on the second only seven.
Notwithstanding this, not only is the substance of the two histories
exactly the same—the satisfying of a multitude of people with
disproportionately small means of nourishment; but also the description
of the scene in the one, entirely corresponds in its principal features
to that in the other. In both instances, the locality is a solitary
region in the vicinity of the Galilean sea; Jesus is led to perform the
miracle because the people have lingered too long with him; he
manifests a wish to feed the people from his own stores, which the
disciples regard as impossible; the stock of food at his disposal
consists of loaves and fishes; Jesus makes the people sit down, and,
after giving thanks, distributes the provisions to them through the
medium of the disciples; they are completely satisfied, and yet a
disproportionately great quantity of fragments is afterwards collected
in baskets; lastly, in the one case as in the other, Jesus after thus
feeding the multitude, crosses the sea.

This repetition of the same event creates many difficulties. The chief
of these is suggested by the question: Is it conceivable that the
disciples, after they had themselves witnessed how Jesus was able to
feed a great multitude with a small quantity of provision, should
nevertheless on a second occasion of the same kind, have totally
forgotten the first, and have asked, Whence should we have so much
bread in the wilderness as to feed so great a multitude? To render such
an obliviousness on the part of the disciples probable, we are reminded
that they had, in just as incomprehensible a manner, forgotten the
declarations of Jesus concerning his approaching sufferings and death,
when these events occurred; [1453] but it is equally a pending
question, whether after such plain predictions from Jesus, his death
could in fact have been so unexpected to the disciples. It has been
supposed that a longer interval had elapsed between the two miracles,
and that during this there had occurred a number of similar cases, in
which Jesus did not think fit to afford miraculous assistance: [1454]
but, on the one hand, these are pure fictions; on the other, it would
remain just as inconceivable as ever, that the striking similarity of
the circumstances preceding the second feeding of the multitude to
those preceding the first, should not have reminded even one of the
disciples of that former event Paulus therefore is right in
maintaining, that had Jesus once already fed the multitude by a
miracle, the disciples, on the second occasion, when he expressed his
determination not to send the people away fasting, would confidently
have called upon him for a repetition of the former miracle.

In any case then, if Jesus on two separate occasions fed a multitude
with disproportionately small provision, we must suppose, as some
critics have done, that many features in the narrative of the one
incident were transferred to the other, and thus the two, originally
unlike, became in the course of oral tradition more and more similar;
the incredulous question of the disciples especially having been
uttered only on the first occasion, and not on the second. [1455] It
may seem to speak in favour of such an assimilation, that the fourth
Evangelist, though in his numerical statement he is in accordance with
the first narrative of Matthew and Mark, yet has, in common with the
second, the circumstances that the scene opens with an address of Jesus
and not of the disciples, and that the people come to Jesus on a
mountain. But if the fundamental features be allowed to remain,—the
wilderness, the feeding of the people, the collection of the
fragments,—it is still, even without that question of the disciples,
sufficiently improbable that the scene should have been repeated in so
entirely similar a manner. If, on the contrary, these general features
be renounced in relation to one of the histories, it is no longer
apparent, how the veracity of the evangelical narratives as to the
manner in which the second multiplication of loaves and fishes took
place can be questioned on all points, and yet their statement as to
the fact of its occurrence be maintained as trustworthy, especially as
this statement is confined to Matthew and his imitator Mark.

Hence later critics have, with more [1456] or less [1457] decision,
expressed the opinion, that here one and the same fact has been
doubled, through a mistake of the first Evangelist, who was followed by
the second. They suppose that several narratives of the miraculous
feeding of the multitude were current which presented divergencies from
each other, especially in relation to numbers, and that the author of
the first gospel, to whom every additional history of a miracle was a
welcome prize, and who was therefore little qualified for the critical
reduction of two different narratives of this kind into one, introduced
both into his collection. This fully explains how on the second
occasion the disciples could again express themselves so incredulously:
namely, because in the tradition whence the author of the first gospel
obtained the second history of a miraculous multiplication of loaves
and fishes, it was the first and only one, and the Evangelist did not
obliterate this feature because, apparently, he incorporated the two
narratives into his writing just as he read or heard them. Among other
proofs that this was the case, may be mentioned the constancy with
which he and Mark, who copied him, not only in the account of the
events, but also in the subsequent allusion to them (Matt. xvi. 9 f.;
Mark viii. 19 f.), call the baskets in the first feeding, κόφινοι, in
the second σπυρίδες. [1458] It is indeed correctly maintained, that the
Apostle Matthew could not possibly take one event for two, and relate a
new history which never happened: [1459] but this proposition does not
involve the reality of the second miraculous feeding of the multitude,
unless the apostolic origin of the first gospel be at once presupposed,
whereas this yet remains to be proved. Paulus further objects, that the
duplication of the history in question could be of no advantage
whatever to the design of the Evangelist; and Olshausen, developing
this idea more fully, observes that the legend would not have left the
second narrative as simple and bare as the first. But this argument,
that a narrative cannot be fictitious, because if it were so it would
have been more elaborately adorned, may very properly be at once
dismissed, since its limits being altogether undefined, it might be
repeated under all circumstances, and in the end would prove fable
itself not sufficiently fabulous. But, in this case particularly, it is
totally baseless, because it presupposes the narrative of the first
feeding of the multitude to be historically accurate; now, if we have
already in this a legendary production, the other edition of it,
namely, the second history of a miraculous feeding, needs not to be
distinguished by special traditionary features. But not only is the
second narrative not embellished as regards the miraculous, when
compared with the first; it even diminishes the miracle, for, while
increasing the quantity of provision, it reduces the number of those
whom it satisfied: and this retrogression in the marvellous is thought
the surest proof that the second feeding of the multitude really
occurred; for, it is said, he who chose to invent an additional miracle
of this kind, would have made it surpass the first, and instead of five
thousand men would have given, not four, but ten thousand. [1460] This
argument, also, rests on the unfounded assumption that the first
narrative is of course the historical one; though Olshausen himself has
the idea that the second might with probability be regarded as the
historical basis, and the first as the legendary copy, and then the
fictitious would have the required relation to the true—that of
exaggeration. But when in opposition to this, he observes, how
improbable it is that an unscrupulous narrator would place the
authentic fact, being the less imposing, last, and eclipse it
beforehand by the false one,—that such a writer would rather seek to
outdo the truth, and therefore place his fiction last, as the more
brilliant,—he again shows that he does not comprehend the mythical view
of the biblical narratives, in the degree necessary for forming a
judgment on the subject. For there is no question here of an
unscrupulous narrator, who would designedly surpass the true history of
the miraculous multiplication of the loaves and fishes, and least of
all is Matthew pronounced to be such a narrator: on the contrary, it is
held that with perfect honesty, one account gave five thousand, another
four, and that, with equal honesty, the first Evangelist copied from
both; and for the very reason that he went to work innocently and
undesignedly, it was of no importance to him which of the two histories
stood first and which last, the more important or the less striking
one; but he allowed himself to be determined on this point by
accidental circumstances, such as that he found the one connected with
incidents which appeared to him the earlier, the other with such as he
supposed to be the later. A similar instance of duplication occurs in
the Pentateuch in relation to the histories of the feeding of the
Israelites with quails, and of the production of water out of the rock,
the former of which is narrated both in Exod. xvi. and Num. xi., the
latter in Exod. xvii. and again in Num. xx., in each instance with an
alteration in time, place, and other circumstances. [1461] Meanwhile,
all this yields us only the negative result that the double narratives
of the first gospels cannot have been founded on two separate events.
To determine which of the two is historical, or whether either of them
deserves that epithet, must be the object of a special inquiry.

To evade the pre-eminently magical appearance which this miracle
presents, Olshausen gives it a relation to the moral state of the
participants, and supposes that the miraculous feeding of the multitude
was effected through the intermediation of their spiritual hunger. But
this is ambiguous language, which, on the first attempt to determine
its meaning, vanishes into nothing. For in cures, for example, the
intermediation here appealed to consists in the opening of the
patient’s mind to the influence of Jesus by faith, so that when faith
is wanting, the requisite fulcrum for the miraculous power of Jesus is
also wanting: here therefore the intermediation is real. Now if the
same kind of intermediation took place in the case before us, so that
on those among the multitude who were unbelieving the satisfying power
of Jesus had no influence, then must the satisfaction of hunger here
(as, in the above cases, the cure) be regarded as something effected by
Jesus directly in the body of the hungry persons, without any
antecedent augmentation of the external means of nourishment. But such
a conception of the matter, as Paul us justly remarks, and as even
Olshausen intimates, is precluded by the statement of the Evangelists,
that real food was distributed among the multitude; that each enjoyed
as much as he wanted; and that at the end the residue was greater than
the original store. It is thus plainly implied that there was an
external and objective increase of the provisions, as a preliminary to
the feeding of the multitude. Now, this cannot be conceived as effected
by means of the faith of the people in a real manner, in the sense that
that faith co-operated in producing the multiplication of the loaves.
The intermediation which Olshausen here supposes, can therefore have
been only a teleological one, that is, we are to understand by it, that
Jesus undertook to multiply the loaves and fishes for the sake of
producing a certain moral condition in the multitude. But an
intermediation of this kind affords me not the slightest help in
forming a conception of the event; for the question is not why, but how
it happened. Thus all which Olshausen believes himself to have done
towards rendering this miracle more intelligible, rests on the
ambiguity of the expression, intermediation; and the inconceivableness
of an immediate influence of the will of Jesus on irrational nature,
remains chargeable upon this history as upon those last examined.

But there is another difficulty which is peculiar to the narrative
before us. We have here not merely, as hitherto, a modification or a
direction of natural objects, but a multiplication of them, and that to
an enormous extent. Nothing, it is true, is more familiar to our
observation than the growth and multiplication of natural objects, as
presented to us in the parable of the sower, and the grain of mustard
seed, for example. But, first, these phenomena do not take place
without the co-operation of other natural agents, as earth, water, air,
so that here, also, according to the well-known principle of physics,
there is not properly speaking an augmentation of the substance, but
only a change in the accidents; secondly, these processes of growth and
multiplication are carried forward so as to pass through their various
stages in corresponding intervals of time. Here, on the contrary, in
the multiplication of the loaves and fishes by Jesus, neither the one
rule nor the other is observed: the bread in the hand of Jesus is no
longer, like the stalk on which the corn grew, in communication with
the maternal earth, nor is the multiplication gradual, but sudden.

But herein, it is said, consists the miracle, which in relation to the
last point especially, may be called the acceleration of a natural
process. That which comes to pass in the space of three quarters of a
year, from seed-time to harvest, was here effected in the minutes which
were required for the distribution of the food; for natural
developments are capable of acceleration, and to how great an extent we
cannot determine. [1462] It would, indeed, have been an acceleration of
a natural process, if in the hand of Jesus a grain of corn had borne
fruit a hundred-fold, and brought it to maturity, and if he had shaken
the multiplied grain out of his hands as they were filled again and
again, that the people might grind, knead, and bake it, or eat it raw
from the husk in the wilderness where they were;—or if he had taken a
living fish, suddenly called forth the eggs from its body, and
converted them into full-grown fish, which then the disciples or the
people might have boiled or roasted, this, we should say, would have
been an acceleration of a natural process. But it is not corn that he
takes into his hand, but bread; and the fish also, as they are
distributed in pieces, must have been prepared in some way, perhaps, as
in Luke xxiv. 42, comp. John xxi. 9, broiled or salted. Here then, on
both sides, the production of nature is no longer simple and living,
but dead and modified by art: so that to introduce a natural process of
the above kind, Jesus must, in the first place, by his miraculous power
have metamorphosed the bread into corn again, the roasted fish into raw
and living ones; then instantaneously have effected the described
multiplication; and lastly, have restored the whole from the natural to
the artificial state. Thus the miracle would be composed, 1st, of a
revivification, which would exceed in miraculousness all other
instances in the gospels; secondly, of an extremely accelerated natural
process; and thirdly, of an artificial process, effected invisibly, and
likewise extremely accelerated, since all the tedious proceedings of
the miller and baker on the one hand, and of the cook on the other,
must have been accomplished in a moment by the word of Jesus. How then
can Olshausen deceive himself and the believing reader, by the
agreeably sounding expression, accelerated natural process, when this
nevertheless can designate only a third part of the fact of which we
are speaking? [1463]

But how are we to represent such a miracle to ourselves, and in what
stage of the event must it be placed? In relation to the latter point,
three opinions are possible, corresponding to the number of the groups
that act in our narrative; for the multiplication may have taken place
either in the hands of Jesus, or in those of the disciples who
dispensed the food, or in those of the people who received it. The last
idea appears, on the one hand, puerile even to extravagance, if we are
to imagine Jesus and the apostles distributing, with great carefulness,
that there might be enough for all, little crumbs which in the hands of
the recipients swelled into considerable pieces: on the other hand, it
would have been scarcely a possible task, to get a particle, however
small, for every individual in a multitude of five thousand men, out of
five loaves, which, according to Hebrew custom, and particularly as
they were carried by a boy, cannot have been very large; and still less
out of two fishes. Of the two other opinions I think, with Olshausen,
the one most suitable is that which supposes that the food was
augmented under the creative hands of Jesus, and that he time after
time dispensed new quantities to the disciples. We may then endeavour
to represent the matter to ourselves in two ways: first we may suppose
that as fast as one loaf or fish was gone, a new one came out of the
hands of Jesus, or secondly, that the single loaves and fishes grew, so
that as one piece was broken off, its loss was repaired, until on a
calculation the turn came for the next loaf or fish. The first
conception appears to be opposed to the text, which as it speaks of
fragments ἐκ τῶν πέντε ἄρτων, of the five loaves (John vi. 13), can
hardly be held to presuppose an increase of this number; thus there
remains only the second, by the poetical description of which Lavater
has done but a poor service to the orthodox view. [1464] For this
miracle belongs to the class which can only appear in any degree
credible so long as they can be retained in the obscurity of an
indefinite conception: [1465] no sooner does the light shine on them,
so that they can be examined in all their parts, than they dissolve
like the unsubstantial creations of the mist. Loaves, which in the
hands of the distributors expand like wetted sponges,—broiled fish, in
which the severed parts are replaced instantaneously, as in the living
crab gradually,—plainly belong to quite another domain than that of
reality.

What gratitude then do we not owe to the rationalistic interpretation,
if it be true that it can free us, in the easiest manner, from the
burden of so unheard-of a miracle? If we are to believe Dr. Paulus,
[1466] the Evangelists had no idea that they were narrating anything
miraculous, and the miracle was first conveyed into their accounts by
expositors. What they narrate is, according to him, only thus much:
that Jesus caused his small store of provisions to be distributed, and
that in consequence of this the entire multitude obtained enough to
eat. Here, in any case, we want a middle term, which would distinctly
inform us, how it was possible that, although Jesus had so little food
to offer, the whole multitude obtained enough to eat. A very natural
middle term however is to be gathered, according to Paulus, out of the
historical combination of the circumstances. As, on a comparison with
John vi. 4, the multitude appear to have consisted for the greater part
of a caravan on its way to the feast, they cannot have been quite
destitute of provisions, and probably a few indigent persons only had
exhausted their stores. In order then to induce the better provided to
share their food with those who were in want, Jesus arranged that they
should have a meal, and himself set the example of imparting what he
and his disciples could spare from their own little store; this example
was imitated, and thus the distribution of bread by Jesus having led to
a general distribution, the whole multitude were satisfied. It is true
that this natural middle term must be first mentally interpolated into
the text; as, however, the supernatural middle term which is generally
received is just as little stated expressly, and both alike depend upon
inference, the reader can hardly do otherwise than decide for the
natural one. Such is the reasoning of Dr. Paulus: but the alleged
identity in the relation of the two middle terms to the text does not
in fact exist. For while the natural explanation requires us to suppose
a new distributing subject (the better provided among the multitude),
and a new distributed object (their provisions), together with the act
of distributing these provisions: the supranatural explanation contents
itself with the subject actually present in the text (Jesus and his
disciples), with the single object there given (their little store),
and the described distribution of this; and only requires us to supply
from our imagination the means by which this store could be made
sufficient to satisfy the hunger of the multitude, namely its
miraculous augmentation under the hands of Jesus (or of his disciples).
How can it be yet maintained that neither of the two middle terms is
any more suggested by the text than the other? That the miraculous
multiplication of the loaves and fishes is not expressly mentioned, is
explained by the consideration that the event itself is one of which no
clear conception can be formed, and therefore it is best conveyed by
the result alone. But how will the natural theologian account for
nothing being said of the distribution, called forth by the example of
Jesus, on the part of those among the multitude who had provisions? It
is altogether arbitrary to insert that distribution between the
sentences, He gave them to the disciples, and the disciples to the
multitude (Matt. xiv. 19), and, they did all eat and were filled (v.
20); while the words, καὶ τοὺς δύο ἰχθύας ἐμέρισε πᾶσι, and the two
fishes divided he among them all (Mark vi. 41), plainly indicate that
only the two fishes—and consequently only the five loaves—were the
object of distribution for all. [1467] But the natural explanation
falls into especial embarrassment when it comes to the baskets which,
after all were satisfied, Jesus caused to be filled with the fragments
that remained. The fourth Evangelist says: συνήγαγον οὖν, καὶ ἐγέμισαν
δώδεκα κοφίνους κλασμάτων ἐκ τῶν πέντε ἄρτων τῶν κριθίνων, ἃ
ἐπερίσσευσε τοῖς βεβρωκόσιν, therefore they gathered them together, and
filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves,
which remained over and above unto them that had eaten (vi. 13). This
seems clearly enough to imply that out of those identical five loaves,
after five thousand men had been satisfied by them, there still
remained fragments enough to fill twelve baskets,—more, that is, than
the amount of the original store. Here, therefore, the natural
expositor is put to the most extravagant contrivances in order to evade
the miracle. It is true, when the synoptists simply say that the
remnants of the meal were collected, and twelve baskets filled with
them, it might be thought from the point of view of the natural
explanation, that Jesus, out of regard to the gift of God, caused the
fragments which the crowd had left from their own provisions to be
collected by his disciples. But as, on the one hand, the fact that the
people allowed the remains of the repast to lie, and did not
appropriate them, seems to indicate that they treated the nourishment
presented to them as the property of another; so, on the other hand,
Jesus, when, without any preliminary, he directs his disciples to
gather them up, appears to regard them as his own property. Hence
Paulus understands the words ἦραν κ.τ.λ., of the synoptists, not of a
collection first made after the meal, of that which remained when the
people had been satisfied, but of the overplus of the little store
belonging to Jesus and the disciples, which the latter, after reserving
what was necessary for Jesus and themselves, carried round as an
introduction and inducement to the general repast. But how, when the
words ἔφαγον καὶ ἐχορτάσθησαν πάντες, they did all eat and were filled,
are immediately followed by καὶ ἦραν, and they took up, can the latter
member of the verse refer to the time prior to the meal? Must it not
then have necessarily been said at least ἦραν γὰρ, for they took up?
Further, how, after it had just been said that the people did eat and
were filled, can τὸ περισσεῦσαν, that which remained, especially
succeeded as it is in Luke by αὐτοῖς, to them, mean anything else than
what the people had left? Lastly, how is it possible that out of five
loaves and two fishes, after Jesus and his disciples had reserved
enough for themselves, or even without this, there could in a natural
manner be twelve baskets filled for distribution among the people? But
still more strangely does the natural explanation deal with the
narrative of John. Jesus here adds, as a reason for gathering up the
fragments, ἵνα μή τι ἀπόληται, that nothing be lost; hence it appears
impossible to divest the succeeding statement that they filled twelve
baskets with the remains of the five loaves, of its relation to the
time after the meal; and in this case, it would be impossible to get
clear of a miraculous multiplication of the loaves. Paulus therefore,
although the words συνήγαγον οὖν καὶ ἐγεμισαν δώδεκα κοφίνους κ.τ.λ.,
therefore they gathered them together and filled twelve baskets, etc.,
form a strictly coherent whole, chooses rather to detach συνήγαγον οὖν,
and, by a still more forced construction than that which he employed
with the synoptical text, makes the narrative pass all at once, without
the slightest notice, into the pluperfect, and thus leap back to the
time before the meal.

Here, then, the natural explanation once more fails to fulfil its task:
the text retains its miracle, and if we have reason to think this
incredible, we must inquire whether the narrative of the text deserves
credence. The agreement of all the four Evangelists is generally
adduced in proof of its distinguished credibility: but this agreement
is by no means so perfect. There are minor differences, first between
Matthew and Luke; then between these two and Mark, who in this instance
again embellishes; and lastly, between the synoptists collectively and
John, in the following points: according to the synoptists, the scene
of the event is a desert place, according to John, a mountain;
according to the former, the scene opens with an address from the
disciples, according to John, with a question from Jesus (two
particulars in which, as we have already remarked, the narrative of
John approaches that of the second feeding in Matthew and Mark);
lastly, the words which the three first Evangelists put into the mouth
of the disciples indefinitely, the fourth in his individualizing manner
ascribes to Philip and Andrew, and the same Evangelist also designates
the bearer of the loaves and fishes as a boy (παιδάριον). These
divergencies however may be passed over as less essential, that we may
give our attention only to one, which has a deeper hold. While, namely,
according to the synoptical accounts, Jesus had been long teaching the
people and healing their sick, and was only led to feed them by the
approach of evening, and the remark of the disciples that the people
needed refreshment: in John, the first thought of Jesus, when he lifts
up his eyes and sees the people gathering round him, is that which he
expresses in his question to Philip: Whence shall we buy bread that
these may eat? or rather, as he asked this merely to prove Philip, well
knowing himself what he would do, he at once forms the resolution of
feeding the multitude in a miraculous manner. But how could the design
of feeding the people arise in Jesus immediately on their approach?
They did not come to him for this, but for the sake of his teaching and
his curative power. He must therefore have conceived this design
entirely of his own accord, with a view to establish his miraculous
power by so signal a demonstration. But did he ever thus work a miracle
without any necessity, and even without any inducement,—quite
arbitrarily, and merely for the sake of working a miracle? I am unable
to describe strongly enough how impossible it is that eating should
here have been the first thought of Jesus, how impossible that he could
thus obtrude his miraculous repast on the people. Thus in relation to
this point, the synoptical narrative, in which there is a reason for
the miracle, must have the preference to that of John, who, hastening
towards the miracle, overlooks the requisite motive for it, and makes
Jesus create instead of awaiting the occasion for its performance. An
eye-witness could not narrate thus; [1468] and if, therefore, the
account of that gospel to which the greatest authority is now awarded,
must be rejected as unhistorical; so, with respect to the other
narratives, the difficulties of the fact itself are sufficient to cast
a doubt on their historical credibility, especially if in addition to
these negative grounds we can discover positive reasons which render it
probable that our narrative had an unhistorical origin.

Such reasons are actually found both within the evangelical history
itself, and beyond it in the Old Testament history, and the Jewish
popular belief. In relation to the former source, it is worthy of
remark, that in the synoptical gospels as well as in John, there are
more or less immediately appended to the feeding of the multitude by
Jesus with literal bread, figurative discourses of Jesus on bread and
leaven: namely, in the latter, the declarations concerning the bread of
heaven, and the bread of life which Jesus gives (John vi. 27 ff.); in
the former, those concerning the false leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadducees, that is, their false doctrine and hypocrisy. [1469] (Matt.
xvi. 5 ff.; Mark viii. 14 ff.; comp. Luke xii. 1); and on both sides,
the figurative discourse of Jesus is erroneously understood of literal
bread. It would not then be a very strained conjecture, that as in the
passages quoted we find the disciples and the people generally,
understanding literally what Jesus meant figuratively; so the same
mistake was made in the earliest Christian tradition. If, in figurative
discourses, Jesus had sometimes represented himself as him who was able
to give the true bread of life to the wandering and hungering people,
perhaps also placing in opposition to this, the leaven of the
Pharisees: the legend, agreeably to its realistic tendency, may have
converted this into the fact of a miraculous feeding of the hungry
multitude in the wilderness by Jesus. The fourth Evangelist makes the
discourse on the bread of heaven arise out of the miracle of the
loaves: but the relation might very well have been the reverse, and the
history owe its origin to the discourse, especially as the question
which introduces John’s narrative, Whence shall we buy bread that these
may eat? may be more easily conceived as being uttered by Jesus on the
first sight of the people, if he alluded to feeding them with the word
of God (comp. John iv. 32 ff.), to appeasing their spiritual hunger
(Matt. v. 6), in order to exercise (πειράζων) the higher understanding
of his disciples, than if he really thought of the satisfaction of
their bodily hunger, and only wished to try whether his disciples would
in this case confide in his miraculous power. The synoptical narrative
is less suggestive of such a view; for the figurative discourse on the
leaven could not by itself originate the history of the miracle. Thus
the gospel of John stands alone with reference to the above mode of
derivation, and it is more agreeable to the character of this gospel to
conjecture that it has applied the narrative of a miracle presented by
tradition to the production of figurative discourses in the Alexandrian
taste, than to suppose that it has preserved to us the original
discourses out of which the legend spun that miraculous narrative.

If then we can discover, beyond the limits of the New Testament, very
powerful causes for the origination of our narrative, we must renounce
the attempt to construct it out of materials presented by the gospels
themselves. And here the fourth Evangelist, by putting into the mouth
of the people a reference to the manna, that bread of heaven which
Moses gave to the fathers in the wilderness (v. 31), reminds us of one
of the most celebrated passages in the early history of the Israelites
(Exod. xvi.), which was perfectly adapted to engender the expectation
that its antitype would occur in the Messianic times; and we in fact
learn from rabbinical writings, that among those functions of the first
Goël which were to be revived in the second, a chief place was given to
the impartation of bread from heaven. [1470] If the Mosaic manna
presents itself as that which was most likely to be held a type of the
bread miraculously augmented by Jesus; the fish which Jesus also
multiplied miraculously, may remind us that Moses gave the people, not
only a substitute for bread in the manna, but also animal food in the
quails (Exod. xvi. 8, xii. 13; Num. xi. 4 ff.). On comparing these
Mosaic narratives with our evangelical ones, there appears a striking
resemblance even in details. The locality in both cases is the
wilderness; the inducement to the miracle here as there, is fear lest
the people should suffer from want in the wilderness, or perish from
hunger; in the Old Testament history, this fear is expressed by the
people in loud murmurs, in that of the New Testament, it results from
the shortsightedness of the disciples, and the benevolence of Jesus.
The direction of the latter to his disciples that they should give the
people food, a direction which implies that he had already formed the
design of feeding them miraculously, may be paralleled with the command
which Jehovah gave to Moses to feed the people with manna (Exod. xvi.
4), and with quails (Exod. xvi. 12; Num. xi. 18–20). But there is
another point of similarity which speaks yet more directly to our
present purpose. As, in the evangelical narrative, the disciples think
it an impossibility that provision for so great a mass of people should
be procured in the wilderness, so, in the Old Testament history, Moses
replies doubtingly to the promise of Jehovah to satisfy the people with
flesh (Num. xi. 21 f.). To Moses, as to the disciples, the multitude
appears too great for the possibility of providing sufficient food for
them; as the latter ask, whence they should have so much bread in the
wilderness, so Moses asks ironically whether they should slay the
flocks and the herds (which they had not). And as the disciples object,
that not even the most impoverishing expenditure on their part would
thoroughly meet the demand, so Moses, clothing the idea in another
form, had declared, that to satisfy the people as Jehovah promised, an
impossibility must happen (the fish of the sea be gathered together for
them); objections which Jehovah there, as here Jesus, does not regard,
but issues the command that the people should prepare for the reception
of the miraculous food.

But though these two cases of a miraculous supply of nourishment are
thus analogous, there is this essential distinction, that in the Old
Testament, in relation both to the manna and the quails, it is a
miraculous procuring of food not previously existing which is spoken
of, while in the New Testament it is a miraculous augmentation of
provision already present, but inadequate; so that the chasm between
the Mosaic narrative and the evangelical one is too great for the
latter to have been derived immediately from the former. If we search
for an intermediate step, a very natural one between Moses and the
Messiah is afforded by the prophets. We read of Elijah, that through
him and for his sake, the little store of meal and oil which he found
in the possession of the widow of Zarephath was miraculously
replenished, or rather was made to suffice throughout the duration of
the famine (1 Kings xvii. 8–16). This species of miracle is developed
still further, and with a greater resemblance to the evangelical
narrative, in the history of Elisha (2 Kings iv. 42 ff.). As Jesus fed
five thousand men in the wilderness with five loaves and two fishes, so
this prophet, during a famine, fed a hundred men with twenty loaves,
(which like those distributed by Jesus in John, are called barley
loaves,) together with some ground corn (‏כַּרְמֶל‎, LXX. παλάθας); a
disproportion between the quantity of provisions and the number of men,
which his servant, like the disciples in the other instance, indicates
in the question: What! should I set this before a hundred men? Elisha,
like Jesus, is not diverted from his purpose, but commands the servant
to give what he has to the people; and as in the New Testament
narrative great stress is laid on the collection of the remaining
fragments, so in the Old Testament it is specially noticed at the close
of this story, that notwithstanding so many had eaten of the store,
there was still an overplus. [1471] The only important difference here
is, that on the side of the evangelical narrative, the number of the
loaves is smaller, and that of the people greater; but who does not
know that in general the legend does not easily imitate, without at the
same time surpassing, and who does not see that in this particular
instance it was entirely suited to the position of the Messiah, that
his miraculous power, compared with that of Elisha, should be placed,
as it regards the need of natural means, in the relation of five to
twenty, but as it regards the supernatural performance, in that of five
thousand to one hundred? Paulus indeed, in order to preclude the
inference, that as the two narratives in the Old Testament are to be
understood mythically, so also is the strikingly similar evangelical
narrative, extends to the former the attempt at a natural explanation
which he has pursued with the latter, making the widow’s cruse of oil
to be replenished by the aid of the scholars of the prophets, and the
twenty loaves suffice for one hundred men by means of a praiseworthy
moderation; [1472] a mode of explanation which is more practicable here
than with the New Testament narrative, in proportion as, by reason of
the greater remoteness of these anecdotes, they present fewer critical
(and, by reason of their merely mediate relation to Christianity, fewer
dogmatical) motives for maintaining their historical veracity.

Nothing more is wanting to complete the mythical derivation of this
history of the miraculous feeding of the multitude, except the proof,
that the later Jews also believed of particularly holy men, that by
their means a small amount of provision was made sufficient, and of
this proof the disinterested industry of Dr. Paulus as a collector, has
put us in possession. He adduces a rabbinical statement that in the
time of a specially holy man, the small quantity of shew-bread more
than sufficed for the supply of the priests. [1473] To be consequent,
this commentator should try to explain this story also naturally,—by
the moderation of the priests, for instance: but it is not in the
canon, hence he can unhesitatingly regard it as a fable, and he only so
far admits its striking similarity to the evangelical narrative as to
observe, that in consequence of the Jewish belief in such augmentations
of food, attested by that rabbinical statement, the New Testament
narrative may in early times have been understood by judaizing
Christians in the same (miraculous) sense. But our examination has
shown that the evangelical narrative was designedly composed so as to
convey this sense, and if this sense was an element of the popular
Jewish legend, then is the evangelical narrative without doubt a
product of that legend. [1474]




§ 103.

JESUS TURNS WATER INTO WINE.

Next to the history of the multiplication of the loaves and fishes, may
be ranged the narrative in the fourth gospel (ii. 1 ff.), of Jesus at a
wedding in Cana of Galilee turning water into wine. According to
Olshausen, both miracles fall under the same category, since in both a
substratum is present, the substance of which is modified. [1475] But
he overlooks the logical distinction, that in the miracle of the loaves
and fishes, the modification is one of quantity merely, an augmentation
of what was already existing, without any change of its quality (bread
becomes more bread, but remains bread); whereas at the wedding in Cana
the substratum is modified in quality—out of a certain substance there
is made not merely more of the same kind, but something else (out of
water, wine); in other words, a real transubstantiation takes place. It
is true there are changes in quality which are natural results, and the
instantaneous effectuation of which by Jesus would be even more easy to
conceive, than an equally rapid augmentation of quantity; for example,
if he had suddenly changed must into wine, or wine into vinegar, this
would only have been to conduct in an accelerated manner the same
vegetable substratum, the vinous juice, through various conditions
natural to it. The miracle would be already heightened if Jesus had
imparted to the juice of another fruit, the apple for instance, the
quality of that of the grape, although even in this his agency would
have been within the limits of the same kingdom of nature. But here,
where water is turned into wine, there is a transition from one kingdom
of nature to another, from the elementary to the vegetable; a miracle
which as far exceeds that of the multiplication of the loaves, as if
Jesus had hearkened to the counsel of the tempter, and turned stones
into bread. [1476]

To this miracle, as to the former, Olshausen, after Augustine, [1477]
applies his definition of an accelerated natural process, by which we
are to understand that we have here simply the occurrence, in an
accelerated manner, of that which is presented yearly in the vine in a
slow process of development. This mode of viewing the matter would have
some foundation, if the substratum on which Jesus operated had been the
same out of which wine is wont to be naturally produced; if he had
taken a vine in his hand, and suddenly caused it to bloom, and to bear
ripe grapes, this might have been called an accelerated natural
process. Even then indeed we should still have no wine, and if Jesus
were to produce this also from the vine which he took into his hand, he
must add an operation which would be an invisible substitute for the
winepress, that is, an accelerated artificial process; so that on this
supposition the category of the accelerated natural process would
already be insufficient. In fact, however, we have no vine as a
substratum for this production of wine, but water, and in this case we
could only speak with propriety of an accelerated natural process, if
by any means, however gradual, wine were ever produced out of water.
Here it is urged, that certainly out of water, out of the moisture
produced in the earth by rain and the like, the vine draws its sap,
which in due order it applies to the production of the grape, and of
the wine therein contained; so that thus yearly, by means of a natural
process, wine does actually come out of water. [1478] But apart from
the fact that water is only one of the elementary materials which are
required for the fructification of the vine, and that to this end,
soil, air, and light, must concur; it could not be said either of one,
or of all these elementary materials together, that they produce the
grape or the wine, nor, consequently, that Jesus, when he produced wine
out of water, did the same thing, only more quickly, which is repeated
every year as a gradual process: on the contrary, here again there is a
confusion of essentially distinct logical categories. For we may place
the relation of the product to the producing agent, which is here
treated of, under the category of power and manifestation, or of cause
and effect: never can it be said that water is the power or the cause,
which produces grapes and wine, for the power which gives existence to
them is strictly the vegetable individuality of the vine-plant, to
which water, with the rest of the elementary agencies, is related only
as the solicitation to the power, as the stimulus to the cause. That
is, without the co-operation of water, air, etc, grapes certainly
cannot be produced, any more than without the vine plant; but the
distinction is, that in the vine the grape, in itself or in its germ,
is already present, and water, air, etc., only assist in its
development; whereas in these elementary substances, the grape is
present neither actu nor potentiâ; they can in no way produce the fruit
out of themselves, but only out of something else—the vine. To turn
water into wine is not then to make a cause act more rapidly than it
would act in a natural way, but it is to make the effect appear without
a cause, out of a mere accessory circumstance; or, to refer more
particularly to organic nature, it is to call forth the organic product
without the producing organism, out of the simple inorganic materials,
or rather out of one of these materials only. This is about the same
thing as to make bread out of earth without the intervention of the
corn plant, flesh out of bread without a previous assimilation of it by
an animal body, or in the same immediate manner, blood out of wine. If
the supranaturalist is not here contented with appealing to the
incomprehensibleness of an omnipotent word of Jesus, but also
endeavours, with Olshausen, to bring the process which must have been
contained in the miracle in question nearer to his conception, by
regarding it in the light of a natural process; he must not, in order
to render the matter more probable, suppress a part of the necessary
stages in that process, but exhibit them all. They would then present
the following series: 1st, to the water, as one only of the elementary
agents, Jesus must have added the power of the other elements above
named; 2ndly (and this is the chief point), he must have procured, in
an equally invisible manner, the organic individuality of the vine;
3rdly, he must have accelerated, to the degree of instantaneousness,
the natural process resulting from the reciprocal action of these
objects upon one another, the blooming and fructification of the vine,
together with the ripening of the grape; 4thly, he must have caused the
artificial process of pressing, and so forth, to occur invisibly and
suddenly; and lastly, he must again have accelerated the further
natural process of fermentation, so as to render it momentary. Thus,
here again, the designation of the miracle as an accelerated natural
process, would apply to two stages only out of five, the other three
being such as cannot possibly be brought under this point of view,
though the two first, especially the second, are of greater importance
even than belonged to the stages which were neglected in the
application of this view to the history of the miraculous feeding: so
that the definition of an accelerated natural process is as inadequate
here as there. [1479] As, however, this is the only, or the extreme
category, under which we can bring such operations nearer to our
conception and comprehension; it follows that if this category be shown
to be inapplicable, the event itself is inconceivable.

Not only, however, has the miracle before us been impeached in relation
to possibility, but also in relation to utility and fitness. It has
been urged both in ancient [1480] and modern [1481] times, that it was
unworthy of Jesus that he should not only remain in the society of
drunkards, but even further their intemperance by an exercise of his
miraculous power. But this objection should be discarded as an
exaggeration, since, as expositors justly observe, from the words after
men have well drunk, ὅταν μεθυσθῶσι (v. 10), which the ruler of the
feast ἀρχιτρίκλινος uses with reference to the usual course of things
at such feasts, nothing can with certainty be deduced with respect to
the occasion in question. We must however still regard as valid an
objection, which is not only pointed out by Paulus and the author of
the Probabilia, [1482] but admitted even by Lücke and Olshausen to be
at the first glance a pressing difficulty: namely, that by this miracle
Jesus did not, as was usual with him, relieve any want, any real need,
but only furnished an additional incitement to pleasure; showed himself
not so much helpful as courteous; rather, so to speak, performed a
miracle of luxury, than of true beneficence. If it be here said that it
was a sufficient object for the miracle to confirm the faith of the
disciples, [1483] which according to v. 11 was its actual effect; it
must be remembered that, as a general rule, not only had the miracles
of Jesus, considered with regard to their form, i.e. as extraordinary
results, something desirable as their consequence, for instance, the
faith of the spectators; but also, considered with regard to their
matter, i.e. as consisting of cures, multiplications of loaves, and the
like, were directed to some really beneficent end. In the present
miracle this characteristic is wanting, and hence Paulus is not wrong
when he points out the contradiction which would lie in the conduct of
Jesus, if towards the tempter he rejected every challenge to such
miracles as, without being materially beneficent, or called for by any
pressing necessity, could only formally produce faith and astonishment,
and yet in this instance performed a miracle of that very nature.
[1484]

The supranaturalist was therefore driven to maintain that it was not
faith in general which Jesus here intended to produce, but a conviction
entirely special, and only to be wrought by this particular miracle.
Proceeding on this supposition, nothing was more natural than to be
reminded by the opposition of water and wine on which the miracle
turns, of the opposition between him who baptized with water (Matt.
iii. 11), who at the same time came neither eating nor drinking (Luke
i. 15; Matt. xi. 18), and him who, as he baptized with the Holy Ghost
and with fire, so he did not deny himself the ardent, animating fruit
of the vine, and was hence reproached with being a wine-bibber
οἰνοπότης (Matt. xi. 19); especially as the fourth gospel, in which the
narrative of the wedding at Cana is contained, manifests in a peculiar
degree the tendency to lead over the contemplation from the Baptist to
Jesus. On these grounds Herder, [1485] and after him some others,
[1486] have held the opinion, that Jesus by the above miraculous act
intended to symbolize to his disciples, several of whom had been
disciples of the Baptist, the relation of his spirit and office to
those of John, and by this proof of his superior power, to put an end
to the offence which they might take at his more liberal mode of life.
But here the reflection obtrudes itself, that Jesus does not avail
himself of this symbolical miracle, to enlighten his disciples by
explanatory discourses concerning his relation to the Baptist; an
omission which even the friends of this interpretation pronounce to be
surprising. [1487] How needful such an exposition was, if the miracle
were not to fail of its special object, is evident from the fact, that
the narrator himself, according to v. 11, understood it not at all in
this light, as a symbolization of a particular maxim of Jesus, but
quite generally, as a manifestation φανέρωσις of his glory. [1488] Thus
if that special lesson were the object of Jesus in performing the
miracle before us, then the author of the fourth gospel, that is,
according to the supposition of the above theologians, his most
apprehensive pupil, misunderstood him, and Jesus delayed in an
injudicious manner to prevent this misunderstanding; or if both these
conclusions are rejected, there still subsists the difficulty, that
Jesus, contrary to the prevailing tendency of his conduct, sought to
attain the general object of proving his miraculous power, by an act
for which apparently he might have substituted a more useful one.

Again, the disproportionate quantity of wine with which Jesus supplies
the guests, must excite astonishment. Six vessels, each containing from
two to three μετρητὰς, supposing the Attic μετρητὴς, corresponding to
the Hebrew bath, to be equivalent to 1½ Roman amphoræ, or twenty-one
Wirtemberg measures, [1489] would yield 252–378 measures. [1490] What a
quantity for a company who had already drunk freely! What enormous
vessels! exclaims Dr. Paulus, and leaves no effort untried to reduce
the statement of measures in the text. With a total disregard of the
rules of the language, he gives to the preposition ἀνὰ a collective
meaning, instead of its proper distributive one, so as to make the six
water pots (ὑδρίαι) contain, not each, but altogether, from two to
three μετρητὰς; and even Olshausen consoles himself, after Semler, with
the fact, that it is nowhere remarked that the water in all the vessels
was turned into wine. But these are subterfuges; they to whom the
supply of so extravagant and dangerous a quantity of wine on the part
of Jesus is incredible, must conclude that the narrative is
unhistorical.

Peculiar difficulty is occasioned by the relation in which this
narrative places Jesus to his mother, and his mother to him. According
to the express statement of the Evangelist, the turning of water into
wine was the beginning of the miracles of Jesus, ἀρχὴ τῶν σημείων; and
yet his mother reckons so confidently on his performing a miracle here,
that she believes it only necessary to point out to him the deficiency
of wine, in order to induce him to afford supernatural aid; and even
when she receives a discouraging answer, she is so far from losing
hope, that she enjoins the servants to be obedient to the directions of
her son (v. 3, 5). How is this expectation of a miracle on the part of
the mother of Jesus to be explained? Are we to refer the declaration of
John, that the metamorphosis of the water was the first miracle of
Jesus, merely to the period of his public life, and to presuppose as
real events, for his previous years, the apocryphal miracles of the
Gospels of the Infancy? Or, believing that Chrysostom was right in
regarding this as too uncritical, [1491] are we rather to conjecture
that Mary, in consequence of her conviction that Jesus was the Messiah,
a conviction wrought in her by the signs that attended his birth,
expected miracles from him, and as perhaps on some earlier occasions,
so now on this, when the perplexity was great, desired from him a proof
of his power? [1492] Were only that early conviction of the relatives
of Jesus that he was the Messiah somewhat more probable, and especially
the extraordinary events of the childhood, by which it is supposed to
have been produced, better accredited! Moreover, even presupposing the
belief of Mary in the miraculous power of her son, it is still not at
all clear how, notwithstanding his discouraging answer, she could yet
confidently expect that he would just on this occasion perform his
first miracle, and feel assured that she positively knew that he would
act precisely so as to require the assistance of the servants. [1493]
This decided knowledge on the part of Mary, even respecting the manner
of the miracle about to be wrought, appears to indicate an antecedent
disclosure of Jesus to her, and hence Olshausen supposes that Jesus had
given his mother an intimation concerning the miracle on which he had
resolved. But when could this disclosure have been made? Already as
they were going to the feast? Then Jesus must have foreseen that there
would be a want of wine, in which case Mary could not have apprised him
of it as of an unexpected embarrassment. Or did Jesus make the
disclosure after her appeal, and consequently in connexion with the
words: What have I to do with thee, woman, etc.? But with this answer,
it is impossible to conceive so opposite a declaration to have been
united; it would therefore be necessary, on Olshausen’s view, to
imagine that Jesus uttered the negative words aloud, the affirmative in
an undertone, merely for Mary: a supposition which would give the scene
the appearance of a comedy. Thus it is on no supposition to be
understood how Mary could expect a miracle at all, still less precisely
such an one. The first difficulty might indeed be plausibly evaded, by
maintaining that Mary did not here apply to Jesus in expectation of a
miracle, but simply that she might obtain her son’s advice in the case,
as she was wont to do in all difficult circumstances: [1494] his reply
however shows that he regarded the words of his mother as a summons to
perform a miracle, and moreover the direction which Mary gave to the
servants remains on this supposition totally unexplained.

The answer of Jesus to the intimation of his mother (v. 4) has been
just as often blamed with exaggeration [1495] as justified on
insufficient grounds. However truly it may be urged that the Hebrew
phrase, ‏מַה־לִּי וָלָךְ‎, to which the Greek τί ἐμοὶ καὶ σοὶ corresponds,
appears elsewhere as an expression of gentle blame, e.g. 2 Sam. xvi.
10; [1496] or that with the entrance of Jesus on his special office his
relation to his mother as regarded his actions was dissolved: [1497] it
nevertheless remains undeniable, that it was fitting for Jesus to be
modestly apprised of opportunities for the exercise of his miraculous
power, and if one who pointed out to him a case of disease and added an
entreaty for help, did not deserve reprehension, as little and even
less did Mary, when she brought to his knowledge a want which had
arisen, with a merely implied entreaty for assistance. The case would
have been different had Jesus considered the occasion not adapted, or
even unworthy to have a miracle connected with it; he might then have
repelled with severity the implied summons, as an incitement to a false
use of miraculous power (instanced in the history of the temptation);
as, on the contrary, he immediately after showed by his actions that he
held the occasion worthy of a miracle, it is absolutely
incomprehensible how he could blame his mother for her information,
which perhaps only came to him a few moments too soon. [1498]

Here again it has been attempted to escape from the numerous
difficulties of the supranatural view, by a natural interpretation of
the history. The commentators who advance this explanation set out from
the fact, that it was the custom among the Jews to make presents of oil
or wine at marriage feasts. Now Jesus, it is said, having brought with
him five new disciples as uninvited guests, might foresee a deficiency
of wine, and wished out of pleasantry to present his gift in an
unexpected and mysterious manner. The δόξα (glory) which he manifested
by this proceeding, is said to be merely his humanity, which in the
proper place did not disdain to pass a jest; the πίστις, (faith) which
he thereby excited in his disciples, was a joyful adherence to a man
who exhibited none of the oppressive severity which had been
anticipated in the Messiah. Mary was aware of her son’s project, and
warned him when it appeared to her time to put it in execution; but he
reminded her playfully not to spoil his jest by over-haste. His causing
water to be drawn, seems to have belonged to the playful deception
which he intended; that all at once wine was found in the vessels
instead of water, and that this was regarded as a miraculous
metamorphosis, might easily happen at a late hour of the night, when
there had already been considerable drinking; lastly, that Jesus did
not enlighten the wedding party as to the true state of the case, was
the natural consequence of his wish not himself to dissipate the
delusion which he had playfully caused. [1499] For the rest, how the
plan was effected, by what arrangements on the part of Jesus the wine
was conveyed in the place of the water, this, Paulus thinks, is not now
to be ascertained; it is enough for us to know that all happened
naturally. As however, according to the opinion of this expositor, the
Evangelist was aware, in a general manner, that the whole occurrence
was natural, why has he given us no intimation to that effect? Did he
wish to prepare for the reader the same surprise that Jesus had
prepared for the spectators? still he must afterwards have solved the
enigma, if he did not intend the delusion to be permanent. Above all,
he ought not to have used the misleading expression, that Jesus by this
act manifested forth his glory (τὴν δόξαν αὑτοῦ, v. 11), which, in the
phraseology of this gospel, can only mean his superior dignity; he
ought not to have called the incident a sign (σημεῖον), by which
something supernatural is implied; lastly, he ought not, by the
expression, the water that was made wine (τὸ ὕδωρ οἶνον γεγενημένον, v.
9), and still less by the subsequent designation of Cana as the place
where he made the water wine (ὅπου ἐποίησεν ὕδωρ οἶνον), to have
occasioned the impression, that he approved the miraculous conception
of the event. [1500] The author of the Natural History sought to elude
these difficulties by the admission, that the narrator himself, John,
regarded the event as a miracle, and meant to describe it as such. Not
to mention, however, the unworthy manner in which he explains this
error on the part of the Evangelist, [1501] it is not easy to conceive
of Jesus that he should have kept his disciples in the same delusion as
the rest of the guests, and not have given to them at least an
explanation concerning the real course of the event. It would therefore
be necessary to suppose that the narrator of this event was not one of
the disciples of Jesus: a supposition which goes beyond the sphere of
this system of interpretation. But even admitting that the narrator
himself, whoever he may have been, was included in the same deception
with those who regarded the affair as a miracle, in which case his mode
of representation and the expressions which he uses would be accounted
for; still the procedure of Jesus, and his mode of acting, are all the
more inconceivable, if no real miracle were on foot. Why did he with
refined assiduity arrange the presentation of the wine, so that it
might appear to be a miraculous gift? Why, in particular, did he cause
the vessels in which he intended forthwith to present the wine, to be
filled beforehand with water, the necessary removal of which could only
be a hindrance to the secret execution of his plan? unless indeed it be
supposed, with Woolston, that he merely imparted to the water the taste
of wine, by pouring into it some liquor. Thus there is a double
difficulty; on the one hand, that of imagining how the wine could be
introduced into the vessels already filled with water; on the other,
that of freeing Jesus from the suspicion of having wished to create the
appearance of a miraculous transmutation of the water. It may have been
the perception of these difficulties which induced the author of the
Natural History entirely to sever the connexion between the water which
was poured in, and the wine which subsequently appeared, by the
supposition that Jesus had caused the water to be fetched, because
there was a deficiency of this also, and Jesus wished to recommend the
beneficial practice of washing before and after meals, but that he
afterwards caused the wine to be brought out of an adjoining room where
he had placed it:—a conception of the matter which requires us either
to suppose the intoxication of all the guests, and especially of the
narrator, as so considerable, that they mistook the wine brought out of
the adjoining room, for wine drawn out of the water vessels; or else
that the deceptive arrangements of Jesus were contrived with very great
art, which is inconsistent with the straightforwardness of character
elsewhere ascribed to him.

In this dilemma between the supranatural and the natural
interpretations, of which, in this case again, the one is as
insufficient as the other, we should be reduced, with one of the most
recent commentators on the fourth gospel, to wait “until it pleased
God, by further developments of judicious Christian reflection, to
evolve a solution of the enigma to the general satisfaction;” [1502]
did we not discern an outlet in the fact, that the history in question
is found in John’s gospel alone. Single in its kind as this miracle is,
if it were also the first performed by Jesus, it must, even if all the
twelve were not then with Jesus, have yet been known to them all; and
even if among the rest of the Evangelists there were no apostle, still
it must have passed into the general Christian tradition, and from
thence into the synoptical memoirs: consequently, as John alone has it,
the supposition that it arose in a region of tradition unknown to the
synoptists, seems easier than the alternative, that it so early
disappeared out of that from which they drew; the only question is,
whether we are in a condition to show how such a legend could arise
without historical grounds. Kaiser points for this purpose to the
extravagant spirit of the oriental legend, which has ever been so
fertile in metamorphoses: but this source is so wide and indefinite,
that Kaiser finds it necessary also to suppose a real jest on the part
of Jesus, [1503] and thus remains uneasily suspended between the
mythical and the natural explanations, a position which cannot be
escaped from, until there can be produced points of mythical connexion
and origin more definite and exact. Now in the present case we need
halt neither at the character of eastern legend in general, nor at
metamorphoses in general, since transmutations of this particular
element of water are to be found within the narrower circle of the
ancient Hebrew history. Besides some narratives of Moses procuring for
the Israelites water out of the flinty rock in the wilderness (Exod.
xvii. 1 ff.; Num. xx. 1 ff.)—a bestowal of water which, after being
repeated in a modified manner in the history of Samson (Judges xv. 18
f.), was made a feature in the messianic expectations; [1504]—the first
transmutation of water ascribed to Moses, is the turning of all the
water in Egypt into blood, which is enumerated among the so-called
plagues (Exod. vii. 17 ff.). Together with this mutatio in deterius,
there is in the history of Moses a mutatio in melius, also effected in
water, for he made bitter water sweet, under the direction of Jehovah
(Exod. xiv. 23 ff. [1505]); as at a later era, Elisha also is said to
have made unhealthy water good and innoxious (2 Kings ii. 19 ff.
[1506]). As, according to the rabbinical passage quoted, the bestowal
of water, so also, according to this narrative in John, the
transmutation of water appears to have been transferred from Moses and
the prophets to the Messiah, with such modifications, however, as lay
in the nature of the case. If namely, on the one hand, a change of
water for the worse, like that Mosaic transmutation into blood—if a
miracle of this retributive kind might not seem well suited to the mild
spirit of the Messiah as recognised in Jesus: so on the other hand,
such a change for the better as, like the removal of bitterness or
noxiousness, did not go beyond the species of water, and did not, like
the change into blood, alter the substance of the water itself, might
appear insufficient for the Messiah; if then the two conditions be
united, a change of water for the better, which should at the same time
be a specific alteration of its substance, must almost of necessity be
a change into wine. Now this is narrated by John, in a manner not
indeed in accordance with reality, but which must be held all the more
in accordance with the spirit of his gospel. For the harshness of Jesus
towards his mother is, historically considered, incredible; but it is
entirely in the spirit of the fourth gospel, to place in relief the
exaltation of Jesus as the divine Logos by such demeanour towards
suppliants (as in John iv. 48), and even towards his mother. [1507]
Equally in the spirit of this gospel is it also, to exhibit the firm
faith which Mary maintains notwithstanding the negative answer of
Jesus, by making her give the direction to the servants above
considered, as if she had a preconception even of the manner in which
Jesus would perform his miracle, a preconception which is historically
impossible. [1508]




§ 104.

JESUS CURSES A BARREN FIG-TREE.

The anecdote of the fig-tree which Jesus caused to wither by his word,
because when he was hungry he found no fruit on it, is peculiar to the
two first gospels (Matt. xxi. 18 ff.; Mark xi. 12 ff.), but is narrated
by them with divergencies which must affect our view of the fact. One
of these divergencies of Mark from Matthew, appears so favourable to
the natural explanation, that, chiefly in consideration of it, a
tendency towards the natural view of the miracles of Jesus has been of
late ascribed to this Evangelist; and for the sake of this one
favourable divergency, he has been defended in relation to the other
rather inconvenient one, which is found in the narrative before us.

If we were restricted to the manner in which the first Evangelist
states the consequence of the curse of Jesus: and immediately the
fig-tree withered away καὶ ἐξηράνθη παραχρῆμα ἡ συκῆ, it would be
difficult here to carry out a natural explanation; for even the forced
interpretation of Paulus, which makes the word παραχρῆμα (immediately)
only exclude further human accession to the fact, and not a longer
space of time, rests only on an unwarranted transference of Mark’s
particulars into the narrative of Matthew. In Mark, Jesus curses the
fig-tree on the morning after His entrance into Jerusalem, and not till
the following morning the disciples remark, in passing, that the tree
is withered. Through this interim, which Mark leaves open between the
declaration of Jesus and the withering of the tree, the natural
explanation of the whole narrative insinuates itself, taking its stand
on the possibility, that in this interval the tree might have withered
from natural causes. Accordingly, Jesus is supposed to have remarked in
the tree, besides the lack of fruit, a condition from which he
prognosticated that it would soon wither away, and to have uttered this
prediction in the words: No one will ever again gather fruit from thee.
The heat of the day having realized the prediction of Jesus with
unexpected rapidity, and the disciples remarking this the next morning,
they then first connected this result with the words of Jesus on the
previous morning, and began to regard them as a curse: an
interpretation which, indeed, Jesus does not confirm, but impresses on
the disciples, that if they have only some self-reliance, they will be
able, not only to predict such physiologically evident results, but
also to know and effect things far more difficult. [1509] But even
admitting Mark’s statement to be the correct one, the natural
explanation still remains impossible. For the words of Jesus in Mark
(v. 14): μηκέτι ἐκ σοῦ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα μηδεὶς καρπὸν φάγοι, No man eat
fruit of thee hereafter for ever, if they had been meant to imply a
mere conjecture as to what would probably happen, must necessarily have
had a potential signification given to them by the addition of ἂν; and
in the expression of Matthew: μηκέτι ἐκ σοῦ καρπὸς γένηται, Let no
fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever, the command is not to be
mistaken, although Paulus would only find in this also the expression
of a possibility. Moreover the circumstance that Jesus addresses the
tree itself, as also the solemn εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα, for ever, which he adds,
speaks against the idea of a mere prediction, and in favour of a curse;
Paulus perceives this fully, and hence with unwarrantable violence he
interprets the words λέγει αὐτῇ he saith to it, as if they introduced a
saying merely in reference to the tree, while he depreciates the
expression εἰς τὸν αἰωνα, by the translation: in time to come. But even
if we grant that the Evangelists, owing to their erroneous conception
of the incident, may have somewhat altered the words of Jesus, and that
he in reality only prognosticated the withering of the tree; still,
when the prediction was fulfilled, Jesus did nevertheless ascribe the
result to his own supernatural influence. For in speaking of what he
has done in relation to the fig-tree, he uses the verb ποιεῖν (v. 21
Matt.); which cannot except by a forced interpretation, be referred to
a mere prediction. But more than this, he compares what he has done in
relation to the fig-tree, with the removal of mountains; and hence, as
this, according to every possible interpretation, is an act of
causation, so the other must be regarded as an influence on the tree.
In any case, when Peter spoke of the fig-tree as having been cursed by
Jesus (v. 21 Mark), either the latter must have contradicted the
construction thus put on his words, or his silence must have implied
his acquiescence. If then Jesus in the issue ascribes the withering of
the tree to his influence, he either by his address to it designed to
produce an effect, or he ambitiously misused the accidental result for
the sake of deluding his disciples; a dilemma, in which the words of
Jesus, as they are given by the Evangelists, decidedly direct us to the
former alternative.

Thus we are inexorably thrown back from the naturalistic attempt at an
explanation, to the conception of the supranaturalists, pre-eminently
difficult as this is in the history before us. We pass over what might
be said against the physical possibility of such an influence as is
there presupposed; not, indeed, because, with Hase, we could comprehend
it through the medium of natural magic, [1510] but because another
difficulty beforehand excludes the inquiry, and does not allow us to
come to the consideration of the physical possibility. This decisive
difficulty relates to the moral possibility of such an act on the part
of Jesus. The miracle he here performs is of a punitive character.
Another example of the kind is not found in the canonical accounts of
the life of Jesus; the apocryphal gospels alone, as has been above
remarked, are full of such miracles. In one of the synoptical gospels
there is, on the contrary, a passage often quoted already (Luke ix. 55
f.), in which it is declared, as the profound conviction of Jesus, that
the employment of miraculous power in order to execute punishment or to
take vengeance, is contrary to the spirit of his vocation; and the same
sentiment is attributed to Jesus by the Evangelist, when he applies to
him the words of Isaiah: He shall not break a bruised reed, etc. (Matt.
xii. 20). Agreeably to this principle, and to his prevalent mode of
action, Jesus must rather have given new life to a withered tree, than
have made a green one wither; and in order to comprehend his conduct on
this occasion, we must be able to show reasons which he might possibly
have had, for departing in this instance from the above principle,
which has no mark of unauthenticity. The occasion on which he
enunciated that principle was when, on the refusal of a Samaritan
village to exercise hospitality towards Jesus and his disciples, the
sons of Zebedee asked him whether they should not rain down fire on the
village, after the example of Elijah. Jesus replied by reminding them
of the nature of the spirit to which they belonged, a spirit with which
so destructive an act was incompatible. In our present case Jesus had
not to deal with men who had treated him with injustice, but with a
tree which he happened not to find in the desired state. Now, there is
here no special reason for departing from the above rule; on the
contrary, the chief reason which in the first case might possibly have
moved Jesus to determine on a judicial miracle, is not present in the
second. The moral end of punishment, namely, to bring the punished
person to a conviction and acknowledgment of his error, can have no
existence in relation to a tree; and even punishment in the light of
retribution is out of the question when we are treating of natural
objects destitute of volition. [1511] For one to be irritated against
an inanimate object, which does not happen to be found just in the
desired state, is with reason pronounced to be a proof of an
uncultivated mind; to carry such indignation to the destruction of the
object is regarded as barbarous, and unworthy of a reasonable being;
and hence Woolston is not wrong in maintaining, that in any other
person than Jesus, such an act would be severely blamed. [1512] It is
true that when a natural object is intrinsically and habitually
defective, it may very well happen, that it may be removed out of the
way, in order to put a better in its place; a measure, however, for
which, in every case, only the owner has the adequate motive and
authority (comp. Luke xiii. 7). But that this tree, because just at
that time it presented no fruit, would not have borne any in succeeding
years, was by no means self-evident:—nay, the contrary is implied in
the narrative, since the form in which the curse of Jesus is expressed,
that fruit shall never more grow on the tree, presupposes, that without
this curse the tree might yet have been fruitful.

Thus the evil condition of the tree was not habitual but temporary;
still further, if we follow Mark, it was not even objective, or
existing intrinsically in the tree, but purely subjective, that is, a
result of the accidental relation of the tree to the momentary wish and
want of Jesus. For according to an addition which forms the second
feature peculiar to Mark in this narrative, it was not then the time of
figs (v. 13); it was not therefore a defect, but, on the contrary,
quite in due order, that this tree, as well as others, had no figs on
it, and Jesus (in whom it is already enough to excite surprise that he
expected to find figs on the tree so out of season) might at least have
reflected, when he found none, on the groundlessness of his
expectation, and have forborne so wholly unjust an act as the cursing
of the tree. Even some of the fathers stumbled at this addition of
Mark’s and felt that it rendered the conduct of Jesus enigmatical;
[1513] and to descend to later times, Woolston’s ridicule is not
unfounded, when he says that if a Kentish countryman were to seek for
fruit in his garden in spring, and were to cut down the trees which had
none, he would be a common laughing-stock. Expositors have attempted to
free themselves from the difficulty which this addition introduces, by
a motley series of conjectures and interpretations. On the one hand,
the wish that the perplexing words did not stand in the text, has been
turned into the hypothesis that they may probably be a subsequent
gloss. [1514] On the other hand, as, if an addition of this kind must
stand there, the contrary statement, namely, that it was then the time
of figs, were rather to be desired, in order to render intelligible the
expectation of Jesus, and his displeasure when he found it deceived; it
has been attempted in various ways to remove the negative out of the
proposition. One expedient is altogether violent, οὗ being read instead
of οὐ, a point inserted after ἦν, and a second ἦν supplied after σύκων,
so that the translation runs thus: ubi enim tum versabatur (Jesus),
tempus ficuum erat; [1515] another expedient, the transformation of the
sentence into an interrogatory one, nonne enim, etc., is absurd. [1516]
A third expedient is to understand the words καιρὸς σύκων as implying
the time of the fig-gathering, and thus to take Mark’s addition as a
statement that the figs were not yet gathered, i.e. were still on the
trees, [1517] in support of which interpretation, appeal is made to the
phrase καιρὸς τῶν καρπῶν (Matt. xxi. 34). But this expression strictly
refers only to the antecedent of the harvest, the existence of the
fruits in the fields or on the trees; when it stands in an affirmative
proposition, it can only be understood as referring to the consequent,
namely, the possible gathering of the fruit, in so far as it also
includes the antecedent, the existence of the fruits in the field:
hence ἔστι καιρὸς καρπῶν can only mean thus much: the (ripe) fruits
stand in the fields, and are therefore ready to be gathered. In like
manner, when the above expression stands in a negative proposition, the
antecedent, the existence of the fruits in the field, on the trees,
etc., is primarily denied, that of the consequent only secondarily and
by implication; thus οὐκ ἔστι καιρὸς σύκων, means: the figs are not on
the trees, and therefore not ready to be gathered; by no means the
reverse: they are not yet gathered, and therefore are still on the
trees. But this unexampled figure of speech, by which, while according
to the words the antecedent is denied, according to the sense only the
consequent is denied, and the antecedent affirmed, is not all which the
above explanation entails upon us; it also requires the admission of
another figure which is sometimes called synchisis, sometimes
hyperbaton. For, as a statement that the figs were then still on the
trees, the addition in question does not show the reason why Jesus
found none on that tree, but why he expected the contrary; it ought
therefore, say the advocates of this explanation, to stand, not after
he found nothing but leaves, but after he came, if haply he might find
any thing thereon; a transposition, however, which only proves that
this whole explanation runs counter to the text. Convinced, on the one
hand, that the addition of Mark denies the prevalence of circumstances
favourable to the existence of figs on that tree, but, on the other
hand, still labouring to justify the expectation of Jesus, other
expositors have sought to give to that negation, instead of the general
sense, that it was not the right season of the year for figs, a fact of
which Jesus must unavoidably have been aware, the particular sense,
that special circumstances only not necessarily known to Jesus,
hindered the fruitfulness of the tree. It would have been a hindrance
altogether special, if the soil in which the tree was rooted had been
an unfruitful one; hence, according to some, the words καιρὸς σύκων
actually signify a soil favourable to figs. [1518] Others with more
regard to the verbal meaning of καιρὸς, adhere it is true to the
interpretation of it as favourable time, but instead of understanding
the statement of Mark universally, as referring to a regular, annual
season, in which figs were not to be obtained, they maintain it to mean
that that particular year was from some incidental causes unfavourable
to figs. [1519] But the immediate signification of καιρὸς is the right,
in opposition to the wrong season, not a favourable season as opposed
to an unfavourable one. Now, when any one, even in an unproductive
year, seeks for fruits at the time in which they are wont to be ripe,
it cannot be said that it is the wrong season for fruit; on the
contrary, the idea of a bad year might be at once conveyed by the
statement, that when the time for fruit came, ὅτε ἦλθεν ὁ καιρὸς τῶν
καρπῶν, there was none to be found. In any case, if the whole course of
the year were unfavourable to figs, a fruit so abundant in Palestine,
Jesus must almost as necessarily have known this as that it was the
wrong season; so that the enigma remains, how Jesus could be so
indignant that the tree was in a condition which, owing to
circumstances known to him, was inevitable.

But let us only remember who it is to whom we owe that addition. It is
Mark, who, in his efforts after the explanatory and the picturesque, so
frequently draws on his own imagination; and in doing this, as it has
been long ago perceived, and as we also have had sufficient
opportunities of observing on our way, he does not always go to work in
the most considerate manner. Thus, here, he is arrested by the first
striking particular that presents itself, namely, that the tree was
without fruit, and hastens to furnish the explanation, that it was not
the time for figs, not observing that while he accounts physically for
the barrenness of the tree, he makes the conduct of Jesus morally
inexplicable. Again, the above-mentioned divergency from Matthew in
relation to the time within which the tree withered, far from evincing
more authentic information, [1520] or a tendency to the natural
explanation of the marvellous on the part of Mark, is only another
product of the same dramatising effort as that which gave birth to the
above addition. The idea of a tree suddenly withering at a word, is
difficult for the imagination perfectly to fashion; whereas it cannot
be called a bad dramatic contrivance, to lay the process of withering
behind the scenes, and to make the result be first noticed by the
subsequent passers by. For the rest, in the assertion that it was then
(a few days before Easter) no time for figs, Mark is so far right, as
it regards the conditions of climate in Palestine, that at so early a
time of the year the new figs of the season were not yet ripe, for the
early fig or boccore is not ripe until the middle or towards the end of
June; while the proper fig, the kermus, ripens only in the month of
August. On the other hand, there might about Easter still be met with
here and there, hanging on the tree, the third fruit of the fig-tree,
the late kermus, which had remained from the previous autumn, and
through the winter: [1521] as we read in Josephus that a part of
Palestine (the shores of the Galilean sea), more fruitful, certainly,
than the country around Jerusalem, where the history in question
occurred, produces figs uninterruptedly during ten months of the year,
σῦκον δέκα μησὶν ἀδιαλείπτως χορηγεῖ. [1522]

But even when we have thus set aside this perplexing addition of
Mark’s, that the tree was not really defective, but only appeared so to
Jesus in consequence of an erroneous expectation: there still subsists,
even according to Matthew, the incongruity that Jesus appears to have
destroyed a natural object on account of a deficiency which might
possibly be merely temporary. He cannot have been prompted to this by
economical considerations, since he was not the owner of the tree;
still less can he have been actuated by moral views, in relation to an
inanimate object of nature; hence the expedient has been adopted of
substituting the disciples as the proper object on which Jesus here
intended to act, and of regarding the tree, and what Jesus does to it,
as a mere means to his ultimate design. This is the symbolical
interpretation, by which first the fathers of the church, and of late
the majority of orthodox theologians among the moderns, have thought to
free Jesus from the charge of an unsuitable action. According to them,
anger towards the tree which presented nothing to appease his hunger,
was not the feeling of Jesus, in performing this action; his object not
simply the extermination of the unfruitful plant: on the contrary, he
judiciously availed himself of the occasion of finding a barren tree,
in order to impress a truth on his disciples more vividly and indelibly
than by words. This truth may either be conceived under a special form,
namely, that the Jewish nation which persisted in rendering no pleasing
fruit to God and to the Messiah, would be destroyed; or under the
general form, that every one who was as destitute of good works as this
tree was of fruit, had to look forward to a similar condemnation.
[1523] Other commentators however with reason maintain, that if Jesus
had had such an end in view in the action, he must in some way have
explained himself on the subject; for if an elucidation was necessary
when he delivered a parable, it was the more indispensable when he
performed a symbolical action, in proportion as this, without such an
indication of an object lying beyond itself, was more likely to be
mistaken for an object in itself; [1524] it is true that, here as well
as elsewhere, it might be supposed, that Jesus probably enlarged on
what he had done, for the instruction of his disciples, but that the
narrators, content with the miracle, have omitted the illustrative
discourse. If however Jesus gave an interpretation of his act in the
alleged symbolical sense, the Evangelists have not merely been silent
concerning this discourse, but have inserted a false one in its place;
for they represent Jesus, after his procedure with respect to the tree,
not as being silent, but as giving, in answer to an expression of
astonishment on the part of his disciples, an explanation which is not
the above symbolical one, but a different, nay, an opposite one. For
when Jesus says to them that they need not wonder at the withering of
the fig-tree, since with only a little faith they will be able to
effect yet greater things, he lays the chief stress on his agency in
the matter, not on the condition and the fate of the tree as a symbol:
therefore, if his design turned upon the latter, he would have spoken
to his disciples so as to contravene that design; or rather, if he so
spoke, that cannot have been his design. For the same reason, falls
also Sieffert’s totally unsupported hypothesis, that Jesus, not indeed
after, but before that act, when on the way to the fig-tree, had held a
conversation with his disciples on the actual condition and future lot
of the Jewish nation, and that to this conversation the symbolical
cursing of the tree was a mere key-stone, which explained itself: for
all comprehension of the act in question which that introduction might
have facilitated, must, especially in that age when there was so strong
a bias towards the miraculous, have been again obliterated by the
subsequent declaration of Jesus, which regarded only the miraculous
side of the fact. Hence Ullmann has judged rightly in preferring to the
symbolical interpretation, although he considers it admissible, another
which had previously been advanced: [1525] namely, that Jesus by this
miracle intended to give his followers a new proof of his perfect
power, in order to strengthen their confidence in him under the
approaching perils. Or rather, as a special reference to coming trial
is nowhere exhibited, and as the words of Jesus contain nothing which
he had not already said at an earlier period (Matt. xvii. 20; Luke
xvii. 6), Fritzsche is more correct in expressing the view of the
Evangelists quite generally, thus: Jesus used his displeasure at the
unfruitfulness of the tree, as an occasion for performing a miracle,
the object of which was merely the general one of all his miracles,
namely to attest his Messiahship. [1526] Hence Euthymius speaks
entirely in the spirit of the narrators, as described by Fritzsche,
[1527] when he forbids all investigation into the special end of the
action, and exhorts the reader only to look at it in general as a
miracle. [1528] But it by no means follows from hence that we too
should refrain from all reflection on the subject, and believingly
receive the miracle without further question; on the contrary, we
cannot avoid observing, that the particular miracle which we have now
before us, does not admit of being explained as a real act of Jesus,
either upon the general ground of performing miracles, or from any
peculiar object or motive whatever. Far from this, it is in every
respect opposed both to his theory and his prevailing practice, and on
this account, even apart from the question of its physical possibility,
must be pronounced more decidedly, than any other, to be such a miracle
as Jesus cannot really have performed.

It is incumbent on us, however, to adduce positive proof of the
existence of such causes as, even without historical foundation, might
give rise to a narrative of this kind. Now in our usual source, the Old
Testament, we do, indeed, find many figurative discourses and
narratives about trees, and fig-trees in particular; but none which has
so specific an affinity to our narrative, that we could say the latter
is an imitation of it. But we need not search long in the New
Testament, before we find, first in the mouth of the Baptist (Matt.
iii. 10), then in that of Jesus (vii. 19), the apothegm of the tree,
which, because it bears no good fruit, is cut down and cast into the
fire; and further on (Luke xiii. 6 ff.) this theme is dilated into the
fictitious history of a man who for three years in vain seeks for fruit
on a fig-tree in his vineyard, and on this account determines to cut it
down, but that the gardener intercedes for another year’s respite. It
was already an idea of some fathers of the church, that the cursing of
the fig-tree was only the parable of the barren fig-tree carried out
into action. [1529] It is true that they held this opinion in the sense
of the explanation before cited, namely, that Jesus himself, as he had
previously exhibited the actual condition and the approaching
catastrophe of the Jewish people in a figurative discourse, intended on
the occasion in question to represent them by a symbolical action;
which, as we have seen, is inconceivable. Nevertheless, we cannot help
conjecturing, that we have before us one and the same theme under three
different modifications: first, in the most concentrated form, as an
apothegm; then expanded into a parable; and lastly realized as a
history. But we do not suppose that what Jesus twice described in
words, he at length represented by an action; in our opinion, it was
tradition which converted what it met with as an apothegm and a parable
into a real incident. That in the real history the end of the tree is
somewhat different from that threatened in the apothegm and parable,
namely, withering instead of being cut down, need not amount to a
difficulty. For had the parable once become a real history, with Jesus
for its subject, and consequently its whole didactic and symbolical
significance passed into the external act, then must this, if it were
to have any weight and interest, take the form of a miracle, and the
natural destruction of the tree by means of the axe must be transformed
into an immediate withering on the word of Jesus. It is true that there
seems to be the very same objection to this conception of the narrative
which allows its inmost kernel to be symbolical, as to the one above
considered; namely, that it is contravened by the words of Jesus which
are appended to the narrative. But on our view of the gospel histories
we are warranted to say, that with the transformation of the parable
into a history, its original sense also was lost, and as the miracle
began to be regarded as constituting the pith of the matter, that
discourse on miraculous power and faith, was erroneously annexed to it.
Even the particular circumstance that led to the selection of the
saying about the removal of the mountain for association with the
narrative of the fig-tree, may be shown with probability. The power of
faith, which is here represented by an effectual command to a mountain:
Be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea, is elsewhere (Luke xvii.
6) symbolized by an equally effectual command to a species of fig-tree
(συκάμινος): Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the
sea. Hence the cursing of the fig-tree, so soon as its withering was
conceived to be an effect of the miraculous power of Jesus, brought to
mind the tree or the mountain which was to be transported by the
miraculous power of faith, and this saying became appended to that
fact. Thus, in this instance, praise is due to the third gospel for
having preserved to us the parable of the barren συκῆ, and the apothegm
of the συκάμινος to be transplanted by faith, distinct and pure, each
in its original form and significance; while the two other synoptists
have transformed the parable into a history, and have misapplied the
apothegm (in a somewhat altered form) to a false explanation of that
pretended history. [1530]







