Chapter II.

Joe and Jim were singularly alike. They were nearly the same size,
very tall, but so heavily built as to appear of medium height, while
their grey eyes and, indeed, every feature of their clean-cut faces
corresponded so exactly as to proclaim them brothers.

"Already up to your old tricks?" asked Jim, with his hand on Joe's
shoulder, as they both watched Nell's flight.

"I'm really fond of her, Jim, and didn't mean to hurt her feelings.
But tell me about yourself; what made you come West?"

"To teach the Indians, and I was, no doubt, strongly influenced by
your being here."

"You're going to do as you ever have--make some sacrifice. You are
always devoting yourself; if not to me, to some other. Now it's your
life you're giving up. To try to convert the redskins and influence
me for good is in both cases impossible. How often have I said there
wasn't any good in me! My desire is to kill Indians, not preach to
them, Jim. I'm glad to see you; but I wish you hadn't come. This
wild frontier is no place for a preacher."

"I think it is," said Jim, quietly.

"What of Rose--the girl you were to marry?"

Joe glanced quickly at his brother. Jim's face paled slightly as he
turned away.

"I'll speak once more of her, and then, never again," he answered.
"You knew Rose better than I did. Once you tried to tell me she was
too fond of admiration, and I rebuked you; but now I see that your
wider experience of women had taught you things I could not then
understand. She was untrue. When you left Williamsburg, apparently
because you had gambled with Jewett and afterward fought him, I was
not misled. You made the game of cards a pretense; you sought it
simply as an opportunity to wreak your vengeance on him for his
villainy toward me. Well, it's all over now. Though you cruelly beat
and left him disfigured for life, he will live, and you are saved
from murder, thank God! When I learned of your departure I yearned
to follow. Then I met a preacher who spoke of having intended to go
West with a Mr. Wells, of the Moravian Mission. I immediately said I
would go in his place, and here I am. I'm fortunate in that I have
found both him and you."

"I'm sorry I didn't kill Jewett; I certainly meant to. Anyway,
there's some comfort in knowing I left my mark on him. He was a
sneaking, cold-blooded fellow, with his white hair and pale face,
and always fawning round the girls. I hated him, and gave it to him
good." Joe spoke musingly and complacently as though it was a
trivial thing to compass the killing of a man.

"Well, Jim, you're here now, and there's no help for it. We'll go
along with this Moravian preacher and his nieces. If you haven't any
great regrets for the past, why, all may be well yet. I can see that
the border is the place for me. But now, Jim, for once in your life
take a word of advice from me. We're out on the frontier, where
every man looks after himself. Your being a minister won't protect
you here where every man wears a knife and a tomahawk, and where
most of them are desperadoes. Cut out that soft voice and most of
your gentle ways, and be a little more like your brother. Be as kind
as you like, and preach all you want to; but when some of these
buckskin-legged frontiermen try to walk all over you, as they will,
take your own part in a way you have never taken it before. I had my
lesson the first few days out with that wagon-train. It was a case
of four fights; but I'm all right now."

"Joe, I won't run, if that's what you mean," answered Jim, with a
laugh. "Yes, I understand that a new life begins here, and I am
content. If I can find my work in it, and remain with you, I shall
be happy."

"Ah! old Mose! I'm glad to see you," Joe cried to the big dog who
came nosing round him. "You've brought this old fellow; did you
bring the horses?"

"Look behind the wagon."

With the dog bounding before him, Joe did as he was directed, and
there found two horses tethered side by side. Little wonder that his
eyes gleamed with delight. One was jet-black; the other iron-gray
and in every line the clean-limbed animals showed the thoroughbred.
The black threw up his slim head and whinnied, with affection
clearly shining in his soft, dark eyes as he recognized his master.

"Lance, old fellow, how did I ever leave you!" murmured Joe, as he
threw his arm over the arched neck. Mose stood by looking up, and
wagging his tail in token of happiness at the reunion of the three
old friends. There were tears in Joe's eyes when, with a last
affectionate caress, he turned away from his pet.

"Come, Jim, I'll take you to Mr. Wells."

They started across the little square, while Mose went back under the
wagon; but at a word from Joe he bounded after them, trotting
contentedly at their heels. Half way to the cabins a big, raw-boned
teamster, singing in a drunken voice, came staggering toward them.
Evidently he had just left the group of people who had gathered near
the Indians.

"I didn't expect to see drunkenness out here," said Jim, in a low
tone.

"There's lots of it. I saw that fellow yesterday when he couldn't
walk. Wentz told me he was a bad customer."

The teamster, his red face bathed in perspiration, and his sleeves
rolled up, showing brown, knotty arms, lurched toward them. As they
met he aimed a kick at the dog; but Mose leaped nimbly aside,
avoiding the heavy boot. He did not growl, nor show his teeth; but
the great white head sank forward a little, and the lithe body
crouched for a spring.

"Don't touch that dog; he'll tear your leg off!" Joe cried sharply.

"Say, pard, cum an' hev' a drink," replied the teamster, with a
friendly leer.

"I don't drink," answered Joe, curtly, and moved on.

The teamster growled something of which only the word "parson" was
intelligible to the brothers. Joe stopped and looked back. His gray
eyes seemed to contract; they did not flash, but shaded and lost
their warmth. Jim saw the change, and, knowing what it signified,
took Joe's arm as he gently urged him away. The teamster's shrill
voice could be heard until they entered the fur-trader's cabin.

An old man with long, white hair flowing from beneath his
wide-brimmed hat, sat near the door holding one of Mrs. Wentz's
children on his knee. His face was deep-lined and serious; but
kindness shone from his mild blue eyes.

"Mr. Wells, this is my brother James. He is a preacher, and has come
in place of the man you expected from Williamsburg."

The old minister arose, and extended his hand, gazing earnestly at
the new-comer meanwhile. Evidently he approved of what he saw in his
quick scrutiny of the other's face, for his lips were wreathed with
a smile of welcome.

"Mr. Downs, I am glad to meet you, and to know you will go with me.
I thank God I shall take into the wilderness one who is young enough
to carry on the work when my days are done."

"I will make it my duty to help you in whatsoever way lies in my
power," answered Jim, earnestly.

"We have a great work before us. I have heard many scoffers who
claim that it is worse than folly to try to teach these fierce
savages Christianity; but I know it can be done, and my heart is in
the work. I have no fear; yet I would not conceal from you, young
man, that the danger of going among these hostile Indians must be
great."

"I will not hesitate because of that. My sympathy is with the
redman. I have had an opportunity of studying Indian nature and
believe the race inherently noble. He has been driven to make war,
and I want to help him into other paths."

Joe left the two ministers talking earnestly and turned toward Mrs.
Wentz. The fur-trader's wife was glowing with pleasure. She held in
her hand several rude trinkets, and was explaining to her listener,
a young woman, that the toys were for the children, having been
brought all the way from Williamsburg.

"Kate, where's Nell?" Joe asked of the girl.

"She went on an errand for Mrs. Wentz."

Kate Wells was the opposite of her sister. Her motions were slow,
easy and consistent with her large, full, form. Her brown eyes and
hair contrasted sharply with Nell's. The greatest difference in the
sisters lay in that Nell's face was sparkling and full of the fire
of her eager young life, while Kate's was calm, like the unruffled
surface of a deep lake.

"That's Jim, my brother. We're going with you," said Joe.

"Are you? I'm glad," answered the girl, looking at the handsome
earnest face of the young minister.

"Your brother's like you for all the world," whispered Mrs. Wentz.

"He does look like you," said Kate, with her slow smile.

"Which means you think, or hope, that that is all," retorted Joe
laughingly. "Well, Kate, there the resemblance ends, thank God for
Jim!"

He spoke in a sad, bitter tone which caused both women to look at
him wonderingly. Joe had to them ever been full of surprises; never
until then had they seen evidences of sadness in his face. A
moment's silence ensued. Mrs. Wentz gazed lovingly at the children
who were playing with the trinkets; while Kate mused over the young
man's remark, and began studying his, half-averted face. She felt
warmly drawn to him by the strange expression in the glance he had
given his brother. The tenderness in his eyes did not harmonize with
much of this wild and reckless boy's behavior. To Kate he had always
seemed so bold, so cold, so different from other men, and yet here
was proof that Master Joe loved his brother.

The murmured conversation of the two ministers was interrupted by a
low cry from outside the cabin. A loud, coarse laugh followed, and
then a husky voice:

"Hol' on, my purty lass."'

Joe took two long strides, and was on the door-step. He saw Nell
struggling violently in the grasp of the half-drunken teamster.

"I'll jes' hev' to kiss this lassie fer luck," he said in a tone of
good humor.

At the same instant Joe saw three loungers laughing, and a fourth,
the grizzled frontiersman, starting forward with a yell.

"Let me go!" cried Nell.

Just when the teamster had pulled her close to him, and was bending
his red, moist face to hers, two brown, sinewy hands grasped his
neck with an angry clutch. Deprived thus of breath, his mouth
opened, his tongue protruded; his eyes seemed starting from their
sockets, and his arms beat the air. Then he was lifted and flung
with a crash against the cabin wall. Falling, he lay in a heap on
the grass, while the blood flowed from a cut on his temple.

"What's this?" cried a man, authoritatively. He had come swiftly up,
and arrived at the scene where stood the grizzled frontiersman.

"It was purty handy, Wentz. I couldn't hev' did better myself, and I
was comin' for that purpose," said the frontiersman. "Leffler was
tryin' to kiss the lass. He's been drunk fer two days. That little
girl's sweetheart kin handle himself some, now you take my word on
it."

"I'll agree Leff's bad when he's drinkin'," answered the fur-trader,
and to Joe he added, "He's liable to look you up when he comes
around."

"Tell him if I am here when he gets sober, I'll kill him," Joe cried
in a sharp voice. His gaze rested once more on the fallen teamster,
and again an odd contraction of his eyes was noticeable. The glance
was cutting, as if with the flash of cold gray steel. "Nell, I'm
sorry I wasn't round sooner," he said, apologetically, as if it was
owing to his neglect the affair had happened.

As they entered the cabin Nell stole a glance at him. This was the
third time he had injured a man because of her. She had on several
occasions seen that cold, steely glare in his eyes, and it had
always frightened her. It was gone, however, before they were inside
the building. He said something which she did not hear distinctly,
and his calm voice allayed her excitement. She had been angry with
him; but now she realized that her resentment had disappeared. He
had spoken so kindly after the outburst. Had he not shown that he
considered himself her protector and lover? A strange emotion, sweet
and subtle as the taste of wine, thrilled her, while a sense of fear
because of his strength was mingled with her pride in it. Any other
girl would have been only too glad to have such a champion; she
would, too, hereafter, for he was a man of whom to be proud.

"Look here, Nell, you haven't spoken to me," Joe cried suddenly,
seeming to understand that she had not even heard what he said, so
engrossed had she been with her reflections. "Are you mad with me
yet?" he continued. "Why, Nell, I'm in--I love you!"

Evidently Joe thought such fact a sufficient reason for any act on
his part. His tender tone conquered Nell, and she turned to him with
flushed cheeks and glad eyes.

"I wasn't angry at all," she whispered, and then, eluding the arm he
extended, she ran into the other room.



