Chapter XXVI.

In the confusion the missionaries carried Young and Edwards into Mr.
Wells' cabin. Nell's calm, white face showed that she had expected
some such catastrophe as this, but she of all was the least excited.
Heckewelder left them at the cabin and hurried away to consult
Captain Williamson. While Zeisberger, who was skilled in surgery,
attended to the wounded men, Jim barred the heavy door, shut the
rude, swinging windows, and made the cabin temporarily a refuge from
prowling savages.

Outside the clamor increased. Shrill yells rent the air, long,
rolling war-cries sounded above all the din. The measured stamp of
moccasined feet, the rush of Indians past the cabin, the dull thud
of hatchets struck hard into the trees--all attested to the
excitement of the savages, and the imminence of terrible danger.

In the front room of Mr. Wells' cabin Edwards lay on a bed, his face
turned to the wall, and his side exposed. There was a bloody hole in
his white skin. Zeisberger was probing for the bullet. He had no
instruments, save those of his own manufacture, and they were
darning needles with bent points, and a long knife-blade ground
thin.

"There, I have it," said Zeisberger. "Hold still, Dave. There!" As
Edwards moaned Zeisberger drew forth the bloody bullet. "Jim, wash
and dress this wound. It isn't bad. Dave will be all right in a
couple of days. Now I'll look at George."

Zeisberger hurried into the other room. Young lay with quiet face
and closed eyes, breathing faintly. Zeisberger opened the wounded
man's shirt and exposed the wound, which was on the right side,
rather high up. Nell, who had followed Zeisberger that she might be
of some assistance if needed, saw him look at the wound and then
turn a pale face away for a second. That hurried, shuddering
movement of the sober, practical missionary was most significant.
Then he bent over Young and inserted on of the probes into the
wound. He pushed the steel an inch, two, three, four inches into
Young's breast, but the latter neither moved nor moaned. Zeisberger
shook his head, and finally removed the instrument. He raised the
sufferer's shoulder to find the bed saturated with blood. The bullet
wound extended completely through the missionary's body, and was
bleeding from the back. Zeisberger folded strips of linsey cloth
into small pads and bound them tightly over both apertures of the
wound.

"How is he?" asked Jim, when the amateur surgeon returned to the
other room, and proceeded to wash the blood from his hands.

Zeisberger shook his head gloomily.

"How is George?" whispered Edwards, who had heard Jim's question.

"Shot through the right lung. Human skill can not aid him! Only God
can save."

"Didn't I hear a third shot?" whispered Dave, gazing round with sad,
questioning eyes. "Heckewelder?"

"Is safe. He has gone to see Williamson. You did hear a third shot.
Half King fell dead with a bullet over his left eye. He had just
folded his arms in a grand pose after his death decree to the
Christians."

"A judgment of God!"

"It does seem so, but it came in the form of leaden death from
Wetzel's unerring rifle. Do you hear all that yelling? Half King's
death has set the Indians wild."

There was a gentle knock at the door, and then the word, "Open," in
Heckewelder's voice.

Jim unbarred the door. Heckewelder came in carrying over his
shoulder what apparently was a sack of meal. He was accompanied by
young Christy. Heckewelder put the bag down, opened it, and lifted
out a little Indian boy. The child gazed round with fearful eyes.

"Save Benny! Save Benny!" he cried, running to Nell, and she clasped
him closely in her arms.

Heckewelder's face was like marble as he asked concerning Edwards'
condition.

"I'm not badly off," said the missionary with a smile.

"How's George?" whispered Heckewelder.

No one answered him. Zeisberger raised his hands. All followed
Heckewelder into the other room, where Young lay in the same
position as when first brought in. Heckewelder stood gazing down
into the wan face with its terribly significant smile.

"I brought him out here. I persuaded him to come!" whispered
Heckewelder. "Oh, Almighty God!" he cried. His voice broke, and his
prayer ended with the mute eloquence of clasped hands and uplifted,
appealing face.

"Come out," said Zeisberger, leading him into the larger room. The
others followed, and Jim closed the door.

"What's to be done?" said Zeisberger, with his practical common
sense. "What did Williamson say? Tell us what you learned?"

"Wait--directly," answered Heckewelder, sitting down and covering
his face with his hands. There was a long silence. At length he
raised his white face and spoke calmly:

"Gentlemen, the Village of Peace is doomed. I entreated Captain
Williamson to help us, but he refused. Said he dared not interfere.
I prayed that he would speak at least a word to Girty, but he denied
my request."

"Where are the converts?"

"Imprisoned in the church, every one of them except Benny. Mr.
Christy and I hid the child in the meal sack and were thus able to
get him here. We must save him."

"Save him?" asked Nell, looking from Heckewelder to the trembling
Indian boy.

"Nellie, the savages have driven all our Christians into the church,
and shut them up there, until Girty and his men shall give the word
to complete their fiendish design. The converts asked but one
favor--an hour in which to pray. It was granted. The savages intend
to murder them all."

"Oh! Horrible! Monstrous!" cried Nell. "How can they be so inhuman?"
She lifted Benny up in her arms. "They'll never get you, my boy.
We'll save you--I'll save you!" The child moaned and clung to her
neck.

"They are scouring the clearing now for Christians, and will search
all the cabins. I'm positive."

"Will they come here?" asked Nell, turning her blazing eyes on
Heckewelder.

"Undoubtedly. We must try to hide Benny. Let me think; where would
be a good place? We'll try a dark corner of the loft."

"No, no," cried Nell.

"Put Benny in Young's bed," suggested Jim.

"No, no," cried Nell.

"Put him in a bucket and let him down in the well," whispered
Edwards, who had listened intently to the conversation.

"That's a capital place," said Heckewelder. "But might he not fall
out and drown?"

"Tie him in the bucket," said Jim.

"No, no, no," cried Nell.

"But Nellie, we must decide upon a hiding place, and in a hurry."

"I'll save Benny."

"You? Will you stay here to face those men? Jim Girty and Deering
are searching the cabins. Could you bear it to see them? You
couldn't."

"Oh! No, I believe it would kill me! That man! that beast! will he
come here?" Nell grew ghastly pale, and looked as if about to faint.
She shrunk in horror at the thought of again facing Girty. "For
God's sake, Heckewelder, don't let him see me! Don't let him come
in! Don't!"

Even as the imploring voice ceased a heavy thump sounded on the
door.

"Who's there?" demanded Heckewelder.

Thump! Thump!

The heavy blows shook the cabin. The pans rattled on the shelves. No
answer came from without.

"Quick! Hide Benny! It's as much as our lives are worth to have him
found here," cried Heckewelder in a fierce whisper, as he darted
toward the door.

"All right, all right, in a moment," he called out, fumbling over
the bar.

He opened the door a moment later and when Jim Girty and Deering
entered he turned to his friends with a dread uncertainty in his
haggard face.

Edwards lay on the bed with wide-open eyes staring at the intruders.
Mr. Wells sat with bowed head. Zeisberger calmly whittled a stick,
and Jim stood bolt upright, with a hard light in his eyes.

Nell leaned against the side of a heavy table. Wonderful was the
change that had transformed her from a timid, appealing,
fear-agonized girl to a woman whose only evidence of unusual
excitement were the flame in her eyes and the peculiar whiteness of
her face.

Benny was gone!

Heckewelder's glance returned to the visitors. He thought he had
never seen such brutal, hideous men.

"Wal, I reckon a preacher ain't agoin' to lie. Hev you seen any
Injun Christians round here?" asked Girty, waving a heavy
sledge-hammer.

"Girty, we have hidden no Indians here," answered Heckewelder,
calmly.

"Wal, we'll hev a look, anyway," answered the renegade.

Girty surveyed the room with wolfish eyes. Deering was so drunk that
he staggered. Both men, in fact, reeked with the vile fumes of rum.
Without another word they proceeded to examine the room, by looking
into every box, behind a stone oven, and in the cupboard. They drew
the bedclothes from the bed, and with a kick demolished a pile of
stove wood. Then the ruffians passed into the other apartments,
where they could be heard making thorough search. At length both
returned to the large room, when Girty directed Deering to climb a
ladder leading to the loft, but because Deering was too much under
the influence of liquor to do so, he had to go himself. He rummaged
around up there for a few minutes, and then came down.

"Wal, I reckon you wasn't lyin' about it," said Girty, with his
ghastly leer.

He and his companion started to go out. Deering had stood with
bloodshot eyes fixed on Nell while Girty searched the loft, and as
they passed the girl on their way to the open air, the renegade
looked at Girty as he motioned with his head toward her. His
besotted face expressed some terrible meaning.

Girty had looked at Nell when he first entered, but had not glanced
twice at her. As he turned now, before going out of the door, he
fixed on her his baleful glance. His aspect was more full of meaning
than could have been any words. A horrible power, of which he was
boastfully conscious, shone from his little, pointed eyes. His mere
presence was deadly. Plainly as if he had spoken was the
significance of his long gaze. Any one could have translated that
look.

Once before Nell had faced it, and fainted when its dread meaning
grew clear to her. But now she returned his gaze with one in which
flashed lightning scorn, and repulsion, in which glowed a wonderful
defiance.

The cruel face of this man, the boastful barbarity of his manner,
the long, dark, bloody history which his presence recalled, was,
indeed, terrifying without the added horror of his intent toward
her, but now the self-forgetfulness of a true woman sustained her.

Girty and Deering backed out of the door. Heckewelder closed it, and
dropped the bar in place.

Nell fell over the table with a long, low gasp. Then with one hand
she lifted her skirt. Benny walked from under it. His big eyes were
bright. The young woman clasped him again in her arms. Then she
released him, and, laboring under intense excitement, ran to the
window.

"There he goes! Oh, the horrible beast! If I only had a gun and
could shoot! Oh, if only I were a man! I'd kill him. To think of
poor Kate! Ah! he intends the same for me!"

Suddenly she fell upon the floor in a faint. Mr. Wells and Jim
lifted her on the bed beside Edwards, where they endeavored to
revive her. It was some moments before she opened her eyes.

Jim sat holding Nell's hand. Mr. Wells again bowed his head.
Zeisberger continued to whittle a stick, and Heckewelder paced the
floor. Christy stood by with every evidence of sympathy for this
distracted group. Outside the clamor increased.

"Just listen!" cried Heckewelder. "Did you ever hear the like? All
drunk, crazy, fiendish! They drank every drop of liquor the French
traders had. Curses on the vagabond dealers! Rum has made these
renegades and savages wild. Oh! my poor, innocent Christians!"

Heckewelder leaned his head against the mantle-shelf. He had broken
down at last. Racking sobs shook his frame.

"Are you all right again?" asked Jim of Nell.

"Yes."

"I am going out, first to see Williamson, and then the Christians,"
he said, rising very pale, but calm.

"Don't go!" cried Heckewelder. "I have tried everything. It was all
of no use."

"I will go," answered Jim.

"Yes, Jim, go," whispered Nell, looking up into his eyes. It was an
earnest gaze in which a faint hope shone.

Jim unbarred the door and went out.

"Wait, I'll go along," cried Zeisberger, suddenly dropping his knife
and stick.

As the two men went out a fearful spectacle met their eyes. The
clearing was alive with Indians. But such Indians! They were painted
demons, maddened by rum. Yesterday they had been silent; if they
moved at all it had been with deliberation and dignity. To-day they
were a yelling, running, blood-seeking mob.

"Awful! Did you ever see human beings like these?" asked Zeisberger.

"No, no!"

"I saw such a frenzy once before, but, of course, only in a small
band of savages. Many times have I seen Indians preparing for the
war-path, in search of both white men and redskins. They were fierce
then, but nothing like this. Every one of these frenzied fiends is
honest. Think of that! Every man feels it his duty to murder these
Christians. Girty has led up to this by cunning, and now the time is
come to let them loose."

"It means death for all."

"I have given up any thought of escaping," said Zeisberger, with the
calmness that had characterized his manner since he returned to the
village. "I shall try to get into the church."

"I'll join you there as soon as I see Williamson."

Jim walked rapidly across the clearing to the cabin where Captain
Williamson had quarters. The frontiersmen stood in groups, watching
the savages with an interest which showed little or no concern.

"I want to see Captain Williamson," said Jim to a frontiersman on
guard at the cabin door.

"Wal, he's inside," drawled the man.

Jim thought the voice familiar, and he turned sharply to see the
sun-burnt features of Jeff Lynn, the old riverman who had taken Mr.
Wells' party to Fort Henry.

"Why, Lynn! I'm glad to see you," exclaimed Jim.

"Purty fair to middlin'," answered Jeff, extending his big hand.
"Say, how's the other one, your brother as wus called Joe?"

"I don't know. He ran off with Wetzel, was captured by Indians, and
when I last heard of him he had married Wingenund's daughter."

"Wal, I'll be dog-goned!" Jeff shook his grizzled head and slapped
his leg. "I jest knowed he'd raise somethin'."

"I'm in a hurry. Do you think Captain Williamson will stand still
and let all this go on?"

"I'm afeerd so."

Evidently the captain heard the conversation, for he appeared at the
cabin door, smoking a long pipe.

"Captain Williamson, I have come to entreat you to save the
Christians from this impending massacre."

"I can't do nuthin'," answered Williamson, removing his pipe to puff
forth a great cloud of smoke.

"You have eighty men here!"

"If we interfered Pipe would eat us alive in three minutes. You
preacher fellows don't understand this thing. You've got Pipe and
Girty to deal with. If you don't know them, you'll be better
acquainted by sundown."

"I don't care who they are. Drunken ruffians and savages! That's
enough. Will you help us? We are men of your own race, and we come
to you for help. Can you withhold it?"

"I won't hev nuthin' to do with this bizness. The chiefs hev
condemned the village, an' it'll hev to go. If you fellars hed been
careful, no white blood would hev been spilled. I advise you all to
lay low till it's over."

"Will you let me speak to your men, to try and get them to follow
me?"

"Heckewelder asked that same thing. He was persistent, and I took a
vote fer him just to show how my men stood. Eighteen of them said
they'd follow him; the rest wouldn't interfere."

"Eighteen! My God!" cried Jim, voicing the passion which consumed
him. "You are white men, yet you will stand by and see these
innocent people murdered! Man, where's your humanity? Your manhood?
These converted Indians are savages no longer, they are Christians.
Their children are as good, pure, innocent as your own. Can you
remain idle and see these little ones murdered?"

Williamson made no answer, the men who had crowded round were
equally silent. Not one lowered his head. Many looked at the
impassioned missionary; others gazed at the savages who were
circling around the trees brandishing their weapons. If any pitied
the unfortunate Christians, none showed it. They were indifferent,
with the indifference of men hardened to cruel scenes.

Jim understood, at last, as he turned from face to face to find
everywhere that same imperturbability. These bordermen were like
Wetzel and Jonathan Zane. The only good Indian was a dead Indian.
Years of war and bloodshed, of merciless cruelty at the hands of
redmen, of the hard, border life had rendered these frontiersmen
incapable of compassion for any savage.

Jim no longer restrained himself.

"Bordermen you may be, but from my standpoint, from any man's, from
God's, you are a lot of coldly indifferent cowards!" exclaimed Jim,
with white, quivering lips. "I understand now. Few of you will risk
anything for Indians. You will not believe a savage can be a
Christian. You don't care if they are all murdered. Any man among
you--any man, I say--would step out before those howling fiends and
boldly demand that there be no bloodshed. A courageous leader with a
band of determined followers could avert this tragedy. You might
readily intimidate yonder horde of drunken demons. Captain
Williamson, I am only a minister, far removed from a man of war and
leader, as you claim to be, but, sir, I curse you as a miserable
coward. If I ever get back to civilization I'll brand this inhuman
coldness of yours, as the most infamous and dastardly cowardice that
ever disgraced a white man. You are worse than Girty!"

Williamson turned a sickly yellow; he fumbled a second with the
handle of his tomahawk, but made no answer. The other bordermen
maintained the same careless composure. What to them was the raving
of a mad preacher?

Jim saw it and turned baffled, fiercely angry, and hopeless. As he
walked away Jeff Lynn took his arm, and after they were clear of the
crowd of frontiersmen he said:

"Young feller, you give him pepper, an' no mistake. An' mebbe you're
right from your side the fence. But you can't see the Injuns from
our side. We hunters hevn't much humanity--I reckon that's what you
called it--but we've lost so many friends an' relatives, an' hearn
of so many murders by the reddys that we look on all of 'em as wild
varmints that should be killed on sight. Now, mebbe it'll interest
you to know I was the feller who took the vote Williamson told you
about, an' I did it 'cause I had an interest in you. I wus watchin'
you when Edwards and the other missionary got shot. I like grit in a
man, an' I seen you had it clear through. So when Heckewelder comes
over I talked to the fellers, an' all I could git interested was
eighteen, but they wanted to fight simply fer fightin' sake. Now,
ole Jeff Lynn is your friend. You just lay low until this is over."

Jim thanked the old riverman and left him. He hardly knew which way
to turn. He would make one more effort. He crossed the clearing to
where the renegades' teepee stood. McKee and Elliott were sitting on
a log. Simon Girty stood beside them, his hard, keen, roving eyes on
the scene. The missionary was impressed by the white leader. There
was a difference in his aspect, a wilder look than the others wore,
as if the man had suddenly awakened to the fury of his Indians.
Nevertheless the young man went straight toward him.

"Girty, I come---"

"Git out! You meddlin' preacher!" yelled the renegade, shaking his
fist at Jim.

Simon Girty was drunk.

Jim turned from the white fiends. He knew his life to them was not
worth a pinch of powder.

"Lost! Lost! All lost!" he exclaimed in despair.

As he went toward the church he saw hundreds of savages bounding
over the grass, brandishing weapons and whooping fiendishly. They
were concentrating around Girty's teepee, where already a great
throng had congregated. Of all the Indians to be seen not one
walked. They leaped by Jim, and ran over the grass nimble as deer.

He saw the eager, venomous fire in their dusky eyes, and the cruelly
clenched teeth like those of wolves when they snarl. He felt the
hissing breath of many savages as they raced by him. More than one
whirled a tomahawk close to Jim's head, and uttered horrible yells in
his ear. They were like tigers lusting for blood.

Jim hurried to the church. Not an Indian was visible near the log
structure. Even the savage guards had gone. He entered the open door
to be instantly struck with reverence and awe.

The Christians were singing.

Miserable and full of sickening dread though Jim was, he could not
but realize that the scene before him was one of extraordinary
beauty and pathos. The doomed Indians lifted up their voices in
song. Never had they sung so feelingly, so harmoniously.

When the song ended Zeisberger, who stood upon a platform, opened
his Bible and read:

"In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord, thy
Redeemer."

In a voice low and tremulous the venerable missionary began his
sermon.

The shadow of death hovered over these Christian martyrs; it was
reflected in their somber eyes, yet not one was sullen or sad. The
children who were too young to understand, but instinctively feeling
the tragedy soon to be enacted there, cowered close to their
mothers.

Zeisberger preached a touching and impressive, though short, sermon.
At its conclusion the whole congregation rose and surrounded the
missionary. The men shook his hands, the women kissed them, the
children clung to his legs. It was a wonderful manifestation of
affection.

Suddenly Glickhican, the old Delaware chief, stepped on the
platform, raised his hand and shouted one Indian word.

A long, low wail went up from the children and youths; the women
slowly, meekly bowed their heads. The men, due to the stoicism of
their nature and the Christianity they had learned, stood proudly
erect awaiting the death that had been decreed.

Glickhican pulled the bell rope.

A deep, mellow tone pealed out.

The sound transfixed all the Christians. No one moved.

Glickhican had given the signal which told the murderers the
Christians were ready.

"Come, man, my God! We can't stay here!" cried Jim to Zeisberger.

As they went out both men turned to look their last on the martyrs.
The death knell which had rung in the ears of the Christians, was to
them the voice of God. Stern, dark visages of men and the sweet,
submissive faces of women were uplifted with rapt attention. A light
seemed to shine from these faces as if the contemplation of God had
illumined them.

As Zeisberger and Jim left the church and hurried toward the cabins,
they saw the crowd of savages in a black mass round Girty's teepee.
The yelling and leaping had ceased.

Heckewelder opened the door. Evidently he had watched for them.

"Jim! Jim!" cried Nell, when he entered the cabin. "Oh-h! I was
afraid. Oh! I am glad you're back safe. See, this noble Indian has
come to help us."

Wingenund stood calm and erect by the door.

"Chief, what will you do?"

"Wingenund will show you the way to the big river," answered the
chieftain, in his deep bass.

"Run away? No, never! That would be cowardly. Heckewelder, you would
not go? Nor you, Zeisberger? We may yet be of use, we may yet save
some of the Christians."

"Save the yellow-hair," sternly said Wingenund.

"Oh, Jim, you don't understand. The chief has come to warn me of
Girty. He intends to take me as he has others, as he did poor Kate.
did you not see the meaning in his eyes to-day? How they scorched
me! Ho! Jim, take me away! Save me! Do not leave me here to that
horrible fate? Oh! Jim, take me away!"

"Nell, I will take you," cried Jim, grasping her hands.

"Hurry! There's a blanket full of things I packed for you," said
Heckewelder. "Lose no time. Ah! hear that! My Heavens! what a yell!"
Heckewelder rushed to the door and looked out. "There they go, a
black mob of imps; a pack of hungry wolves! Jim Girty is in the
lead. How he leaps! How he waves his sledge! He leads the savages
toward the church. Oh! it's the end!"

"Benny? Where's Benny?" cried Jim, hurriedly lacing the hunting coat
he had flung about him.

"Benny's safe. I've hidden him. I'll get him away from here,"
answered young Christy. "Go! Now's your time. Godspeed you!"

"I'm ready," declared Mr. Wells. "I--have--finished!"

"There goes Wingenund! He's running. Follow him, quick! Good-by!
Good-by! God be with you!" cried Heckewelder.

"Good-by! Good-by!"

Jim hurried Nell toward the bushes where Wingenund's tall form could
dimly be seen. Mr. Wells followed them. On the edge of the clearing
Jim and Nell turned to look back.

They saw a black mass of yelling, struggling, fighting savages
crowding around the church.

"Oh! Jim, look back! Look back!" cried Nell, holding hard to his
hand. "Look back! See if Girty is coming!"



