CHAPTER VIII.


Platonic Compositions Generally.

Variety and abundance visible in Plato's writings   342

Plato both sceptical and dogmatical   _ib._

Poetical vein predominant in some compositions, but not in all   343

Form of dialogue--universal to this extent, that Plato never speaks in
his own name   344

No one common characteristic pervading all Plato's works   _ib._

The real Plato was not merely a writer of dialogues, but also lecturer
and president of a school. In this last important function he is
scarcely at all known to us. Notes of his lectures taken by
Aristotle   346

Plato's lectures De Bono obscure and transcendental. Effect which they
produced on the auditors   347

They were delivered to miscellaneous auditors. They coincide mainly
with what Aristotle states about the Platonic Ideas   348

The lectures De Bono may perhaps have been more transcendental than
Plato's other lectures   349

Plato's Epistles--in them only he speaks in his own person   _ib._

Intentional obscurity of his Epistles in reference to philosophical
doctrine   350

Letters of Plato to Dionysius II. about philosophy. His anxiety to
confine philosophy to discussion among select and prepared minds   351

He refuses to furnish any written, authoritative exposition of his own
philosophical doctrine   352

He illustrates his doctrine by the successive stages of geometrical
teaching. Difficulty to avoid the creeping in of error at each of
these stages   353

No written exposition can keep clear of these chances of error   355

Relations of Plato with Dionysius II. and the friends of the deceased
Dion. Pretensions of Dionysius to understand and expound Plato's
doctrines   _ib._

Impossibility of teaching by written exposition assumed by Plato; the
assumption intelligible in his day   357

Standard by which Plato tested the efficacy of the expository
process.--Power of sustaining a Sokratic cross-examination   358

Plato never published any of the lectures which he delivered at the
Academy   _ib._

Plato would never publish his philosophical opinions in his own name;
but he may have published them in the dialogues under the name of
others   360

Groups into which the dialogues admit of being thrown   361

Distribution made by Thrasyllus defective, but still useful--Dialogues
of Search, Dialogues of Exposition   _ib._

Dialogues of Exposition--present affirmative result. Dialogues of
Search are wanting in that attribute   362

The distribution coincides mainly with that of Aristotle--Dialectic,
Demonstrative   363

Classification of Thrasyllus in its details. He applies his own
principles erroneously   364

The classification, as it would stand, if his principles were applied
correctly   365

Preponderance of the searching and testing dialogues over the
expository and dogmatical   366

Dialogues of Search--sub-classes among them recognised by
Thrasyllus--Gymnastic and Agonistic, &c.   _ib._

Philosophy, as now understood, includes authoritative teaching,
positive results, direct proofs   _ib._

The Platonic Dialogues of Search disclaim authority and
teaching--assume truth to be unknown to all alike--follow a process
devious as well as fruitless   367

The questioner has no predetermined course, but follows the lead given
by the respondent in his answers   _ib._

Relation of teacher and learner. Appeal to authority is suppressed   368

In the modern world the search for truth is put out of sight. Every
writer or talker professes to have already found it, and to proclaim
it to others   369

The search for truth by various interlocutors was a recognised process
in the Sokratic age. Acute negative Dialectic of Sokrates   370

Negative procedure supposed to be represented by the Sophists and the
Megarici; discouraged and censured by historians of philosophy   371

Vocation of Sokrates and Plato for the negative procedure: absolute
necessity of it as a condition of reasoned truth. Parmenidês of
Plato   372

Sokrates considered the negative procedure to be valuable by itself,
and separately. His theory of the natural state of the human mind; not
ignorance, but false persuasion of knowledge   373

Declaration of Sokrates in the Apology; his constant mission to make
war against the false persuasion of knowledge   374

Opposition of feeling between Sokrates and the Dikasts   375

The Dialogues of Search present an end in themselves. Mistake of
supposing that Plato had in his mind an ulterior affirmative end, not
declared   _ib._

False persuasion of knowledge--had reference to topics social,
political, ethical   376

To those topics, on which each community possesses established dogmas,
laws, customs, sentiments, consecrated and traditional, peculiar to
itself. The local creed, which is never formally proclaimed or taught,
but is enforced unconsciously by every one upon every one else.
Omnipotence of King Nomos   377

Small minority of exceptional individual minds, who do not yield to
the established orthodoxy, but insist on exercising their own
judgment   382

Early appearance of a few free-judging individuals, or free-thinkers
in Greece   384

Rise of Dialectic--Effect of the Drama and the Dikastery   386

Application of Negative scrutiny to ethical and social topics by
Sokrates   _ib._

Emphatic assertion by Sokrates of the right of satisfaction for his
own individual reason   386

Aversion of the Athenian public to the negative procedure of Sokrates.
Mistake of supposing that that negative procedure belongs peculiarly
to the Sophists and the Megarici   387

The same charges which the historians of philosophy bring against the
Sophists were brought by contemporary Athenians against Sokrates. They
represent the standing dislike of free inquiry, usual with an orthodox
public 388

Aversion towards Sokrates aggravated by his extreme publicity of
speech. His declaration, that false persuasion of knowledge is
universal; must be understood as a basis in appreciating Plato's
Dialogues of Search   393

Result called _Knowledge_, which Plato aspires to. Power of going
through a Sokratic cross-examination; not attainable except through
the Platonic process and method   396

Platonic process adapted to Platonic topics--man and society   397

Plato does not provide solutions for the difficulties which he has
raised. The affirmative and negative veins are in him completely
distinct. His dogmas are enunciations _à priori_ of some impressive
sentiment   399

Hypothesis--that Plato had solved all his own difficulties for
himself; but that he communicated the solution only to a few select
auditors in oral lectures--Untenable   401

Characteristic of the oral lectures--that they were delivered in
Plato's own name. In what other respects they departed from the
dialogues, we cannot say   402

Apart from any result, Plato has an interest in the process of search
and debate _per se_. Protracted enquiry is a valuable privilege, not a
tiresome obligation   403

Plato has done more than any one else to make the process of enquiry
interesting to others, as it was to himself   405

Process of generalisation always kept in view and illustrated
throughout the Platonic Dialogues of Search--general terms and
propositions made subjects of conscious analysis   406

The Dialogues must be reviewed as distinct compositions by the same
author, illustrating each other, but without assignable
inter-dependence   407

Order of the Dialogues, chosen for bringing them under separate
review. Apology will come first; Timæus, Kritias, Leges, Epinomis last
_ib._

Kriton and Euthyphron come immediately after Apology. The intermediate
dialogues present no convincing grounds for any determinate order   408


