letter is to mollify the displeasure of Cn. Pompey, who had written to
blame him for some unfavourable criticisms on the style of Plato.
Dionysius justifies his criticisms by allusions to the Phædrus. If he
had been able to add, that the Phædrus was a first composition, and
that Plato's later dialogues were comparatively free from the like
faults--this would have been the most effective way of conciliating
Cn. Pompey.]

[Side-note: Reasons for this opinion. Labour of the composition--does
not consist with youth of the author.]

All the information (scanty as it is) which we obtain from the rhetor
Dionysius and others respecting the composition of the Platonic
dialogues, announces them to have cost much time and labour to their
author: a statement illustrated by the great number of inversions of
words which he is said to have introduced successively in the first
sentence of the Republic, before he was satisfied to let the sentence
stand. This corresponds, too, with all that we read respecting the
patient assiduity both of Isokrates and Demosthenes.[58] A first-rate
Greek composition was understood not to be purchasable at lower cost.
I confess therefore to great surprise, when I read in Ast the
affirmation that the Protagoras was composed when Plato was only 22
years old--and when I find Schleiermacher asserting, as if it were a
matter beyond dispute, that Protagoras, Phædrus, and Parmenidês, all
bear evident marks of Plato's youthful age (Jugendlichkeit). In regard
to the Phædrus and Parmenidês, indeed, Hermann and other critics
contest the view of Schleiermacher; and detect, in those two
dialogues, not only no marks of "juvenility," but what they consider
plain proofs of maturity and even of late age. But in regard to the
Protagoras, most of them agree with Schleiermacher and Ast, in
declaring it to be a work of Plato's youth, some time before the death
of Sokrates. Now on this point I dissent from them: and since the
decision turns upon "internal grounds," each must judge for himself.
The Protagoras appears to me one of the most finished and elaborate of
all the dialogues: in complication of scenic arrangements, dramatic
vivacity, and in the amount of theory worked out, it is surpassed by
none--hardly even by the Republic.[59] Its merits as a composition are
indeed extolled by all the critics; who clap their hands, especially,
at the humiliation which they believe to be brought upon the great
Sophist by Sokrates. But the more striking the composition is
acknowledged to be, the stronger is the presumption that its author
was more than 22 or 24 years of age. Nothing short of good positive
testimony would induce me to believe that such a dialogue as the
Protagoras could have been composed, even by Plato, before he attained
the plenitude of his powers. No such testimony is produced or
producible. I extend a similar presumption, even to the Lysis, Lachês,
Charmidês, and other dialogues: though with a less degree of
confidence, because they are shorter and less artistic, not equal to
the Protagoras. All of them, in my judgment, exhibit a richness of
ideas and a variety of expression, which suggest something very
different from a young novice as the author.

[Footnote 58: Timæus said that Alexander the Great conquered the
Persian empire in less time than Isokrates required for the
composition of his panegyrical oration (Longinus, De Sublim. c. 4).]

[Footnote 59: "Als aesthetisches Kunstwerk ist der Dialog Protagoras
das meisterhafteste unter den Werken Platon's.' (Socher, Ueber Platon,
p. 226.)]

But over and above this presumption, there are other reasons which
induce me to believe, that none of the Platonic dialogues were
published during the lifetime of Sokrates. My reasons are partly
connected with Sokrates, partly with Plato.

[Side-note: Reasons founded on the personality of Sokrates, and his
relations with Plato.]

First, in reference to Sokrates--we may reasonably doubt whether any
written reports of his actual conversations were published during his
lifetime. He was the most constant, public, and indiscriminate of all
talkers: always in some frequented place, and desiring nothing so much
as a respondent with an audience. Every one who chose to hear him,
might do so without payment and with the utmost facility. Why then
should any one wish to read written reports of his conversations?
especially when we know that the strong interest which they excited in
the hearers depended much upon the spontaneity of his inspirations,
and hardly less upon the singularity of his manner and physiognomy.
Any written report of what he said must appear comparatively tame.
Again, as to fictitious dialogues (like the Platonic) employing the
name of Sokrates as spokesman--such might doubtless be published
during his lifetime by derisory dramatists for the purpose of raising
a laugh, but not surely by a respectful disciple and admirer for the
purpose of giving utterance to doctrines of his own. The greater was
the respect felt by Plato for Sokrates, the less would he be likely to
take the liberty of making Sokrates responsible before the public for
what Sokrates had never said.[60] There is a story in Diogenes--to the
effect that Sokrates, when he first heard the Platonic dialogue called
Lysis, exclaimed--"What a heap of falsehoods does the young man utter
about me!"[61] This story merits no credence as a fact: but it
expresses the displeasure which Sokrates would be likely to feel, on
hearing that one of his youthful companions had dramatised him as he
appears in the Lysis. Xenophon tells us, and it is very probable, that
inaccurate oral reports of the real colloquies of Sokrates may have
got into circulation. But that the friends and disciples of Sokrates,
during his lifetime, should deliberately publish fictitious dialogues,
putting their own sentiments into his mouth, and thus contribute to
mislead the public--is not easily credible. Still less credible is it
that Plato, during the lifetime of Sokrates, should have published
such a dialogue as the Phædrus, wherein we find ascribed to Sokrates,
poetical and dithyrambic effusions utterly at variance with the real
manifestations which Athenians might hear every day from Sokrates in
the market-place.[62] Sokrates in the Platonic Apology, complains of
the comic poet Aristophanes for misrepresenting him. Had the Platonic
Phædrus been then in circulation, or any other Platonic dialogues, he
might with equally good reason have warned the Dikasts against judging
of him, a real citizen on trial, from the titular Sokrates whom even
disciples did not scruple to employ as spokesman for their own
transcendental doctrine, and their own controversial sarcasms.

[Footnote 60: Valentine Rose observes, in regard to a dialogue
composed by some one else, wherein Plato was introduced as one of the
interlocutors, that it could not have been composed until after
Plato's death, and that the dialogues of Plato were not composed until
after the death of Sokrates. "Platonis autem sermones antequam mortuus
fuerit, scripto neminem tradidisse, neque magistri viventis personâ in
dialogis abusos fuisse (non magis quam vivum Socratem induxerunt
Xenophon, Plato, cæteri Socratici), hoc veterum mori et religioni
quivis facile concedet," &c. (V. Rose, Aristoteles Pseudepigraphus,
pp. 57, 74, Leipsic, 1863.)--Val. Rose expresses the same opinion (that
none of the Sokratic dialogues, either by Plato or the other
companions of Sokrates, were written until after the death of
Sokrates) in his earlier work, De Aristotelis Librorum Ordine et
Auctoritate, p. 25.]

[Footnote 61: Diog. L. iii. 35.]

[Footnote 62: In regard to the theory (elaborated by Schleiermacher,
recently again defended by Volquardsen), that the Phædrus is the
earliest among the Platonic dialogues, composed about 406 B.C., it
appears to me inconsistent also with what we know about Lysias. In the
Platonic Phædrus, Lysias is presented as a [Greek: logogra/phos] of
the highest reputation and eminence (p. 228 A, 257 C, and indeed
throughout the whole dialogue). Now this is quite inconsistent with
what we read from Lysias himself in the indictment which he preferred
against Eratosthenes, not long after the restoration of the democracy,
403 B.C. He protests therein strenuously that he had never had
judicial affairs of his own, nor meddled with those of others; and he
expresses the greatest apprehension from his own [Greek: a)peiri/a]
(sects. 4-6). I cannot believe that this would be said by a person
whom Phædrus terms [Greek: deino/tatos ô(\n tô=n nu=n gra/phein].
Moreover, Lysias, in that same discourse, describes his own position
at Athens, anterior to the Thirty: he belonged to a rich metic family,
and was engaged along with his brother Polemarchus in a large
manufactory of shields, employing 120 slaves (s. 20). A person thus
rich and occupied was not likely to become a professed and notorious
[Greek: logogra/phos], though he may have been a clever and
accomplished man. Lysias was plundered and impoverished by the Thirty;
and he is said to have incurred much expense in aiding the efforts of
Thrasybulus. It was after this change of circumstances that he took to
rhetoric as a profession; and it is to some one of these later years
that the Platonic Phædrus refers.]

[Side-note: Reasons, founded on the early life, character, and
position of Plato.]

Secondly, in regard to Plato, the reasons leading to the same
conclusion are yet stronger. Unfortunately, we know little of the life
of Plato before he attained the age of 28, that is, before the death
of Sokrates: but our best means of appreciating it are derived from
three sources. 1. Our knowledge of the history of Athens from 409-399
B.C., communicated by Thucydides, Xenophon, &c. 2. The seventh Epistle
of Plato himself, written four or five years before his death (about
352 B.C.). 3. A few hints from the Memorabilia of Xenophon.

[Side-note: Plato's early life--active by necessity, and to some
extent ambitious.]

To these evidences about the life of Plato, it has not been customary
to pay much attention. The Platonic critics seem to regard Plato so
entirely as a spiritual person ("like a blessed spirit, visiting earth
for a short time," to cite a poetical phrase applied to him by Göthe),
that they disdain to take account of his relations with the material
world, or with society around him. Because his mature life was
consecrated to philosophy, they presume that his youth must have been
so likewise. But this is a hasty assumption. You cannot thus abstract
_any_ man from the social medium by which, he is surrounded. The
historical circumstances of Athens from Plato's nineteenth year to his
twenty-sixth (409-403 B.C.) were something totally different from what
they afterwards became. They were so grave and absorbing, that had he
been ever so much inclined to philosophy, he would have been compelled
against his will to undertake active and heavy duty as a citizen.
Within those years (as I have observed in a preceding chapter) fell
the closing struggles of the Peloponnesian war; in which (to repeat
words already cited from Thucydides) Athens became more a military
post than a city--every citizen being almost habitually under arms:
then the long blockade, starvation, and capture of the city, followed
by the violences of the Thirty, the armed struggle under Thrasybulus,
and the perilous, though fortunately successful and equitable,
renovation of the democracy. These were not times for a young citizen,
of good family and robust frame, to devote himself exclusively to
philosophy and composition. I confess myself surprised at the
assertion of Schleiermacher and Steinhart, that Plato composed the
Charmidês and other dialogues under the Anarchy.[63] Amidst such
disquietude and perils he could not have renounced active duty for
philosophy, even if he had been disposed to do so.

[Footnote 63: Steinhart, Einl. zum Laches, vol. i. p. 358, where he
says that Plato composed the Charmidês, Lachês, and Protagoras, all in
404 B.C. under the Thirty. Schleiermacher, Einleitung zum Charmides,
vol. ii. p. 8.

The lines of Lucretius (i. 41) bear emphatically upon this trying
season:

Nam neque nos agere hoc patriai tempore iniquo
Possumus æquo animo nec Memmi clara propago
Talibus in rebus communi desse saluti.]

But, to make the case stronger, we learn from Plato's own testimony,
in his seventh Epistle, that he was not at that time disposed to
renounce active political life. He tells us himself, that as a young
man he was exceedingly eager, like others of the same age, to meddle
and distinguish himself in active politics.[64] How natural such
eagerness was, to a young citizen of his family and condition, may be
seen by the analogy of his younger brother Glaukon, who was
prematurely impatient to come forward: as well as by that of his
cousin Charmides, who had the same inclination, but was restrained by
exaggerated diffidence of character. Now we know that the real
Sokrates (very different from the Platonic Sokrates in the Gorgias)
did not seek to deter young men of rank from politics, and to consign
them to inactive speculation. Sokrates gives[65] earnest encouragement
to Charmides; and he does not discourage Glaukon, but only presses him
to adjourn his pretensions until the suitable stock of preliminary
information has been acquired. We may thus see that assuming the young
Plato to be animated with political aspirations, he would certainly
not be dissuaded,--nay, he would probably be encouraged--by Sokrates.

[Footnote 64: Plato, Epist. vii. p. 324 C. [Greek: Ne/os e)gô/ pote
ô)\n polloi=s dê\ tau)to\n e)/pathon; ô)|ê/thên, ei) tha=tton
e)mautou= genoi/mên ku/rios, e)pi\ ta\ koina\ tê=s po/leôs eu)thu\s
i)e/nai]. Again, 325 E: [Greek: ô(/ste me, to\ prô=ton pollê=s mesto\n
o)/nta o(rmê=s e)pi\ to\ pra/ttein ta\ koina/], &c.]

[Footnote 65: See the two interesting colloquies of Sokrates, with
Glaukon and Charmides (Xenoph. Mem. iii. 6, 7).

Charmides was killed along with Kritias during the eight months called
The Anarchy, at the battle fought with Thrasybulus and the democrats
(Xen. Hell. ii. 4, 19). The colloquy of Sokrates with Charmides,
recorded by Xenophon in the Memorabilia, must have taken place at some
time before the battle of Ægospotami; perhaps about 407 or 406 B.C.]

Plato farther tells us that when (after the final capitulation of
Athens) the democracy was put down and the government of the Thirty
established, he embarked in it actively under the auspices of his
relatives (Kritias, Charmides, &c., then in the ascendant), with the
ardent hopes of youth[66] that he should witness and promote the
accomplishment of valuable reforms. Experience showed him that he was
mistaken. He became disgusted with the enormities of the Thirty,
especially with their treatment of Sokrates; and he then ceased to
co-operate with them. Again, after the year called the Anarchy, the
democracy was restored, and Plato's political aspirations revived
along with it. He again put himself forward for active public life,
though with less ardent hopes.[67] But he became dissatisfied with the
march of affairs, and his relationship with the deceased Kritias was
now a formidable obstacle to popularity. At length, four years after
the restoration of the democracy, came the trial and condemnation of
Sokrates. It was that event which finally shocked and disgusted Plato,
converting his previous dissatisfaction into an utter despair of
obtaining any good results from existing governments. From
thenceforward, he turned away from practice and threw himself into
speculation.[68]

[Footnote 66: Plato, Epist. vii. 324 D. [Greek: Kai\ e)gô\ thaumasto\n
ou)de\n e)/pathon u(po\ neo/têtos], &c.]

[Footnote 67: Plato, Epist. vii. 325 A. [Greek: Pa/lin de/,
bradu/teron me\n, ei)=lke de/ me o(/môs ê( peri\ to\ pra/ttein ta\
koina\ kai\ politika\ e)pithumi/a.]]

[Footnote 68: Plato, Epist. vii. 325 C: [Greek: Skopou=nti dê/ moi
tau=ta te kai\ tou\s a)nthrô/pous tou\s pra/ttontas ta\ politika/],
&c. 325 E: [Greek: Kai\ tou= me\n skopei=n mê\ a)postê=nai, pê= pote\
a)/meinon a)\n gi/gnoito peri/ te au)ta\ tau=ta kai\ dê\ kai\ peri\
tê\n pa=san politei/an, tou= de\ pra/ttein au)= perime/nein ai)ei\
kairou/s, teleutô=nta de\ noê=sai peri\ pasô=n tô=n nu=n po/leôn o(/ti
kakô=s xu/mpasai politeu/ontai].

I have already stated in the 84th chapter of my History, describing
the visit of Plato to Dionysius in Sicily, that I believe the Epistles
of Plato to be genuine, and that the seventh Epistle especially
contains valuable information. Some critics undoubtedly are of a
different opinion, and consider them as spurious. But even among these
critics, several consider that the author of the Epistles, though not
Plato himself, was a contemporary and well informed: so that his
evidence is trustworthy. See K. F. Hermann, Gesammelte Abhandlungen,
pp. 282-283. The question has been again discussed recently by
Ueberweg (Untersuch. über d. Aechth. u. Zeitf. d. Plat. Schriften, pp.
120-123-125-129), who gives his own opinion that the letters are not
by Plato, and produces various arguments to the point. His arguments
are noway convincing to me: for the mysticism and pedantry of the
Epistles appear to me in full harmony with the Timæus and Leges, and
with the Pythagorean bias of Plato's later years, though not in
harmony with the Protagoras, and various other dialogues. Yet Ueberweg
also declares his full belief that the seventh Epistle is the
composition of a well-informed contemporary, and perfectly worthy of
credit as to the facts and K. F. Hermann declares the same. This is
enough for my present purpose.

The statement, trusted by all the critics, that Plato's first visit to
Syracuse was made when he was about 40 years of age, depends
altogether on the assertion of the seventh Epistle. How numerous are
the assertions made by Platonic critics respecting Plato, upon
evidence far slighter than that of these Epistles! Boeckh considers
the seventh Epistle as the genuine work of Plato. Valentine Rose also
pronounces it to be genuine, though he does not consider the other
Epistles to be so (De Aristotelis Librorum Ordine, p. 25, p. 114,
Berlin, 1854). Tennemann admits the Epistles generally to be genuine
(System der Platon. Philos. i. p. 106).

It is undeniable that these Epistles of Plato were recognised as
genuine and trusted by all the critics of antiquity from Aristophanes
downwards. Cicero, Plutarch, Aristeides, &c., assert facts upon the
authority of the Epistles. Those who declare the Epistles to be
spurious and worthless, ought in consistency to reject the statements
which Plutarch makes on the authority of the Epistles: they will find
themselves compelled to discredit some of the best parts of his life
of Dion. Compare Aristeides, [Greek: Peri\ R(êtorikê=s] Or. 45, pp.
90-106, Dindorf.]

[Side-note: Plato did not retire from political life until after the
restoration of the democracy, nor devote himself to philosophy until
after the death of Sokrates.]

This very natural recital, wherein Plato (at the age of 75) describes
his own youth between 21 and 28--taken in conjunction with the other
reasons just enumerated--impresses upon me the persuasion, that Plato
did not devote himself to philosophy, nor publish any of his
dialogues, before the death of Sokrates: though he may probably have
composed dramas, and the beautiful epigrams which Diogenes has
preserved. He at first frequented the society of Sokrates, as many
other aspiring young men frequented it (likewise that of Kratylus, and
perhaps that of various Sophists[69]), from love of ethical debate,
admiration of dialectic power, and desire to acquire a facility of the
same kind in his own speech: not with any view to take up philosophy
as a profession, or to undertake the task either of demolishing or
constructing in the region of speculation. No such resolution was
adopted until after he had tried political life and had been
disappointed:--nor until such disappointment had been still more
bitterly aggravated by the condemnation of Sokrates. It was under this
feeling that Plato first consecrated himself to that work of
philosophical meditation and authorship,--of inquisitive travel and
converse with philosophers abroad,--and ultimately of teaching in the
Academy,--which filled up the remaining fifty years of his life. The
death of Sokrates left that venerated name open to be employed as
spokesman in his dialogues: and there was nothing in the political
condition of Athens after 399 B.C., analogous to the severe and
perilous struggle which tasked all the energies of her citizens from
409 B.C. down to the close of the war.

[Footnote 69: Compare Plat. Protag. 312 A-B, 315 A, where the
distinction is pointedly drawn between one who visited Protagoras
[Greek: e)pi\ te/chnê|, ô(s dêmiourgo\s e)so/menos], and others who
came simply [Greek: e)pi\ paidei/a|, ô(s to\n i)diô/tên kai\ to\n
e)leu/theron pre/pei.]]

[Side-note: All Plato's dialogues were composed during the fifty-one
years after the death of Sokrates.]

I believe, on these grounds, that Plato did not publish any dialogues
during the life of Sokrates. An interval of fifty-one years separates
the death of Sokrates from that of Plato. Such an interval is more
than sufficient for all the existing dialogues of Plato, without the
necessity of going back to a more youthful period of his age. As to
distribution of the dialogues, earlier or later, among these fifty-one
years, we have little or no means of judging. Plato has kept out of
sight--with a degree of completeness which is really surprising--not
merely his own personality, but also the marks of special date and the
determining circumstances in which each dialogue was composed. Twice
only does he mention his own name, and that simply in passing, as if
it were the name of a third person.[70] As to the point of time to
which he himself assigns each dialogue, much discussion has been held
how far Plato has departed from chronological or historical
possibility; how far he has brought persons together in Athens who
never could have been there together, or has made them allude to
events posterior to their own decease. A speaker in Athenæus[71]
dwells, with needless acrimony, on the anachronisms of Plato, as if
they were gross faults. Whether they are faults or not, may fairly be
doubted: but the fact of such anachronisms cannot be doubted, when we
have before us the Menexenus and the Symposion. It cannot be supposed,
in the face of such evidence, that Plato took much pains to keep clear
of anachronisms: and whether they be rather more or rather less
numerous, is a question of no great moment.

[Footnote 70: In the Apologia, c. 28, p. 38, Sokrates alludes to Plato
as present in court, and as offering to become guarantee, along with
others, for his fine. In the Phædon, Plato is mentioned as being sick;
to explain why he was not present at the last scene of Sokrates
(Phædon, p. 59 B). Diog. L. iii. 37.

The pathos as well as the detail of the narrative in the Phædon makes
one imagine that Plato really was present at the scene. But being
obliged, by the uniform scheme of his compositions, to provide another
narrator, he could not suffer it to be supposed that he was himself
present.

I have already remarked that this mention of Plato in the third person
([Greek: Pla/tôn de/, oi)=mai, ê)sthe/nei]) was probably one of the
reasons which induced Panætius to declare the Phædon _not_ to be the
work of Plato.]

[Footnote 71: Athenæus, v. pp. 220, 221. Didymus also attacked Plato
as departing from historical truth--[Greek: e)piphuo/menos tô=|
Pla/tôni ô(s paristorou=nti]--against which the scholiast (ad Leges,
i. p. 630) defends him. Groen van Prinsterer, Prosopogr. Plat. p. 16.
The rhetor Aristeides has some remarks of the same kind, though less
acrimonious (Orat. xlvii. p. 435, Dind.) than the speaker in
Athenæus.]

[Side-note: The Thrasyllean Canon is more worthy of trust than the
modern critical theories by which it has been condemned.]

I now conclude my enquiry respecting the Platonic Canon. The
presumption in favour of that Canon, as laid down by Thrasyllus, is
stronger (as I showed in the preceding chapter) than it is in regard
to ancient authors generally of the same age: being traceable, in the
last resort, through the Alexandrine Museum, to authenticating
manuscripts in the Platonic school, and to members of that school who
had known and cherished Plato himself.[72] I have reviewed the
doctrines of several recent critics who discard this Canon as unworthy
of trust, and who set up for themselves a type of what Plato _must
have_ been, derived from a certain number of items in the
Canon--rejecting the remaining items as unconformable to their
hypothetical type. The different theories which they have laid down
respecting general and systematic purposes of Plato (apart from the
purpose of each separate composition), appear to me uncertified and
gratuitous. The "internal reasons," upon which they justify rejection
of various dialogues, are only another phrase for expressing their own
different theories respecting Plato as a philosopher and as a writer. For
my part I decline to discard any item of the Thrasyllean Canon, upon such
evidence as they produce: I think it a safer and more philosophical
proceeding to accept the entire Canon, and to accommodate my general
theory of Plato (in so far as I am able to frame one) to each and all
of its contents.

[Footnote 72: I find this position distinctly asserted, and the
authority of the Thrasyllean catalogue, as certifying the genuine
works of Plato, vindicated, by Yxem, in his able dissertation on the
Kleitophon of Plato (pp. 1-3, Berlin, 1846). But Yxem does not set
forth the grounds of this opinion so fully as the present state of the
question demands. Moreover, he combines it with another opinion, upon
which he insists even at greater length, and from which I altogether
dissent--that the tetralogies of Thrasyllus exhibit the genuine order
established by Plato himself among the Dialogues.]

[Side-note: Unsafe grounds upon which those theories proceed.]

Considering that Plato's period of philosophical composition extended
over fifty years, and that the circumstances of his life are most
imperfectly known to us--it is surely hazardous to limit the range of
his varieties, on the faith of a critical repugnance, not merely
subjective and fallible, but withal entirely of modern growth: to
assume, as basis of reasoning, the admiration raised by a few of the
finest dialogues--and then to argue that no composition inferior to
this admired type, or unlike to it in doctrine or handling, can
possibly be the work of Plato. "The Minos, Theagês, Epistolæ,
Epinomis, &c., are unworthy of Plato: nothing so inferior in
excellence can have been composed by him. No dialogue can be admitted
as genuine which contradicts another dialogue, or which advocates any
low or incorrect or un-Platonic doctrine. No dialogue can pass which
is adverse to the general purpose of Plato as an improver of morality,
and a teacher of the doctrine of Ideas." On such grounds as these we
are called upon to reject various dialogues: and there is nothing upon
which, generally speaking, so much stress is laid as upon inferior
excellence. For my part, I cannot recognise any of them as sufficient
grounds of exception. I have no difficulty in believing, not merely
that Plato (like Aristophanes) produced many successive novelties,
"not at all similar one to the other, and all clever"[73]--but also
that among these novelties, there were inferior dialogues as well as
superior: that in different dialogues he worked out different, even
contradictory, points of view--and among them some which critics
declare to be low and objectionable: that we have among his works
unfinished fragments and abandoned sketches, published without order,
and perhaps only after his death.

[Footnote 73: Aristophan. Nubes, 547-8.

[Greek: A)ll' a)ei\ kaina\s i)de/as ei)sphe/rôn sophi/zomai,
Ou)de\n a)llê/laisin o(moi/as, kai\ pa/sas dexia/s.]]

[Side-note: Opinions of Schleiermacher, tending to show this.]

It may appear strange, but it is true, that Schleiermacher, the
leading champion of Plato's central purpose and systematic unity from
the beginning, lays down a doctrine to the same effect. He says,
"Truly, nothing can be more preposterous, than when people demand that
all the works even of a great master shall be of equal perfection--or
that such as are not equal, shall be regarded as not composed by him".
Zeller expresses himself in the same manner, and with as little
reserve.[74] These eminent critics here proclaim a general rule which
neither they nor others follow out.

[Footnote 74: Schleiermacher, Einleitung zum Menon, vol. iii. p. 337.
"Und wahrlich, nichts ist wohl wunderlicher, als wenn man verlangt,
dass alle Werke auch eines grossen Meisters von gleicher Volkommenheit
seyn sollten--oder die es nicht sind, soll er nicht verfertigt haben."

Compare Zeller, Phil. d. Griech., vol. ii. p. 322, ed. 2nd.

It is to be remembered that this opinion of Schleiermacher refers only
to _completed works_ of the same master. You are not authorised in
rejecting any completed work as spurious, on the ground that it is not
equal in merit to some other. Still less, then, are you authorised in
rejecting, on the like ground, an uncompleted work--a professed
fragment, or a preliminary sketch. Of this nature are several of the
minor items in the Thrasyllean canon.

M. Boeckh, in his Commentary on the dialogue called Minos, has
assigned the reasons which induce him to throw out that dialogue,
together with the Hipparchus, from the genuine works of Plato (and
farther to consider both of them, and the pseudo-Platonic dialogues De
Justo and De Virtute, as works of [Greek: Si/môn o( skuteu/s]: with
this latter hypothesis I have here no concern). He admits fully that
the Minos is of the Platonic age and irreproachable in style--"veteris
esse et Attici scriptoris, probus sermo, antiqui mores totus denique
character, spondent" (p. 32). Next, he not only admits that it is like
Plato, but urges the _too great likeness_ to Plato as one of the
points of his case. He says that it is a bad, stupid, and unskilful
imitation of different Platonic dialogues: "Pergamus ad alteram partem
nostræ argumentationis, eamque etiam firmiorem, de _nimiâ
similitudine_ Platonicorum aliquot locorum. Nam de hoc quidem
conveniet inter omnes doctos et indoctos, Platonem se ipsum haud posse
imitari: ni forté quis dubitet de sanâ ejus mente" (p. 23). In the
sense which Boeckh intends, I agree that Plato did not imitate
himself: in another sense, I think that he did. I mean that his
consummate compositions were preceded by shorter, partial, incomplete
sketches, which he afterwards worked up, improved, and re-modelled. I
do not understand how Plato could have composed such works as
Republic, Protagoras, Gorgias, Symposion, Phædrus, Phædon, &c.,
without having before him many of these preparatory sketches. That
some of these sketches should have been preserved is what we might
naturally expect; and I believe Minos and Hipparchus to be among them.
I do not wonder that they are of inferior merit. One point on which
Boeckh (pp. 7, 8) contends that Hipparchus and Minos are unlike to
Plato is, that the _collocutor_ with Sokrates is anonymous. But we
find anonymous talkers in the Protagoras, Sophistês, Politikus, and
Leges.]

I find elsewhere in Schleiermacher, another opinion, not less
important, in reference to disallowance of dialogues, on purely
internal grounds. Take the Gorgias and the Protagoras: both these two
dialogues are among the most renowned of the catalogue: both have
escaped all suspicion as to legitimacy, even from Ast and Socher, the
two boldest of all disfranchising critics. In the Protagoras, Sokrates
maintains an elaborate argument to prove, against the unwilling
Protagoras, that the Good is identical with the Pleasurable, and the
Evil identical with the Painful--in the Gorgias, Sokrates holds an
argument equally elaborate, to show that Good is essentially different
from Pleasurable, Evil from Painful. What the one affirms, the other
denies. Moreover, Schleiermacher himself characterises the thesis
vindicated by Sokrates in the Protagoras, as "entirely un-Sokratic and
un-Platonic".[75] If internal grounds of repudiation are held to be
available against the Thrasyllean canon, how can such grounds exist in
greater force than those which are here admitted to bear against the
Protagoras--That it exhibits Sokrates as contradicting the Sokrates of
the Gorgias--That it exhibits him farther as advancing and proving, at
great length, a thesis "entirely un-Sokratic and un-Platonic"? Since
the critics all concur in disregarding these internal objections, as
insufficient to raise even a suspicion against the Protagoras, I
cannot concur with them when they urge the like objections as valid
and irresistible against other dialogues.

[Footnote 75: Schleiermacher, Einl. zum Protag. vol. i. p. 232. "Jene
ganz unsokratische und unplatonische Ansicht, dass das Gute nichts
anderes ist als das Angenehme."

So also, in the Parmenides, we find a host of unsolved objections
against the doctrine of Ideas; upon which in other dialogues Plato so
emphatically insists. Accordingly, Socher, resting upon this
discrepancy as an "internal ground," declares the Parmenides not to be
the work of Plato. But the other critics refuse to go along with this
inference. I think they are right in so refusing. But this only shows
how little such internal grounds are to be trusted, as evidence to
prove spuriousness.]

I may add, as farther illustrating this point, that there are few
dialogues in the list against which stronger objections on internal
grounds can be brought, than Leges and Menexenus. Yet both of them
stand authenticated, beyond all reasonable dispute, as genuine works
of Plato, not merely by the Canon of Thrasyllus, but also by the
testimony of Aristotle.[76]

[Footnote 76: See Ast, Platon's Leben und Schriften, p. 384: and still
more, Zeller, Plat. Studien, pp. 1-131, Tübingen, 1839. In that
treatise, where Zeller has set forth powerfully the grounds for
denying the genuineness of the Leges, he relied so much upon the
strength of this negative case, as to discredit the direct testimony
of Aristotle affirming the Leges to be genuine. In his Phil. d.
Griech. Zeller altered this opinion, and admitted the Leges to be
genuine. But Strümpell adheres to the earlier opinion given by Zeller,
and maintains that the partial recantation is noway justified. (Gesch.
d. Prakt. Phil. d. Griech. p. 457.)

Suckow mentions (Form der Plat. Schriften, 1855, p. 135) that Zeller
has in a subsequent work reverted to his former opinion, denying the
genuineness of the Leges. Suckow himself denies it also; relying not
merely on the internal objections against it, but also on a passage of
Isokrates (ad Philippum, p. 84), which he considers to sanction his
opinion, but which (in my judgment) entirely fails to bear him out.

Suckow attempts to show (p. 55), and Ueberweg partly countenances the
same opinion, that the two passages in which Aristotle alludes to the
Menexenus (Rhet. i. 9, 30; iii. 14, 11) do not prove that he
(Aristotle) considered it as a work of Plato, because he mentions the
name of Sokrates only, and not that of Plato. But this is to require
from a witness such precise specification as we cannot reasonably
expect. Aristotle, alluding to the Menexenus, says, [Greek: Sôkra/tês
e)n tô=| E)pitaphi/ô|]: just as, in alluding to the Gorgias in another
place (Sophist. Elench. 12, p. 173), he says, [Greek: Kalliklê=s e)n
tô=| Gorgi/a|]: and again, in alluding to the Phædon, [Greek: o( e)n
Phai/dôni Sôkra/tês] (De Gen. et Corrupt. ii. 9, p. 335): not to
mention his allusions in the Politica to the Platonic Republic, under
the name of Sokrates. No instance can be produced in which Aristotle
cites any Sokratic dialogue, composed by Antisthenes, Æschines, &c.,
or any other of the Sokratic companions except Plato. And when we read
in Aristotle's Politica (ii. 3, 3) the striking compliment
paid--[Greek: To\ me\n ou)=n peritto\n e)/chousi pa/ntes oi( tou=
Sôkra/tous lo/goi, kai\ to\ kompso/n, kai\ to\ kaino/tomon, kai\ to\
zêtêtiko/n; kalô=s de\ pa/nta i)/sôs chalepo/n]--we cannot surely
imagine that he intends to designate any other dialogues than those
composed by Plato.]

[Side-note: Any true theory of Plato must recognise all his varieties,
and must be based upon all the works in the Canon, not upon some to
the exclusion of the rest.]

While adhering therefore to the Canon of Thrasyllus, I do not think
myself obliged to make out that Plato is either like to himself, or
equal to himself, or consistent with himself, throughout all the
dialogues included therein, and throughout the period of fifty years
during which these dialogues were composed. Plato is to be found in
all and each of the dialogues, not in an imaginary type abstracted
from some to the exclusion of the rest. The critics reverence so much
this type of their own creation, that they insist on bringing out a
result consistent with it, either by interpretation specially
contrived, or by repudiating what will not harmonise. Such sacrifice
of the inherent diversity, and separate individuality, of the
dialogues, to the maintenance of a supposed unity of type, style, or
purpose, appears to me an error. In fact,[77] there exists, for us, no
personal Plato any more than there is a personal Shakespeare. Plato
(except in the Epistolæ) never appears before us, nor gives us any
opinion as his own: he is the unseen prompter of different characters
who converse aloud in a number of distinct dramas--each drama a
separate work, manifesting its own point of view, affirmative or
negative, consistent or inconsistent with the others, as the case may
be. In so far as I venture to present a general view of one who keeps
constantly in the dark--who delights to dive, and hide himself, not
less difficult to catch than the supposed Sophist in his own dialogue
called Sophistês--I shall consider it as subordinate to the dialogues,
each and all: and above all, it must be such as to include and
acknowledge not merely diversities, but also inconsistencies and
contradictions.[78]

[Footnote 77: The only manifestation of the personal Plato is in the
Epistolæ. I have already said that I accept these as genuine, though
most critics do not. I consider them valuable illustrations of his
character, as far as they go. They are all written after he was more
than sixty years of age. And most of them relate to his relations with
Dionysius the younger, with Dion, and with Sicilian affairs generally.
This was a peculiar and outlying phase of Plato's life, during which
(through the instigation of Dion, and at the sacrifice of his own
peace of mind) he became involved in the world of political action: he
had to deal with real persons, passions, and interests--with the
feeble character, literary velleities, and jealous apprehensions of
Dionysius--the reforming vehemence and unpopular harshness of Dion--the
courtiers, the soldiers, and the people of Syracuse, all moved by
different passions of which he had had no practical experience. It
could not be expected that, amidst such turbulent elements, Plato as
an adviser could effect much: yet I do not think that he turned his
chances, doubtful as they were, to the best account. I have
endeavoured to show this in the tenth volume of my History of Greece,
c. 84. But at all events, these operations lay apart from Plato's true
world--the speculation, dialectic, and lectures of the Academy at
Athens. The Epistolæ, however, present some instructive points,
bearing upon Plato's opinions about writing as a medium of
philosophical communication and instruction to learners, which I shall
notice in the suitable place.]

[Footnote 78: I transcribe from the instructive work of M. Ernest
Renan, _Averroès et l'Averroïsme_, a passage in which he deprecates
the proceeding of critics who presume uniform consistency throughout
the works of Aristotle, and make out their theory partly by forcible
exegesis, partly by setting aside as spurious all those compositions
which oppose them. The remark applies more forcibly to the dialogues
or Plato, who is much less systematic than Aristotle:--

"On a combattu l'interprétation d'Ibn-Rosehd (Averroès), et soutenu
que l'intellect actif n'est pour Aristote qu'une faculté de l'ame.
L'intellect passif n'est alors que la faculté de recevoir les [Greek:
phanta/smata]: l'intellect actif n'est que l'induction s'exerçant sur
les [Greek: phanta/smata] et en tirant les idées générales. Ainsi l'on
fait concorder la théorie exposée dans le troisième livre du Traité de
l'Ame, avec celle des Seconds Analytiques, où Aristote semble réduire
le rôle de la raison à l'induction généralisant les faits de la
sensation. Certes, je ne me dissimule pas qu'Aristote paraît souvent
envisager le [Greek: nou=s] comme personnel à l'homme. Son attention
constante à repéter que l'intellect est identique à l'intelligible,
que l'intellect passe à l'acte quand il devient l'objet qu'il pense,
est difficile à concilier avec l'hypothèse d'un intellect séparé de
l'homme. Mais il est dangereux de faire ainsi coincider de force les
différents aperçus des anciens. Les anciens philosophaient souvent
sans se limiter dans un système, traitant le même sujet selon les
points de vue qui s'offraient à eux, ou qui leur étaient offerts par
les écoles antérieures, sans s'inquiéter des dissonances qui pouvaient
exister entre ces divers tronçons de théorie. Il est puéril de
chercher à les mettre d'accord avec eux-mêmes, quand eux-mêmes s'en
sont peu souciés. Autant vaudrait, comme certains critiques Allemands,
déclarer interpolés tous les passages que l'on ne peut concilier avec
les autres. Ainsi, la théorie des Seconds Analytiques et celles du
troisième livre de l'Ame, sans se contredire expressément,
représentent deux aperçus profondément distincts et d'origine
différente, sur le fait de l'intelligence." (Averroès et l'Averroïsme,
p. 96-98, Paris, 1852.)

There is also in Strümpell (Gesch. der Prakt. Phil. der Griech. vor
Aristot. p. 200) a good passage to the same purpose as the above from
M. Renan: disapproving this presumption,--that the doctrines of every
ancient philosopher must of course be systematic and coherent with
each other--as "a phantom of modern times": and pointing out that both
Plato and Aristotle founded their philosophy, not upon any one
governing [Greek: a)rchê\] alone, from which exclusively consequences
are deduced, but upon several distinct, co-ordinate, independent,
points of view: each of which is by turns followed out, not always
consistently with the others.]




