CHAPTER XI


Euthyphron.

Situation supposed in the dialogue--interlocutors   437

Indictment by Melêtus against Sokrates--Antipathy of the Athenians
towards those who spread heretical opinions   437

Euthyphron recounts that he is prosecuting an indictment for murder
against his own father--Displeasure of his friends at the proceeding
438

Euthyphron expresses full confidence that this step of his is both
required and warranted by piety or holiness. Sokrates asks him--What
is Holiness?   439

Euthyphron alludes to the punishment of Uranus by his son Kronus and
of Kronus by his son Zeus   440

Sokrates intimates his own hesitation in believing these stories of
discord among the Gods. Euthyphron declares his full belief in them,
as well as in many similar narratives, not in so much circulation
_ib._

Bearing of this dialogue on the relative position of Sokrates and the
Athenian public   441

Dramatic moral set forth by Aristophanes against Sokrates and the
freethinkers, is here retorted by Plato against the orthodox
champion   442

Sequel of the dialogue--Euthyphron gives a particular example as the
reply to a general question   444

Such mistake frequent in dialectic discussion   _ib._

First general answer given by Euthyphron--that which is pleasing to
the Gods is holy. Comments of Sokrates thereon   445

To be loved by the Gods is not the essence of the Holy--they love it
because it is holy. In what then does its essence consist? Perplexity
of Euthyphron   446

Sokrates suggests a new answer. The Holy is one branch or variety of
the Just. It is that branch which concerns ministration by men to the
Gods   447

Ministration to the Gods? How? To what purpose?   _ib._

Holiness--rectitude in sacrifice and prayer--right traffic between men
and the Gods   448

This will not stand--the Gods gain nothing--they receive from men
marks of honour and gratitude--they are pleased therewith--the Holy,
therefore, must be that which is pleasing to the Gods   448

This is the same explanation which was before declared insufficient. A
fresh explanation is required from Euthyphron. He breaks off the
dialogue   _ib._

Sokratic spirit of the dialogue--confessed ignorance applying the
Elenchus to false persuasion of knowledge   449

The questions always difficult, often impossible to answer. Sokrates
is unable to answer them, though he exposes the bad answers of others
_ib._

Objections of Theopompus to the Platonic procedure   450

Objective view of Ethics, distinguished by Sokrates from the
subjective   451

Subjective unanimity coincident with objective dissent   _ib._

Cross-examination brought to bear upon this mental condition by
Sokrates--position of Sokrates and Plato in regard to it   452

The Holy--it has an essential characteristic--what is this?--not the
fact that it is loved by the Gods--this is true, but is not its
constituent essence   454

Views of the Xenophontic Sokrates respecting the Holy--different from
those of the Platonic Sokrates--he disallows any common absolute
general type of the Holy--he recognises an indefinite variety of
types, discordant and relative   _ib._

The Holy a branch of the Just--not tenable as a definition, but useful
as bringing to view the subordination of logical terms   455

The Euthyphron represents Plato's way of replying to the charge of
impiety, preferred by Melêtus against Sokrates--comparison with
Xenophon's way of replying   _ib._




CHAPTER I.



PLATO.



PRE-SOKRATIC PHILOSOPHY.



