Chapter IV: "As for Moses, in order to secure the nation firmly to
himself, he ordained new rites, and such as were contrary to other
men. All things are with them profane which with us are sacred; and
again, those practices are allowed among them which are by us esteemed
most abominable. They sacrifice rams by way of reproach to (Jupiter)
Hammon. An ox is also sacrificed, which the Egyptians worship under
the name of Apis," etc.









CHAPTER XI.

SAMUEL THE KINGMAKER--THE WARWICK OF ANTIQUITY.


Our forefathers of antiquity, no matter to what nation they belonged,
dressed every important event with a halo of mystery--fable, myth,
and miracle. They knew no better.

The mind, the brain, the senses, had reached a stage of development
that might well be called childish, with sensuality and selfishness
predominating. Fighting, cruelty, and lust were the leading actions
prompted. And as in the case of children, ghosts and hobgoblins
scared them, shadows and darkness frightened them, unusual sights and
noises surprised and alarmed them. And in their calmer moments they
wondered. And any natural phenomenon was interpreted as miraculous
if it aided any undertaking, and resulted favorably to them.

Wealth and women were considered the capital prizes in those
days. (That was three thousand years ago; how is it with us?) They
were men in physique, but children in the development of their mental
faculties.

It was then as it is now--every man talks about that which is uppermost
in his mind; he makes his comparisons with those things he is most
familiar with; his illustrations are drawn from those objects he
sees most frequently; his language never extends beyond the number
of words at his command; his memory is only equal to the number
of things he has stored away; his mind is made up or composed of
those ideas that he has gathered from the experience of his senses;
his ideas from the number of objects he has come in contact with;
his knowledge consists of that which he has learned; his thoughts
and reflections extend to that which he knows and never beyond;
his understanding depends on all these; and comparatively speaking,
few men are in advance of the age in which they live.

Ideas, like other things terrestrial, have their birth, growth,
development, maturity, and decline, and finally they partially or
wholly disappear.

The birth of the idea of God, without the various objective
representations, had its origin in the mind of man; Abraham being
the first, or supposed to be the first, man who conceived the notion
that these images, idols, were not the proper thing. He doubted
the quality of the gods, and the principal objection to these idols
was that they had ears that did not hear, eyes that could not see,
etc., etc., but the new God, the later Jehova, could. The strangest
of all inconsistencies lies in the fact that while they endowed him
with the human faculties, passions, emotions, desires, and feelings,
there is nothing tangible about his body.

Nothing was accomplished with this God during several centuries in
Egypt. Moses brought his Jehova out--as a stern reality. He skillfully
manipulated the idea. His own intellect and experience, his force and
character, were concentrated in this Jehova. His masterly organization,
his discipline, his impressive sternness, imperative and imperial, his
stupendous will power, left a lasting impress upon this people during
the four centuries. This idea was nursed, nourished, and sustained
by the Levites, and when they found their influence was waning they
established a concentrated form of government by selecting a sanhedrin
or council of seventy and electing the most eligible person they could
find on the recommendation of Samuel as their king. This king was Saul,
whose reign, fortunately or unfortunately, did not last very long.

Competition and struggle with other nations had, if anything, an
educational tendency. As they grew numerically stronger, jealousies
arose. Ambitious men were grasping for power, and contending faction
naturally was the result.

The story about the lost asses is like that about another ass we
have heard of, that saw the angel and talked--we have many such,
even at the present day. These stories are excellent fabrications
to entertain juveniles with. And people must be precious asses to
believe this nonsense, that God would be such an ass as to interfere
with these asses.

But something occurred which was perfectly human, and shows the
character of the man. It happened to be one of those critical moments
in a nation's existence. Nahash the Ammonite had made war against
Israel, and encamped against Jabest-Gilead. Saul hearing of it, he
did as follows (1 Sam. xi, 7): "And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed
them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coast of Israel by the
hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and
after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the
Lord fell upon the people, and they came out with one consent." Thus
Saul collected an army of three hundred thousand men. That is what may
be termed practical politics. He was victorious over the Ammonites. As
to the prisoners of war, whether captured or having given themselves
up, he caused their right eyes to be put out. He plucked their right
eyes out, making them useless for war in the future.

When he went to war against the Philistines, his army observed how
numerous the enemy were. God's army was scared and hid in caves. So
he sent to Samuel to consult the oracle, like any other respectable
heathen.

He also made a conquest of the Amalekites, whom he utterly
destroyed. The Hebrews and these people had a grudge of several
centuries' standing, because when the Jews went out of Egypt they
requested permission to pass through the Amalekites' country, which
was refused them (Ex. xvii, et seq.).

But Saul offended God by saving Agag, the king of the Amalekites,
so said Samuel (1 Sam. xv, 32, 33). "Then Samuel said, Bring ye
hither to me Agag, the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came to
him delicately. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is
passed. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal."

Saul's tenderness and mercy towards Agag displeased the stern, cruel
priest and soldier. His, Agag's, life had to pay the penalty of death,
by the hand of the priest himself, for an offense his forefathers
were presumed to have been guilty of, several centuries before. All
barbarities, cruelties, and slaughter were done in Jehovah's, God's,
the Lord's, name. The same pious crimes were repeated centuries later,
under the pretext of doing some imaginary brutal God a great favor.

For this transgression Saul is rejected by this priestly Warwick. For
this human action this wily priest denounces him, and Saul's act
of kindness is interpreted by this domineering priest as a crime
against his God. To carry out his political scheme, Samuel went to
Beth-lehem. "And the elders of the town trembled at his coming"
(1 Sam. xvi, 4). The revengeful priest, with a nerve of iron and
a will of steel, was not going to stand any nonsense. Saul had not
obeyed him to the letter--it is, Off with your head!

Samuel with all the church palaver, priest discipline, and pious
hypocrisy, selects a successor, without compunction, without ceremony,
and David is anointed to reign instead of Saul. From this time forth
to the end of his life Saul is constantly in hot water. He slinks
to his home at Gibeah (1 Sam. xv, 34) like a whipped cur, rejected
and excommunicated by the priest. Full of apprehension and fear,
he blunders at every step he takes. The priestly influence is gone,
and God has departed from him and is now with David. The crafty Samuel
uses the expression, when others question the propriety of his action:
"Men do not see as God seeth." No! Men must have no will except the
priest's will. Harassed and maddened by priestly cunning, jealous and
angered at David's success in acts of heroism, Saul loses courage,
as well as prestige with the people, to such an extent that David
finds it not a difficult task to organize a small army of his own,
carrying on a sort of desultory war on his own account.

Samuel dies, having governed his people twelve years himself, and
jointly with Saul eighteen years. He was the greatest man, priest,
and general since the times of Moses, a man of singular sagacity
and courage, no doubt right royal and honest in his intentions and
to his nation. Samuel did more to solidify the nation, and terrify
neighboring nations, to infuse courage in his people and inspire them
to acts of heroism, than any other of the judges, or any other man,
during this period.

A curious incident is related of the manner in which Samuel came
into the world. It is the first one of its kind in the Bible. Hannah,
the wife of Elkanah, had no children, or as the Bible phrase has it,
"The Lord had shut up her womb" (1 Sam. i, 5, 6). So she continued
praying before the Lord, and Eli the priest marked her mouth (verse
12). She conceived and bore a son, and she named him Samuel. And
Eli the priest adopted Samuel. "And the child did minister unto
the Lord before Eli the priest" (ii, 12). What the relations were
between Hannah and Eli is not known, but that his own sons were not
very righteous is testified to by the following passage (1 Sam. ii,
20): "Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation."

It was not an unusual thing, in the temples of the heathens, for
women to accommodate the gods whenever they felt piously inclined;
and also the priests lost no opportunity to gratify their saintly
passions, or permit others to gratify theirs so long as it was to
benefit the church.

Samuel's father, or rather reputed father, did not belong to the
priestly tribe. He was an Ephrathite. Eli his adopted father belonged
to the priestly caste. I simply cite this story to show how completely
human these holy Jehovaists were. Many crimes and disreputable acts
were committed under the very shadow of the Lord. Yet Jehova was
pleased with anything these priests delighted in.

Eli was a heavy man (iv, 18). Fat, which I suppose they meant, shows
he was a good liver. He broke his neck by falling off his seat on
hearing the ark was taken by the Philistines and Israel beaten.

When Samuel took the reins of government he was still young. He subdued
the Philistines, regained the ark, and reorganized and consolidated
the nation. He made Saul king and general, and a stream of prosperity
followed; the choice was a good one, and Saul served his nation well
so long as he was obedient to Samuel's commands. Saul's humanity got
the better of him, he offended this stern, dictatorial priest, and
lost his favor. David, his rival, was already chosen and in the field,
on whom all Samuel's influence and priestly glory was shed. Now God
deserted Saul and his cause. Henceforth the Lord was with David.

Samuel was the first and only kingmaker; Saul and David were his
handiwork. He was a priest, a soldier and a statesman of more than
ordinary capacity and qualities, far superior to any of the judges
that governed Israel during the last four centuries. He was stern and
severe, but without blemish otherwise. He was, as far as we can learn
from history, a relentless and cruel man towards his enemies. He
was of immense will-power, resolute and energetic. He was honored
to an extraordinary degree by the people for whom he accomplished
so much. He left the nation at his death more firmly united than it
had ever been--with an organized army, a stable government, and a
well-filled treasury. It was Samuel that really raised the nation to
the utmost hight that it ever attained, for he laid the foundation
for Solomon's glory, the zenith of Hebrew nationality.

It is he that closes the second period of national life, the people
having attained under him its maximum standing as a nation, and the
greatness which culminated in Solomon, and the only political unity
as a nation that the Hebrews ever had.

A parallel may be drawn between the two periods. The Egyptian period:
Four centuries or so pass without anything being done, until a man
rises possessing the necessary qualifications to mold these people
into a nation. The second period consists of a struggle with other
nations, almost continuously, to exist. Necessities arise; men present
themselves who seize the opportunity to fill up the want for the time
being, until the coming of Samuel, the right man, at the right time,
for the right place. He closes the second act of the Hebrews' struggle
for nationality by giving them a centralized form of government,
and placing a king at their head to rule them.

All the transactions of his life were human, natural. His conduct
was perfectly in harmony with the age he lived in. The nation as a
whole had become a little more civilized, and had reached as high a
point of intelligence as it ever attained--that is, as a nation.

Thus far we have not seen anything in their history that other nations
had not to contend with. To attribute their acts, individually or
as a nation, to any supernatural power, to God, Jehova, or the Lord,
is preposterous. In their dealings, their fightings, their cruelty,
their brutality, their superstition, and their ignorance, they were in
no sense superior to any of the contemporaneous nations. They were no
better in their conduct than their neighbors. The strongest had always
the best of it; the conquered had to submit to slavery or be killed,
women are captured and used, and the plunder is divided.

Notwithstanding the priestly rule of the Levites, the Hebrews are
constantly relapsing into idolatry, brought back to the fold, and
relapsing again.

The church was at this time used for all sorts of corrupt purposes. The
Jehova that had been brought into the theological world with such an
immense boom by Moses had expended a good deal of its original force.

The remembrance of that stupendous crisis of the Hebrew national
existence was kept alive and the flames were fanned by priestly
interest. The God after Moses, the Jehova, had shrunk into the Lord,
and the ark was the representative of God. "The ark of God was
taken," ... "when she heard tidings of the ark of God" (1 Sam. iv,
etc.). And the success or failure of the Hebrews depended on the man
who led them. With a weak man as general or leader they were beaten,
with a strong man they won.

Other nations meanwhile had sprung into life, and become powerful,
without Jehova--without the God of the Hebrews. They had, however,
idols and images, which seemed to behave with far greater propriety
than the God of Israel. So well did these mythological deities manage
their affairs, that they almost swallowed up the whole Hebrew race.

Samuel, having established a kingdom, and crowned two kings, Saul
and David, dies, leaving these two competitors in the field.









