CHAPTER VII.

THE DELUGE.


As to the region where the deluge occurred--on the northern edge ascend
the Persian mountains; on the east the steep and lofty parallel chains
of the Indo-Persian boundary mountains, and on the south the plateau
for a thousand miles along the Persian gulf and Arabian sea is bounded
by the wild terraced regions of Beloochistan and Faristan. The second
division includes the mountainous regions of Armenia, Koordistan, and
Azerbijan. Here the table-land is compressed about half its general
width. From this plateau, of which a part is mentioned in scripture
as the "mountains of Ararat," rises the volcanic cone commonly styled
Mount Ararat, to the hight of 17,212 feet above the sea level.

The highlands of Syria rise gradually from the neighboring desert to
the hight of 10,000 feet in Libanus and Antilibanus, and slope steeply
in terraces down to the narrow coastlands of Phoenicia and Palestine.

Of the Syrian and Arabian lowlands, the south is hot and arid, with
almost no oasis; but the north is watered by the Tigris and Euphrates.

Near this isolated corner of Asia, in the neighborhood of the Persian
gulf and the rivers Euphrates and Tigris, where the deluge is supposed
to have occurred, in the lowlands of that region, Chaldea, immense
chains of mountains run in several directions, with highlands 10,000
feet above the level of the sea.

Verse 4: "For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the
earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that
I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth."

This deluge is supposed to have taken place about 2348 B.C. Hale
puts it at 3154 B.C. The sons of God came upon earth and married the
daughters of men about 2948 B.C.; about this date ought to be nearer
the flood. Noah was 600 years old when he floated in his ark.

We will consider, first, a general deluge.

A deluge over the whole earth is an impossibility.

1. We have to take in consideration the inequality of the earth's
surface--lowlands, highlands, hills and mountains, plateaus, etc.

As to mountains: Asia possesses no less than sixty or seventy
mountains, the highest being some 29,000 feet above the sea's
level--the Himalaya, Everest.

Africa boasts of some thirty or forty mountains, the Kenia and
Killamandja being 20,000 feet above the level of the sea, the other
mountains grading downward in hight.

Europe is adorned with some seventy or eighty mountains, Mount Blanc
being the highest, others ranging downwards.

South America boasts of some forty or more mountains, the Tupengater
being the highest, 22,450 feet above the level of the sea.

North America counts some seventy or more mountains, Mt. Elias being
17,900 above the level of the sea.

We have plateaus and table-lands ranging from 10,000 feet above the
level of the sea downward to near the sea's level.

The great basins between the highest points of the earth's surface
are filled with water. These immense expanses form oceans, seas,
lakes, rivers. The ocean bed is just as uneven as the dry portion of
the earth's surface. The numerous islands are the mountains of the
ocean bed, some of greater, others of lesser extent.

2. The fluid part of the terrestrial globe fills the hollow places
of the solid portion of the earth's crust. These are the great and
small depressions, or greater and smaller basins.

3. The earth's weight has always been the same, neither increased
nor diminished. This includes both the solid and liquid part of this
terrestrial globe.

4. The fluid portion of this terrestrial globe has neither increased
nor diminished. It cannot, because the quantity of oxygen and hydrogen
is limited to this earth. None can get away, and none can come to it.

5. Water may change its position, or state--split up into elements;
make clouds, mist, hail, snow, or rain, or dew--but it ultimately
returns to the great basin of water where it came from.

6. If water rises in any one locality beyond the ordinary sea level,
water has diminished in some other locality. The quantity of water
on the earth's surface has not increased, except in one locality.

7. Rain cannot fall over the whole surface of this earth at one time.

8. There is always daylight and sunshine, night and darkness, on
this earth.

9. Heat and cold vary in the different parts of this earth. The
atmosphere is different in the various parts of the earth's
surface. There is a perpetual winter, summer, spring, or autumn in
various parts on this globe.

10. The rays of the sun strike the various portions of the earth at
different times. This variation in the direction of the sun's rays
produces a corresponding variation in the intensity of the sun's
heat and light at different places, and accounts for the difference
between the torrid and the frigid regions, etc.

11. The atmosphere does not, and cannot, carry beyond a certain
percentage of aqueous vapor. When it becomes overcharged the moisture
must fall, in raindrops when the temperature is warm enough.

12. The sun's heat regulates the amount of aqueous vapor the
atmosphere can carry in the form of clouds. When the atmosphere is
fully saturated, rain must fall.

13. When the atmosphere is cool or cold, the raindrops congeal,
and we have snow or hail.

14. There are regions on the earth where it never rains, probably never
rained. The rainless region of Asia is of vast extent. It includes
part of Tibet, the great desert of Gobi, and part of Mongolia--a
space estimated to comprise about 2,000,000 square miles. There are
other rainless regions on the face of the earth's surface. There is
a great diversity in the yearly amount of rainfall; the highest is
about 60 inches, the lowest 21 and less.

15. There is no great difference between the polar and equatorial
diameter of the earth, the average number of miles being about 8,000.

Taking the above facts in consideration--the conformation of the
earth's surface, the elevation above the sea level, table-lands or
plateaus, and mountains, the fixed quantity of water upon the surface
of the earth, the influence of heat and cold, the condition of the
atmosphere, etc., a general deluge must be rigidly excluded.

Supposing it rained forty days and forty nights, how many inches of
rainfall could we possibly get? We can know to an inch the quantity of
rain that would fall. The water would certainly roll down the hills
and mountains, fill up the lakes and rivers, overflow the banks,
and rise in the lowlands to a certain hight.

The deluge, Noah's deluge, was a local affair, if it ever
occurred. Granting such a flood did take place, it never extended
beyond that portion of Asia, Chaldea. Supposing that the rivers
Tigris and Euphrates may have overflowed and caused a flood say of
fifty feet rise above the level of the sea (which is impossible,
because the surplus waters would flow into the seas and oceans),
how insignificant is the rise of fifty feet even in comparison with
table-lands 10,000 feet above the sea-level, and mountains 20 to
30,000 feet above the sea-level.

As to the extent of the rainstorm that caused this deluge, I do not
suppose that the clouds held in the atmosphere extended over 500,
or say 1,000, square miles over the region where the rain fell.

As to collecting the animals for the ark from all over the globe,
that is just as ridiculous as the deluge itself.

It is to be presumed that the person or persons who wrote the
first seven chapters of the Bible had not the slightest idea of the
geographical condition of the earth's surface. It was not known. They
thought that their locality embraced the whole earth. Even in
Columbus's time they had no idea of the extent of this earth. The
seas that they probably had some knowledge of may have been the Gulf
of Persia, the Red sea, the Mediterranean or Arabian sea, probably
the Caspian. That was about the extent. They had means neither of
land travel nor of navigation.

Verse 20: "Fifteen cubits upward did the water prevail, and the
mountains were covered."

A cubit, standard, contains 21 inches. Fifteen multiplied by 21
gives 315 inches, or 26 feet 3 inches. How can 26 feet 3 inches of
water cover plateaus 10,000 feet high and mountains like the Ida,
4,000 feet, and the Himalayas 29,000 feet in height? Mount Ararat in
Asia Minor is 17,112 feet high.

These are figures. They do not lie. We have here positive proof. I
defy contradiction. Every man and woman with a little sense can
prove it. And any priest or clergyman that will maintain the truth
of a general deluge after reading this statement, is either a fool,
or a fraud and an infamous liar.

In fact, the entire rainfall during the forty days and nights would
have had as much effect on this globe as a pint of water would have
to drown an elephant.

Verse 21: "And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl,
and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth, and every man."

Verse 22: "All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, all that
was on dry land, died."

Verse 23: "And every living substance was destroyed, which was upon
the face of the ground, both man and cattle and the creeping things,
and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth;
and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark."

Verse 24: "And the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and
fifty days."

Mount Ararat is situated in Persia about 150 to 200 miles south of
the Black sea, and about 300 miles west of the Caspian sea, about
500 miles east of Aleppo and the Mediterranean sea, and about 700
miles north of the Gulf of Persia, from Mount Sinai about 1,000 or
more miles northeast, and a similar distance from the Red sea.

Arabia is about 700 miles across between the Persian gulf and the
Red sea. The distance between the shores of the Persian gulf and the
Caspian sea is about five hundred miles.

The Caspian chain of mountains are situated about two hundred miles
north of Mount Ararat, and they extend from the Sea of Azof north,
running southwest to the Caspian sea.

The entire tract of territory where this deluge is said to have
occurred does not embrace one thousand miles in any given direction,
and takes in but two countries--Turkey and Persia--and only a portion
of either. It does not extend farther north than the Caspian mountains
and the Black sea, east than the Mediterranean sea, west than the
Caspian sea, and south than the Persian gulf and Arabia.

Turkistan, Afghanistan, and Beloochistan form the eastern boundary
of Persia.

The twenty-six feet three inches of the rise of water in consequence
of the rain could not have extended beyond the limits indicated above.

At the period of the deluge there were immense countries east of
Turkistan, Afghanistan, and Beloochistan--Russia north, the Chinese
empire and Hindostan farthest south. Europe and Africa could not be
reached. So that all living substance was not destroyed and could not
be destroyed. Nor was all living substance destroyed in the country
where the flood occurred, because those living on high table-lands
were out of reach of the flood.

We must necessarily draw our own conclusions as to the truth or falsity
of the statements contained in verses 21, 22, 23. Some destruction
of life may have taken place, limited to the locality.

There are other evidences that go to show the incorrectness of the
scripture. The Hindoo era, or the era of the Caleyung, dates 3001 B.C.,
seven hundred and fifty-six years before the deluge. This country was
flourishing at the time of the flood. Moreover, the Hindoos counted
their months by the progress of the sun through the Zodiacs.

Keep the figures of the deluge in mind, 2348 B.C.

China, north of Hindostan and east of the deluged territory, was
flourishing 2700 B.C. It was not touched by the flood. It had its
own floods, separate and distinct from Noah's.

In 2347 B.C., one year after the flood, Noah made wine from grapes.


            Babylon was founded by Belus          2245 B.C.
            Astronomical observations were made   2234 B.C.
            Bricks were made                      2247 B.C.
            Babylon was built                     2247 B.C.


All this region was in a state of civilization one hundred years later,
when all men had been destroyed, and the region had been under water
twenty-six feet three inches for one hundred and fifty days. One
hundred years seems a long time, and a great deal can be done, that's
true. In those days civilization was exceedingly slow. People did not
progress so rapidly as we do in this New World. There are regions
where hardly any progress has been made. They are at a standstill,
as it is termed. The people live, feed, and die.

The inconsistency, the untruth, of the story of the deluge will be
palpable to everyone, if he or she will take the trouble to examine
the geographical, physical, and historical facts.

I especially call the attention of hysterical, fanatical theologians,
supernaturalists, and the whole priestly class, to the declaration
that God had nothing to do with this deluge; that the God in whom
they believe must be an ass to think that he can drown out the whole
terrestrial globe with forty days and nights' rain, with a rise of
water of twenty-six feet three inches.

It is impossible to enter into every detail in this brief
statement. There is, however, ample proof that a general deluge
never occurred, and that all animals, whether men or beasts, were
never destroyed.

How much honor it would reflect for a convention of clergymen, or a
gathering of archbishops in saintly conclave assembled, to solemnly
declare the whole beginning of Genesis a fabrication, a fiction,
a fable--that God had nothing to do with any such performance; that
God could not do anything so foolish; that God never did anything
contrary to the laws of nature; that neither God nor man could, if they
wished, do anything contrary to the laws of nature. And that "We, the
archbishops, bishops, and clergy in general, further declare and aver,
that we, the sacred representatives of the ignorant masses, no longer
believe that God, the so-called father almighty, created either heaven
or earth, or beast or man, or anything; that we repudiate, deny, and
reject all of the statements made in the book called the Bible; that
we do not believe in any supernatural interference; that we have erred
and have misinstructed and misguided the masses; that the whole story
is false, frivolous, and incredible; that neither the creation, as
recited, nor the deluge, or any part thereof, as described, is true."









