CHAPTER II.

THE EARTH.


This earth we live on is a planet, and belongs to the solar system
of planets. It shines brightly, and appears to other worlds as other
planets do to us. It is nearly 25,000 miles in circumference, and has
a diameter of a little over 8,000 miles. It is five and a half times
denser than water, and weighs about 6,096,000,000,000,000,000,000 tons.

The atmosphere that surrounds this earth is like a shell that is
two hundred to three hundred or more miles in thickness. We live
at the bottom of an immense ocean of gaseous matter, which envelops
everything, and presses upon everything with a force which appears,
at first, perfectly incredible, but whose actual amount admits of
easy proof. Gravity being, so far as is known, common to all matter,
it is natural to expect that gases, being material substances,
should be acted upon by the earth's attraction, as well as solids
and liquids. This is really the case, and the result is the weight
or pressure of the atmosphere, which is nothing more than the effect
of the attraction of the earth on the particles of air. The amount of
pressure exerted upon every square inch of the surface of the earth,
and the objects thereon, is from fourteen to fifteen pounds. This
enormous force is borne without inconvenience by the animal frames,
by reason of its perfect uniformity in every direction; and it may
be doubled, or even tripled, without inconvenience. An important law
which connects the volume occupied by a gas with the pressure made
upon it, is expressed by Mariotte in the following manner. This law is
usually called Mariotte's law: "The volume of gas is inversely as the
pressure; the density and elastic force are directly as the pressure,
and indirectly as the volume."

This law has been found to be true no matter how rarefied the air.

The atmosphere, like everything else on earth or connected therewith,
and like all other planets known, and the earth itself, is composed
of elements, as we shall see presently.

The atmospheric air is composed of gases, elementary substances,
known by the names of Nitrogen and Oxygen, with variable proportions
of carbonic acid and watery vapors, and usually a trace of
ammonia. Besides these, there may occasionally be other substances
present, depending upon local causes, as the odoriferous principles
of plants and the miasmata of marshes, etc., etc.

Nearly three-fourths of the atmosphere is composed of nitrogen,
while about one-fourth or less is oxygen. The following is the
relative proportion:


                            By weight.   By measure.

              Nitrogen         76.9          79.3
              Oxygen           23.1          20.7
                              -----         -----
                              100           100


Its specific gravity is unity (1), being the standard with which
the density of all gaseous substances is compared. It is 814 times
lighter than water, and nearly 11,065 times lighter than mercury;
100 cubic inches weigh 31 grains.

Oxygen is necessary to combustion, to the respiration of animals,
and to various other natural operations, by all of which that gas is
withdrawn from the air. It is obvious that its quantity would gradually
diminish, unless the tendency of these causes were counteracted by
some compensating process. This, to some considerable extent, is
accomplished by vegetation, as it is found that healthy plants, under
the influence of the sun's light, constantly draw carbonic acid from
the air, the carbon of which is retained, while the oxygen is returned.

The atmosphere becomes less and less dense from the surface of the
earth upwards.

Animals and vegetables exist in this atmosphere. They cannot exist
in any other. All living things and beings live on this earth's
crust. Vegetables are fixed to the soil of this earth, while animals
move freely upon it.

The earth's crust.--Sir Charles Lyell speaking of this earth's
crust says: "By the 'earth's crust' is meant that small portion of
the surface of our planet which is accessible to human observation,
or on which we are enabled to reason by observations made at or near
the surface. These reasonings may extend to a depth of several miles,
perhaps ten miles; and even then it may be said that such a thickness
is no more than 1/400 part of the distance from the surface to the
center. The remark is just, but although the dimensions of such a
crust are, in truth, insignificant when compared with the entire globe,
yet they are vast and of magnificent extent in relation to man and to
the other organic beings which people our globe. Referring to this
standard of magnitude, the geologist may admire the ample limits of
his domain, and admit at the same time that not only the exterior of
the planet, but the entire earth, is but an atom in the midst of the
countless worlds surveyed by the astronomer.

"The solid part of this earth consists of distinct substances,
such as clay, chalk, sand, limestone, coal, slate, granite, and the
like. It has been imagined that the various deposits on the earth's
surface were created in their present form and in their present
position. On the contrary, it has been shown that they have acquired
their actual configuration and condition gradually, under a variety
of circumstances, and at successive periods, during each of which
distinct races of living beings have flourished on the land and in
the waters, the remains of these creatures still lying buried in the
crust of the earth.

"The materials of this crust are not thrown together confusedly;
but distinct mineral masses called rock are found to occupy definite
spaces and to exhibit a certain order of arrangement. These rocks
are divided into four great classes by reference to their different
origin, or in other words by reference to the different circumstances
and causes by which they have been produced.

"The first two divisions, which will at once be understood as natural,
are the aqueous and volcanic, or the products of water and those of
igneous action at or near the surface.... The aqueous rocks, sometimes
called sedimentary or fossiliferous, cover a larger part of the earth's
surface than any other. These rocks are stratified, or divided into
distinct layers or strata; these strata have been generally spread
out by the action of water, like what we daily see taking place near
the mouth of rivers or on the land during a temporary inundation.

"The remains of animals, especially of aquatic species, are found
almost everywhere, imbedded in stratified rocks; and sometimes, in
the case of limestone, they are in such abundance as to constitute the
entire mass of rock itself. Shells and corals are the most frequent,
and with them are often associated the bones and teeth of fishes,
fragments of wood, impressions of leaves, and other organic substances.

"When geology was first cultivated, it was a general belief that
those marine shells and other fossils were the effects and proofs
of the deluge of Noah; but all those who have carefully investigated
the phenomena have rejected this doctrine. A transient flood might be
supposed to leave behind it, here and there upon the surface, scattered
heaps of mud and sand and shingle, with shells confusedly intermixed;
but the strata containing fossils are not superficial deposits,
and do not simply cover the earth, but constitute the entire mass
of mountains. Ample proof of these reiterated revelations is given,
and it will be seen that many distinct sets of sedimentary strata,
each several hundreds or thousands of feet thick, are piled one
upon the other in the earth's crust, each containing peculiar fossil
animals and plants, which are distinguishable, with few exceptions,
from species now living. The mass of some of these strata consists
almost entirely of corals, others are made up of shells, others of
plants turned into coal, while some are without fossil.

"Volcanic rocks are those which have been produced at or near the
surface, whether in ancient or modern times, not by water, but by
the action of fire or subterranean heat. These rocks are for the most
part unstratified, and are devoid of fossils.

"There are two other divisions of rock, called Plutonic rocks, granite,
etc., and Metamorphic, or stratified crystalline rocks. The members
of both these divisions of rocks agree in being highly crystalline
and destitute of organic remains.

"The composition of the aqueous rocks, mineral composition of strata:
These may be said to belong principally to three divisions, as follows:

"1. Arenaceous or siliceous rocks. Beds of loose sand frequently
met with, of which the grains consist entirely of silex, which
term comprehends all purely siliceous minerals, as quartz and common
flint. Quartz is silex in its purest form; flint usually contains some
admixture of alumina and the oxide of iron. Silica is the mineral used
in the manufacture of glass, mixed with a little potassium oxide and
lime, or lead, etc.

"2. Argillaceous rock. A mixture of silex or flint with a large
proportion, usually about one-fourth, of alumina or argil; but in
common language, any earth which possesses sufficient ductility,
when kneaded up with water, to be fashioned like paste by the hand
or by the potter's lathe, is called clay. Such clays vary greatly
in their composition. They are, in general, nothing more than mud
derived from the decomposition or wearing down of various rocks. The
purest clay in nature is porcelain clay or kaolin, which results
from the decomposition of a rock composed of feldspar and quartz,
and it is almost always mixed with quartz. (The kaolin of China
consists of 71.15 parts of silex, 15.86 of alumina, 1.92 of lime,
and 6.73 of water.)... One general character of all argillaceous
rocks is to give out a peculiar, earthy odor when breathed upon,
which is a test of the presence of alumina.

"3. Calcareous Rocks. These consist mainly of chalk--lime and carbonic
acid. Shells and corals also are formed of the same elements, with the
addition of animal matter. Any limestone which is sufficiently hard to
take a fine polish is called marble. Many of these are fossiliferous;
but statuary marble, which is also called saccharine limestone,
as having a texture resembling that of loaf-sugar, is devoid of
fossil. Siliceous limestone is an intimate mixture of carbonate of
lime and flint, and is harder in proportion as the flinty matter
predominates. Marl slate bears the same relation to marl which shale
bears to clay, being calcareous shale. Magnesian limestone is composed
of carbonate of lime and carbonate of magnesia; the proportion of
the latter amounting in some cases to nearly one-half. It effervesces
much more slowly and feebly with acid than common limestone. Gypsum
is a rock composed of sulphuric acid, lime, and water. It is usually
a soft whitish-yellow rock, with a texture resembling loaf-sugar, but
sometimes it is entirely composed of lenticular crystals. Alabaster
is a granular and compact variety of gypsum found in masses large
enough to be used in sculpture and architecture. It is sometimes a
pure snow-white substance. It is a softer stone than marble and more
easily wrought."

When geologists examine the earth's crust, they usually commence
with the surface on which we live, and search downwards as far as
possible. Lyell constructed a tabular view of the fossiliferous strata.

It must be borne in mind that we have no other methods of ascertaining
the truth than by close observation, making diligent search, in
order to discover what this earth's crust is made of. We have no
supernatural facilities to give us information, and we are very
certain there never were any. What information we are reckoned to
have, handed down by our antiquated barbarian forefathers, is of a
different nature. It refers--briefly stated--to the conduct of Man,
the manner in which he shall act as an individual, or collectively
as a community; including a great number of what are considered now
theatrical or mountebank ceremonies, fancy customs, sacrifices,
and a repetition of certain phrases, ordinarily called prayers,
accompanied by illustrative images and pictures, and movements of
body--fantastic symbols and devices created and prescribed by man.

Having no other means of ascertaining facts, man was naturally
compelled to search for testimony in the earth's crust--to discover
what it is composed of; the kind of material; how it was formed; the
time it took to form; the period that elapsed between formations;
how the layers or strata were superposed one upon another; what
substances were found in them; where organic life was first found;
what it consisted of; when man first appeared. By examining this
table we get a glimpse of the true state of things. This shows the
order of superposition, or chronological succession, of the principal
European groups:


I. Post-Tertiary. A. Post-Pliocene.

Periods and Groups.

1. Recent.  Peat mosses, shell marls, with bones of land animals, human
remains and works of art. Newer parts of modern deltas and coral reefs.

2. Post-Pliocene. Clay, marl, volcanic trap. All the shell of living
specimens. No human remains or works of art. Bones of quadrupeds,
partly of extinct species.


II. Tertiary. B. Pliocene.

3. Newer Pliocene. Boulder formation. Cavern formation, or
Pleistocene. Three-fourths of fossil shells of extinct species. A
majority of the mammals extinct; but the genera corresponding with
those now surviving in the same great geographical and zoological
provinces. Icebergs frequent in the seas; glaciers on hills of
moderate height.

4. Older Pliocene. A third or more of the species of mollusca
extinct. Nearly, if not all, the mammalia extinct.


C. Miocene.

5. Miocene. About two-thirds of the species of shells extinct. All
the mammalia extinct.


D. Eocene.

                    }  Fossil shells of the Eocene period, with very
6.   Upper Eocene.  }  few exceptions, extinct. All the mammalia of
                    }  extinct species, and the greater part of them
7.   Middle Eocene. }  of extinct genera. Plants of Upper Eocene
                    }  indicating a south European or Mediterranean
8.   Lower Eocene.  }  climate; those of Lower Eocene a tropical
                    }  climate.


III. Secondary. E. Cretaceous--Upper.

9. Maestricht beds. Yellowish-white limestone. Large marine saurians,
etc.

10. Upper white chalk. Marine limestone composed in part of decomposed
corals.

11. Lower white chalk.

12. Upper green sand.

13. Gault. Dark-blue marl at base of chalk escarpment. Numerous
extinct genera--conchiferous cephalopoda, etc.

14. Lower green sand. Species of shells, etc., nearly all distinct
from those of Upper Cretaceous.


F. Wealden.

15. Weald clay, of fresh-water origin. Shells of Pulmoniferous
mollusca.

16. Hastings sand. Fresh water. Reptiles of, etc.

17. Purbeck beds. Limestone, calcareous slate, etc. Roots of trees;
plants, etc.

G. Oölite.

18. Upper Oölite. Portland building-stone, sand.

19. Middle Oölite. Oxford clay, dark-blue clay. Large saurians.

20. Lower Oölite. Preponderance of ganoid fish. Plants chiefly cycads,
conifers, and ferns.


H. Lias.

21. Argillaceous limestone, marl clay. Mollusca, reptiles, and fish
analogous to the Oölitic.


I. Trias.

22. Upper Trias. Red, gray, green, blue, and white marls, and
sandstone, with gypsum. Batrachian reptiles.

23. Middle Trias. Compact grayish limestone, with beds of muschelkalk,
of dolomite and gypsum.

24. Lower Trias. Plants different for the most part.


IV. Primary. J. Permian.

25. Upper Permian. Yellow magnesian limestone. Organic remains both
animal and vegetable, more allied to primary than to secondary period.

26. Lower Permian. Marl slate. Thecodont saurians, heterocercal
fish, etc.


K. Carboniferous.

27. Coal measures. Great thickness of strata of fluvio-marine origin,
with beds of coal of vegetable origin, based on soils retaining roots
of trees. Oldest of known reptiles. Sauroid fish.

28. Mountain. Carboniferous or mountain limestone. Limestone with
marine shells and corals, etc.


L. Devonian.

29. Upper Devonian. Yellow sandstone, paving and roofing stone. Tribe
of fish with hard coverings. No reptiles yet known.

30. Lower Devonian. Gray sandstone.


M. Silurian.

31. Upper Silurian. Tilestone. Oldest fossil fish yet
discovered. Trilobites, etc.

32. Lower Silurian. Caradoc sandstone, etc. No land plants yet
known. Footprints of tortoise, etc.

33. Upper and Lower Cambrian.



SYNOPSIS.


      Post-Tertiary.   }                            }
      Pliocene.        }   Tertiary or Cainozoic.   }
      Miocene.         }                            }
      Eocene.          }                            }   Mesozoic.
                                                    }
      Cretaceous.      }                            }
      Jurassic.        }   Secondary or Mesozoic.   }
      Triassic.        }                            }

      Permian.         }                            }
      Carboniferous.   }                            }
      Devonian.        }   Primary or Paleozoic.    }   Paleozoic.
      Silurian.        }                            }
      Cambrian.        }                            }


The precise chemical action upon the elements composing these
various geological formations at different remote periods, is no
doubt difficult to ascertain. That there always has been some chemical
action going on, and that it is continually going on, is certain. How
and to what extent we can judge only from the experience of actual
observation in the laboratory.

Mr. Crale remarks: "The whole surface of the land is exposed to
chemical action of the air, and of the rainwater with its dissolved
carbonic acid, and in colder countries the frost. The disintegrated
matter is carried down the slopes during heavy rain; and, to a greater
extent than might be supposed, especially in arid districts, by the
wind; it is then transported by the streams and rivers, which when
rapid deepen their channels and triturate the fragments." Darwin
says: "If the theory be true" (speaking of the time elapsed since
the Cambrian lowest formation) "it is indisputable that before
the lowest Cambrian stratum was deposited, long periods elapsed,
as long as, or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the
Cambrian age to the present day; that during these vast periods, the
world swarmed with living creatures. Here we encounter a formidable
objection; for it seems doubtful whether the earth, in a fit state
for the habitation of living creatures, has lasted long enough. Sir
W. Thompson concludes that the consolidation of the crust can hardly
have occurred less than 20 or more than 400 million years ago, but
probably not less than 98 or more than 200 millions of years. These
very wide limits show how doubtful the data are; and other elements may
have hereafter to be introduced into the problem. Mr. Crale estimates
that about 60 million years have elapsed since the Cambrian period,
but this, judging from the small amount of organic change since the
commencement of the glacial epoch, appears a very short time for the
many and great mutations of life, which have certainly occurred since
the Cambrian formation; and the previous 140 millions of years can
hardly be considered as sufficient for the development of the varied
forms of life which already existed during the Cambrian period."

It seems almost impossible for an ordinary mind to grasp the magnitude
of the figures, the span of life being so short. Yet some idea may
be formed when we compare the age of this earth's crust formation,
the hundreds of thousands of years that passed in the evolution of
man, and the brief space of time that has elapsed since he has become
enabled to give an account of himself.

As regards the thickness of the earth's crust, Professor Ramsey has
given the maximum thickness, from actual measurement in most cases,
of the successive formations in different parts of Great Britain;
and this is the result:


  The Paleozoic strata (not including igneous bed),  57,154 feet.
      Secondary,                                     13,190  ,,
      Tertiary,                                       2,240  ,,


making altogether 72,584 feet; that is, very nearly thirteen and
three-quarters British miles. Büchner in his work on "Force and Matter"
states: "The so-called coal formation alone required, according to
Bischoff, 1,000,177 years; according to Chevandier's calculation,
672,788 years. The Tertiary strata required for their development
about 350,000 years; and before the originally incandescent earth
could cool down from a temperature of 2,000 degrees to 200, there
must, according to Bischoff's calculation, have elapsed a period
of 350,000,000 years. Valger calculates that the time required for
the deposit of the strata known to us must at least have amounted to
648,000,000 years. I quote these figures simply to show how difficult
it is, and the labor required, to form even a proximate idea as to
the period of time that must have elapsed for the formation of the
various strata known.

That all animals were not created at once is certain beyond all cavil
and dispute. The development of the various forms of life was an
exceeding slow process, and lasted very many thousand centuries. That
the earth's crust was not at certain stages of formation in a fit
condition either to receive or to maintain the higher types of animal
life, is well known. And we know that man's remains are found only
in the uppermost surface of the earth's crust. Max Müller says in
his "Testimony of the Rocks": "It was not until the earlier ages
of the Oölite system had passed away, that the class of Reptiles
received its fullest development. And certainly very wonderful was the
development which it did then receive. Reptiles became everywhere the
lords and masters of the lower world. When any class of air-breathing
vertebrates is very largely developed, we find it taking possession of
all three terrestrial elements--earth, air, and water. Last of all,
the true placental mammals appear, and thus, tried by the test of
perfect reproduction, the great vertebral division receives its full
development." Agassiz's "Principles of Zoology" says: "We distinguish
four ages of nature, comprehending the great geological divisions,
namely:

"1. The Primary, or Paleozoic age, comprising the lower Silurian,
the upper Silurian, and the Devonian. During this age there were no
air-breathing animals. The fishes were masters of creation. We may
therefore call it the Reign of Fishes.

"2. The Secondary age, comprising the Carboniferous, the Trias, the
Oölite, and the Cretaceous formations. This is the epoch in which
air-breathing animals first appear. The Reptiles predominated over the
other classes, and we may therefore call it the 'Reign of Reptiles.'

"3. The Tertiary age, comprising the Tertiary formation. During
this age terrestrial mammals of great size abound. This is the Reign
of Mammals.

"4. The Modern age, characterized by the appearance of the most
perfect of created beings."

The majority of mankind trouble themselves but little whether progress
is made in any one of the branches of science or not. Man has no
time to think seriously of anything except to provide food for his
family. The priest does his thinking, and he is made to contribute
part of his labor to support the holy man who does the thinking for
him. All he knows is that his soul or his spirit, his hereafter,
and his God are well cared for, and he pays for it. Yet every man
ought to understand that all his rights, civil and political--all the
freedom he enjoys--he has to thank science for procuring and securing.

"Shall it be seriously objected to the application of the sciences
to philosophical problems that its results are not agreeable? That
the truth is not always agreeable, nor always consolatory, nor
always religious, nor always acceptable, is as well known as the old
experience of the almost total absence of reward, either external
or internal, provided for its exemplars. What this or that man may
understand by a governing reason, an absolute power, a universal soul,
a personal God ... is his own affair. The theologians, with their
articles of faith, must be left to themselves; so of the naturalists
with their science; they both proceed by different routes.... The
same bloody hatred with which science was once persecuted by
religious fanaticism would revive now, and with it the Inquisition
and Auto-da-fé, and all the horrors with which a refined zealotism
has tortured humanity would be resorted to, to satisfy the wishes
of the theological cutthroats. A man in advance of his age beholds
the struggle of the contending parties from a high point of view,
and sees in the eccentricities of this contest merely the natural
and necessary expression of the opposing elements which agitate our
time. No one can doubt that truth will finally emerge the victor. It
certainly will not be long before the battle becomes general. Is the
victory doubtful? The struggle is unequal; the opponents cannot stand
against the trenchant arm of physical and physiological Materialism,
which fights with facts, that everyone can comprehend, while the
opponents fight with suppositions and presumptions" (Büchner).

"Science and faith exclude each other" (Virchow).

Fools still cling to faith; wise men find the truth in science.

Note.--Baily's "History of Astronomy," Part I, page 31, § 124, and
Part II, pp. 33, 39, maintains that India has existed as a nation, as
the records show, 4,320,000 years. The Indians divide this time into
four principal periods: First period, that of innocence or simplicity,
1,728,000 years; second period, 276,000; the third period, 864,000;
and the ages of misfortune about 422,000--Cali-yon-gan period. Similar
statements are made by Cicero ("De Divinat," I, 19), concerning the
Chaldeans: "Condemnemus, inquam, hos aut stultitiæ aut vanitatis
aut imprudentiæ qui 470 millia annorum ut ipsi dicunt monumentis
comprehensa continent."




THE ATMOSPHERE.

The atmosphere is the gaseous envelope encircling the earth; and it
constitutes the ocean of air at the bottom of which we live. We become
aware of the existence of the air when we move rapidly and experience
the resistance offered to the passage of our bodies, and also when the
air is set in motion, giving rise to a wind. We notice the pressure
of the atmosphere if we withdraw the air from beneath the hand by
a powerful air-pump, for we then find that the hand is pressed down
with a force equal to 1.033 kilos. on a square centimeter, or nearly
15 lbs. on every square inch. The total atmospheric pressure which
the human body has to support hence amounts to several tons. But
this pressure is not felt under ordinary circumstances, because
the pressure exercised is exerted equally in every direction. The
instrument used for measuring the pressure of the air is termed a
barometer, and the average pressure at the sea level is equal to that
exerted by a column of mercury 760 mm. high. The air being elastic
and having weight, it is clear the lower layers of air must be more
compressed than those above them, and hence the density of the air
must vary at the different hights above the sea level. The density of
the air being thus dependent on the pressure to which it is subjected,
the higher strata of air become generally rarefied, and it is hence
difficult to say whereabouts the air ceases, but it appears that the
limit of the atmosphere is about 200 to 300 miles from the level of
the sea. If the whole atmosphere were of the same density throughout
as it is at the earth's surface, it would reach only to a height of
a little more than five miles above the sea level.

Aqueous vapor is contained in the air in quantities varying in
different localities and at different times, and depending mainly on
the temperature of the air. Air at a given temperature cannot contain
more than a certain quantity of moisture in solution; and when it has
taken up its maximum quantity, it is said to be saturated with aqueous
moisture. The higher the temperature of the air the more water can
it retain as vapor; and when air saturated with moisture is cooled,
the water is deposited in liquid form in very small globules, forming
a mist, fog, or cloud. This is the cause of the fall of rain, snow,
and hail; when warm air heavily laden with moisture from the ocean
passes into a higher and colder position, or meets with a stratum of
air of lower temperature, it cannot any longer retain so much aqueous
vapor, and a large quantity assumes a liquid form, falling as rain
when the temperature is above the freezing-point, or crystallizing
as snowflakes if the temperature is below that point. Hail is caused
by the congelation of raindrops in passing through a stratum of air
below the freezing-point. The deposition of dew is caused by the rapid
cooling of the earth's surface by radiation after sunset, and by the
consequent cooling of the air near the ground below the temperature
at which it begins to deposit moisture. In general the air contains
from 50 to 70 per cent. of aqueous vapor of the quantities necessary
to saturate it. If the quantity be not within these limits the air
is either unpleasantly dry or unpleasantly moist.

The air contains, besides the gases of oxygen and nitrogen, carbonic
acid, ammonia, accidental impurities, and volatile organic matter,
which latter is the most important, as it probably influences to a
great extent the healthfulness of the special situation. We become
aware of the existence of such organic putrescent substances when
entering a crowded room from the fresh air; and it is probable that
the well-known unhealthiness of marshy and other districts is owing
to the presence of some organic impurities.

We may have occasion to refer to this when speaking of the deluge, etc.









