CHAPTER III.

THE CHEMICAL ASPECT.


By the word chemistry we understand the science which investigates
the composition of all material substances, taking them apart or
separating them, by a chemical process, and discovers the nature
and properties of the minutest particle. These small particles have
received the name, elements or elementary substances; that term is
applied in chemistry to those forms of matter which have hitherto
resisted all attempt to decompose them.

"We know that we have earth, air, water, and we have seen in Chapter
II that the earth's crust is made up of many substances, rocks,
coral reefs, clay, marl, feldspar, quartz, limestone, granite, etc.,
etc. These substances are composed of small particles, or elements,
and are called minerals or inorganic substances. There is another class
of substances, called organic, that are derived from living things or
beings. These are also taken apart or separated into their elementary
substances. As plants or animals, all such elementary substances have
received the name organic substances because plants and animals have
organs of reproduction, hence the name.

The taking apart of any substance into its constituent elements is
called analysis by chemists.

The same elements can also be put together to produce various
substances; that is termed synthesis.

Chemists have adopted a name for each of the elements, and these
names are represented by symbols, or letters.

Compound substances may contain two or more elements. When the
composition of a substance is determined by splitting the compound
into its elementary constituents a chemical analysis of that substance
is said to have been made; and if the proportions by weight in which
each of the constituents is present be determined, a quantitative
analysis of the substance has been made, etc.

By chemical action, we signify that which occurs when two or more
substances so act upon one another as to produce a third substance
differing altogether from the original ones in properties; or when a
substance is brought under such conditions that it forms two or more
bodies differing from the original one in properties. Chemistry is
called an experimental science. In investigating all the materials
within his reach, whether solid, liquid, or gaseous, whether contained
in the earth, sea, or air; whether belonging to the mineral, animal,
or vegetable creation, the chemist finds himself obliged to divide
substances into two classes: (1) compound substances--those which he
is able to split up into two or more essentially different materials;
(2) elements or simple substances--those which he is unable thus to
split up, and out of which nothing essentially different from the
original substances has been obtained.

Compound bodies are made up of two or more elementary substances
chemically combined with each other; thus sulphur, copper, lead,
are elementary bodies; out of each of these nothing different from
sulphur, copper, lead, can be obtained; whereas when two of these
bodies are heated together, a compound is formed from which both of the
original elementary constituents can at any time be obtained. Water
is a compound body--it can be split up into two elementary gases,
hydrogen and oxygen; common salt, again, is a compound of a gas
(chlorine) with a metal (sodium); and limestone, clay, sugar, and
wax may serve as examples of compound bodies; whilst phosphorus,
charcoal, iron, mercury, and gold may be mentioned as belonging to
the class of simple substances.

As to physical properties of gases--they have weight, volume,
diffusion, density, etc.

Theologians insist that there is a God, a God that was first
introduced to us by a man with the name of Abraham, advertised
by Moses, and has been palmed off upon the masses as a something
exceedingly wonderful. A multitude of men who find it to their
interest to advocate his pretended claims, are still doing their
utmost to sustain their God. We are trying to discover where he is
to be found, whether he is a local or a universal God, what he is
composed of, whether he resides on earth permanently or transiently,
whether he controls the entire solar system or more systems, whether
he occasionally takes a trip to other planets; and if he has created
everything we want to find out how he has created it. For that reason
we have to search, taking a glimpse among the stars, in the earth,
atmosphere, etc. Since geology does not respond favorably, we are
trying to discover what this earth is composed of. The elementary
bodies at present recognized amount to sixty-four in number. Of these
about fifty belong to the class called metals. Several of them are of
recent discovery, and as yet very imperfectly known. The distinction
between metals and certain non-metallic substances or metalloids,
although very convenient for purposes of description, is entirely
arbitrary, since the classes graduate into each other in the most
indefinite manner. The following is a complete list of the elementary
substances known, giving their names, symbols, and combining weight:


                  Symbols.               METALLOIDS.   Combining
                                                        Weight.

    Elements of life: of primary importance.

                    O        Oxygen     [1] II            16
                    H        Hydrogen       I              1
                    N        Nitrogen       V             14
                    C        Carbon         IV            12

    Elements of secondary importance.

                    Cl       Chlorine       I             35.5
                    Br       Bromine        I             80
                    I        Iodine         I            127
                    F        Fluorine       I             29
                    P        Phosphorus     V             31
                    S        Sulphur        VI            32
                    Si       Silicon        IV            28
                    B        Boron          III           11
                    Se       Selenium       VI            79.5
                    Te       Tellurium      VI           179

    Mechanics, arts, science, and medicine.

                    Al       Aluminium      IV            27.4
                    Ca       Calcium        II            40
    (Cuprum)        Cu       Copper         II            63.5
    (Ferrum)        Fe       Iron           IV            56
    (Plumbum)       Pb       Lead           IV           207
                    Mn       Manganese      IV            55
    (Hydrargyrum)   Hg       Mercury        II           200
    (Kalium)        K        Potassium      I             39.1
    (Argentum)      Ag       Silver         I            108
    (Natrium)       Na       Sodium         I             23
    (Stannum)       Sn       Tin            IV           118
                    Zn       Zinc           II            65.3
    (Stibium)       Sb       Antimony       V            122
                    As       Arsenic        V             75
                    Ba       Barium         II           137
                    Bi       Bismuth        V            210
                    Cr       Chromium       VI            52.2
                    Co       Cobalt         IV            58.7
    (Aurum)         Au       Gold           III          197
                    In       Indium         IV            74
                    Mg       Magnesium      II            24
                    Ni       Nickel         IV            58.7
                    Pd   [2] Palladium      IV           106.6
                    Pt       Platinum       IV           197.5
                    Sr       Strontium      II            87.5
                    Ti       Titanium       IV            50
                    W        Tungsten       VI           184
                    U        Uranium        IV           120

    Little known, rarely used.

                    Be       Beryllium      II             9.3
                    Cd       Cadmium        II           112
                    Cs       Cæsium         I            133
                    Cr       Cerium         IV            92
                    D        Didymium       II            95
                    E        Erbium         II           112.6
                    Ir       Iridium        IV           198
                    La       Lanthanum      II            92
                    Li   [3] Lithium        I              7
                    Mo       Molybdenum     VI            96
                    Nb       Niobium        V             94
                    Os       Osmium         IV           199.2
                    Rh       Rhodium        IV           104.4
                    Rb       Rubidium       I             85.4
                    Ru       Ruthenium      IV           104.4
                    Ta       Tantalum       V            182
                    Tb       Terbium
                    Tl       Thallium       III          204
                    Th       Thorium        II           231.5
                    V        Vanadium       V             51.3
                    Y        Yttrium        II            61
                    Zr       Zirconium      III           89.6


All matter is made up of very small particles which are chemically
indivisible and which are termed atoms, and the atom of each elementary
substance differs essentially from that of every other. All the atoms
of each element are alike, and chemical compounds are formed by the
combination of unlike atoms. Hence the smallest particle of a compound
consists of a group of atoms. This group, which can be divided by
chemical but not by mechanical means, is termed a molecule. The
smallest particle of an element in a free state is, however, not
a single atom, but a group of atoms mechanically indivisible, or a
molecule. This explains why elementary bodies act more energetically
and enter more readily into combination at the moment of their
liberation from a combination than when in the free state.

When chemical changes occur, it is the molecules which react upon
one another, and the change consists in the change of position of
certain atoms contained in the groups. When an element is set free
from a compound, the liberated join together to form molecules,
unless some body is present with which the element can combine.

By an atom we therefore understand the smallest portion of a chemical
element which can enter into a chemical compound; by a molecule,
the smallest portion of a simple compound body which can occur in
the free state or which can take part in a chemical action.

All the elements, with the single exception of fluorine, combine with
oxygen to form oxides. In this act of combination, which is termed
oxidation, heat is always, and light is frequently, given off. When
bodies unite with oxygen, evolving light and heat, they are said to
burn, or undergo combustion. All bodies which burn in the air burn with
increased brilliancy in oxygen gas; and many substances, such as iron,
which do not readily burn in the air, may be made to do so in oxygen.

Oxygen is a colorless invisible gas, possessing neither taste nor
smell.

Hydrogen is a colorless invisible gas, possessing neither taste nor
smell. It is the lightest gas known, being 14.47 times lighter than
air. It combines with oxygen to form water.

Nitrogen is a colorless, tasteless, inodorous gas, slightly lighter
than air. It does not combine readily with bodies, and it is a very
inert substance, neither supporting combustion or animal life, nor
burning itself. It has, however, no poisonous qualities, and animals
plunged into a jar of this gas die simply of suffocation from want
of oxygen. Nitrogen exists in a free state in the air, of which it
constitutes four-fifths by bulk. It occurs combined in the bodies of
plants and animals, and in various chemical compounds, such as nitre,
whence the gas derives its name.

Carbon is a solid element; it is not known in the free state,
either as a liquid or as a gas. Carbon is remarkable as existing
in three distinct forms, which in outward appearance or physical
properties have nothing in common, whilst their chemical relations are
identical. These three allotropic forms of carbon are (1) diamond,
(2) graphite or plumbago, (3) charcoal. These substances differ
in hardness, color, specific gravity, etc., but they each yield
on combustion in the air or oxygen the same weight of the same
substance, carbonic acid or carbon dioxide. Carbon is the element
which is especially characteristic of animal and vegetable life, as
every organized structure, from the simplest to the most complicated,
contains carbon. If carbon were not present on the earth, no single
vegetable or animal body such as we know could exist. In addition to
the carbon which is found free in these three forms, and contained
combined with hydrogen and oxygen in the bodies of plants and animals,
it exists combined with oxygen as free carbon dioxide in the air,
and with calcium and oxygen as calcium carbonate in limestone, chalk,
marble, corals, shells, etc. Plants are able when exposed to sunlight
to decompose the carbon dioxide in the air, liberating the oxygen,
and taking the carbon for the formation of their vegetable structure,
whilst all animals, living directly or indirectly upon vegetables,
absorb oxygen, and evolve carbon dioxide. Thus the sun's rays,
through the medium of plants, effect deoxidation, or reduction,
whilst animals act as oxidizing agents with respect to carbon.

Oxygen, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Carbon--these are the life-giving
elements. They are the life-producing and life-sustaining
elements. Neither animal nor vegetable life can exist without them. The
entire activity of nature depends upon them. Every organic substance
contains them.

No organic substance can exist without them.

The principle of life is due to them.

From a blade of grass to an insect, from an insect to an animal,
including man, one cannot emerge into life without these elements.

The birth, growth, and development of plant and animal depend upon
them, the sustenance and nurture.

All our food-substances are almost wholly made up of these elements.

No force, power, or energy can be produced without their presence.

Our muscular strength, our nervous force, our very thoughts, our
imagination, as well as digestion, respiration, circulation of the
blood, depend on these elements.

Our sensations, our pleasures, our pains, depend upon them. All the
excitement and depression in life are dependent on them.

The beauties of vegetation, all the various shades and colors of
flower and blossom, the tints and odors, are dependent on them.

No phenomenon in nature, no matter how terrible, delightful, or
enchanting, can be manifested without these elements.

No earthquake, thunder, storm, lightning, wind, hail, rain, snow,
or ice could exist without them.

No light, heat, or motion--in fact, none of the physical forces,
could be evolved without them.

Our atmosphere, ocean, seas, rivers, forests, are composed of them.

No art, science, mechanics, architecture, nor indeed anything that
we now enjoy, could exist without them.

Gunpowder, dynamite, electricity, and all else are dependent on
these elements.

Why attempt to enumerate the extraordinary roles they play on earth
and in the universe?

Every plant would wither, every life would perish, without Oxygen;
this element may be truly called the breath of life.

The creation of God is dependent on these elements, because were it
not for man God would never have been.

The ark, made of wood, was composed of them. The figure of Christ,
and the Virgin Mary, as she is called, as well as all the saints,
were and are composed of Oxygen, Carbon, Nitrogen, Hydrogen, etc. We
know that these chemical elements enter into the composition of all
things in nature--mineral, vegetable, animal.

We also may be absolutely certain that no more elements exist now,
at this present time, than existed ten, twenty, or one thousand
million of years ago.

Chemical elementary substances have no greater relative weight towards
one another, nor a greater volume, at this present time than they had
at any time since the existence of this earth. The total weight of
all elements that enter into the formation of this terrestrial globe
has never varied, whether they were in solid, fluid, or gaseous state.

The law of gravitation has always existed.

Elements that enter into the formation of organic beings, vegetable
or animal, must in due time undergo decomposition and return to the
same elements of which they were composed.

The chemical action has always been the same. All substances are
subject to chemical action when exposed to the primary elements,
oxygen and hydrogen especially.

An element can never be annihilated.

It may not be out of place to mention some of the substances in daily
use. For example, water is composed of oxygen and hydrogen. Air is
composed of oxygen and nitrogen. Bread, of starch, sugars--oxygen,
hydrogen and carbon. Meats, of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen,
etc. Salt, of sodium and chlorine. Vegetables, fruits, etc., of oxygen,
carbon, and hydrogen. Fats, of oil. alcohols, of oxygen, carbon,
and hydrogen. The tissues of the animal body are composed of oxygen,
hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen.

The combination of five elements produces electricity, thus: Zinc
(Zn) + copper (Cu) + sulphuric acid, which consists of hydrogen (H2),
sulphur (S), and oxygen (O4), = electricity.

A few examples in the changes of the combination of oxygen and hydrogen
are shown in water. Under conditions of heat and cold it becomes ice,
steam, dew, rain, hail, snow, clouds, etc., etc. These phenomena
are known.

We merely mention these facts to show how much has been discovered
by human skill, but of how much more remains to be discovered we can
not form the slightest notion. All that has been done in the field of
science has been of actual benefit to humanity. For the discoveries are
based on fact and truth. They are ushered into this world to alleviate
and to lighten the struggle and the burden of men. They come without
oppression, without crime, without bloodshed. They come as the great
benefactors of mankind. Men would be much better off to-day if they
received for their Sunday lessons instruction in the natural, instead
of wasting their precious time in repeating the silly twaddle of
supernatural extravagance, that tends to stupefy instead of clearing
up the understanding.

Scientific research has advanced so far, that not only are we able to
know, from the discoveries made, the elementary composition of this
earth, and all that belongs thereto, but other far more difficult
problems have been partially solved. That is, with the aid of newly
discovered instruments, we can ascertain, to a considerable extent,
the elementary composition of the sun, stars, and distant planets.

In 1802 Dr. Wollaston, and later Fraunhofer, discovered and perfected
an instrument called the spectroscope. It consists of a prism,
fixed upon an iron stand, and a tube carrying a slit. When light
passes through a slit it impinges upon a flint glass prism, by which
it is dispersed. The light of burning metals has been tested in that
manner. Thus when any light passes through the slit of a spectroscope,
the substance giving the light may be determined, the elements burning
ascertained. If the solar spectrum be examined--the light of the sun's
rays--numerous dark lines parallel with the edge of the prism are
observed, and reveal a number of colors giving the following: red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. These are intersected
by fine black lines of different degrees of breadth and shade, which
are always present, and always occupy the same relative position
in the solar spectrum. These are called Fraunhofer's lines. By
the means of this instrument, the spectra of the sun, planets, and
moon have been analyzed, and the color and position, the kind of
metals these distant bodies are composed of. The sun's atmosphere,
from experiments made, is known to contain metals, such as soda, iron,
etc., in the condition of glowing gas, the white light proceeding from
the solid or liquid strongly heated mass of the sun which lies in the
interior. The metals hitherto detected in the sun's atmosphere are
about fifteen or more--iron, sodium, strontium, cadmium, magnesium,
calcium, chromium, nickel, barium, zinc, cobalt, manganese, aluminium,
titanium, hydrogen, etc.

So delicate is this instrument that 1/180000000 part of a grain of
sodium can be detected, and a portion of lithium weighing 1/6000000
part of a grain has been detected; thus showing that there exists a
very strong probability that the sun, planets, and moons are composed
of similar, if not the same, elements that this earth is composed of.









