The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Creation of God
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Creation of God

Author: Jacob Hartmann


        
Release date: June 1, 2019 [eBook #59651]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/59651

Credits: Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
        Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
        made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                          THE CREATION OF GOD.

                                   BY

                          DR. JACOB HARTMANN,

     M.D. St. Louis Medical College; Bachelor of Medicine, Toronto
                              University;
          M.B. Trinity College, Ontario; Member of the College
         of Physicians and Surgeons, Ontario; Licentiate of the
               Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons,
                   Edinburgh, Scotland; Member of the
                       County Medical Society of
                          New York, etc., etc.


                               New York:
                       THE TRUTH SEEKER COMPANY,
                          28 Lafayette Place.









CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER I.  The Universal Aspect,                       9
           II.  The Earth,                                 21
          III.  The Chemical Aspect,                       39
           IV.  The Sun,                                   51
            V.  Genesis--The Creation,                     67
           VI.  Genesis--The Garden of Eden,               80
          VII.  The Deluge,                                92
         VIII.  The Scriptural God--The Creation,         101
           IX.  The Creation of God--Abraham,             112
            X.  Moses--Confirmation of the Idea of God,   119
           XI.  Samuel the Kingmaker,                     138
          XII.  God Save the King,                        147
         XIII.  Jehova Takes a Rest,                      170
          XIV.  The End of National Life,                 178
           XV.  The Christian Era,                        200
          XVI.  Organic Life--Vegetable,                  212
         XVII.  Organic Life--Animal,                     221
                    The Master Tissues.
                    The Muscular Tissues.
                    The Nervous Tissues.
        XVIII.  Food and Food-Substances,                 242
         XIX.   Elimination of Waste Substances,          250
                    In General.
                    By the Lungs.
                    By the Skin.
                    By the Kidneys.
          XX.   Digestion, Nutrition,                     278
         XXI.   The Elementary Substances,                300
        XXII.   Alcohol and Its Effects on the System,    310
       XXIII.   The Soul--What is it?                     321
                    The Mind.
        XXIV.   Sin and Salvation,                        340
         XXV.   The Ecclesiastical Kindergarten,          353
        XXVI.   Rational Review,                          372
       XXVII.   Visions--Bible Dreams-Revelations,        380
      XXVIII.   The Planetary Gods,                       392
        XXIX.   Every Man His Own God,                    403
                    Tables { Gateways to Knowledge.
                           { Morals: Whence They Spring.
         XXX.   The Non Credo,                            418
                    Rules for Human Conduct.



ILLUSTRATIONS.


    Map of the Intellectual Faculties--The Mind,    opp. title-page.
    Map of Theological Retrogression,               opp. p. 390
    Map of the Deluge and Garden of Eden,           opp. p. 432









PREFACE.


               "Si les nommes étaient capables de gouverner toute
                la conduite de leur vie par un dessein reglé, si
                la fortune leur était toujours favorable, leur âme
                serait libre de toute superstition."

                                                        --Spinoza, 1650.

               "Il n'y a pas de moyen plus efficace que la
                Superstition pour gouverner la multitude."

                                                         --Quinte Curce.

               "But in the temple of their hireling hearts
                Gold is a living god, and rules in scorn
                All earthly things but virtue."

               "Falsehood demands but gold to pay the pangs
                Of outraged conscience; for the slavish priest
                Sets no great value on his hireling faith."

                                          "But human pride
                Is skillful to invent most serious names
                To hide its ignorance."

                                                              --Shelley.


At this time, in this age of agitation, unrest, dissatisfaction,
and doubt among the masses, and all classes, in every civilized part
of the globe, in all communities and human organizations, in church
and out of church, ecclesiastical bodies of all shades; besides
the vast number of theories and doctrines of a popular socialistic,
anti-poverty, communistic order, etc., a prevailing skepticism has
seized the minds of men, as to the truth, validity, and stability
of the entire religious fabric. The unsettled condition of the minds
of men, the disturbing elements of the laboring classes, the church
quarrels, clerical litigations, disputes, wrangling, and mutual
hate about scriptural authenticity, its truth and supernaturalism,
the heresies and blasphemies, the unsatisfactory condition of the
Roman church, the constant and unremitting papal correspondence, the
petty bickering, the selfish zeal, the greed for money, the anxiety to
raise funds for all kinds of ecclesiastical establishments, naturally
arouse suspicion whether the idea of a God is not going out of fashion,
whether the clergy has not lost faith in the Book, whether the Jew,
the Jehovistic aristocrat, has not been the primary inventor of
these supernatural wares, whether the Christian theologians are not
beginning to lose their sway and grip and their pretended supernatural
authority over their ignorant devotees. We may ask frankly, honestly,
truthfully, and in perfect good faith:

Has not the time arrived for a grand and human reformation? For new
methods of teaching, for new and more accurate ideas, for a more
precise knowledge of the natural, for instructions in absolute facts,
for a more thorough understanding of natural laws, for a broader
comprehension of man himself and his surroundings, for an abandonment
of all the supernatural subterfuge, ignorance, and superstition, of
religious fables, miracles, false theories, and misleading doctrines
as to God, with their immense sacrifice of human life.

Within the limits of the church nothing is to be hoped for, nor can
anything be expected, except the greedy grasping of the hard-earned
money of the ignorant laboring classes, the fanatical devotees, to
sustain and uphold a mercenary priesthood, a rotten supernatural system
that has proved so pernicious to mankind. Europe, at one time the
rich pasture for the holy Roman Catholic apostolic church, no longer
pours the milk and honey into the supreme pontiff's lap as of yore. In
a letter dated "Rome, Feb. 3d," Ledochowski writes of Leo XIII.'s
solicitude for the good of religion in these parts: "The supreme
pontiff has many reasons of sadness on account of the distresses
which the impudent endeavors of wicked men are trying to bring upon
Christianity, especially in Europe. On the other hand, it is a great
consolation to him to see the increase of Catholicism, with God's aid,
elsewhere in the world." Of course Ledochowski signifies the pope's
great admiration for the wonderful resources--for this flourishing,
prolific, and generous American milch-cow. The Roman administration,
with that marvelous business tact so characteristic of that church,
turns its tender attention, with all its pontifical flummery and
grotesque maneuvers, to insinuate its methods upon this republic,
to overawe us with a blaze of stupefaction, profounder ignorance and
superstition, by honoring America with a resident tax-collector, and
to save Gods, their divinities, with the Christ, Holy Ghost, Virgin
Immaculate, saints, angels, and all the other theological absurdities.

Is it not high time for man and woman to learn that their dependence
on any supernatural aid is futile, their prayers and appeals to
an imaginary God worse than useless, their cringing fear for the
so-called sacred authority cowardly, their submission to priestly
rule and authority slavish, and the inculcating of biblical church
lore stupefying? Is it not time for man and woman to comprehend
themselves, their powers, the uses of their several organs, their
functions, and the natural laws that govern them? That ideas, thought,
consciousness, intellect, understanding, imagination, knowledge, etc.,
etc., are but the functions of nervous matter? That everything we know,
have discovered, developed, or produced, is the natural product of
nerve tissue.

In reviewing the history of this theologico-ecclesiastical
organization--this Jehovistic Christianized system, from the very
beginning to the present time, we find that this many-shaded,
ever-changeable, greedy, grasping creed has done during the four
thousand years of its existence a vast amount of mischief and little
or no good. It had to be civilized instead of civilizing. Instead of
elevating their followers, priests rather made every effort to keep
them in subjection, steeped in ignorance and superstition.

In presenting these pages to the public, it is for the purpose of
exposing some simple intelligible facts, some wholesome truths,
some few scientific revelations discovered by men of eminence,
knowledge, and wisdom, regarding ourselves, this terrestrial globe,
and the universe at large of which we are part. It is not possible in
modern times to force men to believe, to accept the impossible. At
this period of mental transition, the tendency is to think,
to reason, to gain knowledge and truth, to be self-supporting,
self-sustaining, independent, free, and untrammeled by barbaric
delusion and terrorism. They no longer fear and cower before a shadow
of some supernatural imaginary thing or being that has no existence
and never had.

Man must learn to know that man is an evolution of nature's forces,
a product of this terrestrial globe; that all the physical and
physiological phenomena of his fine muscular and nervous system are
the natural products and functions of his organization; that whether
soul, spirit, God or Jehovah, they were evolved in the brain of man;
that man, as man, with all his endowments, faculties, and capabilities,
is part and parcel of this earth, a natural result of natural causes,
and the supernatural, the God or gods, is the natural product of
man's working faculties.

The scientific world has long since discarded every idea of anything
supernatural, declared the impossibility, falsity, and absurdity of
the scriptural fable, and that God, Jehovah, with all the ingenious
priestly inventions, has proved itself pernicious and oppressive to
humanity and contrary to intelligence, reason, and common sense. Man
to know his rights must know himself, his nature and his natural
surroundings, and if he knows himself, he will learn that God did
not create man, but that man created God, and that every man is and
must be his own God to be a true man. Know the natural, never mind
the supernatural.









THE CREATION OF GOD.


CHAPTER I.

UNIVERSAL ASPECT.


The beginning of intellectual development consists of observant
experience. By frequent and repeated observation man acquired a
familiarity with the subjects of that process--a clearer and better
understanding of them.

Thus, the Chaldean shepherds, while minding their flocks of sheep
and cattle, lazily and continuously watched the sky and starry hosts,
and by degrees recognized, and acquired a knowledge of, many of the
stars, laying the foundation for astronomy. Authorities state that
they composed seventy-two volumes on that science, these books dating
as far back as 2,540 B.C., treating of the polar star, Venus, Mars,
and so on. It is possible that many errors attended their observations;
many mistakes may have entered their explanations. That was natural,
considering the remoteness of the times and the lack of facilities.

Knowledge and truth never come easily. The former is very hard to
acquire, the latter very difficult to discover.

Every truth, every new idea, has to battle against old established
notions. If the new idea is persisted in, which is ordinarily the case,
a struggle must ensue. The old idea resists, refuses to yield, no
matter how false, ridiculous, or pernicious it may be. Yield, however,
it must, and does in the course of time. Truth must win in the long
run, though it has to fight its way through depths of ignorance,
prejudice, and superstition, sustained by hate, bigotry, terrorism,
and persecution.

As century after century passed in the Dark Ages, apostles of science
and truth appeared, here and there, now and then, calm, dignified,
patient, persistent and persevering, untiring, self-denying,
men of superior intellect, unswayed and undismayed by existing
authorities. These men gave us, though not a complete, a very
ample revelation of nature, unfolding its mysteries, explaining its
phenomena, making known the truth as far as men had been able to
discover up to their time.

Nature with its laws man had to observe carefully in order to learn
to unravel its secrets, its workings, its forces. There is no way to
reveal them except through the mind of man. There are no means of
knowing or discovering the intricacies and subtleties of nature's
hidden and inexhaustible resources but by careful thought, reason,
constant study and application. Not a single problem has ever been
solved--in fact, one cannot be solved--except by acquired intellectual
powers, developed by the refining process of education of the great
nervous centers of man.

Many scholars have devoted and still devote their time, their energy,
their life, in search of new facts, new truths, concerning the stars,
planetary system, and this terrestrial globe we live on especially.

Centuries before Christ's time, and after, men were engaged in
developing the science of Astronomy--Anaximander, Hipparchus, Ptolemy,
Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, Herschel, and many others. These men
were the apostles of truth, the teachers of facts, and some of them
were martyrs to science.

The great civilizer, the press of modern times, was recently filled
with accounts about the planet Mars, comet, etc., giving all the
detailed information obtainable.

Everyone who reads the newspapers learns something about Mars, and
ventures to give his opinion, whether it is like the earth--inhabited,
has seas or atmosphere, etc. So that, whatever new facts are revealed,
new truths announced, the minds of men are made so much richer.

Knowledge, the progress of science, the discoveries of important
facts, the improvements of political, social, or civil laws, do
not come to us spontaneously, nor do they come to us suddenly in
overpowering quantities; it is a process of gradual acquirement, a
slow accumulation, to which every generation contributes its quota
of observation and experience that makes up the total wealth of
aggregate thought, and is handed down from generation to generation,
our common inheritance.

This common inheritance is neither all true nor all good. A large
proportion that has been handed down to us by the ancients is not
true or good, though it is believed to be true and good.

The revelations of absolute truths, of actual facts, are of more recent
date--discoveries made within the last few centuries. The spurious,
so-called revelations are the works of antiquity, which are not based
on truth or fact or knowledge or experience. The mental faculties of
pristine men were primitive, and their ideas were as primitive. They
lived in an age of infancy; it was all surprise, wonder, astonishment,
and miracle.

When Kepler discovered the law that "Planets revolve in ellipses with
the sun at one focus," he worked hard for many days, and after many
trials succeeded. He also discovered a second law, which he defines,
"A line connecting the center of the earth with the center of the
sun passes over equal spaces in equal times;" and his third law,
"The squares of the times of revolutions of the planets about the sun
are proportioned to the center of their mean distance from the sun."

No one ever claimed for Kepler, nor has he laid claim himself, that
he was inspired by God, or received the idea through any supernatural
agency.

The hostile and bitter opposition that Galileo met on the part of
the Christian Church is too well known; but the importance of his
discoveries, and the truth, remains.

All intelligent persons ought to understand Newton's law of
gravitation. If they understood the full import and significance of
that law, they would never believe in the absurd miracles of Moses,
Joshua, Elijah, Christ and Company. The law: "Every particle of matter
in the universe attracts every other particle of matter with a force
directly proportional to its quantity of matter, and decreasing as
the square of the distance increases."

It is most remarkable--that man discovering great truths, concerning
which there has never been any dispute, or controversy, or fight;
that stand, unaltered and unchanged, forever. Such men have not been
inspired by God, Jehovah, Christ, or the Holy Ghost, or anything
supernatural. They have accomplished their works by their powers
of observation, great mental efforts, skillful explanation and
elucidation, accomplished by hard and untiring work.

It is astonishing that, in the presence of so many revealed natural
truths, so many ascertained scientific facts, and numerous discoveries
in this century, which is claimed to be much advanced in civilization,
intelligent persons--teachers, preachers, priests, and those laying
claim to scholarship--still believe that the visionary figures, the
product of distorted imagination or hallucination, of men like Isaiah,
Ezekiel, etc., were of supernatural origin.

The incredible stories found in the Bible, the fabulous inventions
concocted in the imagination of some person or persons away in Chaldea
many thousand years ago, are still taught to be true, and the children
in the Sunday-schools are instructed to believe these absurdities.

The undue haste exhibited in the first chapter of Genesis, in
creating the earth, etc., is one of those wonderful puzzles to
a child's mind. It is a something that is not easily explained
at length to young people without awaking the suspicion of its
impossibility, and requires considerable ingenuity to satisfy
inquiring minds concerning it. The supernaturalists get over it
by a final and complete answer, that admits of no argument--that
"With God everything is possible." That being absolutely untrue,
the answer explains nothing, but has a tendency to stupefy the child
and hinder its educational advancement, for the reason that such an
answer puts a stop to all farther inquiry. This really has been the
effect of this pernicious teaching for many centuries.

All the stories, fables, myths, handed down to us from antiquity
may be classed in the same category. There are many of them--yes, a
perfect wilderness. All are true in part, but false as a whole. Upon
close examination we find glimmerings of truth in all of them. The
difference lies in the kind, not in the quality. In the biblical story
of creation, the writers had evidently observed, and knew, there were
an earth, water, stars, and something above the earth which they called
heaven, the atmosphere. That was the limit of their knowledge. They
knew they existed, and things and objects that surrounded them existed,
and they made an attempt in their primitive method to account for the
manner in which these things came into existence. They could know
nothing about it, because the most important discoveries were made
thousands of years later.

Hesiod, 900 B.C., in his "Theogonia," invokes the Muses who inhabit
the heavenly mansions, and whose knowledge of generation and birth
he had formerly sung: "Tell, ye celestial powers, how first the gods
and world were made; the rivers, and the boundless sea, with its
strong surge. Also, the bright, shining stars, and wide-stretched
heaven above, and all the gods that sprang from them, givers of good
things." The Muses answer: "First of all existed chaos; next in order
the broad-bosomed Earth; then Love appeared, the most beautiful of
immortals. From chaos sprang Erebus and dusky night, and from night
and Erebus came Ether and smiling day."

He gives a further description, which, like the foregoing, we know
to be fiction, yet to contain elements of truth. We are not asked to
believe all. He says:


   "Look up, and view the immense expanse of heaven,
    The boundless Ether in his genial arms
    Clasping the earth. Him callest thou
    God and Jove."


It is no easy matter for a man of ordinary education to form a notion
of the mental crudeness of the lower type of the human race of our
own times; it is far more difficult for him to divest his mind of all
its acquisitions through study and observation, and reduce his ideas
to the level of those progenitors of his race, the men of antiquity.

When men had to struggle with savage beasts, it required superior
intelligence to preserve themselves from destruction. That might
have led to the worship of the strongest animals, such as the lion
and the tiger. But no sooner did man learn the use of iron, which
enabled him to kill these his gods, proving himself superior to the
thing he worshiped, than these gods were thrown aside.

So long as man was unable to explain the mysterious appearances of the
sun, moon, and stars, he endowed them with his own intelligence. He
worshiped what was to him incomprehensible, mighty, wonderful; made
images representing their phenomena or forces for his adoration. In
his mind he pictured the sun as a warrior clad in golden panoply,
the pale moon he regarded as the queen, and the stars as an immense
host of spirits and heroes. Some interpreted the sun to be the child of
darkness, the morning the bride of heaven, the clouds a fairy network,
and the heat a friend of man; when the heat was very intense, then
the sun was slaying his children. They would liken the dark clouds
which rested on the earth to a terrible being whom they named the
Snake or Dragon, that shut up the waters in his prisonhouse. When
the thunder rolled they said that this hateful monster was uttering
his hard riddles; and when, at last, the rain burst forth, they said
that the bright sun had slain his enemy, and brought the stream of
life for the thirsting earth.

Professor Max Müller says: "He begins to lift up his eyes; he stares
at the tent of heaven, and asks, Who supports it? He opens his ears
to the winds, and asks them, Whence and whither? He is awakened from
darkness and slumber by the light of the sun, and him whom his eyes
cannot behold, and who seems to grant him the daily pittance of his
existence, he calls his life, his health, his brilliant Lord and
Protector. He gives names to all the powers of nature."

All sorts of names were invented to designate any particular force,
phenomenon, or characteristic. In the Vedas the sun has twenty
different names, each one descriptive of the sun or its aspect. In
Persia the blazing sun was adored, and altars smoked perpetually of
fire. In Gaul and Britain pillars were raised to the sun, altars to
the moon, and fires were heaped under sacrificial caldrons to Cardwen,
the earth-goddess.

Man's ideas of course underwent modifications as civilization
advanced. The religious idea had taken root and elaborated
ramifications, and laws were evolved to govern them. The sun of
prosperity shone; communities grew stronger and more numerous;
from the worship of the physical laws of nature, the laws governing
morality became involved. Thus morals invaded nations, over which they
enthroned their gods. Every nation elaborated its own details, and
slowly took its relative position. As these gods grew in importance
men assumed the responsibility to guard them, and the function
to attend them. Thus a class called priests were chosen, elected,
or self-appointed to minister to them. These functionaries at the
same time assumed the moral and political guidance of nations or
communities, and individuals. In this manner arose hundreds upon
hundreds of Gods: Io, Isis, Jupiter, Juno, etc., etc.

The qualities of the gods, like the qualities of men, were good and
bad. They were good and evil, light and dark, life and death, and were
arranged to suit the time and occasion. When laws were established
to govern society, obedience to these laws was declared to be right,
disobedience wrong. Men learned this; they became conscious of what
was right and what was wrong. The ministration to these gods was
acknowledged to be a righteous act. Rules were established to prevent
any violation or infringement of the duty due to these gods. A trespass
in violation of anything considered sacred was regarded as an evil--a
sin. Slowly the consciousness of sin, of doing wrong, of violating
the law, was recognized and established, and the attitude men assumed
towards the gods, or their conduct towards them, was regarded as
moral holiness, sanctity, or piety. The evolution of images, idols,
gods and goddesses, was not the work of a day, but of very many
centuries. The same may be said of sacrifices, worship, ceremonies,
the laws concerning the same, holiness, sin, good and evil, sanctity,
sacrilege, divinity, blasphemy, etc., etc.

Theologians, as well as theological philosophers and theorists,
finding their pet notion of a god strangely interfered with and
disturbed by the advancing progress in the knowledge of the natural
sciences, bring to their aid additional proof to demonstrate the
existence of a god, viz., that all races of men, wherever found,
savage, barbarian, Indian, African, etc., on the different parts
of the earth's surface, believe in a something higher and greater
or more powerful than themselves, a spirit, a soul, a supernatural
being. Unfortunately for their argument, this mental condition
that is ascribed to the barbarians, etc., as being instinctive or
innate--that is, this supernatural element--this having an idea of
something they do not understand--proves the contrary, that there
is no truth in their assumption. The very fact that they have gone
through that process, or are going through it, shows it a kind of
educational distemper of a lower order that all primitive races have
to pass. As children who learn to read must first know their A B C,
it is the road that leads to a higher grade of thought. They begin
in surprise and wonder at the natural, concerning which they know
nothing. They fear, they adore the forces they cannot overcome. They
make images of them in their likeness and worship them. When, however,
they have learned through experience to overpower them, they cease to
respect them. New forms are adopted, modifications made, and lastly
so changed that but a mere shadow of the original remains.

All races began in a similar fashion, varying in form and method. The
sun, clouds, atmosphere, seasons, oceans, thunder, and all other
phenomena in nature--the inability to account for the existence of
these led to worship, sacrifice, etc.; and images, idols, gods,
originated; and in connection with them, stories, fables, myths,
and fictions were supplied by the officiating priests or persons in
attendance. The fanciful creations of the imagination hold good and
will hold good so long as we do not know anything of the realities
of life, of nature, of the actualities, of facts, of truth. But when
the masses shall have learned more of nature, then the visionary,
the imaginary god, the heirloom and heritage of our antiquated
forefathers, will be thrown aside as the images were by Abraham,
the idols dismissed or discarded later. The relics, the remnants,
of this barbarism still have a hold on the minds of men.

Our entire religious fabric rests upon the creation as related in the
Bible, handed down to us as the universally acknowledged text-book
of all knowledge. The time was when it was dangerous to doubt, and
imperiled one's safety or even life to openly state an opinion contrary
to the supposed infallible assertions contained in the holy book.

The man or men who originally wrote that part of Genesis had not the
remotest idea what he or they were talking about. He or they knew
nothing of the subject-matter in consideration. The story told is
like many other fables that had their origin in those early days of
waking humanity.

The great masses are not very much better off to-day as regards these
notions. They still believe in the Bible, and hang their hopes of
salvation on its truth. The churches teach it, and it forms part and
parcel of the church creed.

It will therefore do no harm to present a few facts--that the holiest
priest cannot contradict, that the most pious preacher must admit--that
admit of no argument or controversy, because absolutely true.

Every intelligent person knows that we live on this earth; that this
earth is also called the world, and that this world is a planet;
that this planet belongs to a family of planets. This planet of
ours, this earth, belongs to a system of planets known as the solar
system. And the solar system is mainly comprised within the limits of
the Zodiacs. By the Zodiacs is meant a belt of the Celestial Sphere. 8°
on each side of the Ecliptic is styled the Zodiac. This division is
of very high antiquity, having been in use among the Hindoos and
Egyptians. The Zodiac is divided into twelve equal parts, of 30°
each, called signs, to each of which a fanciful name is given.

The sun is the center. Around him the planets revolve in ellipses.

The sun itself has a diameter of 866,000 miles. The major planets
revolving around the sun as far as known are as follows:


        Name.       Distance from the sun.    Diameter.

        Vulcan         13,000,000 miles.      unknown.
        Mercury        36,000,000  ,,          3,000 miles.
        Venus          67,000,000  ,,          7,600  ,,
        Earth          93,000,000  ,,          8,000  ,,
        Mars          141,000,000  ,,          4,200  ,,
        Jupiter       483,000,000  ,,         90,000  ,,
        Saturn        886,000,000  ,,         73,000  ,,
        Uranus      1,782,000,000  ,,         33,000  ,,
        Neptune     2,790,000,000  ,,         37,000  ,,


It is not an easy matter to imagine that we are suspended in space;
being held up, not by any visible object, but in accordance with the
laws of universal gravitation, whereby each planet attracts every
other planet and is in turn attracted by all.

There are a number of minor planets, satellites, a moon, and meteors
or shooting-stars, and comets, etc., etc.

The sun, the great central globe, is so vast as to overcome the
attraction of all the planets, and compel them to circle around him;
next we come to the planets, each turning on its axis while it flies
around the sun in an elliptical orbit; then accompanying them are
the satellites or moons, each revolving about its own planet, while
all whirl in a dizzy waltz about the central orb; next the comets,
rushing across the planetary orbits at irregular intervals of time
and space; and finally shooting-stars or meteors, darting hither and
thither, interweaving all in apparently inextricable confusion. To
make the picture more wonderful still, every member is flying with
an inconceivable velocity, and yet with such accuracy that the solar
system is the most perfect timepiece known.

The moon's distance from the earth is 239,000 miles; and it has a
diameter of 2,160 miles.

The above gives some idea of the immensity of the solar system. And
it is but one of the myriads of systems, and our earth a speck amidst
it. If on a clear night we cast our eyes upwards, we behold a belt of
closely dotted stars extending across the sky--the Milky Way. This
galaxy, a luminous, cloudlike band, stretches across the heavens
in a great circle, and contains myriads of stars, densely crowded
together. Herschel remarks that 288,000 stars once passed across
the field of his great reflector in forty-one minutes, and says:
"Thus we are to think of our own sun as a star of the second or third
magnitude, and of our little solar system as plunged far into the
midst of the vortex of worlds, a mere atom along that


                  "'Broad and ample road
        Whose dust is gold and pavement stars.'"









