CHAPTER CIX.

FIGHTING WITH THE INVADING ARMIES AT THE GATE OF THE CITY.

    Argument:--Adopting ways and means to quell the disturbances of
    the hostile enemies.


Vasishtha continued:--In the mean while, the assembled ministers
advanced before the king, as the sages of yore resorted to the
celestial Indra, being invaded by the Daityas--Titans around.

2. The ministers addressed:--Lord! We have consulted and ascertained,
that as the enemy is irresistible by any of the three means (of peace,
dissension and bribe or concession); they must be quelled by force or
due punishment.

3. When the proffer of amity is of no avail, and the offer of hostages
doth also fail; it is useless to propose to them, any other term for a
reconciliation.

4. Vile enemies that are base and barbarous, that are of different
countries and races, that are great in number and opulence; and those
that are acquainted with our weakness and weak parts; are hardly
conciliated by terms of peace or subsidy.

5. Now there is no remedy against this insurrection, save by showing
our valour to the enemy; wherefore let all our efforts be directed,
towards the strengthening of our gates and ramparts.

6. Give orders to our bravos to sally out to the field, and command the
people to worship and implore the protection of the gods; and let the
generals give the war alarm with loud sounding drums and trumpets.

7. Let the warriors be well armed, and let them rush to the field; and
order the soldiers to pour upon the plains in all directions, as the
dark deluging clouds inundate the land.

8. Let the outstretched bows rattle in the air, and the bowstrings
twang and clang all around; and let the shadows of curved bows, obscure
the skies as by the clouds.

9. Let the thrilling bow strings, flash as flickering lightnings in
the air, and the loud war whoop of the soldiers, sound as the growling
clouds above; let the flying darts and arrows fall as showers of rain,
and make the combatants glare, with the sparkling gold rings in their
ear.

10. The king said:--Do you all proceed to the battle, and do promptly
all what is necessary on this occasion; and I will follow you
straightaway to the battle field, after finishing my ablution and the
adoration of Agni--the fiery god.

11. Notwithstanding the important affairs, which waited on the king;
yet he found a moment’s respite to bathe, by pouring potfuls of pure
_Gangá_ water upon him, in the manner of a grove watered by a showering
of rain water.

12. Then having entered his fire temple, he worshipped the holy fire
with as much reverence, as it is enjoined in the sástras; and then
began to reflect in himself, in the following manner.

13. I have led an untroubled and easy life, passing in pleasure and
prosperity; and have kept in security all the subjects of my realm
stretching to the sea.

14. I have subdued the surface of the earth, and reduced my enemies
under my foot; and have filled the smiling land with plenty, under the
bending skies on all sides.

15. My fair fame shines in the sphere of heaven, like the clear and
cooling beams of the lunar orb; and the plant of my renown, stretches
to the three worlds, like the three branches of _Gangá_.

16. I have lavished my wealth, to my friends and relatives, and to
respectable Bráhmans; in the manner, as I have amassed my treasures
for myself; and I quenched my thirst with the beverage of the cocoanut
fruits, growing on edges of the four oceans. (That is to say:--his
realms were चतुराब्धिसोमा or bounded by the four oceans on
all sides).

17. My enemies trembled before me for fear of their lives, and they
groaned before me as croaking frogs with their distended pouches, and
my rule extended over and marked the mountains, situated in the islands
amidst the distant seas.

18. I have roved with bodies of siddhas, over the nine regions beyond
the visible horizon; and I have rested on the tops of bordering
mountains, like the flying clouds that rest on mountain tops.

19. With my full knowing mind, and my perfection in Divine meditation;
I have acquired my dominions entire and unimpaired, by cause of my good
will for the public weal. (It means the prince’s high attainments in
spiritual, intellectual as well as territorial concerns).

20. I have manacled the lawless Rákshasas, in strong chains and
fetters; and kept my cares of religious duties, and those of my
treasures and personal enjoyments within proper bounds, and without
letting them clash with one another.

21. I have passed my life time, in the uninterrupted discharge of those
triple duties of mine; and have relished my life with great joy and
renown. But now hoary old age hath come upon me, like the snow and
frost fallen upon the withered leaf and dried straw.

22. Now hath old age come, and blasted all my pleasures and efforts;
and after all, these furious enemies have overpowered upon me, and are
eager for warfare.

23. They have poured upon me in vast numbers on all sides, and the
victory is doubtful; it is therefore better for me to offer myself as a
sacrifice, to the god of this burning fire, which is known to crown its
worshipper with victory.

24. I will pluck this head of mine, and make an offering of it to the
Fire-god (as a fit fruit to <the> shrine; and say:--O Igneous god, I
make here an offering of my head to thee).

25. I give this offering, as I have ever before given my oblations to
fire; therefore accept of this also, O god, if thou art pleased with my
former offerings.

26. Let the four urns of thy fiery furnace, yield four forms of mine,
with brilliant and strong bodies, like that of Náráyana, with his
mighty arms.

27. Thus will I be enabled, with those four bodies of mine, to meet my
enemies on all the four sides; and be invulnerable like thyself, by
keeping my thought and sight, ever fixed in thee.

28. Vasishtha replied:--So saying, the king took hold of a dagger in
his hand; and separated the head from his body with one blow of it, as
boys tear off a lotus bud from the stalk with their nails. (In many
instances, the head is mentioned to be torn off by the nails).

29. As the head became an oblation, to the fire of dusky fumes; the
headless trunk of the self-immolated sovereign, sprang and flew also
upon the burning furnace.

30. The sacred fire, being fed with the fat and flesh of the royal
carcass; yielded forth with four such living bodies, from amidst its
burning flames; as it is the nature of the good and great, to make an
instantaneous of fourfold, of what they receive in earnest.

31. The king sprang from amidst the fire, in his fourfold forms of his
kingly appearance, and these were as luminous with their effulgence, as
the radiant body of Náráyana, when it rose at first from the formless
deep. (The spirit of god rising over the surface of the deep).

32. These four bodies of the king, shone forth with their resplendent
lustre; and were adorned with their inborn decorations of the royal
crown and other ornaments and weapons. (The fire born form allude to
the Agniculas or fiery races of men).

33. They had their armours and coronets on, together with helmets,
bracelets and fittings for all and every part of the body; and
necklaces and ear-rings hung upon them as they moved along.

34. All the four princes were of equal forms, and of similar shapes and
sizes in all the member of their bodies; and were all seated on horse
back, like so many Indras riding on their _Uchai-srava_ horses (having
their ears pricked up, as in the plight of their heavenward flight).

35. They had their long and capacious quivers, full with arrows of
golden shafts; and their ponderous bows and bowstrings, were equally
long and strong with the god of war.

36. They rode also on elephants and steeds, and mounted on their
war-cars and other vehicles in their warfare; and were alike
impregnable by the arms of the enemy, both themselves as well as the
vehicles they rode upon.

37. They sprang from the bosom of the sacred fire, as the flames of the
submarine fire, rise from amidst the ocean, by being nourished with the
oblations that were offered upon it.

38. Their flowery bodies on jewelled horses, made resplendent on all
sides as four smiling faces of the moon; and their good figures looked
like Hara-Hari, as if they have come out from fire and water.




