CHAPTER CLXXXXVII.

ON THE EXCELLENCE OF LEARNING.

    Argument:--Study of the sástras whether for temporal ends or
    ultimate bliss tends mainly to the edification of the Mind.


Ráma said:--Do thou, O greatest of sages, deign to give me the best
treasures of knowledge, as the wood-cutter obtained their precious
treasures of the Philosopher’s stones, and whereby I may attain to the
full, perfect and indubitable knowledge of all things.

2. Vasishtha replied:--The woodmen that I have mentioned bear allusion
to all mankind in general and their great poverty that I have
described, refers to the extreme ignorance of men which is the cause of
all their woe (three fold miseries--_tritapas_ of the body, mind and
soul, or of this world and the next. Gloss).

3. The great forest which is said to be the place of their residence,
is the vast wilderness of knowledge, which the human kind have to
traverse under the guidance of their preceptors and the sástras; and
their labour in felling and selling the wood for their daily food, is
the hard struggle of human kind in their life time for their simple
fare and supportance.

4. The unavaricious men that are unemployed in business, and are
yet desirous of the enjoyments of life; are the persons that devote
themselves to the acquisition of learning. (Such is the literary body
of students and scholars).

5. And those people also, who pursue their callings for the provisions
of life, and are dependents <on> others for their supportance; become
successful in the acquirement of learning in their minds, by their
practice of the precepts and studious habits.

6. As the wood-cutters, who sought for the worthless wood at first,
get the very valuable gems at last; so men prosecuting their studies
for a paltry maintenance and self supportance, succeed to gain divine
knowledge at the end. (Secular knowledge often leads to the spiritual).

7. There are some sceptics who say by way of derision, what is the good
to be derived from poring upon books? but these have been found to have
turned to true believers at last. (Those who came to deride, returned
believers at the end and confessed the truth).

8. Worldly men devoted to the objects of their fruition in life, and
acquainted with the objects of mental and spiritual truths; coming
distrustfully to listen to the doctrines of the sástras, have become
fully convinced of their truths at last.

9. Men are led away to many ways by the different tenets of the
sástras, and by direction of their various desires and inclinations;
but they come to meet at last in the same path of glory, as the gemming
forest of the woodmen.

10. He who is not inclined to the injury of others, but goes on in his
own beaten course; is called the upright man, and it is his judgement
which is sought and followed by every one.

11. But men ignorant of truth, are dubious of the result of righteous
conduct, in earning their livelihood; and are doubtful also of the
benefit, which is derived from the study of the sástras. (Hence they
fall to misconduct and neglect their studies also, in order to earn
their bread by foul means).

12. But men persisting in their righteousness, gain both their
livelihood and liberation at once; as the honest woodmen obtained their
wood as well as the gems together, and in the same place.

13. Among these some succeeded to get the sandal woods, and some to
gain the precious gems, while others met with some common metals, and a
great number of them, found the wood of the forest trees only. (So are
our lots differently cast among different individuals, according to our
respective deserts).

14. Some of us gain the objects of our desire, and some acquire riches
or deeds of virtue and merit; others obtain their liberation; and
attain their proficiency in the sástras.

15. Know, O Ráma, that the sástras deal only with instructions for the
acquirement of the triple blessings of our livelihood, riches and
virtue; but they give no direction for our knowing the supreme One,
who is inexpressible in words. (Because no word nor thought can ever
approach to the unknowable One).

16. The words and their significations (which are used in the sástras),
serve only to express the intelligible objects which are signified by
them, as the seasons denote the seasonal fruits and flowers which they
bear; but the knowledge of the supreme being, is derived from one’s
intuition, and is felt in our consciousness alone.

17. Divine knowledge is said in the sástras, to transcend the knowledge
of all other things; and the transparency of the Divine person,
surpasses the brightness of all objects, as the beauty of the female
body excels the lustre of the brightest gems. (The personal grace of
females, transcends the beauty of all their decorations).

18. The transcendental knowledge of the Deity, is not to be derived
from the doctrine of the sástras, nor from the teachings of our
preceptors; it cannot be had by means of our gifts and charities; nor
by divine service and religious observances, can we ever know the
unknowable One.

19. These and other acts and rites, are falsely said to be the causes
of divine knowledge, which can never be attained by them; now attend
to me, O Ráma, and I will tell you the way to your rest in the Supreme
soul.

20. The study of the sástras, serves of course to purify the mind
from vulgar errors and prejudices; but <it> is the want of desire or
aversion to worldly enjoyments, that makes the mind look within itself,
wherein it sees clearly the image of God shining in it.

21. This sástra stablishes right understanding in lieu of ignorance,
and this right reasoning serves to drive away all gross errors from the
mind at once.

22. The sástra or learning serves principally to cleanse the mirror of
the mind, from its dross of errors at first, and then it purifies the
person of its possessor, by the force of its doctrines. (So the sástra
has the power of purifying both the body and mind of the learned man).

23. As the rising sun casts his image spontaneously, on the dark bosom
of the ocean; so doth the luminary of sástra or learning, shed of its
own accord the bright light of truth, in the minds of ignorant.

24. As the sun enlightens all objects, by his presence before them;
so doth the light of learning illume the dark understandings of the
illiterate, by its benign appearance therein.

25. In this manner there is an intimate relation, between the learning
derived from the sástra, and the mind of the man that is desirous of
his liberation; in as much as the sástra alone affords the knowledge of
the otherwise unknowable One to our minds.

26. As the sight of the sun and the ocean, shows us the blue waters of
the one, turning to a bright expanse by the rays of the other; so the
instance of the sástra and its doctrines, shows the enlightenment of
human intellect by means of the other.

27. As boys in their play with pebbles, rub them against one another
in the water, and have their hands cleansed of dirt by abrasion of
the stones; so the discussion of the sástras, clears the minds of the
disputants of their errors, by refutation of discordant opinions.

28. So also do learned men, by their confutation of repugnant
doctrines, clear their minds of doubtful questions; and become
perfected in forming right principles, and ascertaining the truth from
falsehood.

29. The sástras distil with sweetness of the holy texts, and infuse
the sweet balm of true knowledge into the mind; they are as profuse of
dulcitude, as the sugarcane exudes with its saccharine juice, which is
so delectable to taste.

30. As the rays of sunlight falling on the walls of houses, become
perceptible to us, by means of our visual organs; so the light of
spiritual knowledge, pierces into the souls of men, by means of our
hearing the sástras through the medium of our ears.

31. Learning acquired for the acquisition of the triple good of this
world, namely virtue, wealth and the objects of our desire; is no
learning at all without the knowledge of the sástras leading to our
liberation. Much learning both in theory and practice, is worth nothing
without the salvation of our souls.

32. That is the best learning, which gives us the knowledge of truth;
and that is true knowledge, which causes our equanimity in all states
of our being; and that is called perfect equanimity, which produces our
hypnotism in waking (_i.e._ whereby we may sleep in insensibility over
the waking and tumultuous world).

33. Thus are all these blessings obtained from learning of the sástras,
therefore let every one devote himself to the study of the sástras with
all diligence.

34. Hence know, O Ráma! that it is the study of the sástras, and
meditation of their recondite meanings; together with one’s attendance
on his preceptor, and audience of his lectures and counsels, as well
by his equanimity, and observance of his vows and discipline, that he
can attain his supreme bliss, in the everlasting God, who is beyond all
worldly things, and is the supreme lord God of all.




