CHAPTER CLXXXIV.

A LECTURE ON THE ALL COMPREHENSIVENESS OF THE SOUL.

    Argument:--Nature of the unenlightened soul, to represent
    unnumbered worlds within itself.


Kunda-danta said:--I then asked <the> devotee sitting beneath the
_kadamba_ tree, to tell me how the seven large continents of the globe,
could be contained within the narrow limits of the abodes of each of
these brothers (which is next to an impossibility).

2. The kadamba devotee replied:--The essence of the intellect though
so very vacuous in itself, is notwithstanding the most capacious and
ubiquious of any thing in existence; and is present in its own nature
with every thing, wherever it is known to exist.

3. The soul sees itself in the form of the triple world, and every
thing besides in its different nature and figure, without changing
itself to any one of them. (_i.e._ The soul remains unchanged in all
the changeful scenes of nature).

4. Kunda-danta rejoined:--But how do you attribute the quality of
variety or multiplicity, to the purely simple and immutable nature
of the Supreme soul, as you see them appertaining to the intrinsic
character of everything else in nature. (Or as Pope says:--That changed
through all, yet in all the same; great in the earth, as in the
etherial frame).

5. The kadamba devotee replied:--The sphere of the intellectual
vacuum, is all quiet and serene, and there is nothing as any variety
or multiformity in it; the changes that are apparent in its face, are
no more, than the waves and eddies, whirling on the surface of the
changeless main.

6. It is in the immensity of intellectual vacuity, that infinite
creations seem to be continually purling about, as the rising waves are
seen to be whirling in the sea; and it is in its fathomless depth that
they appear to sink, like the waters subsiding in the hollow of the
deep.

7. The substantial forms of things, that rise in the unsubstantial
essence of the intellect, are as the various forms of substances, seen
in the dreaming state of the soul, and all which are utterly forgotten
in its state of sound sleep--susupti.

8. As a Hill seen in dream is no hill at all, and as things appearing
to be in motion in dreaming, are found afterwards to be perfectly
motionless; so are all things in nature but mere unrealities, and
though as real from the real nature of soul itself. (_i.e._ It is
the intellect that fashions everything in its own manner, and its
imagination gives a form to an airy nothing).

9. The intellect is an immaterial substance, and neither creates nor
perceives any thing material by itself; but conceives everything as it
is manifested to it in its idea in the beginning. (_i.e._ The ideas of
things are inborn in the mind).

10. As the intellect sees a great variety of objects in <its> dream,
which it takes for realities for the time; so its belief in the reality
of its ideas, causes it to conceive them as real entities.

11. The vacuous intellect, which glitters of itself in its own state of
transparence; comes to find the world shinning in the same light within
itself. (_i.e._ The world is subjective with the intellect, and not a
part from our intellectual light of the same).

12. As we have the consciousness of heat in the fire, even when it is
seen in a dream; so we are conscious of the presence of everything in
our minds, even in the absence of the thing itself from us. (It was
thus that the Bráhman brothers were conscious of their lordship, even
in their want of the realms themselves).

13. And as we have the idea of the solidity of a pillar, from our dream
of it in sleep; so have we the idea of the great variety of things in
existence; although there is no diversity or difference in the nature
of the One unvaried unity that pervades the whole. (And that shows its
unchangeable self, as many and changed through all--_Aham_-bahusyam).

14. In the beginning all substances were as pure and simple, as the
essence of their maker by and after which they were made; and they
still continue to be in the same state of their ideal purity, as they
were originally made out of that airy entity and unity.

15. As the tree is diversified in the various forms of its roots and
fruits, and its leaves, flowers and the trunk; so is the Supreme unity
varied in all and everywhere in his self-same and undivided essence.

16. It is in the fathomless ocean of the Supreme essence, that the
immensity of creation is subsisting like the waters of the deep; and
it is in the boundless space of that transcendent vacuum, that the
infinity of the worlds have been rolling on, in their original vacuous
and apparently visible forms.

17. The transcendental and comprehensible _i.e._ the immaterial soul
and the material world, are but commutual terms as the tree and arbour,
and their difference lies in the intelligibleness of the one and
unintelligibility of the other; but true intelligence leads us to the
unconceivable One, while our ignorance of the same, deludes us to the
knowledge of many, and tends to our distress only. (True happiness in
our reliance on the unknown One only).

18. The mundane and supermundane is surely the One and same thing,
according to the deduction of spiritual philosophy; and the knowledge
of this sublime truth, is sure to lead one to his ultimate liberation.

19. The world is the product of the will of God, and the will is a
power or faculty appertaining to the personality of the Deity; and the
same being transmuted to the form of the world, it is proved that the
world is the formal part of the Supreme soul. (Whose body nature is,
and God the soul).

20. He whom no words can define, and yet who defines the senses of
words; who is subject to no law or prohibition, or to any state or
condition of being, but appoints them for all sorts of beings, is
indeed the only Lord of all.

21. He that is ever silent but speaks through all, who is inactive
as a rock but acts in all; who is always existent and appears as
inexistent, is the Supreme Lord of all.

22. That subtile essence that constitutes the solidity of all gross
bodies, and remains undecayed in all frail bodies, is the pure Brahma
himself; He has no volition or nolition of creation or destruction, and
there is no possession or want of the property of anything.

23. It is the one and invariable soul, that rests always in its state
of rest and sleep, and perceives the succession of creation and
destruction of the world, in its alternate states of dream and sound
sleep, which present themselves as two pictures before its sight.

24. It is also in the substratum of the intellect, that unnumbered
worlds seem to rise and set in succession; they appear as passing
pictures before the mind, without being rooted or painted therein.

25. As the mixing of one thing with another, produces a different
effect in the mixture; so doth the union of the mind with the organs of
sense, cause a variety of impressions to be imprinted in the intellect.
(So the commixture of curd and sugar creates a different flavour in the
condiment, gloss).

26. All things have their existence in the essence of the intellect
only, without which nothing is knowable to any body; hence there is
nothing anew in nature, except its being but a representation of the
original idea in the mind (and this is evident from the identity and
similarity of the ectypes with its antitypes, gloss).

27. Hence our consciousness of the identity of things with the essence
of our intellect, proves them to be as immaterial and immovable as
their fixed ideas in the mind.

28. Thus the world which is so visible and perceptible to us, is
nothing but a mere nullity in reality; and whatever appears as existing
herein, together with the great gods and angels, are no more than the
false visions in our dream and fancy.

29. We see the various fluctuations and phenomena, rising in the waters
of the vast ocean of the intellect; and appearing in the forms of our
joy and grief, and those of moving and unmoving bodies in creation.

30. O that the nature and course of the world, should so obscure the
bright mirror of the intellect; as to hide it under the dirt of our
passions, and cover it under the clouds and snows of our ignorance.

31. As spectres and dissolving views appear in the air, before the
sight of the dimsighted; so doth this shadow of the world appear as
substance, to the view of the unspiritual myopist.

32. Whatever we imagine, the same we find, and seem to enjoy for the
time; and as we are delighted with the view of our imaginary city, so
do we indulge ourselves in the sight of this air-drawn utopia of the
world.

33. As we seem to enjoy our ecstasy, in the fairy land of our fancy; so
we are betaken by the delusion of this unreal world, under the belief
of its reality.

34. There is one eternal destiny, which ever runs apace in its wonted
course; and destines all beings to continue in their allotted careers
as ever before.

35. It is destiny that produces the moving bodies from living beings,
and the motionless ones from the unmoving; it is that predestination
which has destined the downward course of water and fluids, and the
upward motion of the flames of fire.

36. It is that blind impulse, that impels the members of the body to
their respective actions; and makes the luminous bodies to emit their
light; it causes the winds to wind about in their continuous course,
and makes the mountains to stand unmoved in their proper places.

37. It makes the luminaries of heaven, to roll on in their regular
revolutions, and causes the rains and dews of the sky, to pour down in
their stated seasons; and it is this eternal destiny that directs the
courses of years, ages and cycles, and the whole curricle of time to
run its wonted course.

38. It is the divine ordinance, that has ordained the limits of the
earth and the distant ocean and seas, and has fixed the position of the
hills and rocks in them; it has allotted the natures and powers of all
things, and prescribed the laws of rights and duties for all and every
one.

39. Kunda-danta rejoined:--The reminiscence of the scenes of past
life, occurs in the present state of existence, in the forms of our
imagination and of desire for the same; and these inward thoughts
become the gist and marrow to frame our lives in their fashion; but
tell me sir, how could the first created beings in the beginning of
creation have any reminiscence, whereupon their lives and natures were
moulded?

40. The devotee replied:--All these that offer themselves to our view,
are quite unprecedented and without their original patterns in the
mind, and resemble the sight of our own death that we happen to see
in a dream. It is the omniscience of Brahmá, that caused the first
creation, and not his memory of the past as it is with us and other
created beings.

41. It is the nature of our intellect, to represent the imaginary city
of the world in its empty vacuity; it is neither a positive reality,
nor a negative unreality either; being now apparent and now lost to
sight by itself.

42. It is the clearness of the intellect, which represents the
imaginary world in the manner of a dream; but the pure vacuous
intellect, neither sees nor bears the remembrance of the world in
itself. (It is the sight of a thing, that leaves its traces in the mind
afterwards; but when there is no sight of a thing, there can be no
remembrance of it).

43. The wise that are devoid of joy and grief, and remain unchanged in
prosperity and adversity; are men of right integrity and equanimity in
their nature, and move on as equably as the wheel of fortune leads them
onward.

44. As the intellect retains in it, the remembrance of what it has seen
in its dream; so does it bear in itself the false impression of this
triple world to its end.

45. It is only the reflexion of our consciousness, which passes under
the name of the world; now knowing the nature of your consciousness as
mere vacuousness, you will blot out the impression of the world also.

46. That which is all and everything, and from which all have issued
and in which they exist; know that All as all which fills all space,
wherein all things are situated.

47. I have thus fully explained to you, how you may come to know this
creation as its creator--the Great Brahmá Himself; and have also
expounded to you the means, whereby you may get rid of your impression
of the phenomenal world.

48. Now rise ye Bráhmans and repair to your abodes, as the bees resort
to their cells and calyxes of lotuses at the dusk of the day; go and
perform your evening services, while I remain here in my pensive
meditation, and absorbed in my spiritual ecstasy forever.




