CHAPTER CXVII.

DESCRIPTION OF THE LOTUS-LAKE, BEE AND THE SWAN.

    Argument:--Description of a Lake of lotus, and the bees and swans
    frequenting them.


The companions said:--Behold there, O lord! the lotus lake on the
tableland of the mountain; reflecting the sky in its bosom, and
resembling the pleasure pond of Káma or Cupid. Behold there the beds of
white, red and blue lotuses, with their protruding stalks; and listen
to the mingled sounds of the water fowls sporting thereon.

2. Lo the full blown lotus standing on its stalk with its thousand
petals, and the royal gander or swan resting on its pericarp; it is
crowded by double streaked bees, and birds of various kinds, as if it
were the abode of the lotus-seated Brahmá himself.

3. All the sides are overspread by mists and fearful frost, and the red
dust of the farina of full blown flowers and lotuses, have been flying
all about; the bees and birds giddy with the odours spread around, are
humming and warbling their tunes and notes in the open air; and the
clouds are spreading above as an aerial canopy.

4. There is the lashing sound of the breaking waves, beating against
the shore; and here is the rumbling noise of the humming bees, vying
with one another; somewhere the silent waters are sleeping in the deep,
and elsewhere the fair lotus of the lake, are lying hid in the bushes.

5. The pearly particles of water, are lulling away the heat of the
people; wild beasts are prowling on the bank, overgrown by wild
thickets all around; the waves are laving the stones on the bank, and
the land appears as the clear sky on the earth.

6. The bosom of the lake displays the rays of lightnings, from the
redness of the clouds by the dust of flowers borne above by the winds;
and one side of it is obscured by a dark rainy cloud hanging over it,
while the other side exhibits the variegated rays of the evening skies
above it.

7. There is a fragment of the autumnal cloud, borne aloft by the
driving winds; and appearing as it were a part of the sky supported
upon the air.

8. The rippling waves of the lake by gentle breeze, and the wettish
humming bees fluttering over the bed of the lotus lake, made a noise
all around; like the falling of flowers from the branches of trees,
lying on the bank of a river.

9. The large lotus leaves are waving like fans made of palm leaves, and
the foaming froths were puffing as the snowy _chowries_ of princes; the
buzzing bees and cooing cuckoos, were singing to and lauding the lake
which lay like a lord, in the assemblage of lotuses, resembling the
consorts of his _harem_. (The lake is likened to a lord).

10. Lo the chorus of black bees, singing their charming chimes before
him; and the yellow farina of the lotus flowers, have strewn his waters
with dust of gold. The yellowish froths are floating like fragments of
its gold coloured flowers; and the flowery furzes on the bank, decorate
it as its headdress.

11. The deep fountain, having the beautiful lotuses on its bosom;
enjoys their sweet fragrance, as princes derive from the assemblage, of
talented men in their courts.

12. The pellucid lake, reflecting the clear autumnal sky on its
surface; resembles the mind of the wise man, which is ever clear and
composed, with the light of the true sástra.

13. The limpid lake is little discernible in winter, when the keen
blasts have covered it with hoar frost, and converted its blueness to
white.

14. So the world appears to the wise, a vast sheet of the glory of God;
and all these distinct forms of things, like waves of the sea are lost
at last, into the bright element of Eternity.

15. It is by one’s own exertion, that every body should try to raise
himself above the sea of error, or else he must be continually whirling
in the whirlpool of blunder, like all other ignorant men.

16. As the waters of wells, tanks, lakes and seas, differ from one
another in their quality; so the persons of men and women, are
different from each other in their respective dispositions.

17. Who can count the aquatic plants and lotuses, which grow in the
lakes as plentifully, as the passions and desires spring in the
fountain of the human heart; and which are carried away by the waves of
accidents, or hurled into the whirlpool of perdition.

18. Oh, the wonderful effect of bad company, that the lotus growing
in the company of aquatic plants, loses its fragrance in the current
waters, and shows its thorny stalks to view.

19. The good qualities of a person like those of the lotus, are lost
under the assemblage of vicious faults in the same; such as the pores,
the hollowness and the too fine and fragile fibres of the lotus stalks,
make them entirely useless to any body.

20. But the lotus which adorns its natal waters, and fills the air with
its fragrance; is as a nobleman born with the noble qualities of a
noble family, and whose virtues are impossible for the hundred hooded
serpent--Vásuki also to relate. (Such a person is called the lotus of
his family).

21. What other thing can equal the lotus in its praise, which in form
of Laxmí, rests on the bosom of Hari, and graces his hand in the manner
of a _bouquet_ or nose gay.

22. The white and blue lotuses, are both esteemed for their quality of
sweet scent, though they differ in their colour; and hence the one is
sacred to the sun and the other to the moon.

23. The blooming beauty of the lotus-bed, is not comparable to that
of the full blown flowers of the forest; nor does the lotus-lake bear
comparison with the starry heaven also; but they are to be compared
with the comely and smiling face of the dancing girl in her fete.

24. Blessed are bees, that have all along enjoyed their lives in
revelling over the sweets of flowers, without having any other thing to
care about.

25. Blest are the bees and cuckoos, that feast upon the flavour of
mango fruits, and regale themselves with the fragrance of their
flowers; all others not so blest, are born only to bear the name of the
species.

26. The bees cloyed with honey, and giddy with the flavour of lotuses,
in the lake where they revel; laughed to scorn some others of their
tribe, that led their humble lives on the common farina of flowers.

27. The black bee that buzzed to the lotus, lived and sported in its
company and slept in its honey cup at night; was in trouble at the
approach of autumn, not knowing what flower to choose for its fare, and
were to resort for its rest.

28. A black bee sitting on the unblown bud of a flower, appeared as a
black man placed over a trident by _kála_.

29. O thou insatiate bee! that ever rovest over hills and dales, and
suckest the sweets of all kinds of flowers; why wanderest thou still,
unless it were for thy restless discontent.

30. Thou soft bodied bee, that art bred up in sweets, and feedest upon
the farina of flowers; it is better for thee to resort to the lotuses
of the lake, than bruise thy body in thorns and thistles.

31. O humble bee, if thou art deprived of thy mellifluous food and
thy fair fare of the farina of flowers in stern winter; thou shouldst
yet repair as wise men do to such as may suit thy taste, and be
congenial to thy nature; rather than be mean and debase thyself, by thy
attendance upon the base and mean.

32. Look there, O lord! the assemblage of milk white swans, swimming
in the lake, and feeding upon the silvery fibres of lotus stalks, and
guggling as gravely, as the chaunters of the Sáma Veda.

33. Here the gander pursuing the geese, seated in their cradles of
lotus bushes; thinks the limpid lake as the blue sky, and the lotus
cradle as a cloud, and stops from his pursuit (for fear of falling down
on earth). (Mistake of the terrestrial lake, for the aerial mandákiní).

34. Let no body be so unfortunate, O lord, as was this gander, which
<was> in pursuit of the shadow of the goose.

35. The sweet music of the swan as it sings of its own accord, is
inimitable by the crow or crane, although they are taught to learn it
for many years in its society.

36. Although the swan and drake are both of the same kind, and of like
form and figure, and live upon the same sort of food; yet they differ
widely from one another in their respective species and qualities.

37. The swan soaring in the sky, with his snow white wings and
feathers; appears as the hoary lotus sitting upon its stalk; and then
it gladdens the minds of men, as the full-moon with her icy beams.

38. The elevated stalks of lotuses, rising as the lofty stems of
plantain trees, with the lotuses sitting as the goddess Flora upon
them, afford delight to swans only, and to no other bird.

39. Lo, how the lake is adorned like a beauteous lady, with the
waves resembling her waving bracelets, and the ripples likening her
necklaces; while the aquatic plants and flowers, represent wreaths and
garlands on her bosom.

40. The strings of fluttering bees, are as streaks of black spots on
her person; the swelling of cranes and storks are as the tinklings of
her anklets, and the rippling waves are as the glances of her eyes.

41. The lake is graced like a lady, by the young swans crying by her
side as her young ones; and looking up to the mountain as her lord, for
a fresh supply of fresh water from his profluent cascade.

42. Don’t you, O harmless swan, says one, reside with the malicious
water fowls and birds of prey, in one and the same lake; it is better
that thou dost remain with thy own kind, that may assist thee in
distress.

43. Look to thy end, O silly bee, says one, that art now so giddy
with thy drink of the sweet honey of flower, and treadst on the heads
of elephants, to sip and suck their exuding ichor, and ramblest at
large among the blooming lotuses, that the winter of scarcity is fast
approaching to thee, when thou shalt be constrained to live upon the
dewdrops drizzling on blades of grass or dripping from stones.

44. O lord! the milk white swan with wide stretched wings entered into
the lotus bush, to see after his young ones, they on seeing him, begin
to cackle, as a child does on seeing his father before him. The young
ones said, O father, it is all delusion, like white pearl in silver and
one sees fog over his head at mid-day.

45. The swan is as silently floating over the limpid waters of the
lake, as the bright moon is gently gliding along the translucent
atmosphere of the firmament; and as it passes through, the beds of
lotuses, its wings bruise against the blossoms, causing them to distil
their fragrant fluid, which is gulped in by fishes, in the manner of
the holy water of Ganges.




