CHAPTER CLXXXII.

BRAHMA GÍTÁ CONTINUED. SOVEREIGNTY OF THE SEVEN CONTINENTS.

    Argument:--Meeting of the Kadamba Hermit with his brothers, their
    bane and blessing and final success.


The old anchorite resumed and said:--The goddess Gaurí dwelt for a full
decade of years, on this very Kadamba tree of her own accord; and then
she left this arbour of her own will, in order to join her lord Hara on
his left side.

2. This young Kadamba tree, being verified by the ambrosial touch of
the goddess, never becomes old, nor fades or withers; but ever remains
as fresh as a child in the lap of her mother.

3. After the goddess had left this place, that great garden was
converted to a common bush, and was frequented only by woodmen, who
earned their livelihood by woodcutting.

4. As for myself, know me to be the king of the country of Malwa, and
to have now become a refugee in this hermitage of holy ascetics, by
abdication of my kingdom.

5. On my resorting to this place, I was honoured here by the
inhabitants of this holy asylum; and have taken any abode beneath this
kadamba tree, where I have been in my meditative mood ever since that
time.

6. It was some time ago, that you sir, had come here in company
with seven brethren, and betaken yourselves to the practice of your
religious austerities.

7. So did you eight persons reside here as holy devotees since that
time, and were respected by all the resident devotees of this place.

8. It came to pass in process of time, that one of them removed from
here to the Srí mountain; and then the second among them, went out to
worship the lord Kártikeya in another place.

9. The third has gone to Benares and the fourth to the Himálayas; and
the remaining four remained at this place, and employed themselves to
their rigorous austerities.

10. It was the earnest desire of each and every one of them, to become
the sovran lord of all the seven continents of the earth.

11. At last they all succeeded to accomplish their objects of their
self same desire, by the grace and boon which obtained from the
respective deity of their adoration, that was pleased with the
austerity of his particular devotee.

12. The brethren returned to their habitation, when you had been
employed in your devotion; and after their enjoyment of the fruition of
this earth in golden age, they have ascended to the empyrean of Brahmá.

13. O sir, those brothers of yours, finding their respective gods
propitious to them, and willing to confer blessings upon them, had made
the following request of them saying:--

14. Ye gods! make our seven brothers, the lords of the seven continents
of the earth; and let all our subjects be truthful and sincere, and
attached to the occupations of their respective orders.

15. The gods that were adored by them, gladly occupied their prayer;
and having assented to their request, disappeared from them, and
vanished in the open sky.

16. They all went afterwards to their respective habitation, and met
death except this one who is now here.

17. I only have been sitting alone, devoutly intent upon meditation;
and have remained as motionless as a stone, beneath this kadamba tree,
which is sacred to the goddess of speech.

18. Now as the seasons and years, have been rolling on upon my devoted
head, I have lived to see this forest, to be broken and cut down by
woodmen, living in the skirts of these woods.

19. They have spared only this unfading kadamba tree, which they had
made an object of their veneration, as the abode of the goddess of
speech; and me also whom they believe to be absorbed in inflexible
meditation.

20. Now sirs, as you seem to have newly come to this place, and bear
the appearance of aged ascetics; I have therefore related to you all
that I have come to know by my cogitation only.

21. Rise then ye righteous men, and proceed to your native homes; where
you will meet your brothers in the circle of their family and friends.

22. You will find eight of your brothers, remaining in their abode; and
resembling the eight high minded Vasus, sitting in the high heaven of
Brahmá.

23. After that great devotee had said so far, I interrupted him
saying:--I have a great doubt in this wondrous relation of yours, which
you will be pleased to expound it to me.

24. We know this earth to be composed of seven continents only, how
then is it possible for eight brothers, to be the lord of them all, at
the one and same time.

25. The kadamba ascetic said:--It is not inconsistent what I have
related to you, there are many such are seemingly incongruous, but
become evident when they are explained.

26. These eight brothers, having passed their periods of asceticism,
will all of them become lords of the seven continents of the earth, in
their domestic circles. (_i.e._ Each thinks himself as such).

27. All these eight brothers, will remain in their respective houses
on the surface of the earth; and will there become the lords of the
septuple continents, in the manner as you shall now hear from me.

28. Every one of these eight persons had each a wife at home, who were
of unblemished character and persons withal; and resembled the eight
stars or planets of heavens, in the brightness of their bodies. (They
were equally chaste and fair and loving wives also).

29. After these eight brothers have departed, to conduct their
protracted devotion abroad; their love lorn wives became disconsolate
at their separation, which is altogether intolerable to faithful wives.

30. They in their great sorrow of spirit, made painful austerities to
the memory of the absent lords; and conducted a hundred _Chándráyana_
vows and rites, to the satisfaction of the goddess Párvatí. (The
Olympian Juno, and the patroness of chastity).

31. Invisibly the goddess appeared to them, and spake her words to them
separately in their inner apartments; after each and every one of them
had performed her daily devotion to <the> goddess.

32. The goddess said:--O Child, that hast been long fading away by thy
austerities, like the tender shoot under the scorching sun; now accept
this boon to thy heart’s desire, both for thyself as also for thy
husband.

33. Hearing this voice of the goddess of heaven, the lady Chirantiká,
offered her handfuls of flowers to her, and began to address her prayer
to the goddess, to her heart’s satisfaction.

34. The reserved and close tongued damsel, uttered her words in a slow
flattering voice flushed with joy; and addressed the heavenly goddess,
as the peahen accosts the rising cloud.

35. Chirantiká said:--O goddess, as thou bearest eternal love to
Siva--the god of gods, such is the love I bear also to my husband, O
make him immortal.

36. The goddess replied:--Know, O goodly minded lady, that it is
impossible to gain immortality, from the inflexible decree of destiny,
ever since the creation of the world. No devotion, austerity nor
charity can buy life, ask therefore some other blessing.

37. Chirantiká said:--O goddess! if it be impossible to attain
immortality, then ordain it thus far; that he being dead, his soul may
not depart beyond the confines of this house of his.

38. When the body of my husband, falls dead in this house; then confer
me this boon, that his parted soul may never depart from this place.

39. Be it so, O daughter, that your husband being gone to <the> other
world, you may still continue to be his beloved wife, even after his
demise.

40. Saying so, the goddess Gaurí held her silence in the midst of the
air; as the sound of the clouds is stopped, after its betokening the
welfare of the world.

41. After disappearance of the goddess in air, the husbands of these
ladies returned to them from all sides, and at the lapse of some time
after they had received their desired blessings.

42. Now was there a mutual interview of the wives with their husbands,
and general meeting of the brothers with each other, and with their
friends and relatives.

43. Hear now a wonderful event, which happened to them at this time;
and which presented itself as an obstacle, towards the achievement of
their noble purpose.

44. It was at the time when the brothers were employed in their
devotion, that their parents had gone out with their wives in search
of them, and were wandering about the hermitages of saints, with their
sorrowful hearts.

45. Unmindful of their personal pains and pleasures, for the sake of
the welfare of their sons, they intended to see the village of Kalapa,
which lay on their way.

46. Passing by the village of _munis_ or saints, they espied on their
way a white man of short stature, with grey and erect hairs on his
head, and his body bedaubed with ashes.

47. Thinking him to be an ordinary old passenger, the parents forgot to
do him due honour, and let the dust of the ground they trod upon, fly
unwarily to his sacred person. This irritated the old passenger, who
thus bespake to him in his ire.

48. You great fool that are going on pilgrimage in company with thy
wife and daughters-in-law; don’t you heed me the sage Durvásas, that
you slight to do me due reverence.

49. For this act of thy negligence, the boons so dearly earned by thy
sons and daughters in law will go for nothing, and will be attained
with their contrary effect.

50. On hearing this malediction the old parents and their daughters
in law, were proceeding to do him reverence, when the ancient sage
disappeared from their sight and vanished in air.

51. At this the parents and their daughters, were greatly dismayed
and disheartened; and returned disappointed to their home, with their
melancholy countenances.

52. Therefore I say, there was not the only inconsistency, in each of
the brothers reigning over the seven continents all at once; but there
were many other odds awaiting upon them as on all human wishes; and
these occurring as thickly one after the other as the sores and ulcers
growing on goitres. (Or pouches on the throat).

53. There are as many oddities and vanities, always occurring in the
wishes, and aerial castles of the vacuous mind; as the numberless
portents and comets and meteors and unnatural sights, are seen to
appear in the empty sky.




