CHAPTER CLXXX.

BRAHMA GÍTÁ OR THE STORY ON AUSTERE DEVOTEE.

    Argument:--Vasishtha’s elucidation of the story of Kunda-danta at
    the request of Ráma.


Ráma rejoined:--I pray you sir, to remove the shade of a doubt from my
mind, as the sunshine dispels the darkness from before it; in order to
bring to light whatever is dark and obscure in the world.

2. I beheld once a self-governed ascetic, who came to the seminary,
where I was sitting amidst the synod of the sages and learned men, and
conversing on subjects of theology and divinity.

3. He was a learned Bráhman, and of a godly appearance; he came from
the land of the Videhas or the Mithilas, and was practiced in religious
austerities, and was as unbearable in the lustre of his person as the
terrific seer Durvásas self.

4. On entering the assembly, he made his obeisance to the illustrious
persons; when we also saluted him in return and advanced his seat for
him to sit down.

5. The Bráhman being well seated, I picked up many discourses with
him from the Vedánta, Sánkhya, and Siddhánta philosophy, and when his
weariness was gone, I made this question to him, saying:--

6. Sir, you seem to be tired with your long journey to this place,
please tell me, O eloquent sir, from where you have started here today.

7. The Bráhman replied:--so it is, O fortunate prince, I have taken
great pains to come up to this place; and now hear me to tell you the
reason, that brings me hither to you.

8. There is a district here, known by the name of Vaideha, it is
equally populous as well as prosperous in all respects; and is a
resemblance of its semblance of the heavenly paradise.

9. There I was born and educated, and held my residence at the same
place; and named as Kundadanta from the whiteness of my teeth, bearing
resemblance to the buds of _Kunda_ flowers.

10. I resigned afterwards my worldly concerns, and betook myself to
travel far and wide about this earth; and resorted to the asylums of
holy sages and saints, and to the shrines of gods to rest from my
fatigue.

11. I retired next to <a> sacred mountain, where I sat silent for a
long period, practicing my devotional austerities.

12. There I found a desert, which was devoid of grassy pastures and
woody trees; and where the light of the sun and the shade of night,
reigned by turns, as it was the open sky on earth.

13. There is in the midst of it a branching tree, with little of its
verdant leaves and leaf-lets; and the luminous sun dispensed his gentle
beams, from the upper sky and through cooling foliage.

14. There hung suspended under one of its boughs, a man of a holy mien;
who blazed as the resplendent sun pendent in the open air, by the cords
of his wide extending beams and radiating rays.

15. His feet were tied upwards by a clotted cord of _munja_ grass, and
his head hung downward towards the ground beneath; and this gave him
the appearance of an offshoot of the banian tree rooted in the earth
below.

16. Having then after a while, approached to him at that place, I saw
him to have his two folded palms affixed to his breast (as if he was
intent upon the meditation of the lord, with the devoutness of his
heart).

17. Advancing nearer to the body of the Bráhman, I found it to be alive
by its respiration, and from its having the feeling of touch, and the
perception of heat and cold, and that of the breeze and change of
weather.

18. Afterwards I employed myself solely, in my attendance on that
devout personage only; and underwent all the rigours of the sun and
seasons, until I was received into his confidence.

19. I then asked him saying; who art thou lord, that hast thus
betaken thyself to this sort of painful devotion; say, O long sighted
seer, what is the aim and object of this thy protracted state of
self-mortification at the peril-expense of thy precious life.

20. He then replied to my question saying:--Tell me first O devotee,
what is the object of thy devotion and those of all other persons,
that are devoted to the particular objects of their pursuit. (So it is
useless to inquire into the aim and object of another, when there is no
body without his particular end in view).

21. This he said as introductory to his speech to me; but being pressed
further by my importunate inquiries, he gave the following answer to my
questions.

22. I was born, said he, at Mathura where I grew up from childhood to
youth in the house of my father; and acquired my knowledge of philology
and the arts in course of this time.

23. I then learnt this also, that princes are the receptacles of all
pleasures and enjoyments, and that it is the early bloom of youth, that
is capable of the fruitions of life.

24. Since then I began to reflect on my being the possessor of the
seven continents of the earth; and to foster the ardent expectation, of
the gratification of all my desires of this life.

25. It is for this purpose that I have come to this place, and have
employed myself in this state of devotion, for attainment of objects of
my desire.

26. Therefore, O thou disinterested and self offered friend of mine, do
thou now return to thy own country and desired abode; and leave me to
remain in this state, with my firm resolution for the accomplishment of
my desired object.

27. Being thus bid by him to depart from that place, listen you now to
what I replied unto him; this you will wonder at its rehearsal, and the
wise will be gladdened in their hearts to learn.

28. I addressed him saying:--O holy saint, let me remain here at thy
service, and underneath this holy tree, until you obtain the desired
boon of your devotion.

29. On my saying so, the meek minded devotee, remained as cool and
quiet as a block of stone, and with his closed eye lids, he persisted
in his dormancy as a dead body, without any motion in his outer limbs.

30. I too continued to stay before him, as quiet and quiescent as a
block of wood, and endured without shrinking the rigours of the climate
and seasons, for full six months at that spot.

31. I saw at one time, effulgent as the blazing sun, descending from
the solar orb, and then standing in presence of the devotee.

32. As this deific personage was adored mentally by the ascetic, and by
bodily prostration of myself; he uttered his words, in a tone as sweet
as the exudation of ambrosial sweetness.

33. He said: O painstaking Bráhman, that hast long been pendent on
the projected bough of this branching banian tree, suspend thy severe
austerities, and accept thy desired boon, which I am ready to confer on
thee.

34. Thou shalt as thou wishest, reign over the seven oceans and
continents of this earth; and with this present body, thou shalt rule
over it, for seven thousand years.

35. In this manner did this secondary sun, give his blessing to the
devout ascetic; and was prepared to plunge into the bosom of the ocean
out of which he rose of himself. (The sun is usually said to rise from
and set in the mountain top, but he is made to rise out of and sink in
the sea, according to the Grecian mythology).

36. The Deity having departed, I accosted the ascetic hanging below
the branch, and said to him I witnessed to day what I had heard from
before, that the gods are ever propitious to their suppliants.

37. Now O Bráhman, as you have gained the object of your desire, it is
desirable that you should give up your austerity, and pursue the proper
callings and the course of your life.

38. He having assented to my proposal, I ascended on the tree and
loosened his feet therefrom; as they let loose the feet of an elephant
from the fetters tied to its prop and post.

39. Having then bathed himself, he made his offerings with his pure
hands for the remission of his sins; and then with the fruits which he
was fortunate to pluck from the tree, he broke the fast of his long
lent.

40. It was by virtue of his meritorious devotion, that we obtained
plenty of the delicious fruits of that holy tree; where upon we
refreshed ourselves, and subsisted for three days.

41. Thus this Bráhman being desirous of obtaining the sovereignity of
the earth, consisting of the septuple continents girt by the seven
oceans all around, made his painful maceration with his uplifted feet
and downward head, until he obtained desired boon from the god of day,
and refreshed himself for three days at the spot, till at last both of
us set out on our journey towards the city of Mathurá.




