CHAPTER CLXXXXVI.

STORY OF A WOOD-CUTTER AND HIS GEM.

    Argument:--Illustration of the efficacy of knowledge derived from
    Books and Preceptors. In the story of the Wood-cutter, and his
    obtaining a precious Gem.


Válmíki relates:--After the lotus-eyed Ráma, had said these words, he
fell into a trance and remained silent, with his mind reposing in the
state of supreme bliss. (The ecstatic state of rapture and transport of
the devout).

2. He felt himself supremely blest at his repose in the Supreme spirit,
and then awaking after a while from his holy trance, he wistfully asked
his sagely preceptor, saying:--

3. Ráma said:--O Venerable sir, that art the dispeller of my doubts, as
the clear autumn is the scatterer of dark clouds; that the doubt which
had so long rankled in my breast, has at last quite set at rest.

4. I find this knowledge of mine to be the best and greatest of all,
and capable of saving me from the boisterous ocean of this world; it
transcends all other doctrines, which are mere verbiology to ensnare
the heedless minds of men.

5. If all this is certainly the very Brahma, and our consciousness of
him; then O Venerable sir, he must be unspeakable and inexpressible in
words, even by the most learned and wisest of men.

6. Remaining thus in the meditation of the knowable One, and without
any desire in our minds of any earthly good; we are enabled to attain
the consciousness of our highest bliss (The Turíya state), which is
unattainable by learning and unutterable in words. (The divine state is
only known <to> one’s self, but never to be spoken or expressed).

7. How can this certain and invariable state of felicity, be obtained
from the dogmas of the sástras; which are at variance with each other,
and are employed in the enumeration of their several categories. (The
ever varying sástras cannot give us any knowledge of this invariable
felicity).

8. We can gain no true knowledge from the tenets of the different
sástras, that are <at> best but contradictory of one another; it is
therefore in vain to expect any benefit from them, that are based upon
mere theories of our pretended leaders.

9. Tell me therefore, O Venerable sir, whether it is of any good to us,
to learn the doctrines of the sástras or attend to the teaching of our
preceptors (when our true knowledge is derived from within ourselves:
_i.e._ from our intuition, self-consciousness and our personal
experiences).

10. Vasishtha replied:--So it is, O mighty armed Ráma, the sástras
are not the means to divine knowledge; those being profuse in wordy
torrents, and this beyond the reach of words.

11. Yet hear me to tell you, O thou best of Raghu’s race, how the
dictates of the sástras and the lectures of your preceptors, are of
some avail towards the improvement of your understanding.

12. There lived in a certain place some wood-cutters, who had been ever
unfortunate and miserable in this lives (or who were miserably poor
all their lives). They pined and faded away in their poverty, like the
withering trees in summer heat.

13. Excessive poverty made them cover themselves with patched up rags,
and they were as emaciated in their despair as the fading lotus flowers
for want of their natal water.

14. Being parched by famine, and despairing of their lives; they only
thought of the means of filling their bellies.

15. In this state of their distress and despondence, one thought
gleamed in their minds; and it was to carry the woods day by day to the
town, and to live upon the profits of their sale as fuel.

16. Thus determined they went to the forest to fell down the woods,
because any plan that is hit upon in distress, is best to be availed
of, for the preservation of life.

17. Thus they continued daily to go to the forest to fell the woods,
and fetch them to the town for sale; and to fill their bellies and
support their bodies with the sale proceeds thereof.

18. It happened that the skirts of the forest whither they went, were
full of woods with hordes of treasures, consisting of gold and precious
gems, lying hidden under the trees, and also exposed to view.

19. It then turned out that some of the log-bearers, happened by their
good luck to espy the brilliant gems, which they took with them to
their homes from the forest.

20. Some saw the valuable sandalwood trees, and others beheld beautiful
flowers in some place; some found fruit trees somewhere, all which they
took and sold for their food and livelihood.

21. Some men of dull understanding, slighted all these goods; and kept
collecting the blocks of wood, which they bore to the way side of the
forest, and there sold at trifling prices. (Nothing is valued at home
unless it is taken to a distance).

22. Among all these wood men, who were employed in common in collection
of woods, some of them happened by their good luck, to find some
precious gems there, which set them at ease for every care.

23. Thus amongst all of these that had been toiling and moiling in the
same field of labour; now it happened to obtain their desired boon the
Philosopher’s gem. (That converts all things to gold, and is desired by
all but found by few).

24. Now they having obtained the desirable gem, which bestowed upon
them all the blessings of affluence and prosperity; they became
preeminently happy with their fortune, and remained quite content in
the very woods.

25. So the seekers and sellers of worthless wooden blocks, being
gainers of the all bounteous gem of their heart’s desire (Chintámani);
remained happily with themselves, as the gods dwelling together in
harmony in the Elysian field.

26. Thus the Kir woodmen, having obtained their best gains of what
forms the pith and gist of every good in the main, remained in quiet
and quite content in themselves, and passed their days without any
fear or grief, in the enjoyment of their everlasting equanimity and
felicity.

27. This world is compared to the wilderness, and all its busy people
are as the day-labouring Kiri foresters, daily toiling and moiling in
their hard work, for their help of daily bread. Some amongst them are
happy to find the precious treasure of true knowledge, which gives them
the real bliss of life and lasting peace of mind.




