CHAPTER CLXVIII.

STORY OF THE HEWN STATUE OR CARVED IMAGE.

    Argument:--The false and ignorant Attribution of creation, to the
    increate and self-manifest world.


Vasishtha continued:--As the unconscious tree, displays various forms
in its branches; so doth the unconcerned spirit of God, exhibit the
airy semblance of creation in air.

2. And as the ocean describes the whirlpools, insensibly upon its
surface; so doth the spirit of God, exhibit this rotatory worlds
unconcernedly, on the surface of its own vacuum, and as they are seen
by all.

3. The Lord gives also to the sensible part of his creation, their
internal faculties of the mind, understanding and egoism, as also many
other powers under different appellations.

4. The phenomenal world is the production of the insensible Intellect,
whose volitive faculties are as loose as the rolling eddies of rivers
and seas.

5. The mind and understanding and all mental faculties, proceed from
the Divine Intellect; in the same manner as the whirlpools and eddies,
and waves and surges rise on the surface of the sea.

6. As a picture is nothing except its canvas, so the world which is no
more than a painting, is drawn on the substratum of the intellect; and
this is a vacuous substance, with the lustre of the world in it.

7. What I have said before of the insensibility of the tree and sea,
in the production of the branches and whirlpools by them; the same
instance applies to Intellect also, which shows the creation rising in
its vacuity, not by an act of its intention or will, but by ordinance
of fate, which governs all things, (and rules over Jove himself). This
is the doctrine of fatalism.

8. And as a tree exhibits its various forms, receiving the several
names of a plant, a shrub, a creeper &c.; so doth the intellect display
its many features, like its flowers &c., and called by the different
appellations of earth, air, water &c.

9. And as the branches and leaves of a tree, are not different from the
tree itself; so the productions of the great Intellect, are no other
than its very substance (or are essentially the same with itself).

10. And as there are many things, made of the substance of a tree,
bearing different names to themselves; so the productions of the
Intellect, and the offspring of a living being, pass under several
forms and appellations (of boy, girl, infant, adult and the like).

11. The offshoots of the Intellect are all these creatures, which grow
in and rise from the mind (of their own spontaniety); they appear to be
the works of the mind as their cause, but are no better than the dreams
(arising of themselves in the mind).

12. Should you say, why these conceptions of creation rise in vain in
the mind (if the creation is nothing in substance); I answer that they
rise in the manner of dreams in the state of sleeping, which you cannot
deny to enjoy. (The thoughts of creation like those of imagination and
the conception in our dreaming, are not unattended by a certain degree
of delight, during the time of our enjoyment of them. Gloss).

13. As the tree displays various forms in the productions, and the
imagination presents different shapes to our mental sights; so the
intellect is employed in realizing many such creations in empty air.

14. As the odours of flowers fly about invisible in the open air, and
as pulsation abides inherent in the wind; so the intellectual powers,
are intrinsic in the very nature of the soul.

15. These creations likewise are ingrained in the Divine spirit, as
fragrance is inborn in flowers and vacuity is ingenite in the air; and
as vacillation and velocity are innate in the winds.

16. As the air, wind and the flower, are receptacle of inanity,
oscillation and odours respectively; so the Intellect is container of
creation, although it is literally but an empty vacuity.

17. Vacuity is no other than vacuum itself, as fluidity is not separate
from liquids; fragrance is as inseparable from flowers, as pulsation is
never to be the disjoined from the wind.

18. Heat is not disparate from fire, nor is coldness apart from snow;
know thus the world to be no way different nor disengaged from the
transparence of the vacuous Intellect.

19. In the beginning, the Divine Intellect sees the creation appear
in itself, as a dream rising in the mind; thus the world having no
extraneous cause, and being subjective to the Intellect (as derived
from within itself); is no way a heterogeneous mass or different from
the Divine mind.

20. The instance of the dream is the best illustration of creation, and
you can judge it well by the nature of the dream you dream every night;
say what is there substantial in it, beside its being essential to the
universal soul.

21. The dream is not the effect of any impression in the mind, nor the
result of remembrances stored in the memory; because it shows us many
sights, unseen and unthought of before; say therefore how these come to
pass.

22. If what is seen in a dream, comes to present itself at the time of
our remembrance of the dream?

23. Therefore these revolving worlds; are as the rotatory whirlpools
(in the wide ocean of the infinite mind); they are the fortuitous
appearances of chance, and whatever occurs in the mind, passes
afterwards for its dreams.

24. The creations being insensibly produced from the Divine Mind,
like the waves and whirlpools in the ocean; receives its stability
and continuity afterwards, in the manner of the continuation of the
whirling waters and ever rolling billows.

25. Whatever is born without its cause, is equal to the unborn; because
the unborn are forever similar to those, which have no cause for their
birth.

26. As the precious gems growing insensibly of themselves, have their
lustre inherent in them; and as this brilliance is no substance
or anything real at all, so the appearance of the world has no
substantiality of itself.

27. Some how or other, the world has its rise, like the wave or eddy
in a river; and then it continues to go on as the continuous course of
the stream.

28. There are numberless worlds of intellectual forms, gliding in the
vast vacuity of the Intellect; and passing as aerial dreams without any
cause whatsoever.

29. All these again become causes and productive of others, and they
<are> all of vacuous forms including even the great Brahmá and the gods
and angels (all of whom are aerial beings, and others of the same kind).

30. All that is born in and produced from void, are null and void also;
they grow in the void or air, and return also into vacuity.

31. It is the vacuum that appears as the _plenum_, as in the instance
of an empty dream seeming as something; the man that denies his own
percipience of it, is no better than a boor or brute.

32. The unreal appearing as real, is the fabrication of error and
ignorance; but the spiritualist who knows the truth, views the world as
the wondrous display of the Divine Mind and falsification.

33. It is the longstanding and deep rooted prejudice, that produces the
erroneous conceptions of the creation and destruction of the world; it
is wisdom to know it in its true light, and foolishness to take the
wrong view of it.

34. The light of the Divine spirit, being once seen in this causeless
void of the visible world, it continues for ever before our sight;
as the dream that we see in our vacant minds in sleep, remains ever
afterwards in our remembrance.

35. It happens that the intellect comes to present, the adventitious
appearance of the world to our minds; in the same manner, as the sea
shows its whirls and waves to our sight, of its own nature.

36. Such is the nature of the Intellect also, that it shows itself in
this manner (as the sea); and exhibits the revolving worlds, in its own
etherial essence only (of its own accord).

37. Then the aerial Intellect, by a retrospective view in itself,
invented certain worlds afterwards, significant of the mental
and intellectual powers as well as of material elements and their
properties.

38. Ráma said:--If it is so sir, that all these powers are the
spontaneous growth of chance, how can the mental power of memory be
produced on a sudden, when it is well known to be the product of
remembrance or former impressions in the mind. Please explain me this.

39. Vasishtha replied:--Hear me Ráma, and I will destroy your doubt, as
the lion kills an elephant; and will establish the one invariable unity
as the broad day light of the sun.

40. There is an only universal soul, that is invisible amidst the
vacuum of his Intellect; as the uncarved doll remains unseen, in the
wood of every forest tree. (All things are contained in the Divine
soul, as the future images in blocks of wood and stone. Aristotle,
Addison).

41. We see the carpenter that carves out the puppet, from the wood
of the tree (and the mason who hues out the statue from the block of
stone); but we know not the soul, which chisels out the figure of the
world from the great bulk of Instinct.

42. The statue does not appear in the rugged block, unless and until
it <is> hewn out by the skill of carver, so the hidden world does not
make its appearance in the Intellect, till it is brought to view by the
ingenuity of the Mind (the universal architect).

43. The uncarved body of the world (_Corpus-mundi_), does yet appear
<in> its aeriform state; which is original and genuine form in the
Divine Intellect (until <it> is moulded in this its fictitious shape by
creative mind).

44. In the beginning of creation, the inventive Intellect forms of its
natural originality, the concept of the future world; appearing as an
airy dream in the sight of the soul (and then the imaginative mind
frames it according to its conceit in various forms).

45. The vacuous Intellect conceives in its empty bosom, the airy ideal
of the world; as if it were a toy or doll gliding of itself in itself.

46. It conceives itself as the essential part of the great Brahma, and
the seed of the mundane system; and then imagines itself as the source
of life and the living soul, and the receptacle of egoism.

47. It imagines itself as the understanding and the mind also; and to
be the reservoir of space and time. It deems itself as the root of the
knowledge of I, thou, he, and others, and as the quintessence of the
quintuple elements.

48. It sees in itself the congeries of the inward and outward senses,
as also of the eight faculties of the mind; and both the spiritual as
well as the elemental bodies contained in itself.

49. It thinks itself as the great trinity, consisting of the three
persons of Brahmá, Vishnu, and Siva; and sees the sun, moon and stars
all in itself. It considers itself as the whole creation and the
interior and exterior part of everything.

50. All these being the imaginary creations of the Intellect; there
is nothing whatever beside itself; but it is quite transparent in its
essence, there is no concrete matter in it; and neither remembrance
of gross materials is ever attached to it, nor any duality whatsoever
subsisting in the unity of its nature.

51. The world is a causeless, uncaused and increate thing; and a
nothing at all in reality; its creation is a dream, and its appearance,
is as that of a delusive shadow in empty air.

52. It appears as a phantom in vacuum, and as an intelligence in the
Intellect; it is intelligible as it is, and that is in the sense of a
nihility.

53. What is the remembrance of a thing, any more than the dream of
something, which is nothing in reality; and what is time of which we
have no conception, except it be an imagination or devise of the mind
in empty air.

54. What is contained in the inside of the compact intellect, the
very same appears on the outside of it; but in reality there is no
substantiality in the exterior object of sight, as there is naught in
the interior object of thought; all which are but the glitterings of
the Intellect.

55. Whatever issues out of the bodiless and nameless something, which
is forever quiescent and calm in its nature; are deemed as causeless
and uncaused productions, appearing before the blinded sight.

56. Know therefore that this world, is to be viewed in the same
intellectual light; as you see the supreme Brahma himself; and know it
to be the very aerial castle of your dream, as it is represented in the
vacuous space of your mind in your sleeping state.

57. There is no such thing, as the visible or phenomenal world at any
time; where can you find any dust on the watery surface of the sea; and
how can you see anything visible, in the invisible spirit of Brahma.

58. If the world should appear as anything at all to your sight, you
must view it as the manifestation of God himself, in his unthinkable
and incomprehensible nature. (Nature is the body of God).

59. The world is full of the glory of God, from the fullness of Divine
glory; nor is the one derived from the other; but a full representation
of Divine splendour on the face of nature.

60. Though I have been repeatedly giving these lectures, yet the
deluded minds of men are far from receiving them; they believe the
world of their dream as if it were in waking, and knowing even its
unreality they will never get rid of their rooted prejudice.




