CHAPTER CCXIII.

NARRATION OF RÁMA’S PRIOR PUPILAGE UNDER VASISHTHA.

    Argument:--Vasishtha’s relation of a lecture delivered to Ráma in
    a former birth.


Vasishtha continued:--O Ráma, the destroyer of thy enemies, this very
question that you have asked me today, was put to me once before, when
you had been a pupil under my discipline.

2. In a former age, there was once this spiritual discourse betwixt
ourselves, when you had been a pupil of mine in a certain forest
(according to Metempsychosis), the present is but a repetition of a
past life. The wheel of life rolls and revolves incessantly from age to
age.

3. As I sat there as your preceptor, and your sitting in my presence as
my pupil; you then had put this very question to me, with the gravity
of your understanding.

4. The Pupil said:--You sir that know all things, now deign to remove
this doubt and difficulty of mine, regarding what things die and perish
at the great deluge, and what things are not liable to destruction.

5. The Preceptor replied saying:--Know my son, that the relics of all
things are utterly destroyed at the last deluge; as your thickening
dreams disappear in your sound sleep.

6. The hills and rocks on all the ten sides of the earth, are all
destroyed without any distinction, and of the actions of men and
routine of their business, there remains nothing behind.

7. All beings are destroyed at the end, and the great void (that is the
receptacle of all bodies), becomes a perfect void.

8. The gods Brahmá, Vishnu, Indra, Rudra and others, that are the prime
causes of the causal agencies of this world, do all become extinct at
the end of the world, and there remains no vestige of them at last.

9. There remains only the great vacuity of the divine intellect, which
is ever existent and undecaying; and this appears from the divine
spirits remaining as the witness both of annihilations as also of the
regeneration of the past and future worlds.

10. The entity never becomes a non-entity, nor the non-entity never
comes to be an entity; tell me therefore where the past world
disappears, and from whence the future world comes to existence.

11. The Preceptor replied:--This world, my boy, is not wholly destroyed
nor does it become altogether extinct; and it is quite true that
nothing ever goes to nothing, nor does anything, nor does anything
ever proceed from a nihility.

12. That which is an entity in reality, never becomes a non-entity in
anywise, and how can that which is inexistent of itself, ever become a
nil and null afterwards (Ex nihilo nihil fit &c.).

13. Where is water to be had in the mirage, and when are the two
seeming moons to be seen in the sky; where are the delusive hairs found
to be floating in the air, and when does a false conception prove to be
true. (So the seeming world is a nullity, although it appears awhile as
something to our deluded sight).

14. Know my son, all these phenomenals to be mere delusions, and
without any reality in them; they appear as cities and towns in our
dreams, and are ever obtrusive on us.

15. They are however liable to vanish away quite out of our sight at
last, as our dreams disappear upon our waking, and as our waking scenes
are lost and hid under the veil of our sleep.

16. As we know nothing where the city of our dreaming, vanishes away at
last upon our waking; so we are quite ignorant about that chaotic void,
wherein the universe submerges upon its exit.

17. The Pupil rejoined:--If the world is a nullity as you say, then
sir, be pleased to tell what is it that thus appears to and disappears
from us by turns; and what is that vacuous intellect which presents
this extensive view before us; as also how does the void present its
reflexion of the plenum and to what purpose.

18. The Preceptor replied:--It is the vacuous sphere of the intellect,
my boy, that thus shines with its transparency; and it is this
reflexion of it which is called the world, which is no other than this.

19. It is the reflexion of the widely extended substance of the great
void of the intellect; and this apparently solid figure of it, is no
other than the same transpicuous form of that intellect. (So says the
sruti, Brahmá reflects his twofold forms to us, the one opaque and seen
with our naked eye, and the other translucent and viewed by our mental
sight).

20. The incorporeal Brahmá like all corporeal bodies, presents both
a fair as well as a dark complexion (the one being his clear or
intellectual form seen by the clear sighted, and the other his hazy
figure viewed by gross understandings). He also discloses himself some
times and closes at another, which cause the creation and annihilation
of the world. (Manu calls it the waking and sleeping of God, and others
the evolution and involution of the divine spirit).

21. The clearness of the divine spirit, ever remains the same and
unaltered, both before and after the creation and its dissolution;
as a fountain of limpid waters is always clear, whether it reflects
the shadows of its bordering arbours or not. (No change in nature can
affect the spirit of God).

22. As a man remains unchanged in his sleep, whether he be dreaming
or enjoying his sound rest; so the spirit continues alike in its
intellect, whether it is in the act of creation or annihilation.

23. As the ideal world appears to be calm and quiet, both in the dream
of the dreamer, as well as in the sound sleep of the sleeper; so this
visible world of ours is ever viewed in its calmness, in the tranquil
spirit of the Lord and of the contemplative saint.

24. Hence I do not recognize the existence of a vacuum or sky, anywhere
and independent of our soul; nor can we expect the same sphere
appearing in the souls of others, as it does in ours according to our
view of it.

25. If we can perceive the light of our intellect, even at the point
of our death, and disappearance of the world from us; why should we
not conceive the same to be the case with others, and that they do not
perceive the same intellectual light also in their consciousness. (This
is an evidence of the immortality in our souls).

26. The Pupil rejoined:--If such is the case, that others who are
awake, have the same view of the world, as the dreamer has in his
dream; then I believe that all those that are living, have the same
view of the world as those that are dying, (_i.e._ A mere faint idea of
it and not a substantial one).

27. The preceptor replied:--So it is, O my intelligent lad, the world
then does not appear in its real form (of a solid body to the dreamer
and the dying), as it appears as a reality to the intellects of others
(that are waking and living). Idealism presents the true picture of the
world.

28. The world does not appear and is not anything, and nothing that is
real or has any reality in it; it is a mere reflexion of the intellect,
and there can be no reality in our false sight of it.

29. It is apparent everywhere, and seems to be in every way at all
times; but it does not exist <in reality> in anyway, anywhere or at
anytime.

30. And because it is both the real and unreal form of Brahma, it
is both a reality as well as unreality likewise; and being of the
intellectual void, is never destructible nor ever destroyed.

31. The vacuous entity of the supreme intellect, which exhibits the
phenomena of creation and its destruction (in repeated rotation),
abounds with our misery only, if we attend to its occurrences with any
degree of concern; but it does not affect us at all, if we can but
remain altogether unconcerned with its casualties.

32. All these appearances exist every where at all times, in the same
manner as they appear to the ignorant; but in truth, they appear in no
where, in any manner or at any time to the wise and learned (who know
the nature of worldly delusions).

33. It is the one self-same Being that appears as a god in one place,
and as a pot or clod in another. Here he is seen as a hill and there as
a rill or dale; He is an arbour here, of furze or bush there, and the
spreading grass in another. He is the moving and movable some where and
the unmoving and unmovably else where; and He is the fire and all other
elements also everywhere.

34. He is entity and nonentity, and both vacuity and solidity also; He
is action and duration, and the earth and sky likewise. He is the being
and not being, and their growth and their destruction likewise, and He
is good as well as the evil, that attends on one and forefends another.

35. There is nothing that is not He, who though one is always all
things in all places; He is in and out of everything, and extends
along the beginning, middle and end of all things. He is eternity and
duration and the three divisions of time also; (_i.e._ the present,
past and future, called the triple time).

36. He is all, and existent in all things, in all places and times; and
yet He is not the All, and neither existing with anything at any time
or place (but is but dimly seen in these His lowest works. Milton).

37. Know now, Ráma, that Brahma being the universal soul, He is all
in all places and times; and because Brahma is the conscious soul, He
exhibits all things to our consciousness, as if they were images in our
dreams or the creatures of our imagination. (_i.e._ A corporeal God
only can form a formal and plastic world; but the intellectual soul of
God, can make only a formless and immaterial creation, as we see in our
dream and phantasies).

38. The maker of the terrene world, must have an earthly body; and the
framer of the woody arbours must have a wooden frame, but the Lord God
of all, has neither a corporeal body nor a material shape. (Thus they
frame a fire, air and water God, but the true God is none of these
elements).

39. Others make a mountain God as the Lord of all; and some even make
and worship a human figure as the supreme God (and so are all the
heathen gods represented in human figures).

40. Some make a picture the Lord and maker of all; and others make some
image as such, and worship it as the great God of all.

41. But there is only one supreme Being, who is the maker, supporter
and the Lord God of all others; He is without beginning and end, and
the Lord Brahma, whose spirit upholds and supports all others.

42. A straw made image or an earthen pot, is attributed with divine
powers, and represented as the Most high; and so the formless God is
shown in frail images, which are made and destroyed by human hands.

43. An outward object is made the actor and enjoyer of acts; but the
wise know intelligence only, as the active and passive agent of all
actions.

44. But the truly wise (_i.e._ the vacuist) acknowledges no active nor
passive agent of creation; although many among the wise (_i.e._ the
Páshupatas) recognize one God alone, as the only actor, and enjoyer of
all.

45. All these views may be probable, and well apply to the most high,
who is the sole object of all these theories; and as there is nothing,
which can be positively affirmed or denied of Him. (Here the vacuist
Vasishtha is a tolerator of all faiths, as suited to the capacities of
the different understanding of men).

46. All these believers look to their desired objects, as manifest to
their view in the vacuous space of their intellects, and by viewing the
whole world in themselves, they remain undecayed at all times.

47. All visibles and all laws and prohibitions, together with all
desires and designs of men; are confined with their knowledge of them
in themselves. Hence those that are true to their faiths, and firm
in the observance of their duties and performance of their acts, are
verily of the nature of the divine soul, by their viewing all nature in
themselves.

48. This very doctrine was inculcated to before, when you had been a
pupil under my preceptorship; but as you could not fully comprehend
it then, you are doomed to another birth, to learn it again from me.
(Vasishtha means to say that he is immortal, though Ráma may have his
transmigration in many incarnations).

49. The world representing the longsome dark and dreary winter night,
presents the pure light of knowledge, shining with the serene and
cooling beams of the autumnal lunar disk; now O Ráma! as you <are>
edified by your pure intelligence, shake off the dross of dull
ignorance from you, and continue in the discharge of your duties, as
they have lineally descended to you and to your royal race.

50. Do you remain released from your attachment, to all things of this
temporal world; and relying solely in the One supreme and universal
soul, whose pure nature is perceptible throughout all nature; then be
as lucid as the pellucid sky, with the peace of your mind and transport
of your soul, and learn to rule your realm with justice and equity.




