CHAPTER CLXXXIX.

ON THE UNITY OF THE DIVINE SPIRIT.

    Argument:--Unity of the impersonal and personal _spirit treated_;
    and the materiality of the living soul refuted.


Vasishtha continued:--This spiritual body (or the personal spirit),
as that of Brahma--the primeval creator of all; being possessed of
its volition, comes as by an act of chance and of its own motion, to
think and brood on its thoughts; (which it had derived from the eternal
spirit of Brahma).

2. It continues to remain in the same state, as it is ever conscious of
in itself; and sees of its own nature, this universe exposed before it
as it had in his mind, nor is there and wonder in this.

3. Now this viewer--Brahma, and his viewing and the view of the world,
must either all be false (as there is no duality in nature); or they
must all be true, having the spirit of Brahma at the bottom.

4. Ráma rejoined:--Now sir, please to tell me, how this spiritual and
shadowy sight of the primeval Lord of creation, could be realized in
its solidified state, and reality can there be in the vision of a dream.

5. Vasishtha replied:--The spiritual view is ever apparent by itself
within ourselves; and our continuous and ceaseless sight of it, gives
it the appearance of a solid reality.

6. As the visionary sights of our dreams, come to be realized in times,
by our continuous poring upon them; so doth the spiritual appear
as real, by our constant habit of thinking them as such. (So it is
recorded in the case of King Harischandra of old).

7. The constant thought of the reality of our spiritual body, makes
appear as a real object to our sight; as the constant craving of deer
after water, makes it appear in the mirage of the parched desert before
them.

8. So the vision of this world, has like every other fallacy, misled us
like the poor and parching deer, to the misconception of water in the
mirage; and does this and all other unrealities appear as real ones in
our ignorance.

9. Many spiritual and intellectual objects, like a great many unreal
things, are taken for the material and real, by the avidity of their
desires and ignorant admirers.

10. The impression that I am this, and that one is another, and that
this is mine and that is his; and that these are the hills and skies
about us; are all as erroneous as the conception of reality in our
dreams and false phantoms of the brain.

11. The spiritual body which was at first conceived, by the prime
creator of all--Brahmá, assumed a material form as that of a globe
under his sight. (Meaning the Mundane egg).

12. The living soul of Brahma, being born of the mundane egg in a
corporeal body; forgot or rather forsook to think of its incorporeal
intellectuality, and thought himself as composed of his present
material body only. He looked into it and thought, that this was his
body and the recipient of his soul: (instead of the souls being the
fountain of the body).

13. Then it becomes confined in that body, by its belief of the
unreality as a sober reality; and then it thinks of many things within
itself, and goes on seeking and running after them all. (But the
steady soul is sedate, and has all within itself, without seeking them
elsewhere without).

14. This God then makes many symbolical sounds and forms (invents)
words for names and actions; and at last upon his utterance of the
mystic syllable Om or (on) the Vedas rang out and sang in currents of
verbiage.

15. Then through the medium of those sacred words, the god ordained the
ordinances for the conduct of all mankind; and everything turned to be,
as he wished and thought it to be in his own mind. (Hence Brahmá is
said the creative mind of God).[4]

16. Whatever exists in any manner, the same is the self same Brahmá
itself; and yet no body perceives it as such, owing to the predominant
error of all, of believing the unreal world as a real existence.

17. All the things from the great Brahmá down to all, are but false
appearances as those of dreams and magical show; and yet the spiritual
reality is utterly lost to sight, under the garb of material unreality
(_i.e._ The unreal matter is taken for real spirit).

18. There is nothing as materiality anywhere and at any time; it is the
spiritual only which by our habitual mode of thinking and naming, is
said to be substantial, elemental and material.

19. This our fallacy of materiality, has come to us from our very
source in Brahmá--the creator; who entertained the false idea of the
material world, and transmitted this error even into the minds of the
wise and very great souls.

20. How is it possible, O Ráma, for the intelligent soul, to be thus
confined in a clod of earth, all this must either be an illusory scene,
or a representation of Brahma himself.

21. There can be no other cause of this world, except the eternal
causality of Brahma; who is self-existent, only without any action or
causation of himself; thus the Supreme soul being wholly devoid of
the attributes of cause and effect, what can this world be, but an
extension of the Divine essence?




