CHAPTER CXXX.

ENTERING OF THE STAG INTO THE FIRE.

    Argument:--The stag burnt in the meditation of Vasishtha, and
    turned in its former figure of the Prince.


Válmíki related:--Ráma then asked Vasishtha, to tell him by what means
Vipaschit was released from his brutish shape and restored to his human
form again.

2. Vasishtha said:--The way by which a person has had his rise, is the
only means that conduces to his success, welfare and happiness in life
(and a departure from this course, brings on his ruin).

3. Vipaschit had been a worshipper, and it is by his re-entrance into
the refuge of that deity only; that his changed form of the stag, may
be altered and restored to its former figure, of bright and unalloyed
gold.

4. I will now try the means of his restoration in your presence, as you
may all witness it with your open eyes; and this stag will of itself
enter into the fire before your sight.

5. Válmíki related:--Saying so, the benevolent sage, touched his water
pot with his hand, and muttered his mantras upon it in the proper form
(_i.e._ with fixed attention).

6. He thought intently upon the god of fire, with his flashing flames
all around him; and immediately there sprang a blaze of fire, upon his
reflection on it (in the midst of the royal hall).

7. This was a pure flame, kindled without any coal or fuel, and burning
with a rumbling noise, without emitting any smoke or soot or sloe.

8. Brighter and brighter it burnt in its beauty, and shone as a dome
of gold, by shedding a golden lustre all about; it was as flushing as
the blushing _kinsuka_ blossom, and as glowing as the evening clouds of
heaven.

9. The assembled hosts receded backward, upon beholding the spreading
flame; but the stag flushed with the fervour of its former faith, on
seeing its adored deity manifest before its sight.

10. As it looked on the fire with its ardent desire, he got rid of his
sins, as if they were burnt away by its flames; and then advancing
slowly towards it, he jumped at once amidst the blaze, as a lion
springs aloft on his prey.

11. At this moment, the Muni moved his mind to meditation, and found
the sins of the prince were burnt away from his soul; and then
addressed the god, saying:--

12. O lord, that bearest the sacrificial butter to the celestials,
recall to thy mind the past acts of the prince, in his faith to thee;
and kindly restore him, to his former handsome figure again.

13. As the sage was praying in this manner, he saw the stag to be
released from the flame, and running towards the assembled princes,
with the velocity of an arrow flying towards its butt end or mark.

14. Having entered into the burning fire, he appeared as a flaming
body, and was seen by the assembly to be of a form, as bright as the
appearance of an evening cloud.

15. Thus the stag was changed to the form of a man, before the sight
of the assembled princes; as a spot of cloud is seen to assume another
figure in the face of the bright vault of heaven.

16. It was seen amidst the flame, to assume a figure as that of pure
gold; which afterwards took the form of a man, of handsome shape and
appearance. (So the funeral fire purifies the soul of its impurities,
and gives it a brighter form afterwards).

17. He appeared as the orb of the sun, or as the disc of the moon in
the sky; or as the god Varuna in the waters of the deep, or as the
evening cloud or rising moon.

18. There was the reflexion of the sun in the pupils of his eyes, as
it was reflected on the surface of water, or on a mirror or bright
gem; and the fire of his faith, blazed serenely in the sockets of his
eyeballs.

19. Shortly afterwards this blaze of light disappeared from the court,
as the light of a lamp is blown away by the breath of wind; or as the
tinges of evening clouds vanish in the sky under the shades of night.

20. The man then stood as plainly in the hall, as the idol of a deity
is seen to stand in a dilapidated temple (without its brightness); or
as an actor is seen behind the scene (without his dress).

21. He stood silent holding a rosary on his hand, and having his sacred
thread, hanging down a chain of gold about his neck; he wore a robe of
pure white blanched by the fiery heat; and appeared as the bright moon,
rising before the assembly.

22. On seeing the brightness of his person and attire, the courtiers
all and every one, cried out saying, “O to the lustre”; and because he
was as lustrous as day light, he was named, “Lustre” by all.

23. The courtiers also confirmed it by saying that, because he is as
bright as brightness itself, let him be styled the “bright or Bhása”,
the name that he bore on him ever afterwards.

24. He sat in the hall in his meditative mood, and remembered all the
incidents of his past life and former body.

25. The assembly was struck with wonder, and remained quite motionless
and speechless and absorbed in thought; as Bhása was reflecting in his
mind the adventures of his past life.

26. Then the prince rose from his reverie after a short while, and
advanced towards the assembly, under his newly obtained title of Bhása
or the light.

27. He advanced at first towards Vasishtha, and saluted him with
delight; and then addressed him saying:--“I bow down, sir, before thee,
as the giver of my life and light of knowledge of myself.”

28. Vasishtha raised him by touching his head with his hand; and said:
“May thy protracted ignorance, O prince, dissipate this day and for
ever after”.

29. Victory to Ráma, said Bhása, and bowed down to Dasaratha; who
rising a little from his seat, thus accosted him smilingly and said:--

30. Dasaratha said:--You are welcome, O prince! be seated on this
seat; you have wandered through many difficulties of the world, now
take your rest here.

31. Válmíki related:--Thus accosted by the king, the prince now bearing
the name of Bhása, took his seat on a cushion, after making his
salutation, to the venerable sages Visvámitra and others.

32. Dasaratha exclaimed:--O the pains, that Vipaschit has so long
undergone, under the thraldom of Ignorance; in the manner of a wild
elephant, tied in fetters at his feet by ruthless huntsmen.

33. O to what miseries is man exposed, owing to his want of precise
understanding, and by his false knowledge of the reality of these
worlds, that are seen to be revolving in empty shape.

34. How wondrous are these worlds, so extensive and so remote, which
Vipaschit has traversed out, and how incredible are the pains, through
which he has passed so long.

35. O how wonderful is the nature and glory, of the inane Intellect
of the vacuous spirit of the Supreme, that exhibits in empty air, the
blank thoughts of his all comprehensive mind, as sole and substantial
ones (to the apprehension of ignorant mortals).




