CHAPTER CXXXX.

WORKINGS OF IMAGINATION.

    Argument:--The sage’s situation at the end of the Deluge, and his
    description of the reproduction of creation.


The Huntsman said:--Tell me sir, how a sage as yourself, could be
exposed to that state (of the dream or delusion of the Deluge); and why
were you not delivered from your meditation.

2. The sage replied:--At the end of the Kalpa age, all kinds of beings
meet with their destruction; namely, there is a termination of the
erroneous forms of the worlds, and a cessation of the luminous bodies
in the heaven.

3. Sometimes the dissolution takes place gradually at the end of a
_kalpa_; and at others it comes on all on a sudden, with a simultaneous
turmoil and disorganization on all sides.

4. So when there was an outbreak of waters on every side, and the gods
were repairing to Brahmá the first cause of all; for redress from the
impending danger, they were all swept away by the overflowing tide.

5. Moreover, O forester! know time to be the most mighty destroyer
of all things; and every thing must occur in its time, as it is
predestined at the beginning. (Time devours all things).

6. The time of one’s dissolution being nigh, there ensues a detriment
in the strength, intellect and prowess of everybody not excepting even
the great. (Nothing is of any avail before fate).

7. I have told you also, O fortunate forester! that all that is seen
in a dream is mere dreaming; and nothing of it, comes to take place in
reality herein.

8. The forester responded:--Sir, if the dream is a mere falsity and
error of imagination; then what was the good of your relating all
this, that know well what is good and useful for mankind.

9. The sage replied:--There was much use of my relating all this to
you, O intelligent huntsman, for improvement of your understanding; and
as you have come to know, that the visibles are all as false as the
sights in sleep, you shall now know what is real and true.

10. Now as long as the waters of deluge lasted, I remained seated in
the heart of the said medium, and saw some other false sights in his
dream.

11. I saw the waters of the deluge, to recede to the unknown region
from where they had overflown; and the huge waves disappeared
altogether, as when the winged mountains fled away for fear of the
thunders of Indra. (Who lopped of their pinions of yore. See the legend
in stanza--Book I. Kumára sambhava of Kálidása).

12. I was borne aloft by my good fate to some distant shore, where I
was seated as firmly as upon the elevated peak of a high and solid
mountain.

13. Thence I saw the waters to subside in their basins, and the stars
of heaven shining upon them, like the sparkling particles of their
splashing billows, or as their foaming and floating froths.

14. The reflexions of the stars in water, seemed as the shining gems
in the bosom of the ocean; and the stars that shone above in the
firmament, appeared as the nightly flaming bushes on the tops of
mountains. (There are the medicinal plants that are said to burn by
night. Vide Kumára Sambhava Stanza--Book I.).

15. The firmament studded with lustrous stars, and had the appearance
of an island beaming with gold; and the azure sky seemed wrapt over
with the blue garments of celestial dames.

16. The blue diluvian clouds that floated in the sky, resembled a bed
of cerulean lotuses in the etherial lake; and the lightnings that
flashed in their bosoms, likened the yellow farina of flowers, flying
all about the midway sky.

17. Masses of mountain-like clouds flushed with frost, and poured down
showers of rain on all sides; the floods of the deluge rolled down with
their reflexions, as bearing the huge Kalpa forests in their bosom.

18. Afterwards the basin of the universal ocean was dried up, and
turned to an empty and dry hollow on all around; and the mountain of
the Mandara and Sahya hills, that had been drowned under the waters
were found to be melted down to mud or washed away by the receding
flood.

19. Here the sun and moon were found to be sunk in the slough, and
there the gods Yama and Indra to be hid under the soil; somewhere the
serpents and _takshakas_ were rolling in the mire, and elsewhere the
Kalpa woods lay buried with their tops and branches underneath the mud.

20. In some places the heads and hands of people were scattered over
the ground, and looked like lotus buds and flowers torn from their
stalks and strewn about the bare and barren land.

21. There were the Vidyádhara females drowned up to their necks in the
slime, and crying in their piteous chimes in one place; and there were
the big bodied buffaloes of Yama lying in another, and resembling the
huge bodies of dead elephants appearing in dream. (The buffalo of Yama
is no less bulky than the Airávata elephant of Indra).

22. In some place the bulky body of Garuda, bulged out like the huge
mountain of the gods; and in others the embankments were swept away; as
if they were slashed by the mace of Yama fallen upon the ground.

23. There were the remains of the dead _hansa_ of Brahmá, muddled in
the mire somewhere, and the relics of Indra’s elephant were huddled in
the mud in another place.

24. In the meanwhile I found a flat land in one spot, where I resorted
for rest from my weariness; and was there overtaken by sound sleep,
that insensibility stole upon me.

25. Then waking from my sound sleep, I found myself seated in the heart
of the hunter; and retaining the possession of my sensibility, I was
led by my innate desire to see the similar sights of desolation as
before.

26. I beheld upon my waking, the said flat land to lie in the very
heart of the hunter where I was situated; and was seized with greater
grief and sorrow at my sight of the spectacle. (The reproduction of the
world being but the renovation of our woe, and happy are they who work
no more to the sight).

27. I saw therefrom the rising of the bright and beautiful sun on the
next day; and by means of the solar light, I came to the sight of
the worlds and the sky, of this earth and its hills, which presented
themselves to my view.

28. But I soon found that, the earth and sky, the air and all
its sides, together with the hills and rivers, were all but the
reproduction of my mind (from its previous ideas of them); as the
leaves shoot forth from the trees. (Because the insensible stones, have
no perception of the visibles).

29. Then on seeing the things, as they were exposed to my sight on
the earth; I began to manage with them in a manner as I had somewhat
forgotten their right and proper use. (Reminiscence of the past being
often liable to obliteration).

30. After my birth I passed sixteen years at that spot, and had the
knowledge of this person as my father, and that one as my mother,
and this spot as my dwelling place, and all this knowledge rising
spontaneously from my self-cogitation.

31. I then saw a village and the hermitage of a Bráhman at that place;
and there I beheld a house and found a friend therein, and many more
other places.

32. Thus I remained in the society of my friends, in the village huts
and hamlets; and passed many days and nights, in the states of repeated
watchfulness and returning sleep.

33. Remaining thus in company with these, I came to lose in course of
time the light of the understanding I had attained before, and forgot
myself as one of them by my habitual mode of thinking, as the man
forgot himself to a fish (as it is related before in the story of Dama,
Vyála and Kata).

34. In this manner, I remained as a village Bráhman (or parish-person)
for a long time; relying only in my body as begotten by a Bráhman, and
quite forgetful of other.

35. I believed my material body only to constitute my person, and my
wife alone as my copartner; I understood my desires only to be the
essence of my soul, and thought that riches only were the sole object
of gain in life.

36. I had an old cow only for my treasure, and the greens of my
garden as my only provision; my collections were only the sacred fire
and sacrificial animals, and my utensil an only water pot. (Kines
constituted the wealth of the ancient Indians, as the _pecus_ or sheep
were reckoned as riches by the old Latins; hence _godhana_ means kine
money, as _pancha godhanam_--the value of five cows corresponding with
the _penta pecuniae_ of the Romans).

37. My hopes were as frail as perennial plants, and my conduct the same
with that of other men; and the state of my living was as mean, as of
the mud and mire about my dwelling.

38. I passed my days in pruning and weeding the garden of my greens;
and in performing my daily ablutions, in the rills and rivulets
reckoned as holy by men.

39. I was employed in providing my food and drink, and in procuring the
fuel and cow-dung for fire; and remained entangled in the snare, of
scrutinizing about what was right or wrong for daily observance.

40. In this way a whole century of my life time, passed away at that
place, when it happened on a time that a holy hermit passed by that way
from a great distance, and became my guest in my humble abode.

41. Being welcomed and honoured by me, he entered in my dwelling, and
took his rest after washing and bathing himself. Then after his meal he
sat on his bed, and began to tell his fate at the approach of night.

42. He spoke of many climes and countries, and of many lands and
mountains; and talked of their different customs and manners, which
were pleasant to hear, and related to various subjects.

43. All these, he said, are the display of the One Intellect, which is
infinite and immutable in its nature; and manifests itself in the form
of cosmos, which is for ever present with it as it is now seen to be.

44. Being thus enlightened by him, I was filled as it were with a flood
of light, and remained listening to him with attention, all whatever he
said on this and other subjects.

45. I heard also my own tale from him, and learning that the person
which contained me within its womb, is no less than the body of Virát
himself, I was eager to come out of the same.

46. So long as I was not aware, that its mouth is the only door way for
my exit of that body; I kept moving through it, as if I were wandering
amidst the vast extent of the earth and oceans.

47. I then left that spot, beset as it was by my friends and relations;
and entered into his vital part, in order to make my egress with the
vital breath.

48. Intending then to see both the inside and outside of the Viráta’s
body, in which I resided, I continued to mark well the process of its
outer movements as also of its inner thoughts.

49. I fixed my attention to my consciousness, and remained settled at
my station without changing its spot; and then breathed out with his
breath, as the fragrance of flowers accompanies the wind.

50. The rising with his respiration, I reached the cavity of his mouth;
and mounting afterwards on the vehicle of the wind, I went on forward,
and beheld all that lay before me.

51. I observed there the hermitage of a sage, situated in the grotto of
a mountain at a distance; and found it full with anchorites, and myself
sitting in my _padmásana_ among them. (He saw the sight to which he was
habituated all along his life).

52. These anchorites stood before me as my pupils, and were employed in
their duty of taking care of my person in its state of _anaesthesia_.

53. After a while that man was seen among them, in whose heart I had
been residing; and he appeared as lying flat and at ease upon his back,
after taking some food which he got in the adjacent village.

54. Seeing this wonder I remained quiet, and did not speak any thing
about it to any body waiting upon me; I then re-entered that body for
my own amusement.

55. I got to <the> region of vitality which was situated within the
heart, and was by my lasting desire to see the friends I had before,
and I left behind.

56. As I was looking around, I saw the end of the world approaching
with its direful aspect; and changing the course of nature, together
with the positions of the world.

57. The mountains appeared altered and changed to another state,
the sky presented another face, and the whole world seemed <to> be
dislocated from its place.

58. I could find no trace of my former friends or habitation nor mark
the situation of that tract of land, nor find the direction where it
lay before; all these seemed to be swept away by the winds, nor could I
know where they were taken.

59. I then found the world appearing in another form, and presenting a
sight altogether different from what it had been before, and quite anew
to view.

60. I saw the twelve suns of the twelve signs of the zodiac, shining
all at once and burning in all the quarters of heaven and melting down
the high mountains, like snows and icebergs to water.

61. The volcanic fire spread from mountain to mountain, and the fire of
conflagration flew from forests to forests; the earth was parched with
all the gems in her bowels, so that there remained no vestige of them
save in the memory of men.

62. The seas were dried up, and the earth was full of burning embers
on all sides; and there rose a strong gale, which wafted the ashes all
away.

63. Subterranean, terrestrial and etherial fires, began to issue forth
in flames and flash on all sides; and the face of the whole universe
flushed with a blaze, glistening like the glowing clouds of the evening
sky.

64. I entered amidst this burning sphere, as a flying moth falls into a
flame; and was confined within its cave, as the roving bee is closed
up in the calyx of the shutting lotus, and was quite unscorched and
unscathed by the burning flame.

65. I then flew amidst the flames as freely as air, and flickered as
the flash of fleet lightnings in the cloud; and sometimes hovered over
the burning fire, as the light winged butterfly flies upon the lotus of
the lands (_sthala_ padma).




