CHAPTER CXXXVIII.

THE PERVASION OF THE MIND THROUGHOUT THE UNIVERSE.

    Argument:--The joining of the two souls of the sage and his pupil
    together made them twain, and gave a two fold view of objects:
    but their union in unity made them one, and presented the one and
    same view of things to both the united pair.


The ascetic sage continued:--I then thought of being united with his
consciousness, and breathed out the breath of my life to be joined
with his, as the ripe _mango_ sends forth its flavour, to mix with the
fragrance of lotus flowers.

2. I did not forsake my vital heat (or energy), until I entered into
his intellect; and began with infusing my outward sensations, into the
organs of his external senses.

3. I then attracted my outward sensations, by the internal sensibility
of my heart, and mixed them with those of his, as a drop of oil is
mixed with and diluted in water.

4. As my sensuousness was intermingled with his sensations, I became
sensible of a duplex feeling of all external objects, which appeared in
their reduplicated forms to my senses.

5. All things on all sides seemed to be doubled about me, and there
appeared two suns and two moons to be presented to my sight. So the
heaven and earth appeared in their two fold forms before me.

6. As one face is seen as two in some glasses, so all things presented
their double forms to the mirror of my eyes. And all these biplex
shapes seemed to be as closely united together as the world (_i.e._ the
body and mind).

7. And as the same intellect resides in the form of oil in two sesame
seeds, so I saw the two worlds mixed up together with my intellect
united with his in his body.

8. And though my consciousness was united with his in the same body,
yet it was not wholly assimilated with his (owing to the difference of
our desires); but they view the world respectively, in the different
lights of milk and water (_i.e._ as appearing pleasant to the one and
painful to the other).

9. Yet as I looked awhile into his consciousness, and compared and
measured it with mine; they were both found to be the same thing and of
the self same essence. (Consciousness is joint knowledge of ourselves
in connection with others).

10. My consciousness was joined with his in the same manner, as one
season joins with another (at its end); or as the confluence of two
rivers runs together, and as the smoke mixes with the clouds, or the
wind carries the fragrance of flowers with it.

11. This our consciousness being mixed up together, the double view of
the world now became one; just as the erroneous sight of the two moons
in the sky, is soon changed to one upon aright its right view.

12. Then my power of discernment which was in his person, became finer
and finer without wholly losing itself in his, and resided together in
his very body.

13. Afterwards the faculties of the mind which resided in his breast,
were found to be directed to the observation of external objects; and
to take delight in noticing the occurrences of the day (_i.e._ the
present objects).

14. He being at rest from his weariness, after taking his meal and
drink; felt drowsy and inclined to sleep, as the lotus flower shuts its
petals at nightfall, after sucking the nectarious liquid of the lake.

15. He withdrew his mind from observing occurrences, that circulated
all about the busy scene of the external world; as the setting sun
retrenches his rays from the face of the world, as he goes to take his
rest in the evening.

16. The functions of his senses receded into heart, and the operations
of his mind retired to his brain, and remained hidden therein, like the
members of a tortoise drawn inside its shell.

17. His eyelids were closed, as his heart had shut up; and he remained
as dead as a lifeless block or as a figure in painting or statuary.

18. I also followed the course of his mental faculties, and settled
with them in his mind, and my senses being under the direction of the
mind were reposed in the recess of his heart. (The sensations are said
to pass from their organs, and run through the veins and arteries to
the recess of the heart).

19. Then insensible of all outward perceptions, and their conceptions
too in my mind; I remained with that heat (or spirit) in me, as
sleeping on a soft bed, and perceiving naught but a void all about me.
(This is termed the blissful state of _ánanda-maya_--felicity).

20. And as the breathing of our vital breath, was neither obstructed in
the _aorta_, nor passed with rapidity through the lungs, as it does in
cases of excess in eating and drinking and fatigue, it passed evenly by
its passage of the nostrils.

21. Then our souls remained with the supreme soul in the breast, and
kept the course of the naturally ungovernable mind under subjection (of
the blissful soul).

22. The soul is then employed in its consciousness of supreme bliss
in itself, and takes no notice of the actions of others; and the body
also then rests in perfect blissfulness, in that state of sound sleep.
(Sound sleep of hybernation or hypnotism is the perfect rest of the
body and soul, when undisturbed by dreams).

23. Ráma asked:--Say sir, what does the mind do now in its subjection
under the vital breath, which was the cause of its operations in the
waking state? The mind has no form also beside the breath, how then
does it subsist without the same.

24. Vasishtha replied:--Even so, there is neither the body beside its
being the notion of one’s self; it is the imagination of the mind
alone that makes the body, just as the dream causes the appearance
of a mountain and other things. (There is no existence of the mind
independent of the vital air of breathing. Gloss).

25. So there is not the mind also in absence of its idea or thought of
something; as there is no production of the visible world, for want of
its causes at the beginning of creation. (Therefore the phenomenal
world is only the effect of our previous reminiscence. Gloss).

26. Therefore all these are forms of Brahma, as he is the soul
of all; and the world itself is not otherwise than the image of
God. (Hypothesis of theological Pantheism, that all things are
manifestations of God).

27. The mind and body are both Brahma, to them that know the truth;
though they are otherwise to our knowledge of them, than what they are
in theirs. (The common knowledge of them, is that of Soulism).

28. The manner in which the triple world is Brahma, and how he is the
soul of all these varieties; is as you, O intelligent prince, shall now
hear me to relate unto you.

29. There exists for ever the only pure Intellect (or Intelligence),
which is of the form of infinite vacuum; and it is that alone which
shows itself always in all forms, without being either the world itself
or its visible appearance. (The formless God exhibits all forms).

30. The Lord being omniscient, took upon him the form of hypostasis
of the mind, without forsaking his nature of pure intelligence, and
exemption from disease and decay (which the material body is subject
to).

31. Then as the Lord thought upon the movement of his mind, he assumed
the substantivity of the vital breath upon himself; and know, O Ráma,
that best knowest the knowable, that these are but modalities of the
selfsame being of God.

32. Now as this inflation of the air, appears to be a model form of
the Divine essence; so the sensations and bodily perceptions, and the
entities of space and time, are but various modifications of the same
being.

33. Thus the whole world is entirely the formation of the Divine Mind,
and as this mind is the very intellect of the supreme Brahma; so the
totality of creation is only the expansion of the mind of Brahma
himself.

34. The formless Brahma who is without his beginning and end, who has
no reflexion of himself, and is free from disease and decay, is the
quiet intellect and the only quiescent _Ens_ of Brahma, that was the
whole universe for its body. (Whose body nature is, and God the soul.
Pope).

35. The supreme being <is> omnipotent, and so the mind also retains its
potency every where, though it remains as empty air.

36. The volitive mind is Brahma, which immediately produces in itself,
whatever it wills at any time; and the reproduction of every thing in
the mind, is a truth too well known even to boys.

37. Now behold, O Ráma the almighty power of the mind, which at first
made itself (or became) a living being by its breathing; and then an
intelligent being, by its power of thinking; and next became the living
soul, with its body; it made the three worlds, and became the prime
male in the form of Brahmá; it became embodied from its aerial form,
in the shape of Virát; thus it created every thing in itself of its
own will, as men produce all things in their imagination, and see the
cities of their fancy in dream.




