CHAPTER CCXIV.

DESCRIPTION OF THE GREAT JUBILEE OF THE ASSEMBLY.

    Argument:--Demonstration of the exceeding exultation of the
    audience at the close of the long winded lengthy lecture.


Válmíki related:--As the sage had finished saying these things, or so
far, the celestials sounded their trumpets from heaven, as the clouds
resounded in the rainy skies, with showers of nectarious rain drops (on
the earth below). The face of the sky was whitened on all sides, as by
drifts of snowfalls in hoary winter, and the surface of the earth was
covered by rain drops, dropping like showers of flowers. (The sound of
celestial trumpets, is ever accompanied with or followed by a shower
<of> refreshing rain).

2. The earth appeared to be blessed with prosperity in the beauty of
the flowers, stretching their pistils and peduncles like beauties in
their evening decorations, and sending afar the fragrance of their
farinacious dust, like the perfumery on the persons of fairies, their
outer garniture and inner cool sweetness are verily the gifts of the
gods.

3. The falling flowers of heavenly arbors, dropped down from their
dried boughs, by the rampant and apish hurricane of heaven, are now
vying with the glittering stars, scattered all over the face of the
firmament, and deriding at their grim laughter with their bashful and
blushing smiles.

4. The lowering clouds accompanied with sounds of trumpets, and
drizzling rain drops and falling of flowers (which bore resemblance
to one another); next lighted upon the court hall, like the shadowy
snow fall on Himálaya’s head, and filled the assembly with wonder, and
gaping mouths and staring eyes.

5. The assembly seated in their order, took hold of handfuls of these
heavenly flowers; and poured them upon Vasishtha with their obeisance,
and cast away all their earthly cares and woes with those celestial
offerings to the sage. (Every offering confers and recurs, with an
equivalent blessing to the offerer).

6. The King Dasaratha said:--O wonder! that we are so lightly released
of our cares and woes, in this wide extended vale of miseries of the
world; and that our souls are now lightened of their throws by your
grace, like the heavy clouds lightened of their weight, and floating
lightly at last on Himálayas.

7. We have reached to the goal of our acts, and seen the end of our
miseries of this life; we have fully known the knowable One (that is
only to be known), and have found our entire rest in that supreme state
(by your good grace alone).

8. We have known to rest in the ultimate void in our meditation, and to
get rid of our erroneous thoughts of bodies, by means of our intense
application to the abstract (or Platonic abstraction).

9. It is by our riddance from the coinage and vagaries of our
imagination, and by our escape from the feverish fervour for the sights
of the dreaming world; as also by our ceasing to mistake the shells and
cockles for silver, and by our deliverance from misdeeming ourselves as
dead either in our sleep or dream, (that we may be enabled to the true
knowledge of ourselves &c.).

10. It is by our knowledge of the identity of the wind and its
oscillation, and of the sameness of the water with its fluidity; as
also by our distrust in this talismanic world, and in this fairy land
of our fancy (that we can attain to the knowledge of truth &c.).

11. It must be by our discredit in the magical scenes of this world,
and in the aerial castles of fairies; as also by our mistrust in the
limpid currents of the mirage, and in the aerial groves and double
moons of heaven (that we can come to know the truth).

12. It is no earthquake, if our tottering foot steps should shake and
slip in our drunkenness; nor can we view a ghost in a shadow as boys
do, nor see the braids of hair hanging down from the clouds in heaven.

13. From these and other instances, which you have given for our
instruction; you have sir, at once effaced our credit in the visible
sights of this world.

14. Ráma added:--My ignorance is dispelled, and I have come to the
knowledge of truth by your good grace; and O thou chief of sages,
I acknowledge thee to have brought me to light from my impervious
darkness.

15. I am freed from my doubts, and set to the light of the true
nature of God; and I will now act as thou sayst, in acknowledging the
transpicuous truth (or viewing God as manifest in nature, and not as
hidden under her veil).

16. Remembering and reconsidering thy words, that are so fraught with
ambrosial sweetness and full of delightsome taste; I am filled with
fresh delight, though already satisfied and refreshed by their sense
(_i.e._ the more I think of them, the happier I seem to feel my-self).

17. I have nothing to do for myself at present, nor is there any left
undone or remaining to be done by me. I am as I am and have ever been,
and always without any craving for me. (This state of self-satisfaction
and self-sufficiency, is the highest bliss for man).

18. What other way to our true felicity can there be, than this that
has been shown by thee? or else I find this wide-extended field of the
earth, to be so full of our woe and misery.

19. I have no foe to annoy me nor a friend to give any joy to me; I
have no field to work in, nor an enemy to fear nor a good soul to
rely in. It is our misunderstanding that makes this world appear so
troublesome to ourselves, while our good sense makes it all agreeable
to us. (If the world will not suit thee, suit thyself to it).

20. How could we know all this (for our happiness) without thy good
grace unto us; as it is never possible for a boy, to ford and cross
over a river, without the assistance of a boat or bridge.

21. Lakshmana said:--It is by reason of your removing the doubts, that
had been inherent in and inherited by me in my repeated births; and it
is by virtue of the merit, that I had acquired in my former births;
that I have come to know the truth this day, by the divine sermon of
the holy sage; and to feel the radiance of a holy light in me, shining
as brightly as the cooling beams of moonlight.

22. It is strange that in disregard of this heavenly bright and vivid
light, that men should be entangled in a thousand errors, and be
burnt at last as dried wood or fuel, by their foul mistake and great
misfortune.

23. Viswámitra said:--O! it is by our great merit, that we have come
this day, to hear this holy lecture from the mouth of the sage; and
which has at once expurgated our inner souls, as a thousand lavations
in the clear stream of Ganges.

24. Ráma rejoined:--We have seen the highest pitch of all prosperity,
and the best of all that is to be seen; we have known the end of all
learning, and the last extremity of adversity; we have seen many
countries and heard many speeches; but never have we heard, nor seen
nor known anything better than the discourse on the beauty of the soul,
which the sage has shown to us to-day.

25. Nárada added:--Our ears are purified to-day, by the hearing of what
we have never heard heretofore; to be preached by Brahmá or the gods
above or men below.

26. Lakshmana rejoined:--Sir, you have entirely dissipated all our
inner and outer darkness also; and have shewn us the transcendent
light, of the bright sun of the Divine soul.

27. Satrughna said:--I am satisfied and tranquilized, and uncomposed
in the supreme soul; I am for ever full and perfect in myself, and sit
quite content with my solity.

28. Dasaratha repeated:--It is by the merit of our deeds, done and
acquired in our repeated lives, that we have been, O thou chief of
sages, sanctified this day by thy sacred and sanctifying speech.

29. Válmíki related:--As the king and his courtiers, were speaking in
this manner, the sage oped his mouth again, and thus bespoke his words
fraught with pure and purifying knowledge.

30. Vasishtha said:--Hear me, O thou moon like king of Raghu’s race,
and do as I bid you to do; Rise now and honour the assembled Bráhmans,
who deserve their due honour at the close of a discourse.

31. Rise therefore, and satisfy their desires with thy ample gifts; and
thou will obtain thereby, the merit that attends on the learning of the
vedas, and doing thy duties according to their dictates.

32. It is incumbent on even a mean worm-like man, to honor the Bráhmans
to their utmost at the termination of a sermon on salvation; how much
more important must it then be on the part of a monarch to acquit
himself of this necessary duty.

33. Hearing this behest of the sage, the king held his reverential
silence; and beckoned to his heralds to proceed to all the ten sides of
his dominions, and invite thousands of Bráhmans, that are acquainted
with the vedas forthwith (to the royal court).

34. He bade them to go to Mathura, Suráshtra and Gauda, and to bring
with them with due respect all the Bráhmans, that are born of Vedic
families, and are abiding in those districts and lands.

35. There then assembled more than ten thousands of Bráhmans to the
royal palace, and the king fed them all alike and paying particular
regard to the more learned among them.

36. He treated them with the best sorts of food and rice, honoured them
with their honorariums, and gave them a good many gifts; and after
honouring them in this manner, he offered his oblations to the manes of
his ancestors, and gave his offerings to the tutelar gods of his house.
(A Bráhman has his precedence in a feast to the gods and _patres_; but
the merit of giving a feast is lost unless it is followed by other
gifts).

37. The king next treated his friends and relatives with proper repast,
and then fed his companions and servants and the citizens all on the
same day. His attention was at last directed to the feeding of the poor
and needy, and of the lame and blind and lunatics.

38. Having discharged to his utmost the duties of the festival, he
commanded a great festivity to be held in his hall, all over decorated
with silk and embroidery, and with gold, gems and pearls.

39. The city then being adorned and lighted, like the ever bright
mount of Meru, there went on a merry dance and ball of giddy girls and
players in every house (as a sign of general joy).

40. There was a ringing of bells and sounding of cymbols all about,
with the beating of drums and trimbrels at every door; flutes and
wind instruments were blowing on every side, and guitars and wired
instruments were playing with loud gingling, and vying with each other.

41. The markets were closed, and the marketers stopped in their course;
the air appeared as an arbour of plants, shaking with the uplifted and
quavering and waving arms of the merry dancers in the streets; and it
seemed as the starry heaven, by the glittering light of the teeth of
strolling players, displayed in their comic dance and loud laughter.

42. There was the heroic dance attended by the loud shouts of the
players, and melodramas accompanied with the soft and sweet strains of
the performers, there was also a staggering and strutting dance on one
foot and leg, and thumping the ground with the other.

43. Here they flung wreaths of flowers glittering like stars and
falling down in showers; and there the scattered flowers, which were
strewn over the ground as rain drops, were indiscriminately trodding
down under the feet of passersby.

44. Here the actresses dance about with their loose ornaments and
gestures of love; and there the bards chanted their hymns with
clearness, as the Bráhmans recited them and the songstresses sang.

45. Here the sots and topers drank their fill of wine; and the food
mongers fed upon their eatables of various kinds (_i.e._ some were seen
to be indulging their drink and others in their eating).

46. The insides of houses were daubed with wine, as the outer bodies of
the princes with ointment of moon light hue.

47. The attendent servants and waiting maids on the king, sauntered
about trimmed in gaudy attires of various colours; and graced the royal
festival with their decorations of necklaces and sweet perfumes on
their persons.

48. The sprightly ballet girls, being besmeared with a paste of all
perfumeries (called the yaksha dust), and decorated with glittering
ornaments, repaired to the ball at the royal hall with all alacrity.

49. Thus the king Dasaratha held his entertainment for a whole week,
and passed full seven nights in festive mirth and rejoicing; while he
distributed his gifts and food for as many days, which redounded to
exhaustless prosperity on earth.




