CHAPTER CLVIII.

FALL OF THE HUGE BODY OF THE HUNTER.

    Argument:--The aerial body of the Hunter, and its downfall from
    the high heaven.


The sage resumed and said:--I have thus related these future events,
as if they were past accounts unto thee; do now, O huntsman what thou
wishest and thinkest best for thyself.

2. Agni the god of fire said:--Hearing these words of the sage, the
huntsman remained aghast in wonder for a while; and then rising with
the sage, went to bathe themselves to the nearest pool.

3. In this manner they continued together, to conduct their religious
austerities and discussions at the same spot; and remained in terms of
disinterested friendship with one another.

4. After some time the muni met with his final extinction--_nirvána_,
and by casting off his mortal body, obtained his last repose in the
state of transcendent tranquility.

5. In course of time and the lapse of ages, it pleased the god Brahma
to give him a call, in order to confer upon him the object of his
desire.

6. The huntsman being unable to resist the impulse of his longing,
begged to obtain the very same boon of his god which the sage had
predicted to him.

7. Be it so, said the god, and he repaired to his favourite abode;
and the huntsman flew aloft into the open air, in order to enjoy the
fruition of his austere devotion.

8. He flew with incredible velocity, to the extensive vacuous space,
which lies beyond the spheres of worlds; and it was in course of an
incalculable duration, that the ever expanding bulk of his body, filled
the regions of the upper sky, as a mountainous range is stretched along
and across this lower world.

9. He fled with the force and swiftness of the great Garuda (the eagle
of Jove), up and down and to all sides of heaven: until the huge bulk
of his body, occupied the whole area of the open air, in the process of
an indefinite period of time.

10. Thus increasing in his size with the course of time, and infatuated
in the maze of his delusion, began to grow uneasy in himself.

11. From the great anxiety of his mind, he suppressed the respiration
of his breath; until he breathed out his last breath of life in the
air, and his body dropped down as a carcass in the nether earth.

12. His mind accompanied with his vital breath, fled through the air
into the body of Sindhu, who became the ruler of the whole earth, and
the great antagonist of Vidúratha.

13. His great body resembling a hundred mountainous ranges, became a
huge mass of carcass; which fell down with the hideous clattering of
thunders, as one earth falling upon another.

14. At a certain time, it shines as a _Kesandraka_, at others it
appears as a covering of the huge range of buildings in sky.

15. I have already related to thee, O learned sir, how this huge
carcass had fallen from above, and filled the surface of the globe of
this earth.

16. The globe of the earth, where upon this huge carcass had fallen,
resembled in every way this earth of ours, which appears unto us as a
city in our dream.

17. The dry and big bellied goddess _chandí_, then devoured this
carcass, filling her bowels with its flesh, and stuffing her entrails
with its red hot blood.

18. The earth is called _mediní_ or fleshy from the flesh of this
corpse, which overspreads its surface with its prodigious bulky frame.

19. It was this huge fleshy body, which was reduced to the substance of
the earth in time; and had the name of the earth given to it from the
dust of this body.

20. This fleshy earth gave rise to forests and habitable parts; and the
fossil bones rose high in the forms of mountains from underneath the
ground, which grew everything useful to men.




CHAPTER CLVIX.

WANDERING OF VIPASCHIT.

    Argument:--The god of fire, after directing Vipaschit to wander
    over the world according to his desire, disappeared from his
    sight.


The god of fire added:--Go now O sapient Vipaschit, to your wished for
abodes, and with the steadiness of your mind, conduct with propriety
every where on earth.

2. Indra the lord of the assemblage of creatures, has been performing
his hundred fold sacrifices in his celestial abode; and there I am
invited to attend by an invocation of him.

3. Bhása said:--Saying so, the lord Agni disappeared from that place;
and passed through the transparent ether like the electric fire of
lightning.

4. I was then led by my predestination to roam about in the air; and
direct my mind into the investigation of my allotted acts, and the
termination of my ignorance.

5. I beheld again an innumerable host of heavenly bodies, roving about
in the air; holding their positions at different stations of the
firmament, and containing inhabitants of different natures and customs.

6. Some of these were of one and same form, resembling floating
umbrellas in the sky; and attracting the hearts of men, by their
shining appearance and slow motion. (The great velocity of heavenly
bodies, appear to be slow when they are seen by the naked eyes of men
from this distant earth).

7. Some of them are of earthy substance, but shining and moving onward
like mountains in motion.

8. Some were of woody appearance, and others of stony substance;
but they are all lightsome bodies, and all moving onward in their
uninterrupted course.

9. I beheld also some figures like carved statues of stone, standing
in the open space of my mind, and talking together all their live-long
days.

10. In this manner I beheld for a long while, many such figures like
images in my dream, and was quite bewildered in my utter ignorance of
them.

11. I then intended to perform my austere devotion, in order to obtain
my liberation; when the god Indra appeared unto me and said: “no
Vipaschit, you are doomed to become a stag again, and not entitled to
your liberation now.”

12. You are propelled by your previous predilection to prefer the
pleasures of heaven; therefore I must direct you to dwell in my
paradise, and wander there amidst my gardens of _mandara_ trees.

13. Being thus bid by him, I rejoined and said to him: I am weary, O
lord, with the troubles of the world, and want to get my release from
them; ordain therefore my immediate emancipation from them.

14. The god listened to my prayer and said: emancipation attends on
the pure soul, which is purged from all its desires; and this had been
already expounded to you by the god of fire (in his narrative of the
sage and hunter); ask therefore some other boon, said he, and I begged
him to tell me of my next and future state.

15. Indra replied and said:--I find you to be fated to be changed to
the state of a deer hereafter, from the fond desire of your heart, to
wander about and feed freely in the fields.

16. By becoming a deer, you will have to enter the holy assembly (of
Dasaratha); where another deer like you, has obtained his liberation
before, by listening to the spiritual instructions formerly delivered
there by me.

17. Therefore be born as a deer in some forest on earth with your
pensive soul; and you will then come to recollect your past life from
its relation by Vasishtha (in the court of king Dasaratha).

18. You will learn there, that all this existence is but the delusion
of a dream, and the creation of imagination; and the account of your
future life depicted in its true colour.

19. After being released from the body of the deer, you shall regain
your human form, and perceive the rays of holy light shining in your
inward spirit.

20. This light will then dispel the long prevailing gloom of ignorance
from your mind, and then you shall attain your _nirvána_ supineness, as
the calm and breathless wind.

21. After the god had said so, I had the presentiment of being a deer
in this forest, and entirely forgot my human nature, under my firm
conviction of having become a beast.

22. I have been ever since residing in the recess of these woods, under
the impression of my being changed to a stag; and feeding ever since
upon the grass and herbs growing on the mountain top.

23. Here I saw once a body of troopers coming to a hunting excursion;
and being then affrighted at the sight, I betook myself to flight.

24. They then laid hold of me, and took me to their place; where they
kept me for some days for their pleasure, and at last brought me hither
before Ráma.

25. I have thus related to you all the incidents of my life; and the
magical scenes of the world, too full of marvelous events.

26. It is the production of our ignorance, which pervades over all
things, and branches out into innumerable forms in everything that
presents itself to our view; and there is nothing whatever to dispel
this darkness, except by the light of spiritual knowledge.

27. Válmíki relates:--Then as Vipaschit had held his silence after
speaking in this manner; he was accosted by the well minded Ráma with
the following words.

28. Ráma said:--Tell me sir, how a person without any desire of his
own, sees the object of another’s desire in himself; and could the deer
thought of by yourself, come to the sight of others in Indra’s Paradise?

29. Vipaschit replied:--Let me tell you that the earth where upon the
huge carcass had fallen, was once before trodden upon by Indra, with
the pride of his performance of a hundred sacrifices.

30. There strutting along in his haughty strides, he met the anchorite
Durvásas sitting still in his meditative mood; and believing him to be
a dead body lying on his way, he knocked it down with his feet.

31. At this the angry anchorite threatened the proud god with
saying:--O Indra! as you have dashed me with your feet by thinking me a
lifeless corpse, so will a huge carcass shortly fall upon this ground
and slash it to pieces and reduce it to dust.

32. And as you have spurned me as a dead body, so art thou accursed to
be crushed under the falling carcass on earth.

33. He transformed into a deer, as he was king of kings before, and
remained in his appearance according to his ideas.

34. In truth neither is the actual world a reality, nor the imaginary
one an unreality; it is in fact the one and same thing, whether we
conceive it as the one or other (_i.e._ either as the real or unreal).

35. Listen now, O Ráma, to another reason, which appertains to this
subject, and clearly settles the point in question. (That God being
Almighty and all in all, it makes no difference whatever, whether the
world is viewed as his creation or as a pantheon).

36. He in whom all things reside, and from whom everything proceeds;
who is all in all; and who is every where in all must be the One that
you may call all, and beside whom there <is> none at all.

37. It is equally possible to him, to bring forth whatever he wills to
produce; as also not to produce, whatever he does not wish to bring to
existence.

38. Whatever is desired in earnest by any body, must eventually come
to pass to him in reality (as the desired doership of Vipaschit); and
this is as true as the instance of light, being ever accompanied by its
shade.

39. If it is impossible for the desire and its act, which are opposite
in their nature, to meet together in fact; then it would be impossible
for the omnifarious God to be all things both in being and not being;
therefore the objects of our desire and thought, are equally present
with us as the real ones.

40. There is a reality (or entity of God) attached to every form of
existence, and there is nothing which of itself is either an entity or
nullity also.

41. O the great magic or illusion, which is overspread every where, and
pervades over all nature in every form and at all times; and binds all
beings in inextricable delusion.

42. The nature of the great God comprises the community of spirits
in his spirit, and combines in itself all laws whether permissive or
prohibitive acting in concert and eternal harmony.

43. It is his infinite power that has displayed the ignorance or
Illusion, which spreads over all the three worlds from time with or
without its beginning; and it is our delusion only, which depicts all
things in their various forms to our view.

44. Or how could the creation that was once destroyed by the great
deluge, come to resuscitate again; unless it were a _réchauffé_ of the
reminiscence of the past one, else the elementary bodies of air, fire
and earth, could not possibly be produced from nothing.

45. Therefore the world is no other than a manifestation of the divine
nature; and this is the verdict of the sástras, and the conviction of
mankind from the very beginning of creation.

46. Things which admit of no sufficient proof for their material
existence, are easily proved to exist, by their being considered under
the light of the understanding.

47. Things of a subtile nature, which are imperceptible by the senses,
are known in their essence by the understanding of the learned; hence
the essence of Brahma is pure understanding, of which we are quite
ignorant owing to our ignorance of the Intellect.

48. The world is obvious to us from its figure, as the air is evident
by its vibration; hence no body is born or dies herein, (save that it
appears to or disappears from our sight).

49. That I am living and the other is dead, are conceptions of our
mind; hence death being but the total disappearance of the visible
world from our view, it must be as pleasing to us as our sound sleep
itself.

50. If it be the recognition of the visibles, which is called the life
or revivification of man; then there are no such things in the world,
as are commonly termed the life and death of beings.

51. At a time, the intellect appears a duality, and at other an unity,
both are nothing but intellect.

52. It is the Intellection of the Divine Intellect, that infuses its
intelligence into all minds; hence what is life without the intellect
and the faculty of intellection.

53. The intellect being free from pain, there is no cause of complaint
in any intellectual being; since the word world and all that it means
to express, are but manifestations of vacuous intellect.

54. It is wrong to say, that the intellect is one thing and the
body another; since the unity is the soul of all and pervades all
multiformity; and as the waves and whirlpools are seen in the waters,
so are all these bodies known to abide in the Supreme being.

55. The universal pervasion of divine essence, as that of the subtile
air, is the cause of causes and the sole cause of all; hence the world
is a subtile substance also, being but a reflexion of the Divine
Intellect.

56. It is wonderful, how this subtile world appears as a solid body to
us; it is only our conception of it as such that makes it appear so
unto us; but conception is no substance at all, therefore the world has
no substantiality in it.

57. It is the demon of error that reigns over us in its aerial form,
deludes us to take the shadowy world for the substance; while in fact
this creation of error is as nil and void, as the vacuous creation of
the intellect. (_i.e._ The sensible world is as void and null as the
ideal one).

58. Hence this nether world below and the etherial worlds above, are as
void as the hyperphysical world of the Divine Intellect; and all these
being but reflexions of the Divine mind, are exhibited in various ways.

59. The Intellect being a subtile entity, there is nothing as a solid
substance anywhere; the phenomenals are all unsubstantial rarities,
though they appear to us solidified realities.

60. The knowledge of the true verity and that of the unreality, are so
blended together; that we must remain in mute silence like a block of
wood or stone, to pronounce anything in the affirmative or negative
about either.

61. The visible whole is the infinite Brahma, and this universe
displays the majesty of the great God; and all these bodies are the
various forms, exhibiting the infinite attributes of the deity.

62. In this manner, is the substance of the Divine Intellect displayed
in itself; and it is the vacuous spirit of God, that manifests this
unsubstantial world in its own vacuity.

63. The number of living beings, since the beginning of creation, is
unlimited in every place; and of these there are many, that exist
either in their corporeal or incorporeal forms.

64. There are other siddha and spiritual beings, abiding with their
subtile natures and tenuous forms in the supreme Being; they live in
groups in all elements, but never come to see one another of their own
kind.

65. The exuberance of the visible world, being purely of aerial and
vacuous form; they are never seen in their true and intellectual light,
except when they appear to us in their aerial shapes in our dreams.

66. The world being well known, remains as it does in our inward
conception of it, in the form of a hazy mist appearing to our sight at
the end of night (_i.e._ dark and obscure).

67. It is a dark and indistinct maze, with nothing distinguishable in
it when seen from a distance; it becomes clearer at a nearer view, and
by keeping yourself afar you lose sight of it altogether.

68. As the particles of water fly off, and fall again into the sea; so
do the atoms of intellect in all living beings, continually rise and
subside, in the vast ocean of the Divine Mind. (So doth every thing
proceed from and recede into the Divine Spirit).

69. This grandeur of creation is as the crowding throng of our dreams,
which ere before lay slumbering; in the hollow space of the Divine
Mind, therefore know these effusions of the divine Intellect, as calm
and quiet as the unruffled spirit of God (that ever reposes in its calm
felicity).

70. I have seen the infinite glories of creation, and have felt the
various results of my deeds to no end; I have wandered in all quarters
of the globe for ages; but I found no rest from the toils and troubles
of the delusive world, except in the knowledge of my vanities of the
world.




