CHAPTER CXII.

FLIGHT OF THE FOREIGN FOES.

    Argument.--Account of the routed soldiers, and the names of their
    countries and places of retreat.


Vasishtha continued:--The Chedis of Deccan, who were as thickly crowded
as the sandal wood of their country, and girt with girdles resembling
the snakes about those trees, were felled by the battle axes, and
driven afar to the southern main--the Indian Ocean.

2. The Persians flew as the flying leaves of trees, and striking
against one another in their madness, fell like the vanjula leaves in
the forest.

3. Then the demon-like Darads, who dwell in the caverns of the distant
Dardura mountains, were pierced in their breasts, and fled from the
field with their heart rending sorrow. (The Dardui is a people of
Afghanistan).

4. The winds blew away the clouds of weapons, which poured down
torrents of missile arms, that shattered the armours of the warriors,
and glittered like curling lightnings.

5. The elephants falling upon one another, pierced their bodies and
gored each other to death with their tusks; and became heaps of flesh,
similar to the lumps of food with which they filled their bellies.

6. Another people of the same country, and of the Raivata mountains,
who were flying from the field by night; were waylaid by the horrid
Pisáchas, that tore their bodies and devoured them with voracity.

7. Those that fled to the _tala_ and _tamala_ forests, and to the old
woods on the bank of the _dasárná_ river; were caught by lions and
tigers crouching in them; and were throttled to death under their feet.

8. The _yovanas_ living on the coasts of the western ocean, and those
in the land of cocoanut trees; were caught and devoured by sharks, in
the course of their flight.

9. The sákas or _Scythians_ being unable to endure the impulse, of the
black iron arrows for a moment fled to all directions; and the Rumatha
people were blown away and broken down, like the lotus bed by the
blowing winds.

10. The routed enemy flying to the Mahendra mountain, covered its three
peaks with their armours of black mail, and made them appear as mantled
by the sable clouds of the rainy weather.

11. The legions of these hostile forces, being broken down by the arms
of the king, like the large mines of gold, were first plundered of their
raiments by the highway robbers, and then killed and devoured by the
nocturnal cannibals and hobgoblins of the desert.

12. The surface of the land was converted to the face of the sky; by
the broken fragments of weapons glistering on like the stars of heaven
twinkling in myriads above.

13. The caverns of the earth, resounding to the noise of the clouds
above, appeared as a grand orchestra, sounding the victory of the king
both in earth and heaven.

14. The peoples inhabiting the islands, lost their lives under the
whirling disks; as those dwelling in the watery marshes perish on dried
lands for want of rain.

15. The vanquished islanders fled to the Sahya mountains, and having
halted there for a week, departed slowly to the respective places.

16. Many took shelter in the Gandhamádana mountains, while multitudes
of them resorted to the Punnága forests; and the retreating Gandharvas
became refugees in the sanctuaries of the Vidyádhara maidens.

17. The Huns, Chins and Kirátas, had their heads struck off by the
flying discuses of the king; and these were blown away by the opposite
winds, like lotus flowers by the blast.

18. The Nilipa people, remained as firm as trees in a forest, and as
fixed in their places as thorns on stalks and brambles.

19. The beautiful pastures of antelopes, the woodlands and hilly
tracts on all sides; were desolated by showers of weapons, and the rush
and crush of the forces.

20. The thorny deserts became the asylum of robbers, after they
deserted their habitations to be over grown by thorns and thistles.

21. The Persians who were abundant in number, got over to the other
side of the sea (the Persian Gulph); and were blown away by the
hurricane, like stars blasted by the storm of final desolation.

22. The winds blew as on the last day of destruction, and broke down
the woods and forests all about; and disturbed the sea by shaking its
hidden rocks below.

23. The dirty waters of the deep, rose on high with a gurgling noise;
and the sky was invisible owing to the clouds of weapons, which
obscured its face on all sides.

24. The howling winds, raised a clapping and flapping sound all about;
and there fell showers of snow also, which flowed on earth, like the
waters of the sea.

25. The charioteers of Vidura country, fell down from their cars, with
the loud noise of waves; and were driven to fall into the waters of the
lake, like bees from lotuses.

26. The routed foot soldiers who were as numerous as the dust of the
earth, and well armed from head to foot; were yet so overpowered under
the showers of darts and discs, that they were blinded by the tears of
their eyes, and disabled to beat their retreat. (_i.e._ They were as
dust, set down by the showers of darts from above, and tears of their
eyes below).

27. The Huns were buried with their heads and heels, in their flight
over the sandy deserts of the north; and others were as muddied as the
dirty iron, by their being fastened in the miry shores of northern
seas. (The Huns had been the progenitors of the present Hungarians,
residing beyond the Baltic. They are said to have been as dark
complexioned as their cognate Dravidians of Deccan in Southern India).

28. The Sáks (Saccae or Scythians), were driven to cassia forests on
the bank of the eastern main; there they were confined for some time,
and then released without being despatched to the regions of death.

29. The Madrasees were repulsed to the Mahendra mountains, whence they
lightly alighted on the ground as if fallen from heaven; and there they
were protected by the great sages, who preserved them there with tender
care as they bear for the stags of their hermitage.

30. The fugitives flying to the refuge of the Sahya mountains, found
in lieu of their imminent destruction, in the subterranean cell, the
two fold gain of their present and future good therein. Thus it comes
to pass that, many times good issues out of evil, where it was least
expected. (We know not what were the two great gains made at this
place, except it be made to mean, that the hidden cell of _sahya_ or
patience is the door to prosperity and success).

31. The soldiers flying to Dasárná at the confluence of the ten rivers,
fell into the Dardura forest like the fallen leaves of trees; and there
they lay dead all about by eating the poisonous fruits thereof.

32. The Haihayas that fled to Himálayas, drank the juice of
_Visalya-karaní_ or pain killing plants by mistake; and became thereby
as volant as Vidyádharas, and flew to their country.

33. And then the people of Bengal, who are as weak as faded flowers,
showed their backs to the field, and fled to their homes; from which
they dare not stir even to this day, but remain as Pisáchas all along.

34. But the people of Anga or Bihar, that live upon the fruits of their
country; are as strong as Vidyádharas, and sport with their mates, as
if it were in heavenly bliss.

35. The Persians being worsted in their bodies, fell into the _tala_
and _tamala_ forests; whereby drinking their intoxicating extracts,
they became as giddy as drunken men. (The addictedness of Persians to
their delicious drinks, is well known in their Ána Cronatics).

36. The light and swift mettled elephants of the swarthy Kalingas,
pushed against their four fold armies in the field of battle, where all
lay slain in promiscuous heaps.

37. The salwas passing under the arrows and stones of the enemy, fell
into the waters which girt their city, wherein they perished with the
whole of their hosts, that are still lying there in the form of heap of
rocks.

38. There were numbers of hosts, that fled to different countries in
all directions; and many that were driven to the distant seas, where
they were all drowned and dead, and borne away by the waves.

39. But who can count the countless hosts, that fled to and lay dead
and unnoticed in every part of the wide earth and sea, on the fields
and plains, in forests and woods, on land and water, on mountains and
dales, on shores and coasts and on the hills and cliffs. So there is
nobody who can tell what numbers of living beings are dying every
moment, in their homes and abodes in cities and villages, in caves and
dens, and every where in the world.




