CHAPTER CCIL.

RECUMBENCE OF THE ASSEMBLY TO THEIR HYPNOTIC REST.

    Argument:--Entrancement of the audience to a state of somnolence
    known as Hybernation, hypnotism and Ecstasis in Theosophy.


Válmíki related:--Upon hearing these words of the sage, the assembled
princes and lords of men in the court, felt a _sang froid_ or coolness
in their souls, as if they were all besprinkled with ambrosial waters
upon them.

2. Ráma with his lotus like eyes and moon like face, remained as
resplendent, as if they were filled with ambrowaters, or the nectarious
liquid of the Milky ocean.

3. Then the sage Vámadeva and others, who were fraught with divine
knowledge, exclaimed with their admiration for the preacher; O the holy
instruction, that you have imparted unto us this day!

4. The King with his pacified soul and joyous mind, shone as shining
in his countenance, as if he had a new light infused in himself (and
causing the hairs on his body to stand on their ends, from his inward
gladness).

5. After many other sages, who were well acquainted with the knowledge
of the knowable One, had thus pronounced their praises; the enlightened
Ráma (lit. who was purged from his ignorance), oped his mouth again,
and spoke in the following manner.

6. Ráma said:--O thou seer, that knowest the past and future; thou hast
cleansed away all our inward dross, as fire serves to purge gold from
its impurity.

7. Venerable sir we have now become cosmognostics or all knowing, by
our knowledge of the universal soul, though we are confined in these
visible bodies of ours, and seeming to all appearance, as knowing
nothing beyond them.

8. I feel myself now as perfect and full in all, and to have become
quite undecaying in myself; I am freed from all fear and apprehension,
and am quite cognoscent with all things.

9. I am overjoyed to no end, and am happy beyond all measure; I
have risen to a height from which there is no fear of falling,
and am elevated to the supreme acme of eminence and perfection.
(Parama-purushártha).

10. Alack! how am I cleansed by the holy and cooling water of divine
knowledge, which you have so kindly poured forth in me, and whereby I
am as joyous, as a full blown lotus in the lake of my heart.

11. I am now set, sir, by your favour to a state of happiness, which
brightens to me the face of universe with ambrosial delight.

12. I now hail myself, that have become so fair within myself with the
clearness of my mind, and by disappearance of all sorrow from it. I
have received a grace in my face, from the peace of mind and purity of
my wishes. I am joyous in myself with my inward joy, and I <am> wholly
pure with the purity of my soul.




CHAPTER CCIII.

DESCRIPTION OF NIRVÁNA OR SELF EXTINCTION IN DIVINE MEDITATION.

    Argument:--Sounding of midday trumpet, performance of daily
    ablution, and description of the setting sun. The meeting of the
    assembly on the next morning upon the discourse on Nirvána.


Válmíki related:--As Ráma and the sage had been remonstrating in this
manner, the sun advanced towards the zenith, to listen to their holy
conversation in <its> royal dome.

2. The solar beams spread on all sides, with greater force and
effulgence; as if to expose to clearer and greater light the sense of
Ráma’s speech.

3. Then the lotus beds in the tanks of the pleasure gardens, all about
the royal palace, began to expand their embosomed buds to bloom before
him, as the princes shone forth in brightness amidst the royal hall.

4. The air was exhilarated with joy at hearing the holy lectures of the
sage; and seemed to be dancing with the sunbeams, glistening in the
strings of pearls, suspended at the windows of the palace.

5. The premature gleams of the sun, glistened as bright at the
glittering glass doors and shining chandeliers of the court hall; as
the gladdened hearts of the audience, glowed at enlightening speech of
the sage.

6. After Ráma was settled in his sedateness, his face shone as bright
as a blooming blue lotus by its reflexion of the rays of the sage’s
look upon it. (Here the blue complexion of Ráma, is compared to a
blue lotus, blooming under the moon bright look of fair Vasishtha’s
countenance).

7. The sun advancing towards the summit of the horizon, like the marine
fire rising on the surface of the blue ocean; sucked or dried up by
his darting flames the dewy humidity of the sky, as the submarine heat
resorbs the waters of the deep.

8. The cerulean sphere of heaven, appeared as the lake of blue lotuses,
and the shining sun seemed as the golden pericarp of the flower; his
bright beams resembled the aureate farina of flowers, and his slanting
rays likened the aslant pistils in the air.

9. He shone as the dazzling crown upon the head of the azure queen of
the worlds; and was hanging down like the resplendent earring, pendant
on the ear of heaven; while the little lay hid under his glaring light,
like bits of diamonds lying concealed under the effulgence of a blazing
ruby.

10. The ethereal maids of all the quarters of heaven, held out the
mirrors of silvery clouds before his face, with their uplifted arms of
the mountain peaks all around; and these are emblazoned by solar rays,
like the rainless clouds on mountain tops.

11. The sun stones in the quarries on earth emitted a fury blaze, which
emblazoned the skies around, with a greater light than that of the sun.

12. The trumpets sounded aloud, with the wind blown by the mouths of
trumpeters; and the conchshells blew as loudly at midday, as the winds
of the last deluge, set the sea waves to their tremendous uproar.

13. Then the spherules of sweat, appeared on the faces of the princes,
as the dew drops falling on lotus leaves; and they were so closely
connected together, as to give them the appearance of strings of pearls.

14. The thickening noise of the hurry and flurry of men, resounded as
hoarsely within the hollow walls of the hall, that they filled the ears
of men, as the dashing waves fill the concave of the hollow sea.

15. The waiting maids then came forward with cups of liquid camphor in
their hands; in order to sprinkle them on the persons of the princes;
to assuage their fervour of the solar heat.

16. Then the assembly broke, and the king rose from his seat in company
with Ráma and the princes and Vasishtha, together with all the lords
and nobles, that were present in the assembly.

17. The assembled lords and princes, the ministers of the state and
religion, together with the high priests and sages; rose from their
seats, and having gladly made their greetings to one another, took
their leave and departed to their respective abodes.

18. The front of the royal inner apartment, was fanned with flappers of
palm leaves, wafting the clouds <of> camphor powder, that was scattered
for allaying the midday heat.

19. Then the chief of sages--Vasishtha, oped his mouth and spoke out
to Ráma, amidst the sonata of noonday music, that resounded amidst the
walls of the royal hall.

20. Vasishtha said:--Ráma! you have heard whatever is worth hearing,
and known also all that is worth your knowing; and now I see nothing
further, that is worth communicating to you for your higher knowledge.

21. Now you have to reconcile in yourself, and by your best
understandings, all that you have been instructed by me, and what you
have read and learnt in the sástras, and harmonise the whole for your
guidance.

22. Now rise to do your duties, while I hasten to the performance of
sacred ablutions; it is now midday, and the proper time of our bathing
is fastly passing away.

23. And then whatever else you have to enquire about, for the
satisfaction of your wishes, you can propose the same to me tomorrow
morning, when I shall be happy to expatiate on the subject.

24. Válmíki related:--After the sage had spoken in this manner, the
mighty king Dasaratha saluted the parting chiefs and sages, and
honoured them according to their proper ranks and degrees.

25. And then being advised by Vasishtha, the virtuous king with Ráma by
his side, proceeded to give their due honours, to the sages and siddhas
and to the Bráhmanas also one after the other.

26. He gave them gems and jewels, and monies and bouquets of flowers;
and he gave to others riches equivalent to the values of the gems and
jewels; while he gave strings of pearls and necklaces to some also.

27. He honoured some with his respects and civilities, and others with
monies suited to their worth and degree, while he gave his gifts of
cloths and seats, food and drink, and of gold and lands to others.

28. He saluted others with perfumeries and aromatic spices and wreaths
of flowers; he honoured the elders with due respects, and gave his bare
regards to others.

29. Then the king rose from amidst the assembly, with the whole body
of his courtiers, and the holy sages and Vasishtha with him; as the
splendid moon rises in the sky, with the train of stars about him. (The
moon is masculine in Sanskrit, and twin brother of the sun).

30. The rising of the assembly and its people, was attended with a
rumbling noise, as it is heard in the treading of men, over a bog of
knee deep mud and mire.

31. The clashing of the concourse against one another, and the cracking
of their armlets and wristlets by their friction with each other;
joined with the broken jewels and scattered pearls, slipped from the
torn necklaces of the nobles, gave the floor of the court hall, the
appearance of the spangled heaven.

32. There was a close concussion of the bodies, of sages and saints,
of Bráhmans and princes and nobles all jumbled together; and there was
a rapid undulation of the chourie flappers, waving in the hands of
fanning maid servants.

33. But there was no huddling or dashing or pushing one against the
other; as they were intent upon reflecting on the sense of the sages
preaching, and rather asking excuses of one another, with the gestures
of their bodies, when they came in contact with others.

34. At last the king and the sages and nobles, accosted one another
with sweet and soft words; and took their parting leave (for repairing
to their respective abode for the day).

35. They then left the palace, and proceeded to their residences, with
their gladdened faces and contented minds; as when the immortals
repair to all parts of heaven, from the synod of the king of
gods--Indra or Sakra.

36. After every one had taken leave of others, and arrived at his
house; he employed himself in the discharge of his ritual services of
the day.

37. Thus the king and all, performed their daily ablutions and services
as usual, until the end of the day.

38. As the day ended with the discharge, of the duties of the daily
ritual; so the sojourner of the etherial path--the tired sun, sat
down to rest in the west (as the birds of air repair at eve, to their
respective nests). (The sun is said to be the _unka_ or falcon of
heaven; resting at his _aspiand_ or nest in the west, by a poet of
Persia).

39. After the performance of their vespers, the prince Ráma and the
people at large, passed their nights awake and fastly, with talking
about and thinking upon the discourse of the day.

40. Then the rising sun advanced in the east, with sweeping away the
dust of darkness from before his path, and strewing about the starry
flowers on his way, in order to fix his seat in the midst of his dome
of the universe.

41. The infant or rising sun, reddened the skies with his rays,
resembling the crimson hue of kusambha flowers; and then he embarked
on the board of his bright orb, amidst the wide ocean of the etherial
region. (The sun sailed in the etherial sea, through the scattered
island of the hidden stars and planets on his way. Gloss).

42. Then the regnant princes and lords of men, together with the
nobles, peers and their ministers, met at the court hall of King
Dasaratha; when there gathered also the great saints and sages, with
Vasishtha at their head.

43. They entered into the court and took their seats, according to
their different degrees and ranks; just as the stars of heaven appear
and occupy their places, in their respective constellations and circles
in the expanse of heaven.

44. Then the king and his ministers, advanced and bowed down to
Vasishtha, and ushered him to his high seat or pulpit; and they all
poured forth their praises to him, after that sage was seated in the
rostrum.

45. Now the lotus-eyed Ráma, who sat before the king and the holy sage,
oped his lotus like mouth, and spoke in the following manner, with his
natural good sense, and usual elegance of speech.

46. Ráma said:--O Venerable sir, that art acquainted with all
religions, and art the great ocean of knowledge; thou art the axe of
all knotty questions and doubts, and remover of the griefs and fears of
mankind.

47. Please tell us whatever more is worth our hearing and knowing;
for thou knowest best whatever there remains to be said, for the
edification of our knowledge.

48. Vasishtha replied:--Ráma you have gained your full knowledge, and
have nothing more to learn; you have attained the perfection of your
understanding, and obtained the summum bonum which is sought by all
(but found by few), and wherewith you are quite content in yourself.

49. You better consider in yourself and say, how do you find yourself
and your inner mind at present; and what else is there, that you wish
to know and hear from me.

50. Ráma rejoined:--Why sir, I find myself fully perfected in my
understanding; and being possest of the peace and tranquility of my
mind, with the blessing of Nirvána or ultimate beatitude of my soul, I
have nothing to ask or desire of thee.

51. You have said all that you had to impart to me, and I have known
all that is worth my knowing; Now sir, take your rest with the Goddess
of speech, who has done her utmost for the instruction of us all.

52. I have known the unknown and knowable One, that is only to be known
by us as the true reality; and knowing this all as the One Brahma, I
am freed from my knowledge of the duality (of the living and supreme
soul); and having got rid of the deception of the diversity of the
visibles, I am released from my reliance in all worldly things.




