CHAPTER CXXXXVI.

DISQUISITION OF SOUND SLEEP.

    Argument:--Relation of sleep after dream, and followed by dream
    likewise, concluding with proof of the unity of God.


The Huntsman said:--Tell me, O great sage, what did you do and see
afterwards, from your seat in the erroneous spirit of that person.

2. The sage replied:--Hear me tell you next, what I did and saw
afterwards, by my union with and my situation in the spirit of that
infatuated person.

3. As I resided in the dark cave of his heart, in the confusion of the
last doomsday; there arose methought a hurricane, which blew away the
mountains as straws, on the day of the final desolation of the world.

4. It was soon followed by outpourings of rain water from the mountain
tops; which bore away the woods and hills in the torrent.

5. As I dwelt in that cavity and in union with the vitality of the
individual, I perceived even in that state of my spiritual minuteness,
the falling rains and hailstones from the mountain tops.

6. I was then folded in the chyle of that person, and fell into a state
of sound sleep, and felt a deep darkness enveloping me all over.

7. Having laid down in my sleep for some time, I was gradually raised
from my sleepy state; as the closed lotus of the night, unfolds its
petals in the morning.

8. Then as a man lying in darkness, comes to see some circular disks
appearing to his sight; so I saw some flimsy dreams flying about and
hovering upon me.

9. Being released from the chain of sleep, I fell to a chain of dreams;
and saw a hundred shapes of things, arising in my spirit, as the
shapes of unnumbered waves and billows, rise in the bosom of the sea.

10. Very many forms of visible things, appeared in the cell of my
consciousness; as a great many flying things are seen to be volitant in
the still and motionless air.

11. As heat is inherent in fire, and coldness is innate in water, and
as fluidity is characteristic of liquids, and pungency is immanent in
pepper &c.; so is the world inborn in Brahma.

12. The nature of the Intellect being uniform and selfsame in itself;
the phenomenal world is engrained in it, as the dream of a new born
child, presents itself to the sight of a sleeping man. (Sight is here
applied to the mind’s eye).

13. The Huntsman rejoined:--Tell me sir, how is it possible for the
Intellect to have the sight of anything in its state of sound sleep,
since dreams never occur in the mind except in the state of slight and
light sleep.

14. Again in the state of sound sleep both of yourself, as also of the
person in whose heart you dwelt; how could the sight of the creation
appear to you (or has the term _sound sleep_ any other sense than
the state of utter nescience?) (Sound sleep is the state of utter
insensibility or _anaesthesia_--gloss).

15. The sage replied:--Know that creation is expressed by the words,
_viz. jáyati_ is born, bháti appeareth, and _kachati_ shineth; and are
applied indiscriminately to all material things, as pots and pictures
(घट पट) as well as to the world also; all these words
are used to express a duality (or something different as proceeding
from Unity), by men whose brains are heated with dualism, or the notion
of a duality (as different from the nature of the Unity or the only
One).

16. Know that the word _játa_ or born means only being (sattwa), and
its synonyms are _prádurbháva_--manifestation, which is derived from
the root _bhu_ to be.

17. Now the meaning of Bhu is being, which expresses the sense of being
born also, and the _sarga_ meaning production or creation, it is same
with being also.

18. With us learned men, there is nothing as jáyáti or what is made
or may be said to be born or destroyed; but all is one calm and quiet
unborn being only. (An eternal ideal entity).

19. The whole and soul of this entity, is the one Brahma alone
(the only Ens to On or the Om); and the totality of existence, is
the Cosmos, macrocosm or the world. Say then what hypostasis or
unsubstantiality is there that can be positively affirmed or denied of
it, which is of them alike.

20. That which is called _sakti_ or the active energy of God, resides
literally in the Divine spirit, but not as a free or separate power of
itself; because all power subsists in Omnipotence, which is self same
with Brahma, and not as an attribute or part of him. (Vedánta ignores
the predicates of potentiality as predicable of Brahma, who is the very
essence of Omnipotence).

21. The properties of waking, sleep and dreaming, do not belong to the
nature of God, according to the cognition of men learned in divine
Knowledge; because God never sleeps nor dreams, nor does he wake in the
manner of His creature. (No changing property appertaining to finite
beings can ever be attributable to the Infinite, who is as He is).

22. Neither sleep nor the airy visions of dreaming, nor also anything
that we either know or have any notion of, can have any relation to
the nature of the Inscrutable One; any more than the impossibility of
our having any idea of the world before its creation. (So the Persian
mystic Berun Zátash, aztohmate chunan to chunin. His nature is beyond
our comprehension and presumption of it as so and such).

23. It is the living soul which sees the dream, and imagines the
creation in itself; or else the pure intellect is quite unintelligible
in its nature, and remains as clear as either in the beginning of
creation.

24. The Intellect is neither the observer nor enjoyer (_i.e._ neither
the active nor passive agent of creation); it is something as nothing,
perfectly quiet and utterly unspeakable in its nature.

25. In the beginning there was no cause of creation, or creative agent
of the world; it is only an ideal of the Divine Mind, and exists for
ever in the same state, as a vision in the dream or an airy castle of
imagination.

26. It is thus that the individual Intelligence, is apprehended as a
duality by the unwise, but never by the intelligent; because ignorant
men like silly infants are afraid of the tiger or snake that is painted
upon their own person; but the intelligent knowing them too well to be
marked upon their own bodies, never suspect them as anything otherwise
than their own person.

27. The One invariable and translucent soul, which is without its
beginning, middle and end, appears as varying and various to the
unreflecting dualist and polytheist; but the whole appearing so
changeful and conspicuous to sight, is all a perfect calm and quiet and
serene prospect in itself.




