CHAPTER CXI.

THE FLIGHT OF THE SOLDIERS ON ALL SIDES.

    Argument:--Description of the Discomfiture of the Royal army, and
    their use of pneumatic arms.


Vasishtha continued:--Thus the war waged with the fury of the four
elements, in their mutual conflict on the last doomsday of the world;
and the forces on all sides, were falling and flying in numbers in and
about the battle field.

2. The sky was filled with the stridor of the fourfold noise of drums
and conch-shells; and the rattling of arrows and clattering of arms on
all sides.

3. The furious warriors were violently dashing on one another, and
their steel armours were clashing against each other, and splitting in
twain with clattering noise.

4. The files of the royal forces, were broken in the warfare; they fell
fainting in the field, and were lopped off as leaves and plants, and
mown down as straws and grass.

5. At this time the trumpets announced the advance of king, with a peal
that filled the quarters of the sky; and the cannons thundered with a
treble roar, resounding with uproar of the _kapa_ or doomsday clouds.

6. They rent asunder at the same time, the sides of the highest hill
and mountains; and split in twain, the rocky shores and banks every
where.

7. The king then issued forth to all the four sides, in the four fold
or four parted form of himself; like the four regents of the four
quarters of the sky, or like the four arms of Náráyana, stretching to
so many sides of heaven.

8. Being then followed by his fourfold forces (composed of horse,
elephants, war-cars and foot soldiers); he then rushed out of the
confines of his city of palaces, and marched to the open fields lying
out of the town.

9. He saw the thinness of his own army, and the strong armament of his
enemies all around; and heard their loud clamour all about, like the
wild roar of the surrounding sea.

10. Flights of arrows flying thickly through the air, appeared as
sharks floating in the sea; and the bodies of elephants, moving in the
wide battle field, seemed as the huge waves of the ocean.

11. The moving battalions wheeling circular bodies, seemed as the
whirling eddies in the sea; and the coursing chariots with their waving
flags, appeared as the sailing ships with their unfurled sails.

12. The uplifted umbrellas were as the foams of the sea, and the
neighing of horses, likened the frothing of whales. The glaring of
shining weapons, appeared as the flaring of falling rain under the
sunshine.

13. The moving elephants and sweeping horses, seemed as the huge surges
and swelling waves of the sea; and the dark Dravidian barbarians
gabbled, like the gurgling bubbles of sea waters.

14. The big elephants with their towering and lowering bodies, seemed
as they were mounting or dismounting from the heights of mountains, and
breaking their hollow caves, howling with the rustling winds.

15. The battle field looked like the vast expanse of water, in which
the slain horses and elephants seemed to be swimming as fragments of
floating rocks, and where the moving legions, appeared as the rolling
waves of the sea.

16. The field presented the dismal appearance of an untimely
dissolution; appeared as an ocean of blood, stretching to the borders
of the visible horizon.

17. The fragments of the shining weapons, showed themselves as the
sparkling gems in the womb of the sea; and the movement of forces,
resembled the casting of ballast stones into it.

18. The falling weapons, were as showers of gems and snow from above;
and presented the appearance of evening clouds in some place, and of
fleecy vapours in another.

19. Beholding the ocean like the battalion of the enemy, the king
thought of swallowing it up, as the sage Agastya had sucked in the
ocean; and with this intent, he remembered his airy instrument, which
he thought to employ on this occasion; (and which would disperse the
cloud of the hostile force like the wind).

20. He got the airy instrument, and aimed it at all sides; as when
the god Siva had set the arrow to his bow on Mount Meru, to slay the
demon Tripura. (This passage shows the slaughter of Tripura, when the
Indo-Aryans had their habitation on Meru or the polar mountains).

21. He bowed to his god Agni--Ignis, and let fly his mighty missile
with all his might; in order to repel the raging fire, and preserve his
own forces from destruction.

22. He hurled his airy bolt, together with its accompaniment of the
cloudy arms; both to drive off as well as to set down the fire of the
enemy.

23. These arms being propelled from his octuple cross bow, burst forth
into a thousand dire weapons, which ran to and filled all the four
sides or quarters of the sky.

24. Then there issued forth from these, an abundance of darts and
arrows; and currents of iron spears and tridents; and volleys of shots
and rockets.

25. There were torrents of missiles and mallets, as well as currents of
discs and battle axes.

26. There were streams of iron clubs, crows and lances; and floods of
bhindipalas or short arrows thrown from the hand or through tubes; and
also swashes of spring nets, and air instruments of incredible velocity.

27. There was an effusion of fire bolts, and a profluence of
lightnings, as also showers of fallings shorts, and scuds of flying
swords and sabres.

28. There were falls of iron arrows, and javelins and spears of great
force and strength; and purling of huge snakes, that were found in
mountain caves, and grew there for ages.

29. It was in no time, that the force of these flying arms, blasted
the ocean of the hostile forces; which fled in full haste and hurry in
all directions, as heaps of ashes before the hurricane and whirlwind.

30. The thunder showers of arms, and the driving rain of weapons, were
driven away by the impetuous winds; and invading hosts hurried to all
sides, as the torrent of a river breaks its embankment, and overflows
on the land in the rains.

31. The four bodies of troops (consisting of horse, elephant, chariots
and foot-soldiers), fled vanquished from the field to the four
directions; just as the mountain cataracts precipitate on all sides
during the rains.

32. The lofty flags and their posts, were torn and broken and hurled
down as large trees by storm; and the forest of uplifted swords were
broken to pieces, and scattered like the petals of _mariche_ flowers
over the ground.

33. The sturdy bodies of stout soldiers, were rolling as stones on the
ground, and besmeared with blood gushing out of their wounds; while the
groans of their agony, broke down the stoutest hearts.

34. Large elephants rolled upon the ground with their elevated tusks
rising as trees; and roared aloud with their crackling sounds, vying
with thunder claps and roaring clouds.

35. The clashing of the weapons against one another, was as the
crashing of the branches of trees against each other; and the horses
clashing on one another, sounded as the clashing of waves of the sea.

36. The crackling of war cars and their huge wheels, sounded as the
rattling of the hail storm on high; and the mingled noise of the
clashing of carriages, horse, elephants and foot-soldiers, sounded as
the crashing of stones.

37. The harsh sound of war hoops and shouts, was loud on all sides; and
cries of dying soldiers, crying “we die, we are slain,” swelled in the
air all around.

38. The army appeared as a sea, and their march was as the whirling of
an eddy with its gurgling sound; and the bloodshed on their bodies,
exhibited the roseate hue of the evening sky.

39. The waving weapons, appeared as a lowering cloud moving upon the
shore; and the ground besmeared in blood seemed as the fragment of a
purple cloud.

40. The lancers, mace bearers and spearmen, seemed to bear the tall
_tala_ trees in their hands; while the cowardly crowds of men, were
seen to cry aloud like the timid deer in the plain.

41. The dead bodies of horses, elephants and warriors, lay prostrate on
the ground liken the fallen leaves of trees; and the rotten flesh and
fat of the bruised carcasses, were trodden down to mud and mire in the
field.

42. Their bones were pounded to dust under the hoofs of the horses; and
the concussion of wood and stones under the driving winds, raised a
rattling sound all around.

43. The clouds of dooms-day were roaring, and the winds of desolation
were blowing; the rains of the last day were falling, and the thunders
of destruction were clapping all about.

44. The surface of the ground was all muddy and miry, and the face of
the land was flooded all over; the air was chill and bleak, and the sky
was drizzling through all its pores.

45. The huts and hamlets, and the towns and villages, were all in
a blaze; and the people and their cattle, with all the horses and
elephants, were in full cry and loud uproar.

46. The earth and heaven, resounded with the rolling of chariots and
rumbling of clouds; and the four quarters of heaven, reverberated to
the twanging of his four fold bow on all the four sides.

47. The forky lightnings were playing, by the friction and clashing
of the clouds; and showers of arrows and missiles fell profusely from
them, with the thunder bolts of maces, and darts of spears.

48. The armies of the invading chiefs, fled in confusion from all the
four sides of the field; and the flying forces fell in numbers like
swarms of ants and troops of gnats and flies.

49. The myrmidons of the bordering tribes, were burnt amidst the
conflagration of fiery arms; and were pierced by the fiery weapons,
falling like thunderbolts upon them, from the darkened sky. The flying
forces resembled the marine animals of the deep, which being disturbed
by the perturbed waters of the sea, plunge at last into the submarine
fire.




