CHAPTER CLXXXXIII.

MENTAL TORPOR OR TRANQUILITY.

    Argument:--Ráma’s ecstatic hybernation and union with the Supreme
    unity.


Ráma rejoined:--There is the only One alone whom neither the gods nor
the _rishis_ know or comprehend; He is without beginning, middle and
end, and it is that being that thus shines himself, without this world
and these phenomena.

2. It is useless to us to mind the difference, between the unity
and duality, and to be led to the doubts created by the misleading
verboilogy of erroneous doctrines; without relying in the state of one
tranquil and unvarying Spirit.

3. The world is as clearly a vacuous body, appearing in the womb of
vacuity; as the string of pearls and the aerial castles, that are seen
in the open sky.

4. The world is attached in the same manner, to the solidity of the
invisible intellect; as vacuity is inherent in vacuum, lapidity in the
stone, and fluidity in water.

5. Though the world, appears to be spread on all sides of space; yet it
is no more than an empty vacuity, lying calm and quiet, in the hollow
womb of the great intellect.

6. This world appearing so fair and perspicuous, to the sight of
ignorant people; vanishes as a phantom into nothing, at the sight of
the boundless glory of the transcendent God.

7. The impression of difference and duality, existing between the
creator and creation, among worldly men; vanishes upon reflection, like
waves into the waters of the sea.

8. The existence of the world, together with all our miseries in it,
before the light of our liberation; as the darkness of night flies away
at sunrise, and the light of the day disappears, before the gloom of
night.

9. Whether in plenty or poverty, or in birth, death or disease; or in
the troubles and turmoils of the world, the wise man remains unshaken,
though he may be overpowered by them.

10. There is no knowing nor error in this world, nor any pain or
pleasure, or distress or delight in it; but they are all attributes of
the deity, whose pure nature is unsullied by them.

11. I have come to know, that this existence is the immaculate Brahma
himself; and is the want of our knowledge, which says anything to be
beside the spirit of the Great God.

12. I am awakened to, and enlightened in divine knowledge; and find
external existence cease to exist in any presence.

13. Perfect knowledge tells us, all these worlds to be but Brahma
himself; but want of this knowledge says, I was no Brahma before, but
have now become so by my knowledge.

14. The known and the unknown, the dark and the bright are all but
Brahma, as vacuity and unity, and brightness and blueness, do all
appertain to the one and same sky.

15. I am extinct in the deity (in my divine knowledge), and sit
dauntless of anything; I am devoid of all desire, with my leaning in
perfect blessedness; I am as I am, ravished in my infinite bliss,
without my sensibility of what or which.

16. I am wholly that one and sole entity, which is naught but perfect
tranquility; I see nothing but a calm and quiet, which utterly absorbs
and enrapts me quite.

17. Knowing the knowable (the unknown One) is to unknow one’s self
and ignore the visible; as this cognition continues to dawn in the
soul, the whole cosmos sinks into oblivion and seems a block of stone,
without the name and sign of anything being known.




CHAPTER CLXXXXIV.

RÁMA’S REST IN NIRVÁNA INSENSIBILITY.

    Argument:--Ráma’s feeling of his comatosity, and _his relation_
    of it to his preceptor Vasishtha.


Ráma said:--In whatever manner and form, the living or individual soul
conceives the universal soul within itself; it has the same conception
or idea presented before it, agreeably to its concept thereof. (_i.e._
The divine spirit appears in the same form in us, as we think it to be).

2. All these worlds lie in concert in their spiritual state, in the
boundless spirit of the great Brahma; but they appear to us in various
lights, like the different rays, radiating from the one and same gem.

3. The great and bright quarry of the Divine Mind, contains all these
gemming worlds in its unbounded bosom; all of which unite to shed and
scatter their conjoined light upon us, like the commingled rays of the
gems contained in the womb of a vast mine.

4. All these several worlds, shining together like so many lamps of a
lustre; are clearly perceived by some and are imperceptible to others,
as the blaze of day light is dazzling to the clear-sighted, but quite
dim to the blind.

5. As the rushing of the contrary currents, describe the whirlpools
in the waters of the deep; so do the contact and conflict of the
elementary atoms, produce the consolidation and dissolution of worlds,
which are no acts of creation.

6. The creation is everywhere but a coagulation, of the drizzling drops
of the gelid intellect; who can therefore count the countless watery
particles, that are incessantly oozing out of it, and are condensed in
the forms of worldly spherules.

7. As the part is not different in its substance, from that of the
whole; so the creation is not otherwise than its creator, except in
the difference of the two terms of devious significations.

8. The causeless and uncausing unity, being the archetype of infinite
variety; these numberless multiplicities are only ectypes of that sole
moiety, and neither a duality nor pluralities whatever; nor do these
copies and counterparts, ever rise or fall apart from their original
prototype (but the both are showing the same).

9. It is that intelligence which shows the intelligibles in itself; it
produces these unproduced productions to view, as the sun light exposes
the visibles to light.

10. It is from my inappetency of all things in existence, that I have
accomplished that perfection, and acquired that prosperity for myself,
which is termed _insouciance_ or the nirvána extinction.

11. It is not by our understanding this bliss, nor can we have any
knowledge of it by our percipience; neither is there any knowledge
whereby we may know, the unknown one which is alone to be known. (Here
is a pun and play of the word bódha or knowledge, which is explained in
the gloss to a great length).

12. It is a knowledge that rises of itself, and a waking of the soul
resembling its somnolence; it throws a light as that of the midday sun
in the inmost soul, and is neither confined in or absent from any place
or time. (_i.e._ The full blaze of spiritual light, fills the soul at
all times and places or as Pope says: It wraps my soul, and absorbs me
quite).

13. It is after the subsidence of all desire within, and desistance
from all actions without accompanied with one’s desistance from all
wishes, that this stillness attends upon the enlightened soul.

14. The saint of awakened understanding, that is confined in himself,
and absorbed in his meditation; is neither inclined to the prurience of
any thing, nor to the avoidance of aught whatever. (“Have what I have,
and dare not leave, enamoured of the present day.” Young).

15. In this state of rapture, the mind of the saint, though in full
possession of its mental faculties; remains yet as fixed and inactive,
and unmindful of all worldly things and bodily actions; as a burning
taper, that consumes itself while  illumes others, without any
shaking or motion of its own. (_i.e._ Thoughtful and inactive).

16. The soul becomes as Viswarúpa or incorporated with the world, in
its condition of thoughtfulness, when it is called the Viswátma or
the mundane soul; or else it is said to be situated in the state of
the immense void of Brahma, when it is devoid of and unoccupied with
its thoughts. Hence creation and its cessation, both appertain to the
Divine Intellect, in its states of activity or thoughtfulness and its
wants or stupor.

17. He who is enrapt in divine ecstasy, and settled in his belief of
the identity of the Deity with his excogitation of him, remains closely
confined in himself with his rapture and secure from distraction of his
mind (and perturbation of worldly thoughts).

18. He who relies only in the cogitation of his self, regardless
of all other things in the world; comes to find the reality of his
self-cognition alone, and else beside, to be as _nil_ as empty air.
(Literally: as empty air is not distinct from vacuity).

19. The man of enlarged understanding, has an unbounded store of
knowledge in himself; but this ultimately ends in the knowledge of the
unspeakable one. (The end of all knowledge is the knowledge of God).

20. It is therefore in our quietism, that we feel the very best entity
of our consciousness, to be either dormant or extinct; and this state
of tranquility of the mind, is unutterable in words.

21. That which is the acme of all knowledge, is the abstract and
abstruse knowledge of all as the true One; hence the world is a real
entity, in as much as it abides in the eternal One (in its abstract
light).

22. The felicity of Nirvána--ecstasy, with the utter extinction of all
desire, and the consciousness of a cool and calm composure of one’s
self, is the _summum bonum_ or highest state of bliss and perfection;
that is aimed at to be attained even by the gods Brahmá, Vishnu and
Siva.

23. All things (desirable to the soul), are always present with it,
in all places and at all times; they are ever accompanied with our
concepts of them in the intellect, which is the only pure entity that
is ever in existence, and is never dissolved. (The thought survives the
thing it represents).

24. Too hot is the busy bustle of the world, and very cooling is the
bliss of Nirvána insensibility; it is therefore far better to have
the cold heartedness of _insouciance_, than the heart burning heat of
worldliness.

25. As an artist conceives in himself, the contrivance of a statue
sculptured in relief, in the slab of his mind; so the Great Brahma sees
this universe inscribed in him, in rilievo and not carved out of him.

26. Just as the spacious ocean looks upon the waves, heaving upon the
surface of its waters; so doth the great Brahma see the myriads of
worlds, rolling about in the midst of its intellect.

27. But ignorant people of dull understandings, behold those fixed
inseparable spectacles, in the light of separate spectres, appearing in
various shapes and forms, in the spheres of their intellect.

28. In whatever manner doth any body conceive anything in his mind, he
verily thinks and beholds it in the same light, by his habitual mode of
thinking the same as such.

29. As a man waking from his sleep, finds no truth in aught he saw in
his dream; whether it be the death or presence or absence of a friend
or other; so the enlightened soul sees no reality in the Life or death,
of any living being seen in this visible world because none lives by
himself, nor dies or departs away of himself, but all are deputed alike
in the tablet of the eternal mind.

30. The thought and conviction of this truth in the mind, that whatever
appears to pass under and away from our sight, is the fixed inert and
quiescent _réchauffé_ of its divine original, is sure and enough to
forfend the mind, from its falling into the error of taking the copy
for its mould.

31. This lesson will certainly tend to lessen the enjoyments of your
body, that none of them will ever serve to prevent its fall to naught;
as also to protect you from the error of accounting for the reality of
these numberless, that are at best but passing sights in your dream.

32. Inappetency of earthly enjoyments increases our wisdom, as wisdom
serves to diminish our worldly desires, thus they mutually serve to
augment one another, as the open air and sunshine.

33. The knowledge which tends to create your aversion to riches, and
to your family and friends, is of course averse to your ignorance and
dullness; and the one being acquired and accomplished by you, serves to
put an end to your ignorance at once.

34. That is the true wisdom of wise men, which is unalloyed by avarice,
and that is the true learning of the learned, which is not vitiated by
any yearning.

35. But neither wisdom and inappetency, singly and simply, nor their
combined and augmented states, are of no good unless they have attained
their perfection, but prove as vain as the blaze of a sacrificial fire
in a picture, which has not the power of consuming the oblation offered
upon it.

36. The perfection of wisdom and inappetence, is a treasure which
is termed liberation also; because any body who has reached to, and
remains in that state of infinite bliss, is freed from all the bonds of
care.

37. In this state of our emancipation, we see the past and present,
and all our sights and doings in them as present before us; and find
ourselves situated, in a state of even calm and tranquility, of which
there is no end nor any breach whatever.

38. The self-contented man who finds all his happiness in himself,
is ever cool and calm and tranquil in his soul, and is devoid of all
desire and selfishness in his mind. He relies in his cool hearted
indifference and apathy to all worldly objects, and sees only a clear
void stretched before him.

39. We scarcely find one man, among a hundred thousand human beings,
who is strong enough and has the bravery, to break down the trammels
of his earthly desires, as the lion alone breaks of the iron bars of
his prison house. (The adamantine chain of avarice, binds us all alike
to this nether earth).

40. It is the inward light of the clear understanding, that dispels the
mist of desires that overcasts the cupidinous mind; and melts down the
incrassated avarice, as the broad sunshine dissolves the thickened ice
in autumn.

41. It is the want of desire that is the knowledge of the knowable,
(or what is best and most worthy of being known), and stands above
all things that are desirable or worth our desiring; it bears its
resemblance to the breath of air, without any external action of it.
(_i.e._ The man that is without any desire of his, lives to breathe
his vital breath only, without doing any external action of his; but
breathes as the current mind, to no purpose whatsoever).

42. He sits quiet and firm in himself, with his thoughts fixed in
ascertaining the truths and errors of the world; and looks all others
in the light of himself, without having to do with or desire of them.

43. He sits reclined in the immensity of Brahma, with his enlightened
view of the visibles as subsisting in Him; he remains indifferent to
all things, and devoid of his desire for anything, and sits quiet in
the quiescence of his liberation; which is styled as _moksha_ by the
wise.




