CHAPTER CCXI.

LECTURE ON TRANSCENDENT TRUTH.

    Argument:--Relation of Brahma as the all-pervading spirit, and of
    the means of the presentation of spiritual being before one.


Vasishtha resumed:--As I was sitting relating these things to the
prince, he honoured me with his obeisance; and then thinking I had
dispensed my task to him, rose up to proceed on my aerial journey (from
the Ilávrita-Varsha of Kushadwípa).

2. Thus I have related unto you this day, O most intelligent Ráma,
regarding the omnipresence of the Divine spirit; keep this vacuous view
of Brahma before your sight, and proceed everywhere with the peace of
your mind (as you are ever living and moving in the Lord).

3. Know all this to be Brahma itself, and a nameless and unsubstantial
void only; it is something unborn and increate, all calm and quiet, and
with out its beginning, middle and end. (It is infinity in space and
eternity in duration).

4. It is said to be the reflexion of the intellect, and named as Brahma
from its immensity, it is termed the most transcendent, and something
without any designation at all.

5. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, how can we have the sights of the
celestial, and of the Siddha and Sádhya spirits, of Yama, Brahmá and of
the heavenly Vidyádharas and choristers; and tell me also sir, how the
people of the other spheres can be visible to us.

6. Vasishtha replied:--The celestial siddhas, Sádhyas, the gods Yama
and Brahmá, and the Vidyádhara demigods; these together with all other
beings of great souls and wondrous might;--

7. Are all visible to you both by day and night, and above, below,
behind and ever before you, if you will but look at them with the eyes
of your mind; but if you shut your mental eye against spirituality, you
can never have the sight of spirit presented before your view. (This
passage is illustrated in the story of Chudaloka. Gloss).

8. These beings being habituated to be viewed in our minds, are never
afar from us, and as they are represented to be volitive or self willed
beings, they are said to be ever roving everywhere. (The spirits are of
two kinds; some stationary in their particular lokas or spheres; and
others to be wandering about. Gloss).

9. These volitional beings are as fickle as the living creatures of
this earth of ours; and as the volatile winds, which are blowing at
random in every direction.

10. These resemble the airy creatures of your imagination and dream,
which hover and gather about you by day and night; while the others
are devoid of their volition and motion, and are settled stationary in
their respective spheres.

11. If you can in the calm quietness of your mind and soul, secure
the reflexion of any of these spirits in your silent and steadfast
meditation; you can without fail, have the visitation of the same in
the inmost recess of your soul (and hold your secret communion with it
also. Gloss).

12. In this manner do men see the gods as they see the siddhas, arrayed
with all their majesty and glory, as they are feigned to be in their
intense meditations. (Dhyánenaivapara-devah).

13. Now as men of steady minds, find themselves to be soaring to
heaven, in the company of the siddhas and clad in all their glory;
those of fickle and unsubdued minds, have to take great pains, in order
to confine the fleeting object of their contemplation under their
control. (It is often dangerous to the unadept novice in meditation, to
let slip the object of his contemplation from his grasp).

14. The world is altogether an unsubstantial and imperceptible thing;
and is ever as silent and a serene void, as the vacuum of the intellect
(or the Divine mind). It appears however as a solid and compact mass,
according as the notion we have of it in our consciousness. (_i.e._
This nothing is thought of <as> something, according to our mistaken
notion or conception of it).

15. It does not exist in our unconsciousness, nor does it appear to be
in existence or otherwise it is not dull, insensible and unthinking
beings; it is a vacuity and nullity, and utterly an intangible and
imperceptible thing in our sensibility and unconsciousness of it.

16. It is the nature of the intellect to reflect in itself, and all
that is seen about us, is the shadow of that reflexion; the knowledge
of substantiality in this shadowy reflection, proceeds from the vanity
of the intellect, and not from its nature which <is> free from mistake.

17. There can be no talk of causation, production or vegetation, in
the nature of the universe; which being an absolute void, is entirely
devoid of the elements of cause and effect. (Ex nihilo nihil fit &c.).

18. That which appears to be produced, is only a void in the midst of
primeval vacuum (teo et beo); nor can there be the attribution of unity
or duality to the infinite vacuity.

19. Yet the world appears as something existent in your mind; and as
visible before your eyes; and this happens in the same manner as you
have the consciousness and sight of your dreams; in the unruffled calm
of your hollow sleep.

20. As imagination causes the mountains and mountainous regions, to
rise in the hollow sphere of our minds; but neither is the one nor
the other found to be really existent therein; such is this creation
an airy working of the divine mind (and leaving no trace of it left
behind).

21. Hence it is the nature of the wise and sapient, to remain as quiet
and mute as motionless blocks of wood or stone; and the character of
great minds, to manage themselves as wooden puppets, moving wholly as
they are moved by the prime mobile power of God alone (Without being
actuated by their own desire, or deeming themselves as free agents).

22. As the waves are seen to roll about on the surface waters, and as
the eddies are whirling round and hurling headlong into the deep; so
the whole creation and all created things, turn about the pivot of the
great Brahma alone. (Not an atom herein, has an excentric course of its
own).

23. As vacuity is inborn in the firmament, and undulations are immanent
in the air; so are these creations inherent and inseparably connected
with the divine spirit, in their amorphous or formless and ideal
shapes. (This passage maintains the idealistic theory of the ancients).

24. As an air drawn castle of our will or imagination, presents
a substantial shape before us with all its unsubstantialness; so
does this world appear as a compact frame exhibited before us,
notwithstanding its situation in the formless mind of Brahma.

25. All these three worlds, that we are accustomed to believe as real
ones, and as seats of our temporal as well as spiritual concerns; are
all void and formless, and as unreal ones as the airy castles of our
imagination.

26. As it is the thought of our minds, that creates full populous
cities in them; so it is the thought of the mind of God, that creates
these numerous worlds, and presents them to our minds and eyes.

27. Though ever and all along thought as a reality, this visible world
bears no meaning at all; and resembles the sight of a man’s own death
in his dream.

28. As a man sees the funeral of his dead body, conducted by his son in
his dream; so the unreal world is seen as a reality, in as much as it
is reflected as such by its supreme contriver.

29. Both the entity and non-entity of the cosmos or world, constitute
the corpus of the immaculate deity; just as a fictitious name applied
to a person, makes no difference in his personage.

30. Whether what I have said is true or not (that the siddhas and
others are mere imaginary or spiritual beings), you have nothing to
lose or gain therefrom (because we have no concern whatever with them);
and as it is useless for wise men to expect any reward by casting
fruits into the Phálgu river, so it is of no good to the intelligent
who have known the true God, to take the pains of invoking the aid of
the minor gods instead of Him.




