CHAPTER CXX.

DESCRIPTION OF VARIOUS OBJECTS ON ALL SIDES.

    Argument:--Prolusion on the winds and the forest trees and wild
    bees; then on celestial nymphs, birds &c.


The companions continued:--Thus the loving pair after taking to one
another in the aforesaid manner; began to sip their delicious wine. And
now attend, O lotus eyed lord to the other things of things of this
place.

2. Lo, there the winds, shaking the plantain leaves and clusters of
their flowers, and blowing to all sides, with the dust of various sorts
of flowers, with which they have adorned themselves.

3. There the breezes are blowing, loaded with odours exhaled by the
flowers of the forest; and there the gentle zephyrs are wafting the
perfumes, which they have stolen from the locks of their favourite
fairies.

4. Here are the blasts blowing from the salt sea on the south; and
driving as fastly as the stern lion rushes into the fastness of woods
and mountain caves; and as forcibly, as the fierce giants attacked the
gods on the top of Mount Meru.

5. Again there is the high wind playing and shaking with the high
_tamála_, tála and other palma trees; while the gentle gales, are
softly gliding over the waves, and wafting their moisture to the tender
plants below.

6. There the soft breezes are wheezing, with the dust thrown out by the
flowers; while gentle zephyrs are moving about as princes amidst the
bowers and flower gardens.

7. There the god Aeolus plays his sweet sylvan pipe, in the holes of
the hollow bamboo; in the manner of the female sweet musicians, tuning
their reeds in the city of Pándu or Hastinápura. (Here is a palpable
anachronism with regard to the anterior of prince Pándu).

8. Here every plant is fraught with bees, except the _karnikara_
flower; which is avoided by them, on account of its disregard of the
god of air, by withholding to pay him the tribute odour and farina.

9. The _tála_ or palm tree, that rises as high as a column but yields
no fruit nor flower to the hungry passenger, owing to its inaccessible
height, is as disgraceful in itself as the uncharitable rich man.

10. Ignorant and unworthy people, build their pride on outward show,
as the _kinsuka_ flower displays the beauty of its colour to view, in
absence of its fragrance.

11. Look at the _Karnikara_ flower, blooming only to decay; because its
want of fragrance makes it as worthless and despicable, as unworthy and
ignorant men are disregarded by all.

12. So the _tamála_ tree with its blushing blossoms, beguile the
thirsty _chátaka_ by its false appearance of a rainy cloud, so the fair
outside of the foul, deceives the unwise by his inward foulness.

13. Look at these robust, woody, shady and cloud-capt hills, which
afford shade and shelter to others; and are possessed of many more
qualities, befitting the kings of men; are standing in the manner of
lofty bamboos (having all these qualities in them).

14. Look at yonder cloud on the mountain top, resting as it were upon
the seat of its table land of bright gold, and twirling its yellow
mantle of lightnings; appearing as the god Hari clad in his vest of
aureate yellow.

15. Look on the blooming _kinsuka_ flower, with the flutter-bees and
birds about them appearing as a fighting warrior, pierced by flying
arrows, and besmeared with crimson blood.

16. Lo the golden _mandára_ flowers, touching the amber-coloured clouds
of heaven; appearing as the giddy Gandharva lads, lying on the top of
the Mahendra mountain.

17. Behold the weary wayfarers, laying and lulling themselves to rest,
under the shade of the Kalpa trees in the garden of paradise; while
the siddhas and Vidyádharas are sitting there at ease, and singing
their songs to the tune of their stringed instruments.

18. Behold also the celestial nymphs, stretched there at ease,
tittering and singing in the groves-bowers of the Kalpa arbour of Eden.

19. There is the silent abode of the great sage Mandapala, famed in the
legends; and the cave of the celebrated vulture said to be his wife.

20. See there the line of hermitages of the ancient sages; where the
envious animals forget their mutual animosities, and <live> together in
perfect concord and amity.

21. There are the coral plants, growing with other shrubs and bushes,
by the side of the sea coast; and the drops of water trickling upon
them, glisten as gems by the solar rays.

22. The waves are rolling with precious gems, on the bosom of the
ocean; like playful damsels rocking on with their ornaments on the
breasts of their lovers.

23. Here the jingling noise of the jewelleries of the celestial nymphs,
sauntering from the celestial regions, to the infernal abodes of the
serpents through the midway skies.

24. Here those hollow mountain caves, whistling with a sound resembling
the buzzing of wild bees, falling down giddy with drinking the ichor
exuding from the forehead of elephants.

25. Lo the sea ebbing with the waning moon during the dark fortnight
of the month; and the receding tides describing and leaving the linear
marks of their regression upon the sands on the shore.

26. Lo the woodland decorated as a beauty, with clusters of flowers
hanging as wreaths and garlands on every side; breathing fragrance all
about, and attired in the robe of its cooling shade.

27. The variegated foliage from its party-coloured dress, and the
waterfalls seem as its sweet smiles; and the flowers strewn about,
appear as the flowery bed of the happy woodland dame. (The word _vana_
means the _vana-devi_ or woodland goddess, corresponding with a dryad,
sylva or Flora).

28. Here the high-minded sages and hermits, are as highly delighted
with their quiet sylvan retreats; as the celestials are joyous in
gardens of Eden. (Eden and Udyána are both the same).

29. The placid and indifferent minds of sages, are equally delighted
with these solitary woodlands, as the restless and impatient minds of
lovers and worldly people.

30. The waters of the sea, whether running into the land, or washing
the foot of the rock on the sea-shore; are equally shining and sounding
as their tinkling ornaments or anklets (nupurs).

31. The _punnága_ flowers blooming on mountains, appear as golden mines
upon them; and the goldfinch birds flying over them, look like winged
angels in the aerial course.

32. The mountain forests appear to be in a conflagration, with their
full blown _champaka_ flowers blazing as fire, and the bees and clouds
hovering over them as smoke; while the current winds are spreading
above their dust and petals like the sparks of fire.

33. Lo the _kokila_ swinging and singing, on his seat of the topmost
stalk of a _karavira_ tree; when his mate comes and embraces him there,
and sings responsive to his songs with her clamorous chattering. (It is
a sarcasm on pettish wives, that often interrupt the silent musings of
their consorts with their tastelessness).

34. See the salt waters of the briny ocean, roaring aloud against
shore; but the coast-lands are kept in subjection under the hands of
their able masters. (The rule of kings stretched to the seashore).

35. O lord! deign to make this earth (_i.e._ the continent of
Jambudwípa or Asia), stretching to the four seas on the four sides, as
thy footstool; and establish thy rule over the remaining potentates,
that escaped the brunt of thy valour; appoint rulers over all the
provinces on all sides; and provide them with proper force and arms,
which are necessary to keep them in order; and continue to govern thy
realms with mercy and moderation.




