CHAPTER CXXIII.

THE KING’S EXCURSIONS ON ALL SIDES.

    Argument:--The King and his train, pass over the islands and
    proceed towards the west.


Vasishtha related:--Thus they proceeded onward, to explore into the
visible phenomena, exposed before them by Ignorance (avidyá or external
nature); and continued to walk on foot, over the watery maze and the
islands it contained.

2. They passed over the ocean to some island, and then from that island
to the sea again; and in this manner they traversed on foot, over many
a mountain and wilderness in interminable succession.

3. Then as the king was proceeding towards the western main, he was
seized and devoured by a voracious fish, which was as the undying breed
of Vishnu’s fish, and as fleet as a boat in the stream of Bitasta
Beyah. (Vishnu’s fish was the deathless incarnation of himself).

4. The fish fled with him in his belly to the milky ocean; but finding
him too hard for his digestion, he bore him in his bowels to a great
distance in another direction.

5. He was then borne to the saccharine ocean on the south, and was
there cast out in the island of Yakshas; where he was overpowered to
the love of a female fiend by her art of enchantment, (or) where he was
enchanted into the amour of a female Yakshí, by her skill in sorcery.
(The yakshas are the present yakhas of Ceylon, or Egypt, and are said
to be equally adept in the art of máyá or magic).

6. He then went towards the east, and passing by the Ganges, he killed
a shark that had pursued him, and arrived at last at the district of
Kánya Kubja the modern Cawnpore.

7. Then proceeding towards the north, he came to the country, of
Uttara-kurus, where he was edified by his adoration of Siva, and
became exempted from the fear of death, in all his wanderings on all
sides of the earth.

8. In this way, travelling long and afar, both by land and sea; he
was often attacked by wild elephants on the boundary mountains, and
repeatedly gorged and disgorged by sharks and alligators in the seas.

9. Then proceeding towards the west, he was picked up by an eagle and
set upon his back; and the bird took to his golden pinions, and bore
him in an instant to the Kusa-dwípa across the ocean.

10. Thence he passed to the Krauncha-dwípa on the east; where he was
seized and devoured by a Rákshasa of the mountain, but whom he killed
afterwards by ripping up his belly and its entrails.

11. Roving then in the south, he was denounced to become a yaksha by
curse of Daksha the king of that part: until he was released from that
state by the king of the Saca-dwípa after some years.

12. He then passed over the great and smaller seas lying in the north,
and after passing over the great frigid ocean, he arrived at the
country of gold, where he was changed to a stone by the siddhas of that
place.

13. In this state he remained a whole century, till by the grace of
his god Agni--ignis, he was released from the curse of the siddha, who
received him again into his favour.

14. Then travelling to the east, he became king of the country of
cocoanuts; and after reigning there for full five years, he was
restored to the remembrance of his former state.

15. Then passing to the north of the Meru Mountain, he dwelt among the
Apsaras, in the groves of kalpa trees for ten years, and subsisted on
the bread fruits of cocoanuts.

16. Going afterwards to the Salmali-dwípa in the west, which abounds
in trees of the same name, he dwelt in the society of birds for many
years, having been previously instructed in their language, when he had
been carried away by Garuda.

17. Thence journeying in his westerly course, he reached to the
Mandara Mountain which abounded in verdure and _madára_ forests; and
here he sojourned for a day in company with Mandarí--a Kinnera female.

18. He then journeyed to the Nandana garden of the gods, which abounded
in kalpa trees rising as high as the waves of the milky ocean; and he
remained in the company of the woodland gods for a septenary, sporting
with the Apsara damsels in their amorous dalliance.




CHAPTER CXXIV.

QUADRIPARTITE STATE OF THE KING VIPASCHIT.

    Argument.--The actions of the Individual prince, appertaining to
    his quaternary forms.


Ráma said:--Tell me sir, whether the different states and acts of the
prince, relate particularly to any one part of his quadripartite body,
or generally or severally to all and each part of himself; because it
is equally impossible that all and every part should act the same part,
as that the several parts of the same person, could act differently
from the other. (It is unnecessary to be multipartite to act alike, as
well as impossible for the same personality to act differently in its
many persons or parts or forms, which are all one and the same being).

2. Vasishtha replied:--Any person that is conscious of his self
identity, and its invariability and indivisibility, may yet think
himself as another person and doing different things, as a man does in
his dream.

3. Again it is the clearness of the soul, that shows the abstract
images of things in itself, as it did in that of Vipaschit or the wise
prince; and as a mirror reflects the discrete figures of objects, and
of the sky and sea, in its clear and empty bosom.

4. As reflectors made of the same metal, reflect one another in
themselves; so all things which are in reality but of an intellectual
or ideal nature, reflect themselves in the intellect. (The mind is the
repository of the ideal forms of things, and it is mental fallacy only
which makes them appear as real ones. This is the idealistic theory of
Berkeley).

5. Hence whatever object presents itself, to any one of the senses
of any body, is no other than the concretion or density of his
intellectual idea of the same in its nature. (Hence the sensibles are
but solidified ideas, and ectypes of the ideal; and not as causes or
prototypes of our eternal ideas).

6. It is the one and self same thing <that> appears as many, and the
varied ones are but the invariable one in reality; there is no positive
variety nor uniformity either in _esse_, because all apparent variety
is positive unity (_i.e._ all is one, and the one in all).

7. Hence whatever part of the prince, was conscious of anything,
which presented itself before him of any time; the same is said to be
the state of his being during that time. (_i.e._ Whatever a man is
conscious of doing or suffering at any time, the same forms the state
or mode of living for the time being).

8. And as it is possible to a yogi, who sits secluded in one place;
to see all present, past and future events at one view before him; so
it is possible for a prince, sitting retired in his palace, to manage
all affairs of his whole domain; and much more for the king Vipaschit,
who delegated his viceroys, as members of his body to all parts. (This
passage explains the quadripartite kings, to mean himself and his three
viceroys on three sides).

9. So doth a cloud stretch itself to all the quarters of the sky, and
perform at once the several functions of quenching the parched earth
with its water, and of growing the vegetables and fructifying the
trees. So also doth a man boast of his manifold acts at the same time.

10. So also are the simultaneous acts of the lord God, and those of the
lords of men and yogis; who design and perform at the same time, the
multifarious acts relating to the creation, preservation and management
of the world.

11. So doth the one and selfsame Vishnu, with his four arms and as many
forms, act many parts and separably also, as the preservation of the
world on the one hand, and the enjoyment of his fair consorts on the
other.

12. Again though the two hands of a person, are enough to discharge the
ordinary affairs of life; yet it is requisite to have many arms, in
order to wield many weapons in warfare.

13. It was in the same manner, that the self same monarch was situated
with his fourfold persons, in all the four sides of the earth; where
though they were impressed with the consciousness of their self
identity, yet they all acted their several parts as quite distinct and
apart from others.

14. They were all alike conscious of the pains and pleasures attending
on their lying down on naked grounds, their passing to distant islands
and their travelling to different forests and groves, and desert lands
also.

15. They all remembered their journeys over hills and mountains, as
well as their voyages by water and air; they knew how they floated on
the seas, and rested on clouds.

16. They knew how they mounted upon waves of seas, and rode on the back
of flying wind; and how they lay on the shores of seas, and at the foot
of mountains.

17. Again the prince proceeding to Scythea, or the land of _sacas_ on
the east; passed into the enchanted city of the yakshas, lying at the
foot of the Eastern mountain or Udaya-giri; where being spellbound by
their sorcery, he lay asleep for full seven years in the wood of the
leafless mansá sijá trees.

18. Rising afterwards from his drowsiness, he was converted to the
torpid state of a stone by his drinking some mineral water, and was
condemned to remain for seven years more with the mineral substances of
the earth.

19. He was then confined in a cave of the western mountain--Astáchala,
which reaches to the region of the clouds and is shrouded by darkness;
and he became enamoured of the company, of Pisácha and Apsara females.

20. He then arrived at a region which was free from fear, and where
there rose a high mountain with water-falls in all sides of it; here
the prince was lost in the forest of _haritaki_ or chebula--myrobalans,
and become invisible for years.

21. The prince that had erewhile been spellbound by the yaksha,
travelled afterwards to the frigid climate; and there being transformed
to a lion, he roved about the Raivata hills for ten days and nights.

22. And then being deluded by the black art of Pisáchas, he was changed
to the form of a frog, and lived in that state in the caves of the
golden mountain for a decad of years.

23. Travelling afterwards to the country of Kumárika (Cape Comorin),
he dwelt at the bottom of the northern ridge of the Black mountain.
Then going to the _saca_ country, he was transformed to a hog, and
lived in a dark hole for a hundred years in that shape.

24. He lived for fourteen years as a squint-eyed, in the land of
_marivaca_; when the western form of the prince was turned to a
Vidyádhara, by virtue of his skill in learning various lore.

25. There he enjoyed sexual intercourse at his full satisfaction under
the scented bower of _alá_, and passed his time in amusement.




