CHAPTER CLXIV.

UNITY OF THE DIVINITY AND THE MUNDANE WORLD.

    Argument:--Intromission of the Living soul and all bodies, that
    is the subjective and objective into the Divine Essence.


Vasishtha continued:--The atoms of living souls in the world, are as
the particles of rays in the orb of the sun (or as the sparks of fire
in a furnace); and as all these parts taken collectively, make the one
undivided whole; so there is no division of the unity of the Deity,
throughout the whole creation.

2. By attaining the transcendental knowledge of all being the One, and
the One as all; every thing loses its shape and form before us, and
there remains nothing whatever as a distinct being or duality.

3. The true believer or knower of truth, sees the self-same object
in all states and forms of things; and this is the transcendent and
translucent Brahma only, and nothing else whatsoever at any time.

4. He is the same, that is known to the ignorant, as their objects
of sense; but we do not recognize either ourselves or others, or the
sensible objects of the ignorant as such.

5. The belief of the ignorant man in the reality of himself, thyself
and all others, does not affect the knower of truth, as the delusion
of mirage never overtakes the man on Mount Meru: (where the deceptive
sands of the deserts are wanting).

6. As the man intent upon one object, has no consciousness of any
other thing in his mind; so one enrapt at the sight of God alone, is
conscious of nothing besides.

7. There neither is nor was nor shall ever be, any such thing as the
material world at any time; the world in _esse_ is the image of Brahma
himself, and abides in his spirit.

8. The world is the splendour of the chrystalline vacuum of the Divine
Intellect, and subsists in the vacuity of the supreme soul itself;
it is in this light that the universe is seen in the _dhyána yoga_ or
abstruse contemplation of <the> yogi.

9. As there is nothing in an empty dream or in the aerial castle of
imagination except the clear atmosphere of the Intellect; so there is
no essence or substance nor form or figure of this world, that we view
in our present waking state.

10. At first there was no creation of any kind, nor this world which
appears to us (in its material form); it exists in its aerial form
in the Divine Mind from all eternity; and there being no primary or
secondary cause of it, how is it possible to call it a material thing
of its own spontaneous growth.

11. Therefore there is nothing that sprang itself out of nothing at
first, nor was there ever a creator called Brahmá or other by the
ignorant, in the beginning; there is nothing but an infinite void from
eternity to eternity, which is filled by the self-born or increate
spirit, whose intellect exhibits this creation, contained for ever and
ever in its vacuity.




CHAPTER CLXV.

ON THE SIMILARITY OF WAKING AND DREAMING.

    Argument:--The steadiness of the Intellect in waking and
    Dreaming, which are alike to one another.


Vasishtha continued:--In the state of waking dream the dream passes
under the name of waking; and in the state of dreaming wakefulness,
this waking goes by the name of sleeping.[2]

2. The dream terminates into waking, and the waking man rises from his
dreaming, and falls back into it again; so one awakened from his dream
like waking, falls afterwards to his waking dreams.

3. The dream of the waking dreamer, is to be called a dream also, as
the waking dream of this world; and so the waking (or consciousness) of
the sleeping waker, is to be styled his waking state.

4. Therefore that wakefulness (or consciousness) of one, remains
in his dreaming state, is to be called his waking likewise and not his
dreaming; so also the waking dream (of the existence of the world),
and the imaginations of airy castles while one is waking, is to be
designated his dreaming and never as his waking.

5. Whatever lasts for a short while, as a temporary delusion or flight
of imagination, passes under the name of a dream even in one’s waking
state; and so the short watchfulness of consciousness in the state of
dreaming, is known as dreaming and never as waking.

6. Therefore there is no difference whatever, between the two states
of waking and dreaming, beside the absence of one of these two in
the other (_i.e._ the absence of shortness in waking, and that of
durability in the dream). Again they are both unreal, owing to their
blending with one another (_i.e._ dreaming blended with the view of
the phenomenals in waking; and the wakeful consciousness blending with
dreaming).

7. The waking dream of the world, vanishes under its unconsciousness in
death; and the consciousness of dreaming is lost, under the knowledge
of its being an airy nothing. (The world recedes as heaven opens to
view. Pope).

8. The dying person that does not come to perceive the vanity of the
visionary world at his death-bed can have no sight of the state of his
waking (or resurrection), in the next or future world.

9. Whoever believing himself as alive, among the varying scenes of this
vacuous world, lives content with them; he can never come to the sight
of the visions, which await upon him.

10. As the intellect displays its wonders, in the exhibitions of the
various scenes of worlds, to the sight of one in his dream; so doth
this universe appear before the minds of men, at the time of their
waking.

11. These creations which are so conspicuous to sight, are at best but
nothing in their transcendental light and all the forms of things, are
as the empty shadows of them appearing in our dreams.

12. As the world with all its varieties of visible objects, appear in
its inane and shadowy form in the dream; so it is seen in its vacuous
and intellectual form only, in our waking state (although it seems to
be tangible body).

13. It is the nature of the vacuous Intellect, to show the form of the
world in its own firmament; so doth this earth appear unto us, amidst
the spacious atmosphere, like the orbs of light in the skies.

14. It is the wondrous display of the Intellect, that shines before
us under the name of universe; and these wonders are as inborn and
innumerable in itself, as the watery and earthly particles, are connate
with, and diffused throughout nature.

15. What thing is there in it, which you can mistake for a reality in
this unreal world; that is situated as a vacuous body in the infinite
womb of vacuity.

16. The words recipient, receipt and reception, or the percipient,
perceived and perception (_i.e._ the subject, object and attribute),
are all meaningless with regard to this vacuous world; and whether it
is a reality or unreality, we have no perception of it. (Because the
presence of everything is lost, at the absence of its properties, which
are adscititious only).

17. Whether it is so or not or be it anything otherwise (as others
may have it); yet why should mistake it for anything at all, in
whatever light you take it, it will amount to your mistake of an
empty ball for a fruit (so says the vedánta:--जगद्ब्रह्म स्वरूपत्वात्
प्रागभाब तथा प्रध्रंसाभाब एबं अन्यान्य भाबानाम दुर्निरूप्यत्वात् केबलात्यन्ताभाबोऽस्ति ।).




