CHAPTER CCVIII.

SOLUTION OF THE GREAT QUESTION.

    Argument:--Answer to the question of _future rewards_ and
    punishment of departed souls in another world.


Vasishtha continued:--Hear me now to tell you, why men happen to meet
with their (unexpected) good or fortune at home; and in the same manner
how rewards and retributions, come to attend on departed souls from
unforeseen causes in the far distant (or next) world.

2. You know the whole world to be the volitional city (or fabric) of
Divine will, and appearing as phenomenal to our outward sight, and
as noumenal in the light of our inward insight of it, and as Brahma
himself in its spiritual light. (_i.e._ God has so willed the world,
as to be viewed in the triple light of the physical, intellectual and
spiritual also).

3. In this volitional city, everything appears in the same light, as
one would behold it in any of its different aspects.

4. As in your own house, you are master of the direction of your
offspring, and of the disposal of your things and affairs as please;
so is the Lord the sole disposer and dispensator of all things in this
world of his will, as he likes of his own accord.

5. As in the desired dwelling of your liking, you find everything to be
as well disposed as you wish it to be; so doth he direct and dispose
all things in this world of his.

6. The disorder that there appears to take place in the order of
nature, is to be attributed to the Divine Will as the sovran law of all.

7. The good or evil which waits on men, owing to the obedience to or
transgression of law; is both attributable to the Divine Will (which
has originated the laws and ordained their results).

8. It is the dispensation of the Divine will also, whereby all living
bodies have their perceptions of worldly things; just as they have
the conception of the existence of the world, which in reality has no
entity of it.

9. It is by will of the divine intellect, that everything appears to
be existent before us; as it is the oscitation and occlusion or the
gaping and closing of the intellect, which causes the appearance and
disappearance of the world to our view.

10. The king said:--Tell me sir, if the world was the production of the
divine will, why was it not known to exist before with the eternity of
the Will divine, and why and when it came to be manifested and known
to others afterwards; tell me also, whether the world is an unstable
and vanishing appearance in the air, or it has any fixity in the divine
mind or stability in nature.

11. Vasishtha replied:--Such is the nature of the vacuous and
volitional city of divine intellect; that it comes to being and not
being in succession, in the states of repeated waking dreams of
creation, and in the sleeping oblivion of its desolation.

12. Like the mud built house of playful boys, and the air drawn castles
of fanciful men, do the appearances of creation, appear both as real
and unreal in the divine intellect as well as to our minds.

13. As you build and break your imaginary city in the air, and make
and unmake a fabric of your will elsewhere; whether it be of your own
or choice or for any other reason, so it is with the Divine will,
to construct and protract or retract or annul any of its works _ad
libitum_.

14. Thus are all beings, continually rising and falling, in this
vacuous city of the divine will; which is ever shining in its nature,
with the pure light of the divine mind. (God throws his own light on
the work of his will).

15. The whole plenum of the world is a vacuum, and full with the
dense intelligence of omniscience; therefore it is this omniscient
intelligence, which doth still whatever it thinks upon and wills. (This
passage shows that the Vedánta Brahma, is not inactive or Nishkriya as
many believe; but the living God, and sole agent of all things and
director of all accidents in this world).

16. Therefore it is not the hidden but self manifest God, that does all
things even at the distance of Millions of miles, and myriads of ages,
as if they lay before him at the present time.

17. So there is nothing in any country or in any world, which is not
known nor thought of by the sole and unhidden soul of all. (The gloss
applies it to every individual soul, which is conscious of its merits
and demerits everywhere).

18. As a brilliant gem reflects its light and shade within itself, so
doth the gem of the intellect reflect by its own light the various
vicissitudes of the world in itself. (_i.e._ The human mind is sensible
of its deserts).

19. Laws and prohibitions, which are necessary for the preservation
of people, are implanted in the human soul. (As they are the eternal
varieties of the divine mind), and accompany it every where with their
just rewards.

20. The soul never sets nor rises (_i.e._ It neither dies nor revives,
but supposes itself as such by its error only); It is Brahma himself
and his reflexion in others, and emanating always from the divine soul
its source and origin.

21. As from being the viewer, it supposes itself to be the view, and
thinks its imaginary world as a visible phenomenon; (_i.e._ believes
itself both as the subjective as well as objective); so it thinks
itself to be born, living and dying (by the like error of its own).

22. When the soul of its own nature ceases to cast its reflexion, or
suppresses it within itself, and remains quietly in the vacuous sphere
of divine intellect, by assimilating itself with the universal soul of
Brahma, it is then said to be _quietus_ of quiet in death. (The word
for death in the text is _Sánta-Samita_ or extinct, or instinct in the
divine soul).

23. The emission and intromission of its reflexion, are as natural to
the ignorant and imperfect living soul of animal beings; as oscillation
and calm are congenital with air (or as respiration and inspiration
with breath).

24. Now as you see in the city of your imagination, the growth, decay
and death of people, at different times and places;--

25. So it is the nature of this imaginary city of God, to exhibit these
changes everywhere, as in the cases of animals, vegetables and all
things in all the three worlds.

26. But God neither wills nor does everything himself, in this creation
of his will, but he acts by general laws and secondary causes, as
in the cricket play of boys, and growth of grass from grass, and
production of trees and their fruits &c. from seeds.

27. It is the nature of the almighty intellect of God, to bring forth
forthwith to being whatever it wills to be and appear. (The almighty
thought, will or word, is variously said to be the prime cause of all).

28. All things being originally of intellectual form, appear afterwards
in various forms, and with different natures; as the almighty intellect
invests them with.

29. Hence everything here, is verily of an intellectual form, by their
originating from the divine intellect; and as the intellect includes
all things in itself, it is omniform and shows itself in any form it
likes.

30. This very intellect is the omniscient and universal soul, without
having its beginning, middle or end; it is omnipotent and something
which is nothing, and an entity appearing as non-entity; It appears
such as it remains anywhere, and shows itself as anything; it is the
origin of all things and beings, and the source of all vegetables and
grass.




