CHAPTER CXXXXVII.

THE PHENOMENON AND PERSPECTION OF DREAMS.

    Argument:--The rise of dream from sound sleep; and the vision of
    friends and relations in Dreaming.


The sage continued:--Hear me now, O strong armed archer, how I awoke
from my sound sleep, and saw the sight of the world in my dream; just
<as> a man rising on the surface from the depth of the sea, surveys the
heavens above him.

2. I saw the heavens, as hewn out of the etherial vacuum; and I beheld
the terrestrials, as sculptured out of the earth; but found them all,
to be fashioned out of the Divine Mind; or framed in that manner, by my
visual organs or ocular deception only.

3. The world appeared, as the early or long sprung blossom of the
arbour of the eternal mind; or as the ceaseless waves of the vast
ocean, or as phantoms of my deluded eye sight.

4. It seemed to appear from the bosom of the sky above, or to have
proceeded from all sides of heaven; it seemed moreover as a masonry
carved out of the mountains of all quarters of the firmament, and also
as a prodigy rising out of the earth or Tartarus.

5. It seemed also to have sprung out of the heart, as any of its
feelings or affections; and to have filled all the space of vacuity,
as the all pervading clouds of heaven; methought it likewise as the
produce of a large forest, or like seeds or grains growing out of the
earth.

6. As pictures of houses with apartments, are painted upon the planes
of level plates; so the figures of living beings, are drawn upon the
smooth flatness of the Intellect, together with all the members and
organs of their bodies.

7. These worlds appear to have sprung in some unknown part of Infinity,
and to have presented themselves to our view, like flying herds of
distant regions coming to our sight; or as presents are brought
to the presence of prince from different parts of lands, or as the
retributions and rewards of one’s <good> or bad deeds in this life,
meet him in the next and successive transmigration.

8. The world is but a blossom of the great arbour of Brahma, or a
little billow of vast ocean of Eternity; it is a sculpture on the
colossal pillar of the Intellect, without being carved out or cast upon
it. (It is the macrocosm moulded in the mind of God).

9. The firmament is the ample field, filled with an infinity of worlds,
appearing as our earthly abodes in the empty city of air; the mind
wanders at random all over it as an infuriate elephant, with an airy
empty life, as fickle and fleeting as a breath of air.

10. The edifice of the world appears to be built without its
foundation, and is unsupported by walls; and the sky appearing so
bright and variegated, is without any colour or taint of its own;
it is the magical power of the great magician, that has displayed
these wonders and spread a curtain of delusion over the ignorant and
infatuated world. (Instead of knowledge, man has rather eaten the fruit
of the tree of ignorance).

11. Though the creation seems so exuberant, at all places and in all
times; yet it is quite quiescent, and unbounded by any limitation of
space and time; and though it appears as multitudinous yet it is the
single unity; and though seemingly multifarious, yet is all but one
invariable uniformity.

12. The instance of the fairy land is exactly alike to that of this
world, in respect of the unreality of both; and it is the same error
which occurs to us in our dream, <that> possesses us also even in our
waking state of dreaming. (Equality of day and night dreams).

13. It is the reflexion of the mind only, that represents the absent
past, as well as the future which is yet to be, as already present
before it; whether they relate to aught of time or place, or substance
or action or anything relating to its creation or its destruction.

14. There are numberless beings contained under every species of
animals, which contain others _ad infinitum_ in their ovaries, bearing
animalcules like seeds of pomegranate fruits.

15. The rivers, forests and mountains, are seen to be beset by clouds
of the sky, and studded with the gemming stars of heaven; and the sea
is heard to resound with the loud larum of battle drums, raised by the
warring winds with the conflicting currents.

16. I then beheld there a visible sphere before me, amidst which I saw
the village of my prior dream, and recognized the spot of my former
residence therein.

17. I saw there all my former friends and relations, at the very spot
and of the same age as I had seen them before; I saw my wife and my
very children seated in the very same house.

18. Seeing my fellow villagers and my former village scenes, my heart
wished to meet them as violently, as the sea-waves swell to meet the
shore.

19. I then began to embrace all my relatives, and felt happy at my
joining with them; and being enrapt by my desire of seeing more and
more, I utterly lost all my remembrance of the past.

20. As a mirror receives the reflexion of whatever is present before
it, so the mirror of the mind is wholly occupied with the objects of
its future desires, and becomes unmindful of the past.

21. It is the vacuity of the Intellect, that has the knowledge of
everything; nor is there any other principle of understanding beside
the intellect, which ever subsists by itself.

22. He who has not lost his pure understanding, and his remembrance of
himself; is never misled by the goblin of dualism or doubt, to think of
a duality.

23. He whose understanding is awakened by his constant inquiry into
truth and divine knowledge, and by his study of good sástras and
attendance on divine sages, does not forget his enlightenment any more
(nor relapses to his former ignorance).

24. He who is imperfect in his divine knowledge, and whose mind
is bound down by worldly desires; is liable to lose his good
understanding, as it were by the influence of an unfavourable planet or
inauspicious star.

25. Know thou, O huntsman! that thy understanding also, which is not
yet cultivated by association with the wise, is liable to fall into
error of duality, and involve thee thereby to repeated difficulties.

26. The Huntsman answered:--It is all very true, O sage, that
notwithstanding all thy lectures, my understanding does not find its
rest in the knowledge of only true One.

27. My understanding is still hanging in doubt, as to whether it is so
or not; and though I rely in my conception of the truth as you have
declared, yet my mind finds no rest in it.

28. Ah! that though I fix my faith on the doctrine you have preached,
yet I cannot rest secure in it, so long as my ignorance reigns supreme
in me.

29. Unless the understanding is enlightened in the company of wise men,
by attending the doctrine of the best sástras, and due examination of
their precepts, there can be no end of the errors of the world, nor any
rest for the weary soul, wandering continually in the maze of errors.




