CHAPTER CLX.

DESCRIPTION OF HEAVEN AND HELL.

    Argument:--The Breaking and Rejoining of the Court and the
    dissolution of the Ignorance of Bhása and his Liberation in Life.


Válmíki related:--As Vipaschit was going on saying these things, the
sun wishing to put an end to his speech, proceed with his rapid strides
to enlighten another world.

2. Loud trumpets gave the alarum of the departing day, and filled the
air on all sides with their swelling sound: and all the quarters of
heaven seemed to re-echo in their joy, the fanfare of victory.

3. The king Dasaratha gave Vipaschit, many gifts in money, maidservants
and houses; and bestowed on him many rich and royal presents worthy of
kings, and then rose from his seat.

4. The king, Ráma and Vasishtha, having taken leave of the assembly,
and saluted one another in their proper order, retired to their
respective abodes.

5. Then having bathed and refreshed themselves, they passed the night
in ease and repose; then resorted to the assembly in the morning, and
were seated in their respective seats.

6. The sage Vasishtha then resumed the subject of the last discourse;
and spoke his sweet words with such complacence of his countenance, as
if the comely moon was shedding her ambrosial beams, from her bright
and cooling face.

7. Let me tell you, O king, that Vipaschit has not been able with all
his endeavours, to ascertain the true nature of Ignorance; nor is it an
error of the mind which makes the unreal appear as real.

8. The nature of Ignorance as long as it is unknown, appears to be
eternal and endless; but being understood, it proves to be as null and
nothing, as the limpid water in a mirage.

9. You have already heard, O wise monarch, the narration of Bhása the
minister of Vipaschit; and shall now hear of his liberation in his
living state.

10. It is likely that he will come to be acquainted with truth from
some other source or discourse, and then he will be liberated in his
life time; by being freed from his ignorance.

11. And because this ignorance or Avidyá, is ever accompanied with
Intellect of the Lord himself, it is for this very reason, that the
unreality is erroneous by taken for the reality itself.

12. If this ignorance--_avidyá_--nescience, be an attribute of
God, then it is no other than the very God; and the unknown or the
mysterious nature, is not otherwise than the inscrutable nature of God.

13. This ignorance is infinity (in the infinity of created things), and
is productive of endless shoots like the sprouts of spring, some of
which are insipid and others sapid, some are luscious, while others are
mellow and inebriating.

14. Some growing as thorny plants, all hollow within and hollow
without, while others are straight and herbaceous as the succulent
reeds or sugar cane.

15. Some of them are unfruitful and unprofitable, and others are
attractive of the heart by their untimely blossoming, which is
predicative of evil only and no desirable good. (Early blossoms are
ominous).

16. Avidyá or Nescience has no form nor shape, save that of its
shapeless bulk, which fills all worlds; it is a long and broad mass of
darkness, and infested by demons and devils (that take in the dark and
at night).

17. Like false light and phantasms in the open air, and like the linked
and twisted motes of light curling about in the sky; do all these
visibles appear to our view in the clear firmament, and are in reality
but fallacies of our vision.

18. The variegated views which are stretched all about the empty air,
without any connecting chain or link between them; are as the many
coloured rainbows of heaven, which are described by the falling rains
and melt into the empty air.

19. The world resembles a rainy river, with all its orbs appearing
as the countless waves of water, with the dirty and foaming froths
floating over it; and the fearful eddies and whirlpools, resembling the
revolving planetary bodies.

20. The world is a vast and dreary desert, ever exhibiting the waters
of mirage on its surface; while in reality but a body of dust, and
filled with the ashes of dead bodies.

21. As a man wandering in the fairyland of his dream, finds no terminus
of his journey; so have I been roving forever in the land of my waking
dream, without finding any end to my travelling.

22. The web of desires that I have been fondly weaving so long, proved
at last to be fragile and frail; hence men of firm minds learn betimes,
to abandon their desires for the whole range of visible objects.

23. All those objects (ideas) that are contained in the empty space of
the Intellect, are as precious germs safely stored in the casket of
the mind; and appear by our misconception of them, as visible objects
placed in the open space of air.

24. Those worlds are as the celestial cities of the siddhas, which
are situated in the air and are quite invisible to us; but these that
appear to our view, are non-entities, and mere phantoms of our fancy.

25. The heavenly abodes of the siddhas or godly souls, are feigned as
teeming in gold, precious gems and rubies, with rivers yielding pearls
and fields of diamonds; they abound with victuals and eatables, and
rivers running with limpid and drinkable waters.

26. They are said to abound in honey and wines, in milk and curds, in
butter and clarified butter also; there are streams of sweet beverage,
and celestial nymphs in groups.

27. There fruits and flowers grow in the gardens at all seasons, and
heavenly damsels sport in the bowers at all times; and all sorts of
gains and enjoyments, readily attends on the immediate desire of every
body.

28. There a hundred suns are shining, on one side, and a thousand moons
on another; and some inhabitants are dressed in gold and purple, while
others are quaffing their fill of ambrosial draughts.

29. There is a spontaneous darkness in one place, and full sunshine
in another, and an everlasting joy in some place; and the siddhas or
perfected spirits are continually wafted as by a breeze, from one of
these to another, with their light and ponderous bodies.

30. Some meet with their birth and death at each moment, while there
are others that live to enjoy their everlasting joys of heaven.

31. There are magnificent palaces and great dignities of all sorts; it
is fraught with the delights of all seasons, and filled with whatever
is desirable to mind, and delectable to the spirit.

32. But these desirable blessings, attending upon the pious deeds of
virtuous; find no place in the quiet minds of the righteous (which
fixed divine felicity alone).

33. There is nothing that is desirable to the soul, which is devoted to
the contemplation of Brahma only; say therefore, O ye unholy, of what
good are all these blessings, if they do not lead to divine felicity.

34. If in the beginning there was no creation at all, owing to its want
of a creator; say then what is this world, of what it is composed, and
how came it to existence.

35. If the world is not the act of causality and nothing in reality,
then how does <it> appear to be existent? It is the everlasting will of
God, that manifests itself in the manner in the Divine Mind; just as we
see the display of our rising thought and wishes in our mind.

36. It is even so, O ye simpletons, that you or I or he, come to see
our imaginary castles in the air; by the stretch of our imagination, or
the liveliness or flight of our fancy.

37. He who has the single object of divine felicity, for his sole
pursuit in life; comes to attain the same supreme bliss, after he
forsakes his mortal body.

38. But whoso pursues after the two fold objects of heaven and heavenly
bliss, by means of his religious rites and sacrifices in this life;
acquires both of them afterwards, as the unity of purpose secures one
only to one.

39. The siddhas reign in the said manner, according to the thoughts in
their minds; while the unholy are doomed to the torments of hell, owing
to the sinful thoughts of their minds.

40. Whatever one thinks upon, he feels the same in himself, as long as
he possesses his mortal body; and after he loses his material body, he
feels it in his mind, which is but a part of the body.

41. When a living person quits one body for another, he carries with
him the same mind into the other that he had in the prior one, and sees
the same things in its thoughts, which he was accustomed to look upon
before.

42. A good conscience has all goodly prospects before it, as a vitiated
soul meets with ghastly aspects on all sides; the airy mind sees only
such aerial shapes in its vacuity.

43. Pure souls only come to enjoy the sights of these siddha cities in
the air, but impure spirits are subjected to suffer their torments in
hell.

44. There is a continual rotation of the unwieldy stones of grinding
mills, for crushing the vicious souls; and the hurling of wicked into
blind wells or dark pits, out of which they can rise no more.

45. There some bodies are cast amidst the frozen snows, where they are
petrified to stones; and many are thrown into the burning coals of
devils, or led amidst the burning sands of trackless deserts.

46. The clouds dropped down living fire, and the skies poured forth
fiery showers; and red-hot bolts and arrows darted down from heaven.

47. Stones and disks and swords, were floating on the running stream of
the sky; and falling like fragments of clouds upon the breasts of the
accurst, and breaking them as with the strokes of felling axes.

48. The hot iron sleets and brimstones, falling with a hissing sound;
and weapons were hurled from engines, with a loud tremendous noise.

49. Missiles and bolts and discs, together with pikes and clubs, and
swords and shafts were falling in showers; and traps and tackles and
malls and mallets were striking in hundred.

50. There the hot and burning sands, buried the passengers under the
ground; and there burning meteors were falling like torches; while
large ravens were devouring the dead bodies around.

51. Blazing piles also ingulfed the dead, from which they could never
get out; while darts and spears and bolts and arrows, were piercing the
other bodies all about.

52. Hunger and dismay and excruciating pains, tormented by turns, the
bodies of dead apostates; while others were hurled down from high hills
and heights, on rough and hard stones below.

53. Some were weltering in blood, and rolling in pools of dirt, rotten
flesh and disgusting pus; and others were crushed under stones and
weapons, and beneath the feet of horses and elephants.

54. Hungry vultures and owls, were picking up and tearing the dead
bodies, out of caves and places; and their limbs and members, were
mangled and scattered all over the ground.

55. It is thus that men are prepossessed, with these thoughts of the
punishment of their guilt, from the sacred writings; and thereby come
to suffer the same, both in their bodies and minds, from their inward
impressions of them.

56. Whatever form or figure, ever appears in the vacuum of the
Intellect; or whatsoever is dreamt or thought of at anytime; the same
holds fast the imagination, and presents itself before the mirror of
the mind of its own accord.




