CHAPTER CXXI.

EXPOSITION OF THE STORY OF VIPASCHIT.

    Argument:--Boundaries of Vipaschit’s Realms. His adoration of
    fire and attempt to proceed further.


Vasishtha related:--Then the king Vipaschit and his companions, sat
on the coast of the sea, and did whatever was requisite for the
establishment of his sovereignty.

2. They then chose spots for their abodes at that place, and made
houses for themselves according to their positions; they settled the
boundaries of the provinces, and set guards for their defence.

3. At last they went down into the ocean, and then proceeded to the
other side of the world; in order to show his glory; like that of
Vipaschit, to other parts of the world.

4. Then came on the dark night, in the form of an all overshading
cloud; and the people all sank into the lap of sleep, after finishing
their daily works and rituals.

5. They were amazed to think in themselves, how insensibly they were
led to so great a distance in so short a space of time, and to meet the
ocean like currents of rivers falling into it.

6. They said: “It is a wonder that we have come so far, without
any attempt on our part; and therefore this great velocity must be
attributed, to the swiftness of the vehicles of the great god Agni (or
Electricity itself)”.

7. Lord! say they, how extensive is the view that lies before our
sight; stretching from one end of the Jambudwípa to its other extremity
of the vast salt ocean, and thence again to the islands in it, and
other lands and seas beyond them.

8. There are islands and seas beyond these, and others again beyond
them; how many such and many more, may there be of this kind, and how
inscrutable is the delusion which is thus spread before our minds.
(_i.e._ All these are but our mental delusions).

9. Let us therefore pray the god of fire (electricity), that we may
see at once every thing on all sides by his favour, and with<out> any
exertion of or pain on our sides.

10. So saying and thinking in this manner, they all reflected on
the god with one accord, and meditated on him, as they sat in their
respective places.

11. The god appeared to them, and stood manifest before their sight in
his tangible form, and spoke to them saying:--“Ask ye my sons, what
favor you desire of me.”

12. They said: O lord of gods, that abidest beyond this visible and
elemental world, ordain, that by means of the vedic mantra and our
purified minds, we may know the knowables in our minds.

13. Give us, O God, this great and best boon, that we ask of thee; that
we may know by thy light, whatever is knowable by either the external
senses; mind or by our self-consciousness. (_i.e._ By the three means
of knowledge).

14. Enable us to see with our eyes O lord! the paths, which lead the
siddhas and yogis to the sight of the invisibles; and make us also to
perceive in our minds the things, that <are> imperceptible to them.

15. Let not death overtake us, till we have reached to the ways of the
siddhas; and let thy grace guide us in the paths, where no embodied
being can pass (_i.e._ in our journey to the next world, when we have
shuffled our mortal coil).

16. Vasishtha said:--“So be it”, said the igneous god, and instantly
disappeared from their sight; as the submarine fire bursts forth, and
vanishes at once in the sea.

17. As the fiery god disappeared, there appeared the dark night after
him; and as the night also fled after a while, the sunshine returned
with the reviving wishes of the king and his men, to survey the wide
ocean lying before them.




CHAPTER CXXII.

THE KING’S SURVEY OF THE SEA, AND HIS LOCOMOTION ON IT.

    Argument:--The king walks on foot on the sea, his chase of sharks
    and other marine animals.


Vasishtha related:--Rising then in the morning, they regulated the
affairs of the state according to the rules prescribed by law; and were
eager to see the sea, as if they were impelled by some preternatural
force, which nothing less than the power of ministerial officers could
restrain.

2. But they were so exasperated by their mad ambition, that they forgot
their affection for their families, and forsook them all weeping before
them, for undertaking their perilous sea voyage.

3. They said, “we will see what there is on the other side of the sea,
and then return instantly to this place.” Saying so they muttered the
invocatory mantras of the Fire god, who inspired them with the power of
walking on foot and dryshod over the sea.

4. All the representatives of the king, being followed by their
companions on all sides, proceeded to the borders of the several seas,
and then walked on their feet over to watery maze.

5. They walked on foot upon the waters, as if they were walking upon
the surface of the ground, and all the four bodies of the quadruple
king, now met together in one place, and immediately afterwards they
separated apart with all their forces.

6. Marching on foot over the vast expanse, they surveyed all that was
in and upon the sea; and disappeared altogether from the sight of the
people on the shore, as a spot of cloud, vanishes from view in autumn.

7. The forces travelled on foot all over the watery path of the ocean,
with as much fortitude; as the elephants of the king, traverse with
patience on land, when they are bound to a distant journey.

8. They mounted high and went down, along with the rising and lowering
waves; as when men climb upon and descend from steep mountains, and as
one rides and goes galloping on horseback, or in the manner of Hari
floating upon the billowy ocean, or in his act of churning the sea.

9. They paced over the whirlpools, as the straws float upon waters; and
they promenaded as gracefully amidst the encompassing waves, as the
beauteous moon passes through the surrounding clouds.

10. The brave soldiers that were so well armed with weapons in their
hands, and so well protected by the power of their _mantras_ and
amulets; that they were as often disgorged from bowels of the sharks,
as they came to be devoured by them: (because they could neither
masticate nor digest them).

11. Pushed onward by the waves, and driven forward by the winds, their
bodies were carried to the distance of many a league in a moment.

12. The huge surges which lifted them to great heights, represented
the enormous elephants, on which they used to mount, and ride about in
their native land.

13. The vast expanse of water appears as the void space of the sky;
and the succession of heaving waves in it, represents the folds of
gathering clouds in heaven, and as they were dashing against one
another, they emitted the flash of lightnings anon.

14. The loose and loud surges of the sea, resembled the loosened
elephants in the battle field; and though they dashed against the shore
with all their force; yet they were unable to break them down, as the
elephants are baffled in their attempt to break down a stone built
rampart.

15. The waving waves reflecting the rays of the brilliant pearls and
gems, which they bore with them from shore to shore; resemble the
eminent men, who though they pass alone from place to place, appear
yet to be accompanied by their train and glory every where.

16. The surf tramples over the mass of hoary froth with contempt, as
the snowy white swan treads upon the bed of whitish lotuses in disdain.
(The surf and the swan, being whiter far than the froth and the lotus).

17. The sounding main, which was as loud as the roaring clouds, and the
re-billowing billows, which were louder than they, bore no terror to
them that stood as rocks thereon.

18. The cloud-kissing waves of the ocean, now rising above the
mountains, and now falling low at their feet, were likely to touch the
solar orb, and then sink into the infernal.

19. They were not afraid of the rising or falling waters; but passed
over the sea as upon sheet of cloth; and shrouded by the drizzling
clouds, which formed a canopy over them.

20. Thus the companions of the king crossed the ocean, which was full
of sharks and alligators, and tremendous eddies; they were sprinkled by
water like showers of flowers, and adorned with marine gems and pearls;
and they crossed over on foot, as others do in navies.




