CHAPTER CLXIII.

MEANS AND MANNER OF GOVERNING THE SENSES AND SENSIBLE ORGANS.

    Argument:--Government of the senses and fixedness of the Mind,
    and the study of yoga sástra.


Ráma rejoined:--I know sir, all knowledge to be in vain and useless,
without proper government of ourselves and senses; tell me therefore
how these may be kept under control, in order to give us the true
knowledge of things unbiased by the senses.

2. Vasishtha replied:--Addictedness to enjoyments and display of
manhood, and devotedness to the acquisition of the means of life or
wealth; are preventives of self-controul and liberation of one’s self,
as blindness is an obstruction to one’s sight of a light.

3. Then listen to this least advice of mine as the shortest and best
means, for the government of yourself and your senses; and this is sure
to lead one to his successfulness, by his own endeavour and with no
toil or trouble.

4. Know the intellect as the man that mans you, and its power of
intellection which makes you a living man; and whatever the living
soul thinks of within itself, it verily becomes the very same (but the
ignorant man becomes effeminate).

5. Let the strength of your consciousness, ply the pointed goad of
your acute good sense; and you will doubtless subdue your ungovernable
elephantine mind, and come off victorious shortly at last.

6. The mind is the captain of the army of your bodily and mental
senses; subdue therefore this leading mind, and you will conquer the
whole host of your senses. Just so does a man walking on boots, tread
over the thorns lying by his way.

7. [In order therefore to subdue your mind], you must settle your
self-consciousness in your consciousness of the omnipresent vacuum of
the Divine soul, and rest yourself quiet in the recess of your heart;
and then your mind will sit quiet of itself, as the snows of winter
settle down of themselves in autumn.

8. Thus by stopping the action of your consciousness, you will
also shut up your mind, and put a stop to the operation of all its
faculties; as you can never been able to do by means of all your
devotion and austerities, your pilgrimages, your knowledge and
sacrifice, and all other ceremonies and acts and duties.

9. Whatever comes to occur in the consciousness, the same must be
forgot or buried in the consciousness of the great God alone; and so
the forgetfulness of all enjoyments and their objects, amounts to our
victory over them. (The way to overcome the pleasures of life, is to
bury their remembrance in oblivion).

10. We must try by all means, to shut out the objects of sense from
our consciousness; and this state of our unconsciousness of them, is
tantamount to the state of godliness or heavenly bliss.

11. Again the contentment which arises, from our acting in conformity
with the rules of our order, is another cause of preserving the
steadiness of the mind; therefore remain firm in the practice of your
particular duties, and seek no happiness besides.

12. He who relinquishes his inclination, towards the attainment of
what is unlawful for him; and remains content with earning his lawful
gains, is verily said to be a man of subdued appetites, and one who has
governed.

13. He who is pleased with his inward and conscious gratification, and
is not grieved at the unpleasant things all about him, is said to have
well governed and benumbed his mind.

14. By suspension of the action of consciousness, the mind too comes to
forget and forsake its activity, and the sensations also being relaxed
from their restlessness, pursue their discrimination and judgement.

15. The discriminative and judging soul, becomes ennobled and
magnanimous, and keeps its command over the feelings and senses; and
is not impelled by the waves of its desires, to be tossed about on the
surface of the wide ocean of this world.

16. The man of well governed senses comes, by his association with the
wise, and his constant study of religious works, to know all things in
the world in their true light.

17. All worldly errors are dispelled by the light of truth; or else
one must fall into the pit of misery, by his mistake of falsehood for
truth; as the ignorant traveller is ingulfed in the dreary sands, by
his mistake of the mirage for water.

18. Knowing this world as the unknowable intellect itself, that is the
knowledge of the material world as the immaterial mind of God; is the
true light in which the cosmos is viewed by the wise, who have neither
the fear of their falling into the snare of error, nor require their
release from it.

19. As the dried up waters of a river, are seen no more to glide even
slightly in their course; so the formless phenomenals of the world,
never appear in the sight of the wise, nor leave their slightest
vestiges behind in their mind.

20. The knowledge of the world as an infinite void, and freed from the
erroneous individualities of myself and thyself; leads to the knowledge
of a supreme-self, which is apart from all, and the only ego that fills
the whole.

21. All this conception of our subjective egoism and the objective
world, are but errors of our brain proceeding from ignorance; they are
all situated in the void of Intellect, and are void of themselves; and
all bodies are but empty shadows in air, and as quiet as quietus or
nullity itself.

22. This world appears as a shadow of the Intellect, in the vacuity
of the very Intellect; it is a void amidst the void of the Intellect,
which is certainly a void itself.

23. No body can deny its similitude, to the shadowy sight in a dream;
it is an unreal notion, and as unsubstantial as all notions can be, and
as the notion of a void is void itself.

24. This dream is no other than our consciousness of it, and the airy
realms that it presents to our view for the time; so doth the Intellect
show us the sight of the world, without any action or passion or
instrumentality of itself.

25. So I am of the substance of the very Intellect, which is without
its activity, passivity and instrumentality; and the world being
unassignable to any causality or instrumentality, subsists only in our
simple conception of it.

26. As the conception of one’s death in a dream, is no reality at
all; and the sight of water in the mirage, is a visual deception only
(so the sight of the world appearing to view, is no real existence or
entity at all).

27. The vacuous intellect reflects its thoughts at first, in the clear
mirror of its vacuity (or concavity); which is a mere hap-hazard of
chance, and has no firm base or support (nor any form or figure of
itself).

28. The world appears as fixed and firm, without its foundation
anywhere; and seems to be shining brightly, with its darksome opacity;
know then this fixity and this brightness of it, to be the diuturnity
and glory of the eternal and glorious God.

29. The vivacity of living beings, displays the spirit of the ever
living God; the air is his vacuity, and the running waters, show the
vortiginous current of the eternal soul.

30. As every member of the body is constituent part of the whole frame;
so all the various parts of animated and inanimate nature, constitute
the entirety of the one cosmical deity. (These are but parts of one
undivided whole, whose body nature is and God the soul. Pope).

31. As the crystal mirror shows the shade of everything in itself, so
doth the transparency of Divine soul, exhibit the reflexions of all
things in it; the silent soul is as quiet as the mute crystal, but
shows the varying scenes of nature, as interminably as a clear mirror
reflects everything.

32. There is no beginning or end of the supreme being (nor of his acts
and attributes, which are displayed in nature); it is the intermediate
of the two that is dimly seen by us, the rest is all enveloped in
ignorance, though there is no ignorance in the Omniscient.

33. The living soul wakes from its sleeping dream, to fall back to its
waking dream again; and thus it continues for ever in its dreaming
whether waking or sleeping which are both alike to it.

34. The soul finds its rest only, while it remains in the fourth state
of its sound sleep; or else it passes all along from dreaming to
dreaming, in both its state of sleeping and waking, which continually
haunt after it, unless it is drowned in its _susupti_ or sound sleep of
_hynotism_, the only resort of the wise.

35. But waking and sleeping and dreaming and sound sleep, are all alike
to the enlightened soul; which is equally indifferent in all states,
and whether it is asleep or awake, is never infested by dreams nor set
beside itself.

36. The knowledge of unity or duality, and that of Ego _and tu_ or the
subjective and objective; never disturbs the enlightened; who views the
whole as an empty void, and is alike insensible of all as well as null.

37. The distinction of unity and duality, made in the meaningless
speech of the unwise, is laughed at by the enlightened and wise, as the
aged and intelligent men laugh to scorn, at the pranks and prattlings
of young lads.

38. The controversy of unity and duality, is of spontaneous growth in
the heart like an indigenious plant; which without its pruning will not
put forth its blossoms, to perfume the atmosphere of the understanding.

39. The discussion of unity and duality, is as benificial to man as
his best friend; in sweeping away the dirt and dross of ignorance from
their minds, as they drive away the dust from within the doors of their
houses.

40. Then the minds of men are settled in the Divine Mind, when there
ensues a mutual communion between themselves, and a communication and
participation of their reciprocal joys and felicity with one another.

41. These men being always joined together in their fellowship, and
serving one another with the mutual delight and obligingness of
their hearts; attain to that state of the enlightenment of their
understandings, whereby they are admitted into their communion with the
Most High.

42. It is possible for a man to be benefited, even by his careful
preservation of a trifle (at some time or other); but it is never
possible for any body, to attain the most recondite knowledge of God,
without his diligent inquiry into the same.

43. Whatever highest position one may enjoy in this material world, is
to be recognised by all as nothing, provided that one does not remain
aloof from all kind of vices.

44. What is that happiness which is gained by the possession of a
kingdom, which at last is no better than mere botheration of the mind;
while the mind that has gained its peace and tranquility in truth and
Divine knowledge, spurns at the state of gods and kings as mere straws
to him.

45. The sleepy as well as the wakeful, are alike apt to see the
visibles, and are rapt with the sight; but the saints that are calm and
quiet and at rest with themselves, are averse to sight-seeing, and see
the only one in themselves.

46. Without painstaking, and your continued practice of contemplation,
you can not succeed to attain this state of infinite felicity; for know
this state of transcendent bliss, is the fruit of intense devotion only.

47. Thus have I said at length, to impress in you the necessity of
intense devotion; but to what good is all this say the evil-minded to
me, and thus slight and take no heed of all that I have been so long
delivering unto you.

48. It must be by means of steady attention to these lectures, and
by long and repeated practice of devotion; as also by hearing these
sermons and discoursing upon them that the ignorant can come to the
right light of truth.

49. He who having once read this spiritual work, slights it afterwards
as already perused by him; and turns to the study of unspiritual books,
is a vile wretch that collects the burnt ashes after the fire is
extinguished. (Irreligious works are the ashes of the fiery religious
ones).

50. This excellent work is to be read always, like the recital of the
vedas, which are embodied herein; and this is calculated to reward the
labor of the student, by its being constantly read with reverence, and
rightly explained with diligence.

51. The student will learn from this _sástra_ all that he expects to
find in the vedas; because it embodies both the practical as well as
spiritual doctrines of the sacred scriptures, and a knowledge of both
of them, is available by proper perusal of this work.

52. By learning this book, one may have a knowledge of the doctrines
of the vedánta, tarka and siddhánta _sástras_, because this is the
only work, that treats of the tenets of all schools. (Here the word
drishti is homonymous with _darsana_, which is rendered as a school of
philosophy by Colebrooke).

53. It is from my sympathy for you all, that I propound these doctrines
to you; and by way of imposture, that I impose these lessons on your
credulity. You are best judges of my discourse and can well detect,
whether there is anything as deception in my prolusions.

54. The knowledge that you may derive, by weighing well the
instructions given in this great work; will serve you as salt, in order
to season and relish the teachings of other _sástras_, that are at best
but sundry dishes before it.

55. The materialist who is conversant with the visibles, disparages
this book for its occult teachings of spiritualism; but don’t you be
the killer of your souls as to neglect your eternal salvation, in order
to revisit this material world, and to be busied with your temporal
affairs.

56. Biased minds cling to the dogmas of exploded systems, and ignoble
men drink the foul water of tanks, dug by their ancestors; you are
reasoning men yourselves, therefore do not remain for ever fast bound
to your ignorance.




