CHAPTER CXXXXVIII.

INVESTIGATION INTO THE NATURE OF DREAMS.

    Argument:--Truth and untruth of Dreams.


The Huntsman said:--If the sight of the world is no more than a
vision in dream, then tell me, O great sage, where lies its truth or
falsehood, which is a matter of great doubt and difficulty to me.

2. The sage replied:--That dream is true and comes actually to take
place, which rises in our consciousness under the conditions of proper
place and time, and right actions and things. (These are the morning
dreams relating to pious acts and sacred things in some adjacent place).

3. A dream that is caused by use of some gem or drug or by effect of
some mantra or amulet, comes to pass in actu, whether it is favourable
or not to the dreamer.

4. When the earnest desire of a man, presents itself in the shape of a
dream before his mental sight, it comes to occur by accident by law of
chance.

5. Whatever we believe with certainty in our consciousness, the same is
sure as fate, we are sure to see and become the same (by the natural
tendency and constitution of our minds).

6. Certainty removes the uncertainty, if any one reaches there, the
other falls down absolutely.

7. No object is ever situated, either in the inside or outside of any
body; it is the consciousness alone, that assumes to itself the various
forms of worldly things, and remains in the same state as it knows
itself to be.

8. The certainty arrived at by evidence of the sástras, that the
phenomenals are as appearances in a dream, makes it to be believed as
so indeed; but a disbelief, in this belief makes one a sceptic, who
wanders about in his doubts for ever. (Without coming to a settled
belief).

9. If one gains his object by any other means, notwithstanding his
belief in the visionariness of the world; that gain is to be reckoned
as a visionary one only.

10. Whatever is ascertained as true in the world, by the strong
consciousness of any body in his waking state; the same comes to be
known as otherwise or (untrue), in course of time and change of place
either sooner or later.

11. In the beginning the world existed in Divine Intellect, and was
represented in its subtile and incompressible form; It had its essence
in the mind of God, and then extended its tenuous substance to any
length _ad libitum_.

12. Know that beside the true and immutable entity of the intellect
of Brahma alone, all others are both real and unreal, and lasting and
transient also. (They are real as reflexion of the Divine Mind, and
unreal and transitory in their phenomenal aspects.)

13. Whereas Brahma is the only ens and soul of all, there can be no
other that may be styled as such; say therefore what else is there,
that may be called a reality or non reality either.

14. Whether therefore a dream be true or false at anytime, it cannot be
deemed as the one or the other, by either the ignorant or enlightened
part of mankind.

15. The phenomenal world appears before us, by delusion of our senses
and misconception of our consciousness; the visible worlds commonly
passed under the name of illusion (máyá), hath naught of reality or
certainty in it.

16. It is the Divine Intellect that flashes forth in the mind, with the
glare of the glaring world; just as fluidity is seen to be thrilling
and flowing still, in all bodies of waters and liquids.

17. As one sees a dream at first, and falls fast asleep afterwards;
so doth everybody behold the phenomenals in his waking state, and
then falls naturally into a deep and sound sleep. (This refers to the
alternate creation and annihilation of the world).

18. Know then, O great sage, that the waking state is analogous to that
of dreaming; and know the dreaming state to be as that of waking,
and that both these states are but the two phases of the one and same
Brahma (as the liquid and condensed states of ghee or butter are both
the same).

19. The Divine Intellect is a vacuous and incomprehensible entity,
and the spacious universe is its reflexion only; the three states of
waking, dreaming and sleeping, are the triple hypostases of the same
being (or Divine Existence).

20. There is no law regarding the efficacy of dreams, say how can you
determine any rule for ascertaining the results of various dreams.

21. As long as the mind dwells on the appearance of dreams (either in
sleep or waking), so long it is troubled with its vagaries; therefore
the sage must wipe off their impressions from his consciousness.[1]

22. It is the humour of the mind that gives rise to dreams, like
pulsation in air causing the current wind; there is no other cause of
dreams nor any laws for governing them; except the sound sleep (or
insouciance), when these appearances entirely subside or vanish away.

23. It is the manner of the learned, to impute the cause of the
impressions in our consciousness, to external appearances of this thing
or that (or ghata patadi &c.); but relying on the doctrine of the
causelessness of external objects (or the objective), they prove to be
no other than mere imaginations of the subjective mind (or noumenal
only).

24. In this therefore there is <no> other law with respect to this,
than the appearances of things whatever they be, are generally granted
as such by the common sense of mankind (vyávahárikam).

25. Thus there being no law in dreaming, there is some times some truth
in some dreams, and at others there is no truth in any of them at all;
and in want of any constancy, it is only a fortuitous occurrence.

26. Whatever appears subjectively to one’s self, either from his own
nature or by means of artificial appliances; and whatever one is
habituated to think of anything in himself, he sees the same in the
very form, both in his dreaming as well as waking states.

27. The appearances of things, both in the sleeping and waking states
of men, are the mere reflexions of their minds; and they remain the
same whether when one is waking or lying in the visionary city of his
dreams.

28. It is not enough to call the waking alone as waking, because the
dream also appears as waking to the waking soul that never sleeps. (The
soul is ever wakeful).

29. So also there is nothing as dreaming, and may be called by that
name; it is only a mode of thinking in the Divine Mind, which sees
sleeping and waking in the same light.

30. Or it may be that there does not exist, either of the two states of
waking or dreaming, because the ever living soul of <a> dead person,
continues to behold the visibles; even after its separation from the
body, and resurrection after death.

31. The soul remains the same, and never becomes otherwise than what it
is, in any state whatsoever; just as the endless duration never changes
with the course of time, and the ocean continues alike under its
rolling waves, and the airy space remains unchanged above the changing
clouds.

32. So the creation is inseparable from the supreme soul, whether it
exists or becomes extinct; and as the perforations and marks in a stone
are never distinct from it; so are the states of waking and sleeping
coincident with the soul Divine.

33. Waking, sleeping, dreaming and sound sleep, are the four forms of
bodies of the formless and bodiless Brahma; who though devoid of all
forms, is still of the form of whole creation, cosmos and the mundane
soul.

34. The supreme soul, that pervades and encompasses all space is
visible to us in only form of infinite space or sky; the endless
vacuity therefore being only the body of supreme Intellect, it is no
way different from it.

35. The air and wind, the fire and water, together with the earth and
clouds on high, are reckoned as the causes of all creation, and subsist
in their ideal shapes in the mind of Brahma alone.

36. The Lord is devoid of all appellations and attributes, and remains
united with his body of the Intellect, containing the knowledge of all
things within itself; and the phenomenal is never separate from the
noumenal.




