CHAPTER CXXVII.

COSMOLOGY OF THE UNIVERSE.

    Argument:--Account of the Earth and the starry frame below the
    endless Vacuum, which envelops the Universe.


Ráma said:--Please, tell me sir, how this globe of the earth is
situated, how and where the polar mountain stands upon it, and do the
stars revolve about the same.

2. Vasishtha replied:--As boys build their fancied castles in empty
air, so is this world the creation of the imagination of the mind of
Brahmá, and no more than this.

3. As the dimsighted man sees the shadow of the moon, and other false
sights before his eyes, so the creative Power--Brahmá sees in the
beginning, the phantoms of the phenomenal world in the vacuity of its
Intellect (like a shadow of the prototype in the Divine mind).

4. As an imaginary city is situated in the mind, and is invisible to
the eye; so the notion of the world is posited in the intellect, and
not exhibited in actuality.

5. Whenever there is the reflexion of anything whatever in the
mind, and arising spontaneously of its own nature (from previous
reminiscence); the same presents itself even then and in that state
before the sight (as in a dream).

6. As the dimsighted eye, sees false sights in the sky; so the deluded
mind, sees the earth and the orbs of heaven (_i.e._ the heavenly
bodies).

7. As the current water flows on the surface of rivers, and there
resides the latent fire underneath; so the notions of things presenting
themselves as dreams of the mind, are manifested as real ones before
the sight.

8. Hence as thoughts and notions of things, occur and subside
continually in the mind; so the earth and heavenly bodies, appear
incessantly to revolve in their spheres (and the stars to rise and set
in endless succession).

9. The world is entirely inexistent, to dull and inanimate beings; it
is visible to those that have the visual organs but utterly invisible
to the blind, and altogether unknown to them that are born as such. It
is imperceptible to the insensible, and perceptible only in the same
manner as it is presented in the mind. So it is in the power of the
mind alone, to represent it in some form or other to one’s self.

10. It is thus according to the mental conception (of some
astronomers), that the bodies of stars, are considered to be as large
as the earth; and the unreal world (of spiritualist), is believed as a
real entity (by the materialist).

11. The world has both light and darkness, owing to the presence or
absence of the sun; beyond which there is the great abyss of vacuity,
which is a vast expanse of darkness, except where there is a glimpse of
Zodiacal light.

12. The polar circle is called the polar mountain, from the
protuberance of the poles at both ends; it is termed also the Lokáloka
or having a light and another dark side, owing to the course of the sun
towards or away from it. Its distance from the starry circle, derives
it also of Zodiacal light.

13. Beyond the polar circle, and afar from the sphere of the sky, there
is the sphere of the starry frame, which revolves around them at a
great distance on all the ten sides.

14. This starry (zodiacal) belt, girds the firmament up and down, from
the heavens above to the infernal regions below, in the vast vacuity of
space; and extends to all sides.

15. The starry sphere (or belt of the zodiac), turns round the polar
circle of the earth, and its nether regions, as it appears to our
imagination, and not otherwise (as fixed and motionless).

16. The sphere of zodiacal stars, is twice as distant from the poles,
as those are distant from the middle of the earth; in the same manner
as the covering crust of a ripe walnut is aloof from the sheath of its
seeds.

17. Thus the starry belt is settled at double the distance from the
poles, as the polar circle is situated from the equator; and it turns
all about the ten sides, as a _bel_ fruit whirls in the sky.

18. The aspect of the world is according to the modality, in which it
is situated in the imagination of Brahmá, and as it is reflected from
its archetype in the Divine mind (or its consciousness of it).

19. There is another sphere of the heavens, which is afar from the
starry frame, and twice in its extent than that; this is lighted by the
zodiacal light and beyond it there reigns a thick darkness.

20. At the end of this sphere, there is the great circle of the
universe; having one half of it stretching above and one below, and
containing the sky in the midst of them. (This is called the _Brahmánda
kharpara_, or the mundane sphere).

21. It extends to millions of yojanas, and is compact with all its
contents; it is a mere work of imagination, and formed of vacuity in
the immensity of vacuum (which is the mind of God).

22. The sphere of light turns on every side, of the great circle of
vacuity, with all the lightsome bodies of the sun, moon and stars in
its circumstance: there is no upside nor downward in it, but are all
the same herein.

23. There is no actual ascending, descending nor standing, of any
planetary body therein; they are mere manifestations of the intellect,
which exhibits these variations in the workings of the mind.




