CHAPTER CCX.

REFUTATION OF THE CONCEPTION OF A DUALITY IN UNITY.

    Argument:--End of Vasishtha’s Replies to the important queries,
    and his showing the unity of the world with Brahma himself.


Vasishtha resumed and said:--Now hear me tell you in reply to the
question, why the heaven is not filled with a hundred full moons, if
it were the wish of a hundred persons to shine as such a luminary on
future, and if the wishes of all are crowned with success in their next
state of being. (The souls of the pious are said to twinkle as stars in
heaven).

2. Those that aspired to become as bright as the full moon of heaven,
became actually so in their conception of themselves as such in the
sphere of their minds; and not by their situation in the vault of the
sky or in the orb of that luminary.

3. Say who has ever and anywhere, got into the imaginary city of
another; and who has ever got any fancied treasure, except the framer
of the fancy and the fabricator of the wished for wealth. (Every one is
the master of his own Utopia and delights in his hobby horse).

4. Every one has a heaven of his own, in the utopia of his creation;
wherein he is situated and shines as a full bright moon, and without
its phases of the wane and waste.

5. All those aspirants to luminosity, had thought of entering into the
moon of his own mind; and there he found himself to rest at last, with
full light of that luminary and delight of his conscious soul.

6. Each of them thought of entering into the disc of the moon shining
in their minds, and felt themselves glad in their situation, as if they
were seated in the orb of the celestial moon.

7. Whatever one seeks and searches after, the same becomes con-natural
with his consciousness; and in the case of his firm belief in the same
state, he thinks and feels himself to be the very same.

8. As every aspirer to the state of the full moon, came to be such in
his respective conception of that luminary; so the suitors of the same
bride in marriage, became wedded to her according to his own conception
of hers. (Every one imagines his doxy, as a fairy paragon of beauty).

9. The one pure maiden that is thought of being taken to wife, by
many men in their minds; is never defiled by any one of them in her
character, by their simple enjoyment of her ideal only. (The ideal is
not tangible possession).

10. As the sovereign ruler of the seven continents, holds his sway over
them, without ever going out of his city; so the soul passes to them
all, by remaining in the precincts of its body: and so does every man
see his imaginary castle, in the sphere of his own house.

11. When the whole universe owes its origin to the imagination of its
omniscient originator--the self born Brahma; what can it be otherwise,
than an intangible vacuum and quite calm and quiet in itself. (The
moving bodies are the fixed figures of the divine mind, and appear to
be turning round like the pictures in a panorama or the objects in a
scenograph).

12. Now hear me tell you of the unknown and invisible results of the
acts piety, such as charity, obsequeous rites, religious austerities
and the mutterings of holy mantras, which accrue to the departed ghosts
of bodily beings in the next world.

13. The souls marked with traces of pious acts in them, come to view
them vividly as their actual works, and painted in as lively colours as
their dreams, by fabrications of their lively intellects.

14. The carnal mind distrusting the reality of these impressions of
consciousness, and disregarding the internal operation of the inward
intellect; becomes restless for its sensuous enjoyment and exercise of
the outward organs of action, until by abatement of this fervour, it is
restored to its inward peace and tranquility.

15. It is the theme of early poets which tells us, that the impressions
of the acts of piety and charity which are imprinted in the intellect,
are reflected over the passive soul in the next world, when the
conscious soul continues to keep the gratification of those acts.

16. Thus the rewards of charity and uncharitableness, are equally felt
in the gratification and dissatisfaction of the soul in this world
also, where everything is by our feeling of it.

17. Thus have answered fully to whatever you have asked of me; and now
know from all this, that the sensible world is an intangible dream, and
an air drawn spectacle of the mind.

18. The prince rejoined:--But please to tell me sir, how could the
intellect alone and itself before the production of the body; and how
can a light subsist without its receptacle of a lamp or lantern.

19. Vasishtha replied:--The sense in which you use the world body, is
quite unknown to the spiritualist, who discard the material meaning of
the term, as they reject the idea of the dancing of stones in air. (The
learned know the spiritual body only).

20. The meaning of the word body, is the same as that of Brahma (who is
all in all); and there is no difference in the meaning of the two, as
there is none between the words fluid and liquid.

21. The body is a visionary appearance, and the great body of Brahma,
is likened unto the figure of a phantom in vision, which represents
the forms of all things as in dream in the stupendous fabric of the
universe. [Brahma is more likely the phantasmagoria that shows all
forms in it. Gloss].

22. But the difference between thy dream or vision and spectrum of
Brahma, consist in the former representing the figures of thy previous
thoughts alone, which disperse and vanish upon thy waking; but the
universe which is exhibited in spectrum of Brahma, is not so evanescent
as that of other.

23. What is thing then we call the body, and how does it appear into
us in the shape of something in our dream; and why doth anything
appearing as a reality in dream, appear as nothing and vanish as an
error upon our waking.

24. There is no waking, sleeping or dreaming, nor any other condition
of being, in the _Turíya_ or transcendent state of Brahma [as in those
of the divine hypostases of Brahmá, Virát and others]. It is something
as the pure and primeval light and as the transparent air, all quiet
and still, [as the infinite eternity].

25. It is the same as the unknown and inscrutable light, which shows
and glows before us to this day; It is the same primeval and primordial
light, that showed first the sight of the world to view, as if it were
a dream in the gloom of night. (Light was nature’s first born, and
brought forth all nature from it).

26. As in passing from one district to another, the body though
proceeding onward, is ever in the midst of its circuit, and yet never
fixed at any spot; so are all things in their endless rotation in this
world, whether singly or collectively.

27. The sight of the world, like that of a dream, presents <a> favourable
aspect to some minds, but it presents a clear and serene prospect to
men of unclouded intellects.

28. The vacuum as well as the plenum of objects, and the reflexion
as likewise the eclipse or adumbration of things; the existence and
inexistence of the world and matter, and the unity and duality of the
divine entity, are all but the extraneous phases or aspects of the same
vacuous intellect.

29. The world is entirely or completely evolution from the fulness of
the deity; and stands as a complete counterpart of the original; it is
neither a shining or unshining body by itself, but is as bright as the
contents of a crystal within its bowels.

30. Wherever there is the evolution of the world in the intellect,
there is the presence of the subtile soul also at that place, and
whenever there is a jot of thought anywhere, it is attended with the
thought of the world also. (The mind and soul are one with creation,
and the same thing).

31. The vacuum of intellect is present everywhere (pervading and
comprehending the whole). And this omnipresence is the divine presence
(which engrosses and envelopes this all) which is termed the world.
[The word world-jagat passing [in our right], is spiritually _sánta_ or
quiet].

32. The divine soul is as quiet and unchangeable, as this universe is
stable and stationary; and it is the fluctuation of the supreme mind,
which causes these variations in the face of the city of the divine
will [or the world].

33. The impossibility of any other inference [of the world’s duality
or its being aught otherwise than the divine entity]; proves it
necessarily to be of the very same essence. Any unreasonable hypothesis
of sophists is inconsistent with this subject [of the absolute unity].

34. The joint assent of the common belief of mankind, the testimony
of the sástras, and the dicta of the Vedas, are established and
incontrovertible truths. Hence nobody can have any doubt in regard to
the real entity of the Divine spirit.

35. This being confessed it becomes evident, that the world is the
deity itself; and when the world appears as one with the deity, it
is seen in our clairvoyance to be extinct in the Divine essence.
(Clairvoyance is _charama-sákshat kára_ or the last sight of creation
at one’s dying moment; when the world disappears, and eternity appears
full open to view. Gloss).

36. From this analogy of the ultimate evanescent sight of the world, it
will be evident to the living soul, that the sight of the phenomenal
is wholly lost before it in the noumenal. This is the doctrine of
cosmotheism, wherein whole nature is seen in nature’s God.

37. He who is acquainted with the sphere of his intellect, is not
unacquainted with the fact of the dependency of the arbour of the world
to it, he sees the three worlds in himself, in either of his two states
of bondage and liberation. (The fettered soul is fastened to the sight
of the material and temporal world; but the liberated soul views it in
its spiritual light).

38. The visible world though so manifest to view, is entirely lost to
sight upon its right knowledge; and the knower thereof in its light,
becomes like the setting sun, wholly invisible to public sight, and
remains as mute as a clod of silent stone.

39. The way that is established by the Vedas, and received by the
general assent of wisemen; is to be acknowledged, as the right path
leading to sure success (vox populi vox dei).

40. He who adheres steadily to his own purpose, by utter disregard of
all other objects in his view; is said to be firmly fixed to his point,
and is sure to reap his success at the end.

41. Everything appears to one in the same light, as he is accustomed to
view and take it for; and whether this object of his faith is a true
or false one, it appears just the same to any body as he is wont to
believe it.

42. This is the conclusion of your question, as I have determined and
delivered to you; now be quick and walk your way with perfect ease of
your mind, health of your body and agility of your limbs.




