CHAPTER CV.

THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.

    Argument:--Description of the hills and forests, rivers and other
    objects on all sides.


The Royal companions related:--Hear, O high minded lord! the Kinnara
females from their abodes of leafy bowers, where they enjoy themselves
with singing their songs; and the Kinnara also being enrapt with the
music, listen to it attentively by forgetting their business of the day.

2. There are the Himálaya, Malaya, Vindhya, Krauncha, Mahendra,
Mandara, Dardura and other mountains; which from their distant view,
appear to the sight of the observer, to be clothed in robes of hoary
clouds, and seen as heaps of stones covered with the dry leaves of
trees.

3. Those distant and indistinct chains of boundary mountains, appear to
stretch themselves like the walls of cities; and those rivers which are
seen to fall into the ocean with their gurgling noise; appear as the
woof and texture threads of the broad sheet of waters of the ocean.

4. The ten sides of the sky, which are spread over the tops of
mountains; appear as the royal consorts, looking on thee from their
lofty edifices, and smiling gladly at thy success. The many-coloured
and roaring clouds in the sky, resembling the variegated birds of air,
warbling their notes on high; and the rows of trees which are dropping
down the showers of flowers from high, appear as the arms of heavenly
nymphs, shedding their blessings upon thy head with their hands.

5. The high hills overgrown with rows of trees, and stretching all
along the sea shore; appear as ramparts; and these being beaten by the
surges, seem as mere moss gathered on the coast.

6. O! the extensive, all sustaining and wondrous body of the ocean,
that supported the body of Hari sleeping upon it; contained the
unrighteous creation at the great deluge, and it covered all the
mountains and rocks and the submarine fire under it.

7. There is the northern ocean, to which the Jambu river, pours all the
gold of the Meru or polar mountain, and it contains numerous cities and
forests and mountains and countries. It washes the face of the sky and
all its lights, and is therefore adored by gods as well as men.

8. Here is this polar mountain, reaching to the solar sphere, and
presenting the trees on its top as its cloud-capt head; may the earth
extending to this mountain be thine, and may not this mount which hides
the sun under its clouds, obstruct the extension of thy realm.

9. Here is this Malaya mount on the south, growing the fragrant sandal
wood, which converts all other woods to its nature. Its sweet paste
decorates the persons of gods, men and demons, and is put as a spot on
the forehead like the frontal eye <of> Siva; and is sprinkled over the
body belike the bedewed persons of females with sweat.

10. The waves of the ocean are continually laving the coast, overgrown
with forests of the sandal wood, and encircled by folds of snakes;
while the woodland nymphs wandering on this mount, throw a lustre about
it by the beauty of their persons.

11. Here is the hill called Krauncha, with its groves resonant with the
cooing of cuckoos; and its rugged caves and rivers resounding harshly
to one another; while the bamboos are crackling with their mutual
friction, and the humble bees have been humming about; among these is
heard the warbling of emigrating cranes on high, and the loud screams
of peacocks, which are terrific to the serpent tribe.

12. Behold here, O great lord, the sport of woodland nymphs, in the
groves of their soft leafy bowers; and listen to the tinkling sound of
their bracelets, which are so sweet to the ears of hearers.

13. There behold the drizzling ichor, exuding from the foreheads of
elephants, and the swarming bees giddy with the drink; which has made
the sea to melt in tears, on account of its being slighted by them.

14. Lo there the fair moon, with his train of fairy stars, sporting in
their reflexions, in the lap of his sire, the milky ocean, from which
it was churned as its butter or froth.

15. See there the tender creepers, dancing merrily on the table-lands
of the Malaya mountain; displaying their red petals as the palms of
their hands, and winking with their eyes formed of fluttering bees.
The blooming flowers bespeak their vernal festivity, and the warbling
cuckoos fill the groves with their festive music.

16. Here the rain-drops produce the pearly substance of
_vansa-lochana_, in the hollows of bamboos; and the _gaja-mati_ or
frontal pearl, in the skull of elephants; and large pearls in the womb
of pearl-shells. So the words of the wise, are productive of unlike
effects in different persons.

17. So the gems are productive of various effects, according as they
are produced in varied forms in different receptacles; as in men and
stones, in seas and forests, in frogs, clouds and elephants. They
gladden and distract the mind, cause fear and error, fever and death,
and many other preternatural and supernatural effects.

18. Lo here the city smiling under the rising moon, and singing in
praise of that ambrosial luminary, through all its windows, doorways
and openings, as it were from the mouths of its females; and responsive
to his eulogy sung by the Mandara mountain, from the many mouths of its
caves and caverns, and the pipes of hallow bamboos.

19. The wondering women of the siddhas, behold with their astonished
and uplifted faces and eyes, a large body of cloud borne away by the
winds; and dubitate in their minds, whether it is a mountain peak
carried away by the winds, or is it a forest of the snowy mountain
flying upward in the air, or is it a column to measure the distance of
the earth and sky, or a balance to weigh their weight.

20. See the moorlands at the foot of the Mandara mountain, how cool
they are with the cooling breezes wafting the coldness of the waves of
Ganges; and see its footlands inhabited by the fair Vidyádhara tribe;
and behold its flowery woodlands all around, overtopped by shady clouds
of flowers above.

21. See the forests and groves and the hursts spread there abouts, with
the huts and hamlets and habitations of men scattered therein. Look at
the holy shrines, and the sacred brooks and fountains lying in them,
the very sight of which, disperses our woes, poverty and iniquities.

22. Mountain craigs and ridges, overhung on all sides of the horizon;
the dales and caverns, and the groves and grottos, are overshadowed by
clouds; the limpid lakes, resemble the clear firmament; such sights are
sure to melt away masses of our crimes.

23. Lo here my lord, the ravines of the Malaya mountain, redolent with
the odour of the aromatic sandal wood; and there the Vindhyan hills,
abounding with infuriate elephants; the Kailása mount yielding the
best kind of gold, in its olden laureate lore; and the Mount Mahendra,
fraught with its mineral ore (_aguru_--agallochum); the summits of
the snowy mountain are plenteous, with the best kind of horses and
medicinal plants; thus while every place <is> found to abound with
richest productions of nature, why does man set to repine in his time
worn cell, like an old and blind mouse in its dirty hole.

24. Behold the dark and rainy cloud on high, appearing as another
world, to submerge the earth under its flood; and threatening it with
its flashing and forky lightnings, and gliding as frisky shrimp fishes
in the etherial ocean.

25. Oh! the bleak rainy winds, blowing with the keen icy blasts of
frozen snows, poured down profusely by the raging rainy clouds on high.
They are now howling aloud in the air, and now chilling the blood, and
shaking the body with horripilation.

26. Oh! the cold winds of winter are blowing, in their course with the
dark clouds of heaven; and scattering cluster of flowers, from the
twigs and branches of trees. And there are the drizzling rain drops
dropping in showers, amidst the thick forests, redolent with the odours
of kadamba blossoms.

27. There the winds are bearing the fragrance of the breaths of languid
females, as if it were the celestial odour of ambrosia, stolen by and
borne on the wings of zephyr.

28. Here the gentle breezes are breathing, with the breath of the new
blown lilies and lotuses of the lake, and sweeping their tender odours
to the land; and the blasts are bursting the flakes of the folded
clouds, and wafting the perfumes from the gardens and groves.

29. Yonder the mild airs are lulling our toils, cooled by their contact
with the evening clouds of heaven; and resembling the vassal florists,
perfumed all over in their culling the flowers from the royal gardens.

30. Some of these are perfumed with the odours of different flowers,
and others with the fragrance of lilies and lotuses; in some places
they are scattering showers of blossoms, and shedding the dust of
flowers at others. Some where the air is blowing from the hoary
mountain of frost, and at others from those of blue, black and red
minerals.

31. The sun is scattering his rays, as firebrands in some places, and
these are spreading a conflagration with loud cluttering in the woods,
like the riotous rabble in a country.

32. The winds like wicked attendants on the sun, are spreading the
conflagration caused by the solar rays; and carry their clattering
noise afar.

33. The cooling winds blowing from the woods, and bedewed by the gentle
beams of the moon, or moistened by the watery particles of heaving
waves; though cheering to the souls of others, appear yet as fiery hot
to separated lovers.

34. Lo here, O lord! how the _savara_ women, on the low lands of the
eastern main, are covered in their rude and rough leafy garments,
and wearing their sounding bracelets of brass; and see how they are
strutting about, in the giddiness of their prime youth.

35. See how these newly loving lasses, are clinging round the bodies
of their mates, for fear of darkness of the approaching night; in the
manner of timid snakes twining about the trunk of sandal wood trees.

36. Struck with fear by the alarm, given by the sounding bell at day
break; the loving consort leans on the bosom of her lover, as the
darkness lingers in the enclosed room.

37. There is a furze of kinsuka flowers, blooming as firebrands, on
the border of the southern sea, which is continually washing them with
lavations of its waves, as if it wanted to extinguish them.

38. The winds are wafting their fuming farina, which are flying upwards
like mists of hazy clouds to heaven; the flowers are falling about like
flames of fire, and the birds and black-bees are hovering over them as
extinguished cinders of fire.

39. Behold there on the other side, the real flashes of living wild
fire, blazing in the forests on the east; and to their flames are borne
above the mountain tops, by the flying winds of the air.

40. See the slow moving clouds, shrouding the lowlands lying at the
foot of the Krauncha mountain; and observe the crowding peacocks
dancing under them, and screaming aloud with their grave and shrill
cries to the clouds. Lo there the gusts of rain-winds rising high, and
blowing the fruits and flowers and leaves of trees afar on all sides.

41. Behold the sun setting mountain in the west, with its thousand
peaks of glittering gold; shining amidst the dusky hue of the evening
sky; and the sloping sun descending below in his chariot whirling down
with its rattling wheels in the rustling of evening winds. (But the
solar car is a velocipedes with a single wheel only).

42. The moon that rises upon the eastern mount of Meru like a full
blown flower, in order to give light to the darkened mansion of this
world; is itself accompanied by its black spots, sitting as black-bees
upon the blossom. Hence there is no good thing in this perverted world,
which is free from its fault and frailty.

43. The moon light is shining like the laughter of the god Rudra,
amidst his dome of the triple world; or it is as the white wash of the
great hall of the universe, or it likens <to> the milky fluid of the
milky ocean of the sky.

44. Look on all sides of the sky, tinged with the evening twilight, and
the variegated hues of mountain tops; and filled with the milky beams
of the moon, that was churned out by the Mount Mandara from the milky
ocean.

45. Look there, O incomparable lord! those hosts of Guhyka ghosts,
that are as hideous as the large _tála_ or palm trees; and also those
puny Vetála younglings are pouring upon the ill-fated dominions of the
Hunas; and devouring troubled inhabitants at night.

46. The face of the moon shines brightly like the beauteous face of a
fairy, so long as it does not appear out of its mansion at night; but
it is shorn of its beams, and appears as a piece of fleecy cloud, by
its appearance at day light; as the fairy face becomes disgraced, by
appearing out of the inner apartment.

47. Look at the lofty peaks of the snowy mountain, covered with the
fair vesture of the bright moon beams; and see its craigs washed by
floods of the falling Ganges; behold its head capped by perpetual
snows, and begirt by creepers of snowy whiteness.

48. Behold there Mandara mountain touching the sky, and crowning the
forest with its lofty ridges; here the winds are wafting the cradle
chimes of Apsara nymphs, and there the mountainous mines gemming in
various hues.

49. See the high hills all around, abounding with blooming flowers like
offerings to the gods; see the thickening clouds round their loins,
and resounding hoarsely within their hollows, while the starry heaven
shines over their heads.

50. There is the Kailása mountain on the north, vying with firmament in
its brightness; below it there is the hermitage of _Skanda_, and the
moon shines in her brilliance above.

51. Lo, the god Indra has let loose his winds, to break the branches
of trees, and demolish the huts on the ground, the fragments of which
they have been carrying afar.

52. The winds are wafting the profuse fragrance of flowers after the
rains, and filling the nostrils of men with their odours; while the
flights of bees are floating as clouds in the azure sky.

53. Methinks the goddess Flora has chosen for her abode, the blooming
flowers in the forests; limpid waters in the marshy grounds, and in
villages abounding in fruitful trees, and flourishing fields.

54. The windows are overgrown with creeping plants in the rains, and
the house tops are decorated with the flowers of the climbing creepers
upon them. The ground is strewn over with the dropping flowers up to
the heels, and the breezes are blowing the dust of the flowers all
about. All these have made the woodlands the seats of the sylvan gods.

55. The rains have converted the rustic village, to a romantic paradise
or fairy land; by the blooming _champaka_ flowers, the swinging of the
rural nymphs in their cradles, of creepers, by the warbling of birds
and gurgling of water-falls, the blossoming of the tall palm trees in
the skirts; the tender creepers blooming with clusters of snow white
blossom, the dancing of peacocks on the tops of houses, and the borders
shaded by the sal trees; and the rainy clouds hanging over the village
and the bordering hills.

56. Again the soft and sweet breathing breezes, the variegated leaves
of the plants and creepers, the verdure of the village, the cries of
cranes and other fowls, and the wild notes of the foresters; these
together with the jollity of the swains, and the merriment of the
pastoral people, over their plenty of milk, curd, butter and ghee, and
their glee in their peaceful abodes, add a charm to this hilly tract.




