CHAPTER CXXXV.

DISAPPEARANCE OF THE CARCASS, AND THE REAPPEARANCE OF THE EARTH.

    Argument:--The corpse was eaten up by the ghosts, and its blood
    sucked up by the goddess.


Vasishtha resumed and said:--After the corpse had been partly devoured
by the demons, the gods who had been sitting on the polar mount, with
Vásava or Indra at their head spoke to one another in the following
manner.

2. Lo! the voracious goblins have not yet wholly devoured the corpse;
but flung its fat and flesh into the air to prove the paths of vehicles
of Vidyádharas; and these being wafted away and scattered about by the
winds, appear as huge masses of clouds overspreading the skies.

3. See them also throwing away the relics of their food and drink, over
the seven continents and oceans of the earth, and making it again to
reappear to view (in the forms of its mud and waters).

4. Alas! that the once delightsome earth, is now polluted by the impure
carrion and blood; and covered under the garniture of its forests, as
the sky is over shadowed by clouds.

5. The big bones of its bulky body, form the mountains of this earth;
and what is this high Himálaya, but the huge back bone of <the>
gigantic skeleton.

6. Vasishtha said:--As the gods were speaking in this manner, the
demons were employed in the meantime to construct the earth anew with
the materials of the carcass, after which they flew in the air, and
kept on dancing and flouncing there.

7. As the ghosts were disporting in their giddy dance in the air, the
god commanded the liquid portion of the dead body, to be collected
together in one great basin of the ocean the abodes of whales and
sharks.

8. And as this ocean was from the pleasure (_gaudium_) of the gods, it
is thenceforth styled the ocean of wine (or merriment of the deities;
in distinctions from the oceans of milk and other beverages).

9. The demons having done their dancing in the pandemonium in air, come
down to drink their full draughts of that Stygian pool; after which
they repair to their aerial abysm to dance again.

10. The demoniac orgies are still wont, to indulge themselves in
drinking of that bloody pool; and to dance in their airy circles, in
company with their co-partners. (It refers to strong drink and drunken
sots).

11. And because the earth was besmeared, with the fat and flesh
(_medhas_) of the corpse, it is thenceforward termed the _mediní_ or
corpus. (The earth is said to have been formed of the flesh of the dead
body of the demon Madhu, killed by Hari in the beginning of creation).

12. At <the> last disappearance of the dead body of the demon, there
appeared again the succession of day and night; and the lord of
creatures having formed all things anew, restored the earth to its
former shape. (This is event of the war between the gods and titans of
yore).




CHAPTER CXXXVI.

STORY OF THE GNAT AND HUNTER.

    Argument:--Explication of the story of the carcass, and the
    Narrative of Asura and others.


Bhása said:--Hear now, O lord of the earth, what I then said to the
god of fire, from my seat under the wing of his riding parrot, and the
answer which the god made to my query.

2. I said, O lord, of the sacrificial fire and sacrifice, deign to
explain unto me the mystery of the carcass, and the accompanying events
(of the goddess and her demons).

3. The god <of> fire replied:--Attend, O prince, and I will tell you
all of what has happened; and relate to you all about the carcass, as
it is well known in all the three worlds (_i.e._ in the traditions of
all people).

4. Know there is an eternal formless and transcendent Intellect, in the
form of the boundless and formless vacuity; wherein there are countless
worlds, subsisting as minute atoms in endless space.

5. This intellectual void, which contains all and every thing in
itself; happened of its own spontaneity, to be conscious of its
contents in course of time.

6. I conceived by its innate knowledge, the abstract idea of igneous
particles of in itself, just as you find yourself to be in the state of
travelling in your dream; by thinking yourself as such in the state of
your waking. (One dreams whatever he thinks in himself).

7. It was thus that the Divine Intellect saw the particles of fire, as
in the unconscious state of its dream; and as one sees the lotus dust
(for any thing,) before him in his imagination.

8. Then as this Intellect reflected on the expansion of these
particles, it became itself assimilated with them; and evolved itself
in the thought in the shape of powers and organs of sense, in those
particles of its body.

9. It then beheld the sensible organs, as receptacles of their
particular faculties; and saw the world with all its beings, appearing
before it as in its dream; and as we see a city in our dreaming state.

10. There was one among the living by name of Asura, who became haughty
and proud of his dignity, he was vain and addicted to vanities, and had
no parents nor forefathers of his own.

11. Being elated with giddiness, he entered once into the holy
hermitage of a sage, and destroyed and defiled the sacred asylum in his
rage.

12. The sage denounced his curse upon him and said “whereas thou hast
demolished my abode with thy gigantic figure, be thou now be born as a
contemptible gnat, by thy immediate death under my curse.”

13. The burning fire created by the rage of the sage, burnt down the
Asura to ashes, even at that moment and on the very spot, as the wild
fire consumes the woods, and as the submarine fire dries up a channel.

14. Then the Asura became as air, without his form and its supporting
body; and his heart and mind became as insensible as in a swoon.

15. His sensibilities fled from him, and became mixed with the etherial
air; and were hurled up and down thereabouts, by the course of the
flying winds.

16. They existed in the form of the intelligent and airy soul, which
was to be the living soul in connection with the body; composed of
particles of the undivided elements, of earth, fire, water and air (or
the air in motion as distinguished from the vacuous air).

17. The quintessence of five elements being joined with a particle of
the intellect, begets a motion of their own accord as the vacuity of
the sky, produces the wind by its breath and of its own nature.

18. At last the particle of intellect, is awakened in the airy soul; as
the seed developes its germs in connection with the earth, water and
air, and in course of time.

19. The understanding (or intellectual part) of the Asura, being fully
occupied with the thought of the sage’s curse and that of its having
the nature of a gnat; brooded over the reflection of the parts of its
body, and became the very gnat in its shape.

20. This puny insect which is born by daylight in dirt, and is blown
away by the breath of wind, is the short-lived ephemeral of a day.

21. Ráma asked:--How can living animals be born from other sources
(as dirt &c.), if they are but the creatures of our dream as you said
before? So please to tell me, whether they have really their birth; or
be anything otherwise.

22. Vasishtha replied:--Know Ráma, all living beings from the great
Brahmá to the animalcule and vegetable below, have two kinds of birth;
the one is that they are all full of Brahma, and the other that they
are the creatures of our errors.

23. The false but rooted knowledge of the previous existence of the
world, and of all creatures besides, leads to the belief of the
regeneration of beings from the reminiscence of the past; and this
called the erroneous conceptions of births in the visible world.

24. The other is the viewing of the representation of Brahma, in all
things appearing to exist in this non-existent and unreal world; and
this called the pantheistic view of the world, and not as a production
either by birth or creation of it.

25. Thus the gnat being produced by its delusive knowledge of the
world, and its continuance in the same state of blunder; did not
allow it to see the one Brahma in all, but led to different views and
attempts, as you shall hear just now.

26. It passed half a day of its lifetime in whistling its faint voice,
among the humming gnats in the bushes of reeds and long grass; and
drank merrily their juice and dews, and sported and flew all about.

27. The next day it kept fluttering over a pool of mud and mire, in
company with its female copartner.

28. Being then tired with its swinging, it rested on a blade of grass
in some place, where it was trodden over by the foot of a deer, which
killed him on the spot, as it was by the fall of a rock upon him.

29. Now as it died by looking <at> the face of a deer, it was reborn
in the shape and with the senses of the same (from its reminiscence of
them).

30. The deer grazing in the forest, was killed by arrow of an archer;
and as he saw the countenance of the huntsman in his dying moment, he
came to be born next in the same form.

31. The huntsman roaming in the forest, happened to enter into the
hermitage of a hermit, by whom he was reclaimed from his wickedness,
and awakened to the light of truth.

32. The _muni_ said:--O erring man! why did you roam so long,
afflicting the innocent deer with your arrows; why do <you> not rather
protect them, and observe the law of universal benevolence in this
transitory world?

33. Life is but a breath of air, and overhung by the clouds of
calamities, and is as frail as a drop of falling water; our enjoyments
are a series of clouds interspersed by fickle and flickering
lightnings; youth is fleeting and its pleasures are as the gliding
waters, and the body is as transient as a moment; therefore O my
child! attain thy felicity while in this world, and expect thy
_nirvána_-extinction at the end.




