CHAPTER CXIV.

DESCRIPTION OF THE PROSPECTS ALL AROUND.

    Argument:--Description of the forest trees, the hills and seas,
    the forest and hill peoples, and clouds on high.


Vasishtha continued:--Then the royal army beheld whatever there was on
sides of them; namely, the forests and hills, the seas and the clouds,
and the foresters and hill people, and the trees of the forest.

2. They said: behold, O lord, that high hill, which lifts its lofty top
to the sky, and invites the clouds to settle upon it; while its midmost
part is the region of the winds, and the base is composed of hard and
rugged stones.

3. See, O lord, how they abound with fruit trees of various kinds, and
the groves whose fragrance is wafted around by the gentle winds.

4. The sea breaks down the peninsulas with its battering breakers,
and disperses the stones of the rocks on its banks; it shatters the
bordering forests with its wavy axes, and scatters their fruits and
flowers all over the waters. (The gloss explains the peninsula to mean
the maritime lands of Madras).

5. Behold the sea-breeze wafting away the clouds, settling on the tops
of mountains, by the sufflation of the leafy boughs of trees dancing
over them; in the manner of men, blowing away the smoke with their fans.

6. Here are arbours on its coasts, like the trees in the garden of
paradise; whose branches are as white as the conch-shells growing in
the full-moon-tide, and whose fruits are as bright as the disk of the
moon.

7. Lo, these trees with their spouses of the creepers, are honouring
you with offerings of gemming flowers, from the rosy palms of their
rubicund leaves.

8. There is the Rikshabana rock, howling as a ferocious bear; and
devouring the huge sharks and swallowing the swelling waves, in its
cavern-like mouth, and under its stony teeth.

9. The Mahendra mountain with loud uproar, growls at the roaring clouds
(moving below its height); as the stronger champion hurls defiance
against his weaker rival.

10. There the enraged Malaya mount lifts his lofty head, decorated with
forests of sandalwood; and threatens the loud ocean below, rolling with
its outstretched arms of the waves on the shore.

11. The ocean rolling incessantly, with its gemming waves on all sides;
is looked upon by the celestials from high, as if he bore away the
treasured gems of the earth.

12. The wild hillocks, with woods and ruddy rocks on the tops, and
waving with the wafting gales; appeared as huge serpents, creeping with
their crescent gems, and inhaling the breeze.

13. There were the huge sharks and elephants, moving and grappling with
each other upon the surges; and this sight delights the minds of men,
as that of a rainy and light cloud opposing and pursuing one another.

14. There is an elephant fallen in a whirlpool, and being unable to
raise itself from the same, it left its proboscis on the water, and
dies with sputtering the water from snout on all sides.

15. The high hills as well as the low seas, are all equally filled with
living beings; and as the oceans abound with aquatic animals, so are
all lands and islands full of living beings.

16. The sea like the earth and all the worlds, are full of whirlpools
and revolutions of things, and all these are mere falsities, that are
taken for and viewed as realities.

17. The ocean bears in its bosom the liquid waves, which are inert in
themselves, and yet appearing to be in continual motion; so Brahma
contains the innumerable worlds, which seem to be solid without any
substantiality in them. (The worlds are as empty and unstable waves).

18. It was at the churning of the ocean, by the gods and giants of
yore; that it was despoiled of all its bright and hidden treasures,
which have since fallen to the lot of Indra and the gods.

19. It has therefore adopted to wear on its breast, the reflexions
of the greatest and brightest lights of heaven, as its false and
fictitious ornaments. These are seen even from the nether worlds, and
of these no one can deprive it.

20. Among the shining sun is one, whose image it bears in its bosom,
with equal splendour as it is in heaven. This bright gem is daily
deposited as a deposit in the western main, to give its light to the
nether world. It is called the gem of day दिनमनि, because
it makes day wherever it shines.

21. There is a confluence of all the waters from all sides to it, and
assemblage of them in its reservoir, gives it the clamorous sound, as
it is heard in the crowds of men in mixed processions.

22. Here is a continued conflict of the marine monsters in their mutual
contentions, as there is a jostling of the currents and torrents of the
waters of rivers and seas, at the mouths of gulfs and bays.

23. There the large whales are rolling and dancing on the rising waves;
and spurting forth spouts of water from their mouth; and these shedding
showers of pearls, are borne aloft and scattered about by the blowing
winds.

24. The streams of water, flowing like strings of pearl, and bearing
the bubbles resembling brilliant pearls (abdas) amidst them; adorn the
breast of the ocean as necklaces, and whistling by their concussion.

25. The sea winds serve to refresh the spirits of the siddha and sádhya
classes of spirits, that dwell in their abodes of the caverns of
Mahendra mountains; and traverse the howling regions of the sounding
main.

26. Again the winds exhaled from the caves of the Mahendra mountains,
are gently shaking the woods growing upon it, and stretching a cloud of
flowers over its table lands.

27. Here is the Mount Gandhamádana, full of mango and kadamba trees;
and there the fragments of clouds, are seen to enter into its caves
like stags, with their eyes flashing as lightnings.

28. The winds issuing from the valleys of Himálaya mountains, and
passing through the encircling bowers of creeping plants, are
scattering the clouds of heaven, and breaking the breakers of the sea.

29. The winds of the Gandhamádana mountain, are exhaling the fragrance
of the _kadamba_ flowers growing upon it; and ruffling the surface of
the sea with curling waves.

30. After twisting the fleecy clouds, in the form of the curling locks
of hair, on the pinnacles of Alaka (the residence of Kubera); the winds
are passing by the alleys of the Gandhamádana groves, and forming <a>
cloud or canopy of flowers at this place.

31. Here the odoriferous airs, bearing the sweet burthen of fragrant
flowers and gums, and moistened by the admixture of icy showers, are
creeping slowly amidst the alleys.

32. Lo there the _nálikera_ creepers, diffusing their sourish scent
to the breezes, which being acidulated by their sourness, are turning
towards the regions of Persia.

33. Here the winds are wafting the odours, of the flowery forests of
Ísana on the Kailasa mountain; and there they are breathing with the
perfume of the lotuses of the mountain lakes; and blowing away the
camphor-white (fleecy) clouds from the face of the sky.

34. The fluid ichor which flows from the frontal proboscis of
elephants, is dried and stiffened by the breezes issuing out of the
caverns of the Vindhya mountain.

35. The females of the _savara_ foresters, covering their bodies with
the dry leaves of trees, and accompanied by their swarthy males, in
leafy apparel, have been making a town of their jungle, by extirpating
the wild animals, with their iron arrows.

36. Behold, great lord, these seas and mountains, these forests and
rivers, and these clouds on all sides, look as if they are all smiling
under your auspices, as under the brightness of sun-beams.

37. Here they also describe the flowery beds, of the Vidyádhari wood
nymphs; and their sports (which <is> omitted on account of their
uselessness).




