CHAPTER CLXXXXII.

ON THE ATTAINMENT OF SPIRITUAL ANAESTHESIA.

    Argument:--Ráma’s coma and trance, and his revival by the
    spiritual lecture of his preceptor.


Ráma rejoined and said:--Alas! that I have so long strayed about, in
the erroneous maze of the world; without the knowledge of its being a
mere void and vacuum.

2. I now come to know the fallacy of my conception of the world, which
is but a mere nullity; which never is nor was, nor shall ever prove to
be a positive reality.

3. It is all still and supportless, and existing in our false knowledge
of it; it is an endless formation of the solid intellect, and a mere
vacuous conception of ours, without any figure or form or colour or
mark of its own.

4. It is the transcendental vacuum and of a wholly inconceivable
nature; and yet how wonderous it is, that we call this our world, our
earth and the sphere of our action.

5. How it appears as a duality (apart from the unity of God), and
how these worlds and mountains seen as separate and solid bodies of
themselves; when they are in reality but the pellucid sky appearing as
thick and opaque to our misconception of them.

6. This creation and the future world, are as the dreams that we see,
but working of our imagination; while it is the intellect only that
shows itself as these intelligible objects, which could not otherwise
present their visible aspects to our conceptions of them.

7. The thought that I am situated in heaven or hell in this life, makes
this world appear as such unto us; because the visibles are all objects
or creatures of our consciousness of them. (It is the mind that makes a
heaven or hell).

8. There is nothing as visible or its vision, nor this world or its
creation, unless it is caused as such, by the intellect within us; it
is neither a scene in our waking or sleeping, nor is this anything as
real in its nature.

9. If this be but an erroneous sight, how could the negative error
produce this positive spectacle, should it <be> but a false conception
of the mind, then tell me, O sage, how could this blank fallacy bring
forth the thought of this real existence.

10. It is not possible for error, to creep into the infallible mind
of omniscience; nor is it probable that error should reign over this
perfect creation at large; it is therefore the Lord himself, that
exhibits his glory in this manner.

11. What can we think otherwise of the continuity of space, infinity
of vacuum and infinity of time, than they are the attributes of
omnipotence; and how are we to look on the transparency of the air and
crystal, without thinking them as manifestation of his nature?

12. An erroneous notion is as false, as the sight of one’s own death in
a dream; but how can this world which is so palpable to sight, be lost
to or expunged from our sight, without losing our sight of its great
manifester also? (To ignore the world is to ignore its maker also, as
the denial of God leads to that of the world).

13. The sights of the mirage, fairy cities and double moons in the sky,
are of course deceptions of vision and productions of our error; but
the same analogy does not apply to our sight of the world.

14. The boys’ apparitions of ghosts, never lay hold on adults and the
waking, nor on any one in the day light and open air; this and similar
errors arise in our ignorance only, but they vanish upon our second
thought and true knowledge of them.

15. It is improper in this place to raise the question, regarding
whence this bug bear of error could rise among mankind; since it is
evident from our own reasoning, that there is no such thing as _avidyá_
or ignorance (which is the cause of error) ever in existence, nor an
_asat_ or not being even in being. (Because the Veda says सदेवईदमग्र आसीत्
the existence existed from before).

16. It is evident by rational reasoning, that whatever is invisible and
imperceptible to us, the same is called as _asat_ or not being, and the
conception of idea or that is termed an error.

17. That which is not clearly obtained by any proof or reasoning, and
is as impossible as the sky-flower or the horn of a hare, how can that
be believed to be as anything in existence.

18. And a thing however apparent to sight, but having no cause or
evidence of its reality, cannot be believed as <a> thing in existence,
but it must be a nullity like the issue of a barren woman.

19. Therefore there can no error at any time, nor can an error ever
produce anything whatever; it is therefore the manifest omniscience of
Providence, that is conspicuous in every part of this wide and grand
display.

20. Whatever then is seen now to shine before us, is the manifestation
of Supreme being itself; the same Supreme spirit fills this plenitude,
and is full with it in itself. (So the Veda पूर्ण मदः पूर्णमिदं &c.).

21. There is nothing that is either shining or unshining here at any
time, unless it be the calm and quiet and transparent spirit of God,
that inheres in its body of the mundane world.

22. It is the one unborn, undying and unchanging everlasting Being,
that is the most adorable and ever adored Lord of all, that fills
and pervades the whole with his essence. He only is the word ego,
selfmanifest--pure and all pervading, while I and all others are
without our egoism, and shine only in that unity (literally, without
our duality).




