CHAPTER CXXXIII.

STORY OF THE WONDERFUL CARCASS.

    Argument:--Description of a carcass falling from above, and
    covering the whole surface of the Earth.


Vipaschit said:--I saw another great wonder, in some part of some other
world, which I will now rehearse unto you; it was a horrible sight
that attends on sin, and which I had to see by my blind attachment to
ignorance.

2. There is somewhere amidst the vast vacuum, a wonderfully bright
sphere, which is quite impassable by you; it is situated in a vacuity
like this of ours, and so different from it, as a city in dream differs
from one in sight. (Because the romantic view of the vision is not
realizable to ocular sight).

3. As I saw rambling in that sphere, in search of the object that I
have in my heart, and looking to all sides of the void; I saw a huge
and unmoving shadow, like that of a body of locusts spread over the
earth.

4. I saw astonished at the sight, and cast my eyes on all sides to see
what it was; I came to find the mountainous form of a man, falling fast
from the sky; and hurling down like a whirlpool upon the earth.

5. Who can be this person? said I, is it the lord Virát with his
mountainous body, or a mountain falling from the clouds? It fills the
sky and the whole space of heaven, and hides the light of the day under
its all developing shadow?

6. As I saw pondering in me what might this portent mean; (as whether
it was the figure of Virát or the form of Brahmá himself); I saw soon
after, the bulky body of the sun falling down from heaven, it seemed
to be hurled down by the hurricane of desolation and dashing with a
hideous crash against the backbone or great belt of the mundane egg of
Brahmá.

7. Soon as this hideous and prodigious body, fell down upon the
earth, it filled its whole surface, and covered the face of the seven
continents and oceans.

8. I dreaded my imminent destruction, together with that of whole earth
under its blow; and determined to enter into the ever burning fire by
my side.

9. Then the lord fire--the source of vedas, and my adored divinity in
a hundred repeated births, appeared manifest before me in his cooling
moon-like form, and said, fear not, no evil will betide thee.

10. I then addressed the god, saying: be victorious, O my lord and
adored one in repeated births; save me from this untimely desolation,
which is now impending on all.

11. Thus invoked by me, the god responded again saying the same words:
“Fear thou not, but rise, O sinless one, and follow me to my region of
the empyrean”.

12. Saying so, he made me sit on the back of his parrot, and flew with
me up to heaven; by burning athwart a part of the falling body.

13. Getting to the upper sky, I found the body as if it were made of
wood, and it was this which struck so much terror below, as it is
attended with the falling of a portent--a comet or meteor from above.

14. Then as it felt down in full force, the earth shook beneath its
weight, with all trembling waters and tottering mountains, and shaking
woods and forests. The mountains burst forth in cataracts, which
overflowed on the land, and bored it to horrible holes.

15. The earth groaned from her bowels, and the sky roared on all its
four sides; the heavens resounded to the roar, and mountains growled
with the fearful howling of all beings, as at the approach of their
last doom.

16. The earth groaned under the burden, and all the quarters trembled
with fear; the vacuum was filled with the echo of cries rising from the
earth, and the _Garuda_-eagles were on their flight through fear.

17. There arose a harsh and hideous uproar on high, from the loud
bursting of the mountains below; and like the crashing and clattering
of the dark and dense clouds of deluge, when they are shattered and
scattered, by the blasts of diluvian winds.

18. The earth trembled and roared at the impetuous fall of the hideous
carcass, and the resounding sky re-bellowed to the sound from its
hundred mouths; the mountains burst out on all sides, and their falling
fragments and pinnacles, were hurried headlong, and buried underneath
the ground.

19. Its fall was as the breaking down of a mountain pinnacle or
fragment, smashing the tops of the lower hills, rending and splitting
the ground, and levelling all things on earth with the dust.

20. It perturbed the waters of the deep, and hurled down the hills to
the ground; it crushed all living beings, and gave ample range to the
sport of the agents of destruction (the Rudras).

21. The falling of the sun upon the earth, and his hiding the face of
the continents under him; the crushing of mountains and the breaking
down of towering cities.

22. The celestials saw all these from above this earth, which forms one
half of the mundane egg, turning to a vacuum form; (_i.e._ vanishing
into the air).

23. As I was looking on that mountainous body of flesh, (_i.e._ the
huge carcass); I observed that the ample space of all the seven
continents of the earth was not enough to contain this single body.

24. Seeing this, I applied to the good grace of the god of fire; and
asked him saying, Lord what is this and what does it mean.

25. Why did the sun also fall down from heaven, along with that corpse;
and how is it that the space of the whole earth and all its oceans, has
not sufficient room to compass it?

26. The God of fire replied:--Hold your patience, my son, for a while,
until this portentous event passes away; when I will explain this
marvellous matter fully to you.

27. Soon as the God had said these words, there flocked an assemblage
of the celestials all around us; and it consisted of all kinds of
beings that are born and move about in the aerial regions.

28. There were the siddhas, sadhyas, Apsaras, Daityas, Gandharvas and
Kinnaras among them; together with the Munis, Rishis, yakshas and
Patres, Matres and the gods also with them.

29. All these celestials then, bowed down their heads in veneration;
and all joined with their prostrate bodies to praise the dark goddess
of Night, who is the refuge and resort of all.

30. The celestials said:--May that goddess protect us her protégés, who
is immaculate and incomparable, and has the grey braids of Brahmá’s
hairs, tied at the top of her _khattanga_ ensign, and the heads of the
slain Daityas, strung to the neck-chain hanging on her breast; who
wears the feathers of _Garuda_ on her head, and who after devouring the
world, drinks off the deep also at the end.




