CHAPTER CLIV.

RELATION OF PAST EVENTS.

    Argument:--The living liberation of the sage, by means of his
    habitual meditation.


The sage continued:--Having thus considered the vanity of the visibles,
I remained free from my anxious cares about the world; and became
passionless and fearless, and extinct in _nirvána_, from insensibility
of my egoism.

2. I became supportless and unsupporting, and remained without my
dependence upon any body; I was quite calm with my self-composure, and
my soul was elevated and rested in heaven.

3. I did as my duty called, and did nothing of my own accord; and
remained as void and blank as vacuum, which is devoid of all action and
motion.

4. The earth and heaven, the sky and air, the mountains and rivers, and
all that lies on all sides and the sides themselves, are not but shadow
in the air, and all living bodies are no more than the embodied (died)
Intellect or Intellectual bodies.

5. I am quiet and composed, and manage myself as well as I can; I am
quite happy in myself; having no injunction nor prohibition to obey,
nor to act an inner or outer part (_i.e._ not having a double part to
play, nor any duplicity in the heart).

6. Thus I resided here in my even temper, and the same tenor of my mind
and actions; and it is by mere chance, that you have come to meet me
here.

7. Thus I have fully explained to thee about the nature of dream and my
personal self; together with that of the phenomenal world and thyself.

8. Hence thou hast well understood, what is this visible world that
lies before thee; as also what these beings and these people are, and
what Brahma is after all.

9. Now knowing these things, O thou huntsman, to be mere false, <you>
must now have your peace of mind, with the conviction that, all this is
the representation of the Intellect in empty air. Yea, it is this that
is dimly seen in these, and naught besides.

10. The hunts-man rejoined:--If so it be then both me and thee and the
gods even, you say to be nullity; and that all of these are but the
phantoms of a dream, and that all men are no men, and all existence as
non existence (sadasat).

11. The sage replied:--It is verily so, and all and every one of us is
situated as the spectre of a dream to one another, and as _phasma_ in
the cosmorama of the world.

12. These spectres appear in forms, according to one’s conception of
them; and the only One appears as many, like the rays of light. All
these radiations cannot be wholly true or untrue, nor a mixture of both
of them.

13. The visionary city of the world that appears in our waking state,
is but a waking dream or an apparition of our minds, and appears as the
prospect of a distant city before us, that we never saw before.

14. I have fully explained all this to you already, and you have been
enlightened in the subject to no end; now you have grown wise and well
known all and everything; do therefore as you may like best for you.

15. Though thus awakened and enlightened by me, your reprobate mind is
not yet turned to reason, nor found its rest either in transcendental
wisdom, or in the transcendent state of the most high.

16. Without assuetude you cannot concentrate your vagrant mind into
your heart; nor can you without the practice of constant reflexion
attain the acme of wisdom.

17. It is impossible to attain the summit of perfection, without your
habitual observance of wisdom; as it is incapable for a block of wood
to contain any water in it, unless it is scooped out in the form of a
wooden vessel.

18. Habitual reliance in sapience and constant attendance to the
precepts of the sástras and preceptors, tend to the removal of
the mind’s suspense between unity and duality (_i.e._ between
God and the world), and set the mind to its ultimate bliss of
_nirvána_--anaesthesia in quietism.

19. Insensibility of one’s worth and state and inertness to all
worldly affections, refraining from the evils of bad associations, and
abstaining from all earthly desires and cravings of the heart--

20. These joined with one’s deliverance from the fetters of dualities,
and enfranchisement from all pleasurable and painful associations, are
the surest means that lead the learned to the state of unalterable
bliss--_nirvána_ (which is ever attendant on the Deity).




