CHAPTER CXXXIV.

THE STORY OF THE CARCASS CONTINUED.

    Argument:--Description of the body of the Goddess, and her food
    of the carcass, and drink of the blood.


Vipaschit continued:--All this time I was looking at the carcass, that
had fallen from above, and covered the whole surface of the earth under
it.

2. I distinguished that part of its body which was its belly, and
had hid in it the whole earth, with all its seven continents and
immeasurable mountain.

3. I was then told by the god of fire, that there was no limitation of
its arms and thighs, and of the extent of its head; and that it had
fallen from beyond the polar region, which <is> inaccessible to mankind.

4. The Goddess who is so much lauded by the celestials, is the
manifestation of vacuum, which of itself becomes dry (_i.e._ is
naturally empty and void).

5. She is represented as accompanied by ghosts and furies, as followed
by demons and hobgoblins, which walk in her train, and shine as stars
and meteors in the open firmament.

6. Her long and muscular arms, are stretched to the skies as the tall
pines of the forest; and her eyeballs flash forth with living fire, and
scatter the solar beams all around.

7. The flashing weapons in her hands, were jangling in the sky; and her
missiles were darting like flocks of birds flying from their aerial
nests.

8. Her flaming body and flashing eyes and limbs, glistened with the
glare of a bush of reeds set on fire, or as the sparkling of a flight
of arrows in the midway air.

9. Her glittering teeth, shed the lustre of the beaming moon, and
brightened the faces of the four quarters of heaven, with a milk white
splendour; while her tall slender stature, reached to and touched the
sky.

10. She stood supportless, like the stretching clouds of the evening
sky; and was mounted on a dead body, as if she rested on the blessed
seat of Brahmá. (_Brahma pada_ the throne of God, Elysium, Valhalla or
Nirvána).

11. She shone in her brilliant form, like the crimson clouds of
evening; and added to the ocean of the etherial expanse, the burning
blaze of submarine fire.

12. She was flaunting in her decorations of human skeleton and bones,
and flourishing her weapons of the mallet and others; and darting her
arrows all around, as a mountain scatters its flowers all about.

13. She mounted aloft in the air, with her neckchain of human skulls,
sounding with a harsh clattering noise; resembling the rattling of
stones, falling down a mountain with the precipitate rains.

14. The gods then prayed to her saying: O mother goddess! we make an
offering of this carcass to thee; do thou join with thy adherents, and
soon take this corpse for your food, and make an end of it.

15. Upon this prayer of the gods unto her, the goddess began to draw in
with her inhaling breath, the blood and pith of the carcass into her
bowels and intestines.

16. As the goddess was absorbing the dead blood, by her inhalation of
it, the red fluid rushed into her wide open month, like the entrance
of the evening clouds, into the cavity of the western mountain (of the
setting sun).

17. The etherial goddess drank the blood, thus drawn in by her breath;
as long as her lean skeleton-like frame, grew fat from her satiety, and
she stood confest in her form of Chandika.

18. Being thus filled and fattened, by full draughts of the sanguineous
beverage; she had the appearance of a blood red cloud, with flashing
lightenings shooting from her eyes.

19. The pot bellied goddess, being then giddy with her bloody drink;
became loose in her attire, began to flounce her ornaments, and
flourish all her weapons in the empty air.

20. She began to dance and toss about in the air, which was almost
filled by the bulk of her body; while the gods kept watching on her
movements, from their seats on the distant border or boundary mountains.

21. Immediately upon this, the whole host of her female ghosts and
goblins, composed of Rupikas and others, flew upon the carcass, as the
rainy clouds alight upon mountains.

22. The mountainous carcass, was laid hold by the clutches of
Kumbhandas, and torn to a thousand pieces by them; while the Rupikas
bored its belly, and the yakshas gored its back with their elephantine
tusks.

23. But they could not get or break its arms, shoulders and thighs;
because these members of its body, stretched far beyond the limits of
the mundane or solar system.

24. They could not therefore be reached unto by the ghosts, who are
confined within the limits of this world, and could not go beyond,
where those parts were rotten away of themselves.

25. As the goddess was dancing in the air, and her hobgoblins were
prancing over the carcass; the celestials remained sitting on the
mountain tops, and kept looking on this dreadful scene.

26. The disgusting morsels of putrid flesh, and the stench of the
rotten carcass filled the air and blood red clouds shrouding the scene,
seemed as burning bushes, forming the fuel of the furnace (for roasting
the rancid meat).

27. The chopping of the fetid flesh, raised a _sap-sap_ sound; (meaning
the sap of the carcass); and the breaking of its hard bones, sent forth
a _kat-kat_ noise (purporting to cut them to pieces).

28. The concourse of the demons, caused a clashing sound; resounding as
the clashing occasional by the collision and concussion of rocks and
mountains against one another.

29. The goddess devoured her mouthfuls of flesh, roasted in the fire
that flashed forth from her mouth, and the offals and fragments that
fell down from it, covered the earth below with filth; while the drops
of blood that distilled from the draughts she had drank, reddened the
ether with tints of vermilion hue.

30. The celestial spectators saw their premises, within the precincts
of the visible horizon; and the surface of the continents of the earth,
to present the sight of an universal ocean of blood.

31. All the mountains on earth, were covered with blood, which
reflected their redness to the cloud on high; which gave the appearance
of a red mantling veil, spreading over the faces of the female regent
deities of all sides of heaven.

32. The sky below blazed with the flash of the weapons, which
brandished in the hands of the goddess all around; and there was no
vestige of any city or habitation to be seen on earth. (Lit.: they were
lost to sight, but retained in memory: i.e. things absent from sight,
are present in the mind).

33. It was an incredible sight to see, that all the moving and unmoving
objects of nature should be engrossed and absorbed in the bodies of the
ghosts of insatiate death.

34. The dancing demons were waving their arms in air, in a manner as
if they <were> weaving nets for catching the aerial birds; and were
lifting and dropping them up and down, so as they seemed to measure the
height and depth of the firmament.

35. They stretched out the entrails of their victims, from the earth
below to the solar circle above; and appeared to measure the distance
with lines and cords.

36. The gods seeing the earth thus endangered by the portentous carcase
and its surface converted to an extensive sheet or ocean of blood.

37. They felt themselves dismayed and distressed, from their seat above
the polar mountain; and beyond the boundary of the seven continents,
where the stench of the putrid carcass could not stink into their
nostrils.

38. Ráma asked:--How is it sir, that the stench of the carcass could
not infect the gods, in their seats on the polar mountain; when the
fallen dead body is said to extend even beyond the limits of the
mundane system?

39. Vasishtha replied:--It is true, O Ráma, that the dead body
stretched beyond the limits of the mundane sphere; but its belly lay
within the boundaries of seven continents, and that its head and thighs
and its head and feet were without it.

40. But from its breasts and the two sides and its loins and waist,
which lay out of this sphere, one could have a clear view of the polar
circle, as well as that of its mountainous top.

41. Sitting in those parts and places, the gods could well behold the
pinnacles of the mountain; which were surely bright to sight, and as
white as the rainless clouds of the skies (_i.e._ white as fleecy
clouds).

42. Then the maters of furies of heaven, kept on dancing on the wide
spread dead body; while the hosts of ghosts were devouring its flesh,
as the corpse lay its face turned downwards (_i.e._ upside down or
topsy turvy).

43. Seeing now the streams of reddish blood running around and the
putrid stink of rotten body spreading on all sides; the gods all felt
sorrowful at heart, and grieved among themselves with exclaiming (as
follows).

44. Ah alas! whither hath that earth disappeared, with all the bodies
of waters upon her; where are those multitudes of men fled from it, and
where are the mountains swept away from its surface.

45. Alas for those forest of sandal, _mandara_ and _kadamba_ woods
which had so ornamented the earth! and woe for the flower gardens, and
the happy groves of Malaya mountains!

46. Where are those uplands of the lofty and gigantic snowy mountains
of Himálaya which appear now to be reduced to lurid clay, by ire of the
redhot blood, of the bloody ghost of the carcass.

47. Even the gigantic Kalpa trees, that grew below the Krauncha
mountains, in the continent of the Krauncha dwípa; and which had spread
its branches up to the Brahma-loka, are now reduced to dirt.

48. O thou lordly milky ocean! where art thou now, that hast produced
the moon and the goddess Laxmí from thy bosom; and that didst yield the
párijata flower and the celestial ambrosia of the gods of yore.

49. O thou ocean of cards! what has become of thee, that was full with
thy waving forest of billows; which rose as high as mountains, and
bore about sweet butter with their foaming froth.

50. O thou mellifluous sea of honey, which was bordered by mountains
studded by cocoa-nut trees; whose fruits afforded sweet liquor for the
beverage of goddesses, where hast thou and they fled at present.

51. O Krauncha dwípa! that didst abound in Kalpa arbour which were
inseparably clasped by the twining ivy of golden hue; say where art
<thou> hid with thy towering Krauncha mountain.

52. O Puskara dwípa! where art thou now with thy limpid fountains,
which were ever decked with beds of lotus bushes, sported upon by the
silvery swans of Brahmá?

53. O where are thy Kadamba groves gone, with their outstretched
branches on all sides; and whose sheltered coverts were frequented by
aerial nymphs, for their secluded amusements.

54. O where is the _Gomedha_ dwípa gone with its springs of sweet
waters, and the flowery gardens about its holy places? And where <are>
those vales and dales, which were beautified by Kalpa trees and their
golden creepers?

55. Ah! where is the Saka dwípa with its forests of heavenly and ever
verdant arbours, the very remembrance of whose fair spectacles, raises
in the minds the sense of holiness and the sensations of heavenly bliss.

56. Ah! where are those tender plants, which waved their leaves at
the gentle breeze; and where are those blooming flowers, which had
brightened the scene all around.

57. The devastation of all these beauties of the landscape, fills our
mind with pity and grief; and we know not how much more piteous and
painful must it be to the majority of mankind.

58. Ah! when shall we see again, the sugar-cane field beside the sea of
saccharine waters; and the hardened sugar candy on the dry lands about;
when shall we see the sweetmeats made of molasses and confectionary
dolls of sugar.

59. When shall we see again, sitting on our golden seats on Mount Meru
the merry dance of the beauteous Apsaras daubed with sandal paste
in their arbours of tála and tamála trees; and wafted by the cooling
breeze of Kadamba and Kalpa trees on sylvan mountains?

60. Ah! we remember the memorable Jambuvatí river, which flows with the
sweet juice of jambu fruits, and passes through the Jambudwípa to its
boundary ocean (_i.e._ the Indian ocean in the south).

61. I oft remember said one, the giddy song and dance of celestial
nymphs, in the thick and shady groves of _sailendra_-trees, and in the
coverts of mountains beside the heavenly stream; and it rends my heart
like the lotus flower, as it opens its petals in the morning.

62. Another one said:--Look at this ocean of blood, sparkling like the
melted gold on the top of the golden mountain of Meru; and brightening
the beams of the rising and setting sun, or as the moon-beams spread
over the face of all sides of heaven.

63. Alas! we know not where the earth is gone, with all her
circumambient oceans about the continents; nor do we know where that
high hill of Himálaya has fled, which was the resort of many rainy
clouds, and yielded the lotus flowers on its summit.

64. We know neither where those rivers, forests and groves have gone,
which decorated the earth before; and pity for the cities and villages
and their people, that are now to be seen no more.




