CHAPTER CLXXXVI.

DEMONSTRATION OF ALL NATURE (AND THING) AS BRAHMA HIMSELF.

    Argument:--Elucidation of the sacred text that “all is Brahma”;
    and the equality of curse.


Válmíki said:--After Kunda-danta had finished his saying in the said
manner, the venerable Vasishtha delivered his edifying speech on
spiritual knowledge and said:

2. Whereas the elevated soul of this person, has found his rest in the
paradise of spiritual philosophy; he will see the world like a globe in
his hand, and glowing with the glory of the great God.

3. The phenomenal world is a false conception, it is verily the
increate Brahma himself shining in this manner; this erroneous
conception is the very Brahma, that is one and ever calm and undecaying.

4. Whatever thing appears any where, in any state, form or dimension;
it is the very Deity, showing himself in that condition of his being,
form and mode of extension.

5. This unborn or self-existent Deity, is ever auspicious, calm and
quiet; he is undecaying, unperishing and immutable, and extends through
all extent, as the extensive and endless space.

6. Whatever state of things he proposes in his all-knowing intellect,
the same is disposed by him in a thousand ways, like the branching out
of a plant in the rains.

7. The great mundane egg, is situated as a particle in the bosom of
the great intellect of God; and this world of ours is a particle also,
being comprised in a grain of our brains.

8. Know therefore, my good friend, thy intellectual sphere to be
boundless, and without its beginning or end; and being absorbed in the
meditation of thy personal extinction, do thou remain as quiet as thou
art sitting, relying in thy unperturbed and imperishable soul.

9. Wherever there is anything in any state or condition in any part of
the world, there you will find the presence of the divine spirit in its
form of vacuity; and this without changing its nature of calm serenity,
assumes to itself whatever form or figure it likes (or rather evolves
them from within itself at its free will).

10. The spirit is itself both the view and its viewer; it is equally
the mind and the body, and the subjective and objective alike; It is
something and yet nothing at all, being the great Brahma or universal
soul, that includes and extends throughout the whole.

11. The phenomenal is not to be supposed as a duality of, or any other
than the self-same Brahma; but it is to be known as one and the same
with the divine self, as the visible sky and its vacuity.

12. The visible is the invisible Brahma, and the transcendent One
is manifest in this apparent whole (because the noumenon shows the
phenomenon, as this exhibits the other): therefore it is neither
quiescent nor in motion, and the formal is altogether formless.

13. Like dreams appearing to the understanding, do these visions
present themselves to the view; the forms are all formless conceptions
of the mind, and more intangible ideas of the brain.

14. As conscious beings come to be unconscious of themselves, in their
dormant state of sleep; so have all these living and intelligent
beings, become unconscious and ignorant of themselves and their souls,
and turned to torpid trees that are lost to their sensibility.

15. But the intellect is capable to return to its sensibility, from its
state of vegetable torpidity in time; as the dormant soul turns to see
its dreams in sleep, and then to behold the vivid outer world after its
wakening.

16. Until the living soul is liberated from its charm of self delusion,
it is subjected to view its guileful reveries of elemental bodies,
appearing as a chain of airy dreams, before the mind’s eye in sleep.

17. The mind gathers the dross of dullness about it, as the soul
draws the sheath of sleep upon itself; this dullness or dimness of
apprehension is not intrinsic in the mind, but an extraneous schesis
contracted by it from without.

18. The intellect moulds the form of one, who is conversant with
material and insensible things, into a motionless and torpid body; and
it is the same intellect, which shapes the forms of others, that are
conscious of their intellectual natures, into the bodies of rational
and moving being. (The dull soul is degraded to the state of immovable
things and rooted trees, but intelligent souls, are elevated to the
rank of moving men and other locomotive animals).

19. But all these moving and unmoving beings, are but different
modifications and aspects of the same intellect; as the nails and other
parts of the human body, are but the multifarious modalities of the
same person.

20. The order and nature of things has invariably continued the same,
as they have been ordained by the Divine will ever since its first
formation of the world; and because the creation is a transcript of its
original mould in the Divine mind; it is as ideal as any working of
imagination or a vision in dreaming, both in its states of being and
not being.

21. But the intangible and quiescent Brahma, is ever calm and quiet in
his nature; he is never permeated with the nature of things, nor is he
assimilated with the order of nature.

22. He appears as the beginning and end of creation, or as the cause of
its production and dissolution; but these are the mere dreams of the
Divine intellect, which is always in its state of profound sleep and
rest.

23. The world is ever existent in his spiritual nature, and without any
beginning or end of himself; the beginning and end of creation, bear no
relation with his self-existent and eternal nature.

24. There is no reality in the nature of the visible creation,
or in its existence or dissolution; all these are no other than
representations shown in the spirit of God, like figures described in a
picture.

25. As a legion drawn in painting, does not differ from its model in
the mind of the painter; so these tangible objects of creation, with
all other endless varieties, are not different from their prototype in
the mind of God.

26. Notwithstanding the want of any difference, between the noumenal
and phenomenal worlds; yet the mind is prone to view the variance of
its subjectivity and objectivity, as it is apt to differentiate its own
doings and dreams, in the states of its sleep and ignorance. It is the
profound sleep and insouciance of the soul, that cause its liberation
from the view, as its sensibility serves to bind it the more to the
bondage of the visibles.

27. It is the reflexion of the invisible soul, that exhibits the
visible to view, just as the subtile sunbeam, displays a thousand solid
bodies glaring in sight; and shows the different phases of creation and
dissolution as in its visions in dreaming.

28. The dreaming state of the sleeping intellect is called its
ideality, and the waking state of the self-conscious soul is termed its
vitality, as in the instances of men and gods and other intellectual
beings.

29. After passing from these, and knowing the unreality of both these
imaginative and speculative states, the soul falls into its state of
profound sleep or trance, which is believed as the state of liberation
by those that are desirous of their emancipation.

30. Ráma said:--Tell me, O venerable sir, in what proportion doth the
intellect abide in men, gods and demons respectively; how the soul
reflects itself during the dormancy of the intellect in sleep, and in
what manner does it contain the world within its bosom.

31. Vasishtha replied:--Know the intellect to abide alike in gods and
demons, as well as in all men and women; it dwells also in imps and
goblins, and in all beasts and birds, reptiles and insects, including
the vegetables and all immovable things (within its ample sphere).

32. Its dimension is boundless and also as minute as an atom; and it
stretches to the highest heaven, including thousands of worlds within
itself.

33. The capacity that we have of knowing the regions beyond the solar
sphere, and even of penetrating into the darkness of polar circles; is
all the quality of our intellect, which extends all over the boundless
space, and is perfectly pellucid in its form and nature.

34. So very great is the extent of the intellect, that it comprehends
the whole universe in itself; and it is this act of his comprehension
of the whole, that is called the mundane creation, which originates
from it.

35. The intellect spreads all around like the current of a river,
which glides all along over the ground both high and low, leaving some
parts of it quite dry, and filling others with its waters. So doth
the intellect supply some bodies with intelligence, while it forsakes
others and leaves them in ignorance.

36. It is intelligence which constitutes the living soul of the body,
which is otherwise said to be lifeless and insensible; it resides in
all bodies like the air in empty pots, and becomes vivid in some and
imperceptible in others as it likes.

37. It is its knowledge of the soul (_i.e._ the intellectual belief in
its spiritual), that removes the error of its corporeity; while the
ignorance of its spiritual nature, tends the more to foster the sense
of its corporeality, like one’s erroneous conception of water in the
mirage.

38. The mind is as minute as the minutest ray of sunbeams; and this is
verily the living soul, which contains the whole world within it.

39. All this phenomenal world is the phenomenon of the mind, as it is
displayed in its visionary dreams; and the same being the display of
the living soul, there is no difference at all between the noumenal and
the phenomenal.

40. The intellect alone is assimilated into all these substances, which
have substantiality of their own; whatever is seen without it, is
like its visionary dream, or as the forms of jewelleries made of the
substance of gold. (_i.e._ The intellect is the intrinsic essence of
all external substances).

41. As the same water of the one universal ocean, appears different in
different places; and in its multifarious forms of waves and billows;
so doth the divine intellect exhibit the various forms of visibles
in itself. (_i.e._ Nothing is without or different from the divine
essence).

42. As the fluid body of waters, rolls on incessantly in sundry shapes
within the basin of the great deep; so do these multitudes of visible
things, which are inherent in and identic with the divine intellect,
glide on forever in its fathomless bosom.

43. All these worlds are situated as statues, or they are engraved as
sculptures in the aerial column of the divine intellect; and are alike
immovable and without any motion of theirs through all eternity.

44. We see the situation of the world, in the vacuous space of our
consciousness; as we see the appearances of things in our airy dreams.
We find moreover everything transfixed in its own sphere and place, and
continuing in its own state, without any change of its position or any
alteration in its nature. (The invariable course of nature, is not the
fortuitous production of blind chance).

45. The exact conformity of everything in this world, with its
conception in the mind of man, with respect to their invariable
equality in form and property, proves their identity with one another,
or the relation of one being the container of the other. (_i.e._ The
mind is either same with or container of the world).

46. There is no difference between the phenomenal and noumenal worlds,
as there <is> none between those in our dream and imagination. They
are in fact, the one and same thing, as the identity of the waters,
contained in tanks, rivers and seas, and between the curse and blessing
of gods.

47. Ráma said:--Tell me sir, whether a curse or blessing, is the
effect of any prior cause or the causation of subsequent consequences;
and whether it <is> possible for any effect to take place without
its adequate causality. (Here is a long legend of the transformation
of Nundi and Nahusha given in illustration of this passage in the
commentary).

48. Vasishtha replied:--It is the manifestation of the clear firmament
of the divine intellect in itself, that is styled as the world; just as
the appearance and motion of waters in the great deep, is termed the
ocean and its current.

49. The revolution of the eternal thoughts of the divine mind,
resembles the rolling waves of the deep; and these are termed by sages,
as the will or volitions of the ever wilful mind of God.

50. The clear minded soul comes in course of time, to regard this
manifestation of the divine will, in its true spiritual light; by means
of its habitual meditation and reasoning, as well as by cause of its
natural good disposition and evenness of mind.

51. The wise man possest of consummate wisdom and learning, becomes
acquainted with the true knowledge of things; his understanding
becomes wholly intellectual, and sees all things in their abstract
and spiritual light; and is freed from the false view of duality (or
materiality).

52. The philosophic intellect, which is unclouded by prejudice, is the
true form of the Great Brahma himself; who shines perspicuous in our
consciousness, and has no other body besides.

53. The enlightened soul sees this whole plenitude of creation, as the
display of the Divine Will alone; and as the exhibition of the tranquil
and transparent soul of the Divinity, and naught otherwise.

54. This manifestation of the Divine Will, in the boundless space of
the universe; likens to the aerial castle of our imagination, or the
city of palaces seen in our dream.

55. This all productive will, is selfsame with the Divine Soul; and
produces whatever it likes to do any place or time. (Lit. Whatever it
wills, the same takes place even then and there).

56. As a boy thinks of his flinging stones, at the aerial castle of his
imagination; so the Divine will is at liberty to scatter, myriads of
globular balls, in the open and empty space of boundless vacuity.

57. Thus everything being the manifestation of the Divine will, in all
these three worlds; there is nothing as a blessing or curse (_i.e._
good or evil) herein, which is distinct from the Divine Soul.

58. As we can see in our fancy, the gushing out of oil from a sandy
desert; so can we imagine the coming out of the creation, from the
simple will of the Divine Soul.

59. The unenlightened understanding, being never freed from its
knowledge of particulars and their mutual differences: It is impossible
for it to generalize good and evil, under the head of universal good.
(“All partial evil is but universal good”. Pope).

60. Whatever is willed in the beginning, by the omniscience of God; the
same remains unaltered at all times, unless it is altered by the same
omniscient will.

61. The contraries of unity and duality, dwell together in the same
manner in the formless person of Brahma; as the different members of an
embodied being, remain side by side in the same person. (The knowledge
of all contrarieties, blends together in omniscience. Gloss).

62. Ráma said:--Why some ascetics of limited knowledge, are so very
apt to confer their blessings, as also to pour their imprecations on
others; and whether they are attended with their good or bad results or
not.

63. Vasishtha replied:--Whatever is disposed in the beginning, by the
Divine will which subsists in Brahma; the very same comes to pass
afterwards, and nothing otherwise. (Lit. there is no other principle
besides).

64. Brahmá the Lord of creation, knew the Supreme Soul in himself, and
thereby he became the agent of the Divine will; therefore there is no
difference between them (_i.e._ betwixt Brahmá and Brahma); as there is
none between the water and its fluidity.

65. Whatsoever the Lord of creatures--Brahmá, proposes to do at
first as inspired in him by the Divine will; the same takes place
immediately, and the very same is styled this world.

66. It has no support nor receptacle for itself, but appears as vacuous
bubble in the great vacuity itself; and resembles the chain of pearls,
fleeting before the eyes of purblind men in the open sky.

67. He willed the productions of creatures, and institution of the
qualities of justice, charity and religious austerities; He stablished
the Vedas and sástras, and the five system of philosophical doctrines.
(Namely; the four Vedas and the Smritis, forming the five branches of
sacred knowledge, and the five branches of profane learning--consisting
of the Sánkhya yoga, Pátanjala, Pásupata, and Vaishnava systems. Gloss).

68. It is also ordained by the same Brahmá, that whatever the
devotees-learned in the Vedas, pronounce in their calmness or dispute,
the same takes place immediately (from their knowledge of the Divine
will).

69. It is he that has formed the chasm of vacuum in the inactive
intellect of Brahma, and filled it with the fleeting winds and heating
fire; together with the liquid water and solid earth.

70. It is the nature of this intellectual principle, to think of
everything in itself; and to conceive the presence of the same within
it, whether it be a thought of thee or me or of anything beside (either
in general or particular).

71. Whatever the vacuous intellect thinks in itself, the same it sees
present before it; as our actual selves come to see, the unreal sights
of things in our dreams.

72. As we see the unreal flight of stones, as realities in our
imagination; so we see the false appearance of the world, as true by
the will of God, and the contrivance of Brahma.

73. Whatever is thought of by the pure intellect, must be likewise of
a purely intellectual nature also; and there is nothing that can do it
otherwise (or convert it to grossness), as they defile the pure metal
with some base alloy.

74. We are apt to have the same conceptions of things in our
consciousness, as we are accustomed to consider them, and not of what
we are little practiced to think upon; hence we conceive all that we
see in our dreams to be true, from our like conceptions of them in our
waking state. (It is thus that we conceive this purely ideal world as a
gross body, from our habit of thinking so at all times).

75. It is by uniting one’s intellectuality, with the universal and
divine intellect, and by the union of the subjective and objective and
their perceptibility in one’s self, by means of the _tripúti yoga_,
that we can see the world in its true light.

76. One universal and vacuous intellect, being all pervading and
omnipresent, is the all seeing subject and all seen objects by itself;
hence whatever is seen or known to be anywhere, is the very verity of
the intellect and no other.

77. As oscillation is inherent in air, and fluidity is immanent in
water; so is amplitude intrinsical in Brahma, and the plentitude is
innate in the Divine mind.

78. Even I am Brahma also in his self manifest form of Virát, which
embodies the whole world as its body; hence there is no difference of
the world from Brahma, as there is none between air and vacuity.

79. As the drops of water as a cataract, assume many forms and run
their several ways; so the endless works of nature take their various
forms and courses, at different places and times.

80. All beings devoid of their senses and understanding, issue as
waters of the waterfall, from the cascade of the divine mind; and
remain forever in their uniform courses, with the consciousness of
their existence in Brahma.

81. But such as come forth from it, with the possession of their senses
and intellects in their bodies, deviate in different ways like the
liquid waters, in pursuit of their many worldly enjoyments.

82. They are then insensibly led, by their want of good sense, to
regard this world as theirs (_i.e._ the sphere of their actions,
कर्म्मक्षेत्र); being ignorant of its identity with the uncreated
spirit of God.

83. As we see the existence and distribution of other bodies in us,
and the inertness of stones in our bodies; so the Lord perceives the
creation and annihilation of the world, and its inertia in himself.

84. As in our state of sleep we have both our sound sleep and our
dreams also; so doth the divine soul perceive the creation as well as
its annihilation, in its state of perfect rest and tranquility.

85. The divine soul perceives in its state of tranquility, the two
phases of creation and destruction, succeeding one another as its day
and night; just as we see our sleep and dreams recurring unto us like
darkness and light.

86. As a man sees in his mind, both the dream of moving bodies as
well as immovable rocks in his sleep; so does the Lord perceive the
ideas, both of the stable and unstable in his intellectual tranquility.
(_i.e._ It is possible for the intellect to conceive the ideas of gross
bodies also).

87. As a man of absent mind, has no heed of the dust flying on any part
of his body; so the divine spirit is not polluted, by his entertaining
the ideas of gross bodies within itself.

88. As the air and water and stones, are possessed of the consciousness
of their airy, watery and solid bodies, so are we conscious of our
material, intellectual and spiritual bodies likewise.

89. As the mind that is freed from seeing the objects of sight, and
liberated from entertaining all their thoughts and desires also, flows
along like a stream of limpid waters; so doth the current of the divine
spirit glide on eternally, with the waves and eddies of creation and
dissolution, perpetually rolling on and whirling therein.




