CHAPTER CCXV.

EULOGY ON THIS WORK AND THE MODE OF ITS RECITAL.

    Argument:--Válmíki speaks in praise of this work to this pupil
    Bharadwája, and blesses him to be as blessed as the divine Ráma
    with the hearing of it.


Válmíki said:--O most intelligent Bharadwája, and the chief of my
pupils, you have now heard how the great Ráma and others, came to the
knowledge of the knowable One (that is only to be known), and passed
across this vale of misery and sorrow, by their attention to these
lectures.

2. Do you thus fix your sight to the light of Brahma, and conduct
yourself gladly, by abandoning all your affections and cares of this
world, and by remaining dauntless with your living liberation and
tranquility of mind.

3. Know, O thou sinless one, that the learned and the meek, that do
not mix with the society of worldly men, but remain steady as Ráma
and others in their right principles, are never liable to be deluded
although they are beset by temptations on all sides.

4. Thus these men of great natures, as the king Dasaratha and the
prince Ráma and his brothers, together with companions, have attended
to the state of the living liberated (even in their life time).

5. Thou my son Bharadwája! that art naturally of a liberal mind, hast
now become more liberated at present, by thy hearing of these sermons
on the salvation of our souls.

6. It is possible even for boys to obtain their liberation, by their
attention to those holy lectures, as the most evident and surest means
to salvation; and cannot therefore fail to convince thee of the truth
thereof.

7. As the high minded and sinless and sorrowless sons of Raghu’s race,
have attained to their holy state of perfection and self-liberation;
so do thou also obtain that best and highest state, by your attending
to the lectures of the divine sage Vasishtha.

8. It is by advice of the good and service under the great, as also by
means of humble inquiries to and explications of the learned; that weak
men of good understandings, can know the knowable, as the Rághavas and
others did under Vasishtha.

9. The ties of avarice and affection that have fast bound the hearts of
the ignorant (to this world); do all tend to debar them like playful
boys from inquiring into the means of their liberation, until they
become too old to benefit by their knowledge.

10. Those that can discern the minds of high minded men, can only come
to their knowledge of truth; and such men only have no more to return
to this world of woe; and this is the substance of all that I can speak
to thee (_i.e._ know and have the minds of the great, in order to
become as great thyself, so says Gay in his Fables. (Hast thou fathomed
Tully’s mind, and the vast sense of Plato’s head)).

11. Having first received your instruction from the preceptor, you must
weigh well and digest its meaning in yourself; and then communicate its
sense, to the most sensible and intelligent student. This is said by
sages and saints, as the trivium of science; know this and you need no
more, to become wise when your boyhood is over.

12. Whoso will read this book, not without understanding its sense and
whoever will manuscript it without the expectation of getting its fee;
as also anybody who will recite or cause it to be recited (to a public
audience), either with or without any desire of reward, shall have his
ample recompense in the land of Áryas (both in his present and future
lives). (So it is with the public preaching of its doctrine).

13. These men receive the reward, awaiting on the performance of the
Rájasúya sacrifice, and are entitled to their heavenly seats in their
pure essence; as often as they ascend to it after their demise on
earth, and until they attain their final liberation, which attains
on them as prosperity does on the meritorious (after the third
transmigration of their expurged souls).

14. It was at first that the god Brahmá of unknowable form, had
composed this work in his excellent diction; and then considering it
as the only means to the liberation of mankind, had revealed it to
the assemblage of saints (of which Vasishtha or Válmíki has made this
version). Let nobody therefore take the truthfulness of this saying for
an untruth.

15. At the close of the recital of these lectures, on the means of
human salvation, it becomes every sensible man of good sense, to honour
the Bráhmans with diligence; and to serve them with their desirable
gifts of food and drink, and furnish them with goodly houses for their
lodging.

16. They should also be rewarded with their honorariums, and supplied
with monies to their hearts’ desire, and to the utmost capacity of the
donor; and then the giver or master of the ceremony should rest himself
assured, of having acquitted his duty to and reaped its merit to the
intent of the sástras.

17. I have thus rehearsed to you the great sástra, in elucidation of
divine knowledge and its pure truth; with addition of a great many
tales and stories, serving as example and illustrations of the abstruse
doctrines for your clear understanding of them. May your hearing of
these, serve to lead you to your utter indifference of this world, and
to the desire of your liberation in it, while you are alive herein. May
this tend also to your continued prosperity, in order to engage your
attention towards the perfection of your knowledge and devotion, and to
the discharge of the duties of your station without failing.




