CHAPTER CLVI.

EXPOSTULATION OF SINDHU BY HIS MINISTER.

    Argument:--The aerial spirit of the Huntsman is reborn on Earth
    as prince Sindhu, who kills Vidúratha, and is remonstrated by his
    Minister.


The Huntsman said:--Tell me Sir, what will then become of my soul in
its aerial position, and of my body in its situation on earth.

2. The sage replied:--Hear me attentively to tell you, about what is
to become of your lost body on earth, as also of your living soul
sustained in the air.

3. The body being subducted from thy whole self, thy soul will assume
an aerial form, and will remain in empty air, united with its vital
breath.

4. In that airy particle of your soul, you will find the surface of the
earth, situated in the recess of your mind; and you will behold it as
clearly, as you view the world in your dream.

5. Then from the inward desire of your heart, you will see in the
amplitude of your mind, that you have become the sovereign lord of this
wide extended globe.

6. The will of this idea rises of itself in your mind, that you have
become a king by name and in the person of Sindhu, who is so highly
honoured by men.

7. After eight years of thy birth, thy other will depart from this
mortal world, and leave to thee this extensive earth, reaching to its
utmost boundaries of the four seas.

8. You will find in the border of your realm, a certain lord of the
land by name of Vidúratha, who will rise as thy enemy, and whom it will
be difficult for thee to quell.

9. You will then reflect in yourself, of your past and peaceful reign
of a full century; and think of the pleasures you have so long enjoyed
in company with your consort and attendants.

10. Woe unto me, that this lord of the bordering land, has now risen
against me in my old age; and has put me to the trouble of waging a
formidable warfare against him.

11. As thou shalt be thinking in this wise, there will occur the great
war between thee and that lord of the land; in which all your quadruple
armaments, will be greatly worsted and thinned.

12. In that great war, thou wilt succeed to slay that Vidúratha, by
striking him with thy sword, and keeping thy stand on thy war-car.

13. You will then become the sole lord of this earth, to its utmost of
the four oceans; and become to be dreaded and honoured by all, like the
regents of all the sides of heaven.

14. Having thus become the sovereign monarch of the earth, and reigning
over it and the name of the mighty Sindhu, thou wilt pass thy time in
conversation with the learned pandits and ministers of thy court.

15. The minister will say, It is a mighty wondrous deed, O lord, that
thou hast achieved, by slaying the invincible Vidúratha in thy single
combat.

16. Then thou wilt say, tell me O good man, how this Vidúratha waxed so
very rich, and possessed his forces as numerous as the waves of ocean;
and what cause impelled him to rise against me.

17. The Minister will reply:--This lord has Lílá as his lady, who had
won the favour of the fair goddess Sarasvatí; who is the supportress of
the world, by her extreme devotion to her. (Sarasvatí is the goddess of
wisdom and hand-maid of God. See Sir Wm. Jones’ prayer).

18. The benign goddess took this lady for her foster-daughter, and
enabled her to achieve all her actions, and even obtain her liberation
with ease. (Wisdom facilitates all human act).

19. It is by favour of this goddess, that this lady is able to
annihilate thee at a single nod or word of hers; wherefore it is no
difficult task to her to destroy thee all at once.

20. Sindhu then will answer him saying:--If what thou sayest is true,
it is wondrous indeed, how then could the invincible Vidúratha come to
be slain by me in warfare.

21. And why he being so highly favoured by the goddess, could not get
the better of me in this combat (by slaying me with his hand).

22. The Minister will reply:--Because he always prayed the goddess with
earnestness of his heart, to give him liberation from the cares and
troubles of this world.

23. Now then, O lord, this goddess that knows the hearts of all men,
and confers to all the objects of their desire, gave thee the victory
thou didst seek, and conferred <on> him the liberation he sought by thy
hands.

24. Sindhu then, will respond to it; saying:--If it is so, then I must
ask, why the goddess did not confer the blessing of liberation on me
also, that have been so earnestly devoted to her at all times.

25. The Minister will then say in his reply:--This goddess resides as
intelligence in the minds of all men, and as conscience also in the
hearts of all individual beings, and is known by the title of Sarasvatí
to all.

26. Whatever object is constantly desired by any one, and earnestly
asked of her at all times; she is ever ready to confer the same to him,
as it is felt in the heart of everyone.

27. You lord never prayed for your liberation, at the shrine of this
goddess; but craved for your victory over your enemies, which she has
accordingly deigned to confer unto you.

28. Sindhu will then respond to it and say:--why is it that prince did
not pray the goddess of pure wisdom for his obtaining a kingdom like
me; and how was it that I slighted to pray her for my final liberation
as he did?

29. And why is it that the goddess knowing the desire of my heart for
liberation, left me only to desire it without attempting to seek after
the same? (_i.e._ Why does the goddess give us the knowledge of what is
good, without enabling us to exist and persist after its attainment)?

30. To this the minister will reply saying:--The propensity of doing
evil (or slaughter), being inherent in your nature (from your past
profession of huntsmanship), you neglected to stoop down to the
goddess, and pray unto her for your liberation.

31. It is well known since the creation of the world, that the
intrinsic gist forms the nature of man; and this truth being evident to
all from their boyhood to age, there is no body to ignore or repudiate
it at any time.

32. The purity or impurity of the inner heart, to which one is
habituated by his long practice or custom, continues to predominate
over all his qualities and actions to the very last, and there is no
power to contravene it in any manner.




