CHAPTER CLXXXV.

ADMONITION TO AND CLAIRVOYANCE OF KUNDA-DANTA.

    Argument:--The return of the interlocutors to the abodes; Demise
    of the brothers and enlightenment of Kunda-danta.


Kunda-danta rejoined:--The old sage having said so far, closed his eyes
in meditation; and he became as motionless as a statue or picture,
without any action of his breath and mind.

2. And we prayed him with great fondness and endearment, yet he uttered
not a word unto us; because he seemed to be so rapt in his abstraction,
as to have become utterly insensible of the outer world.

3. We then departed, from that place, with our broken hearts and
dejected countenances; and were received after a few days journey, by
our gladsome friends at home.

4. We live there in joyous festivity, as long as the seven brothers
were living; and passed our time in narrations of our past adventures,
and relations of the old accounts of by gone times.

5. In course of time the eight brothers disappeared (perished) one by
one, like the seven oceans at the end of the world, in the vast ocean
of eternity; and were released like many of my friends also, from their
worldly cares.

6. After sometime, the only friend that I had, sunk also like the
setting sun in darkness; and I was left alone to bewail their loss in
sorrow and misery at their separation.

7. I then repaired in the sorrow of my heart, to the devotee under
the Kadamba tree; in order to derive the benefit of his advice, to
dissipate my dolor.

8. There I waited on him for three months, until he was released from
his meditation, when upon my humble request of him, he deigned to
answer me as follows.

9. The devotee replied:--I can not pass a moment, without my
employment in meditation; and must without any loss of time, resort to
my wonted devotion again.

10. As for you, you can not derive the benefit of my transcendent
advice to you; unless you engage yourself to practice my precepts with
all diligence.

11. Now I tell you to repair to the city of Ayodhyá (Oudh), where
the king Dasaratha reigns, and remains with his son Ráma (and other
children and members of his royal family).

12. Do you now go to this Ráma, who has been attending on the lectures
of the sage Vasishtha, the preceptor and priest of the royal family,
and delivered before the princes assembled in the imperial court.

13. You will there hear the holy sermon, on the means of attaining our
final emancipation; and will thereby obtain your best bliss in the
divine state like that of mine.

14. Saying so, he was absorbed in the cooling ocean of his meditation;
<after> which I directed my course to this way, and arrived at last
before Ráma and this princely assembly.

15. Here am I, and all these are the incidents of my life, as I have
related herein, regarding all what I have heard and seen, as also all
that has passed on me.

16. Ráma said:--The eloquent Kunda-danta that made this speech to me,
has been ever since sitting by my side in this assembly.

17. This very Brahmin bearing the name of Kunda-danta, that has sat
here all along by me; has heard the whole of the sermon, which has been
delivered by the sage, on the means of obtaining our liberation.

18. Now ask this Kunda-danta, that is sitting here by me at present,
whether he has well understood the context of this lecture, and whether
his doubts are wholly dissipated or not.

19. Vasishtha said:--Upon Ráma saying so to me, I looked upon
Kunda-danta, and made him the following interrogatory, saying:--

20. Tell me, Oh you goodly Bráhman Kunda-danta, what you have learnt
and understood, by your long attendance upon and hearing of my
lecture, calculated to confer liberation on men.

21. Kunda-danta replied:--Sir, your lecture has wholly removed the
doubts of my mind, and I find myself now as perfect master of myself,
by my victory over all selfish passions, and by my knowledge of the
knowable One.

22. I have known the immaculate One that is to be known, and seen the
undecaying One that is worth our seeing; I have obtained all that
is worth our obtaining, and I have found my repose in the state of
transcendent felicity.

23. I have known this plenum, to be the condensation of that
transcendental essence; and that this world is no other than a
manifestation of this sel-fsame soul.

24. The universal soul being also the soul of every individual, is
likewise the soul inherent in all forms of things; it is only the
self-existent soul, that becomes apparent in all existences and all
places.

25. It is possible for the human mind, which is minuter than the
molecule of a mustard seed, to contain the whole world in itself;
though it is naught but a mere zero, before the clear sight of the
intelligent.

26. It is possible also for a little room, to contain the seven
continents of the earth (in its map or picture); though the room itself
is no more than a mere empty space.

27. Whatever object is perceptible to us at any time or place, is only
the concrete form of the divine spirit; which is quite apart from every
thing in the discrete.




