CHAPTER CXXXXI.

DESCRIPTION OF THE TERMINATION OF A KALPA-PERIOD.

    Argument:--Continuation of the subject of fire and flame, and hot
    winds and fiery clouds at the final Dooms-day Dissolution.


The sage continued:--Though repeatedly burning amidst those fires, yet
I was neither consumed nor felt the least pain therein; and though
falling from one fire into another; yet I thought all this as a dream
in my dreaming (_i.e._ one dream in another).

2. The fires flew aloft, and filled the vault of heaven with flames;
and I was flying as a fire-brand amidst and all about it. (So the
sinless soul soars in the highest empyrean of heaven).

3. As I was wandering with my spiritual light and unwearied soul amidst
this universal conflagration, there arose on a sudden a tremendous
hurricane (raised by the rarefied air on all sides).

4. It howled and growled aloud like the roaring of clouds on high; and
blew fiercely all along, bearing down and carrying away every thing
before it.

5. The whirling and howling tornado, raged with redoubled force in the
forest; lifting aloft large tracts of woods in the form of clouds, and
intermixed with rolling firebrands, resembling the revolving suns above.

6. Flames of fire flashed above, like the evening clouds of heaven, and
blazed like hundreds of fiery pools on high; and the earth with the
habitation of men, giants and gods, burned as burning mountains on all
sides.

7. The burnt, unburnt and half burnt devils and demons, were roving
together throughout the heated air, and grappling each other in the
etherial streams.

8. The gods and goddesses, were falling down as flames of fire; and
the abode of the celestials, were melted down in showers of fire.

9. Flashes of fire were flickering as lightnings, from the burning
vault of heaven; and clouds of dark smoke hid the face of the vertical
sky in darkness.

10. The faces of the earth and sky and of all sides of heaven, were
wrapt in a flaming veil like that of the evening cloud; and the whole
universe with its seven spheres, appeared as a massive mountain of
flaming fire.

11. On one side the sparks of flaming fire, were flashing over
the head; and on another a huge mountainous mist of smoke hid the
hemisphere from sight. In the midst there appeared a mountainous body
of fire as that of Hara--the god of destruction, dancing amidst the
destructive winds of the Rudras blowing on all sides.




CHAPTER CXXXXII.

ASCERTAINMENT OF KARMA OR ACTS OF MEN.

    Argument:--Here God is ascertained as the Cause of the visionary
    world; and Refutation of the Theory of Karma or Human Deeds and
    Destiny.


The sage resumed and said:--Continuing thus in the vagaries of my false
imagination, I was led to many such painful sights, until they raised
in me the feelings of woe and sorrow, and my curiosity gave way to
weariness.

2. I then thought in my mind that it is a mere dream in the mind of
another person, which I have come to see from my seat within his
breast; therefore I must refrain from such sights, and restrain my
sorrow for them in vain.

3. The Huntsman asked:--It was for the investigation of the nature of
dream, that you had entered into the bosom of another person; say then
what have you come to know about it, and how are your doubts removed
(with respect to its false phantasms).

4. How came you to see the ocean in the breast, which never exists
therein, and how did you see the conflagration in the heart and the
tornado in the bowels, which are never to be found in any of those
places.

5. You said you saw the earth and sky, and the rivers and mountains and
many other things in the mind; but how can these and the world itself,
be in any manner situated therein.

6. The sage replied:--All these things and the world also are mere
non-entities, as there was no pre-existent material cause for the
production of the world, before its coming to existence; therefore
neither the term creation nor its sense, is in any way applicable to
this world or it is seen by us. (It is therefore but the mere phantasm
of an everlasting dream).

7. Hence the world creation and its meaning, proceed from ignorance of
the supreme soul, which is immutable in its nature; and it is ignorance
of this truth (lit. true knowledge), that produces the fallacy (lit.
the false knowledge) of creation. (Therefore the world (_i.e._ the idea
of the world), is ever present in the Divine mind).

8. Therefore I say, O thou fortunate one, that after you come to your
knowledge in this respect (_i.e._ of the nature of God), and your
ignorance of His supremely pure nature is removed:--

9. You will no more believe like myself, the false impression of
your consciousness (of the existence of the world); but must come to
know that, this causeless and uncreated world, is only the expanded
reflexion of your own mind.

10. Where is the body and the heart, and where are these elements
of water &c.; what is this dream and what are these conceptions and
perceptions, and what is life or death or anything else? (All which are
nothing in reality).

11. There is but one transpicuous Intellect everywhere, before which
the subtile ether is opalescent, and the biggest mountain is but a mite.

12. It is of its own nature that this intellectual vacuity, reflects on
something in its thought; and sees the same as its aeriform body; and
this it is what is called the world.

13. As it is our intellect alone, which reflects itself in various
forms in our dream; and as there is nothing besides it that then
presents itself to our view, so this world is no other than the aerial
form of the intellect only.

14. This universe is a quiet vacuity without any stir or shadow of
anything in it; and it is the dimness of the purblind eye of the
intellect, that presents these false shapes to sight, as blind men see
black spots in the clear sky.

15. To my sight the world is neither an entity nor a non-entity, nor is
it a mere void or the shadow or reflexion of anything; but the formless
infinity of the vacuous intellect only: (or the infinite vacuity of the
formless intellect only).

16. As it is in the state of our sleep, that the pure intellect sees
itself in the various forms of its dream, without any cause whatsoever;
so doth it view every thing in its own vacuum in waking also; without
the external objects of sight or its act of seeing them.

17. It is something that is unspeakable and without its beginning and
end; it is apparent with its own conceptions which are one with it and
make no duality in its nature (Lit., whose nature is free from unity or
duality, or as Sádi says:--_azchunin O chunan_, from this & that and so
& such).

18. As there is but one endless duration, embracing the periods both
of creation as well as annihilation; and as the tree comprehends all
its parts, blossoms and fruit under it; so is Brahma the Soul of all.
(These are but parts of one stupendous whole. Pope).

19. As the great edifice of one, appears as an empty space to another;
so as one’s sight of a castle in a mirage, appears as nothing to
another; so this visible world of waking people, is the dream of
sleeping persons, and rising on the ground of their imagination.

20. It is as the transpicuous vacuity of the intellect, exhibits itself
from time to time in itself; that we see the things in our dream, as
we behold them when we are awake; and so also we see the sights in our
waking state, as we behold them in our dreams in sleep.

21. As the fragrance of flowers, lies hid in the invisible air; so the
world lies concealed in the invisible intellect, which sees through
every pore of it.

22. It is by shutting out your thoughts of all and everything from your
mind, that thou mayst <be> quite pure in thyself; and it is then only
that thy infinite soul has its everlasting peace and rest, when it is
freed from all cares, both within and without itself.

23. The Huntsman said:--Tell me sir, how can men get rid of their
thoughts and cares of life, when they <are> invariably accompanied by
the acts and reminiscences of their past lives. Tell me also what kind
of men are subject to the tendencies of their past conduct, and who are
they that are released from them.

24. The sage replied:--Those souls that are full of intelligence and
have their spiritual bodies, are never subject to renewed births nor
to the consequences of their past actions; and such were the bodies
of Brahmá, and Kapila and others, that became manifest of themselves
(suam-bhávah), and such were the supernatural bodies of the gods and
divine incarnations.

25. Their bodies were not of this world, nor were they subject to
its dualistic illusory imaginations; but they were forms of pure
intelligence and of a subtile and spiritual nature.

26. In the beginning of creation, there was no primordial act of any
body, to fashion his form or frame of mind; but there existed the sole
and self-existent Brahma only, who manifested himself in the form of
the world (which is therefore a manifestation of the Deity himself, and
is thence called _tanmaya_ or full of the Divine essence).

27. As the great Brahmá and others, were the manifestations of the
supreme Brahma in the beginning, so there have been many thousands more
that were manifested from the same divine essence, which are known as
pure intelligences, and superior orders of beings. (Such are the gods
and angels and spirits of different denominations).

28. But these persons who are deluded by their ignorance of truth,
to think themselves other than or apart from Brahma, and as dull and
unintellectual beings, and as a distinct duality from the nature of
God:--

29. They are seen to be born again the next time, in consequence of
their past actions, and accompanied with the results of those acts,
whereby they are confined in their unintellectual bodies, in order to
lead their unspiritual lives, quite forgetful of their divine nature,
and subjected to the false belief of their materiality.

30. But such as preserve the purity of their divine character, by
thinking themselves as inseparable from the Divine soul, are known here
as uncontaminated by their former acts, as the persons of the divine
Brahmá, Vishnu and Siva or the holy trinity.

31. All those that know the true nature of the soul, remain with its
purity in the spirit of God; but such as understand it in the light of
the living spirit, live in themselves as detached from the Divine soul.

32. Whenever one knows himself as a mere living being, he is then
certainly accompanied by his ignorance or avidyá; and the soul takes
the name of the animal spirit or life, which is conversant only with
the world wherein it is situated.

33. But as he comes to know in course of time, the true and divine
nature of his soul, he is then reinstated in his real state and becomes
one with the supreme soul of all.

34. As the fluidity of water exhibits itself in the form of whirlpools
in some waters; so the divine intellect shows the in-existent world as
existent, to those understandings which are ignorant of the nature of
the supreme soul. (It is the nature of the omniscient mind, to picture
in itself, the appearances of things that are not in actual existence).

35. The world is the reflexion of omniscience, and not the
representation of our dreaming or waking states; therefore it can have
no action or property of itself, when it is nothing in reality.

36. In fact neither the knowledge of the world nor ignorance of it, or
its action or motion or any of its properties, is anything in reality;
all these are the results of our thought, that represents the unreal as
real one unto us.

37. In truth Brahma being the very creation or the great cosmos itself,
is verily the soul of all beings; it is in vain therefore to suppose
our prior acts as cause of our births. That God is the creator of the
universe, is a mere assumption made from his omnipotence (which is
supposed to make everything out of nothing; but as _ex nihilo nihil
fit_, God is himself diffused throughout all nature).

38. It is impossible for any body to have the bindings of his prior
acts upon him, at his first creation in the world; it was only
afterwards through his ignorance that he fabricated to himself a fate
or causality of his actions for his fruitions in afterlives (_i.e._ in
his subsequent and succeeding births or transmigrations in the world).

39. Say whether the vortex of sea has any body or action of its own; it
is but the whirling water, as Brahma himself is apparent in the form of
this seeming world.

40. As the persons appearing in our dream have no prior acts for their
appearance; so were the living beings in their first formation, endued
with pure understanding only (for want of their prior acts to actuate
them at first).

41. It is a mere supposition, that they had their causal acts at first
creation; and that all living beings have been roving ever since (in
repeated births), being fast bound by the chain of their prior acts.
(Man was pure in his creation, but since his first act of transgression
or original sin, and then his actual sins, have subjected him to the
miserable doom of undergoing repeated births).

42. But this creation is no act of creation, but verily the
manifestations of Brahma himself; and such being the case (that the
world is the selfsame Brahma), say what can acts mean, whence they
proceed and where they lie.

43. It is only the ignorance of the supreme soul, which binds us to the
bondage of acts; but its fetters fall off from the believer of Brahma
by his knowledge of truth. (Those who rely on their acts of faith,
are subjected to them; but the believer in One is released from their
bonds).

44. Know the outward acts of faith, to proceed from ignorance of the
universe; but as the wise man advances in his knowledge, he extricates
himself from the bondage of all religions and ceremonial acts and
observances.

45. Whereas the external acts of faith <are> entirely devoid of any
substantiality or meritoriousness in them, it is no way difficult to
get <rid> of them at once; it is solely our spiritual bond which is our
chief concern, beside which there is no bond whatsoever.

46. So long there is the dread of the dreadful illusion of this world,
as long as you do not attain to your wisdom; and so long do you
exhibit your wisdom, that you do not fall into the vertiginous eddy of
worldly affairs. Therefore try always, ye men of pure hearts and soul,
to acquire your wisdom and learning; because there is no other way of
your flying from the fears of the world, save by means of your right
understanding.




