CHAPTER CL.

TRANSCENDENTAL ADMONITIONS.

    Argument:--Conversation of the impossibility of the departed
    soul, to reenter into the former body.


The house keeping sage then said as follows:--It was by this kind of
reasoning, that my sagely guest expostulated with me, and made <me>
acquainted with whatever was worth knowing.

2. I then restrained my guest, to remain longer with me by entreaties;
and he consented to abide at mine, which resembled the abode of a dead
(ignorant) person. (Those that are dead to reason, are called dead
people).

3. The sage that spake to me those edifying words, which were as bright
and cooling as moonlight; behold him to be the venerable personage,
that is now sitting beside you.

4. He said without my request the following speech, for removal of my
ignorance; as if the sacrificial god rose out of fire, being pleased
with my sacrifice.

5. Hearing these words of the sage, the huntsman was confounded with
wonder; and could not know the sage that expounded the theory of
dreaming, now sitting confest before me.

6. The Huntsman said: O! it is a great wonder, and inconceivable in
my mind, that the sage that expounded the nature of dreams, is now
manifest before me.

7. I wonder at this, O sage! that the sagely guest whom you saw in your
dream, and who explained the cause of dreams to you, should now be seen
in this waking state.

8. Say how could this visionary sage seen in your airy dream, come to
appear in a solid body, and sit sedate at this place, like the fancied
ghost of boys.

9. Please to explain to me this wonderful narration of yours, in due
order; as to who he is and whence and wherefore he comes in this
questionable form.

10. The sage replied:--Hear me patently, O fortunate man, to relate to
you about this wonderful narrative. I will tell this briefly to you,
but you must not be hasty about it.

11. This sage that now sits by thee, had told me then for my
acquaintance of him; that he was a learned man, and has come hither now
with his tale too long to relate.

12. He said these words, saying, that he remembered his former nature,
which was as bright and fair as the clear sky, at the end of the foggy
season (of the month of _mágh_).

13. O! I remember also that I became a sage afterwards, with an
expanded mind; my heart was swollen with joy, and remained bathed
(amazed) at my wondrous change.

14. I was glad at that state of my life, from my desire of the
enjoyments of the world; but was deceived like a weary passenger,
pursuing a mirage with eager expectation of water.

15. Alack! that the phantoms of the phenomenal world, should so allure
even the wise; as the tempting fiends of hell, deceive mankind only to
deceive them.

16. Alas! and I wonder at it, that I was misled by my ignorance, that
I was misled by my erroneous knowledge of the world, to this state of
life, which is utterly devoid of every good.

17. Or what ever I am, I find myself to be full of errors only, and
there is no truth whatever in me; and yet it is the error of errors and
the greatest blunder, that we should be so beguiled and betrayed by
unrealities.

18. Neither am I nor this or that any entity at all; and yet it is a
wonder, that all these false appearances, should appear as realities.

19. What then must I do at present to break my bondage to these
falsities; I see the germ of error lying inside myself, and this tear
off and cast away from me.

20. Be there the primeval ignorance, prevalent all over the world; she
can do us no harm, that is a mere negation herself; It is now that I
must try to get rid of my error, of deeming the unreal as real.

21. That this sage is my preceptor and I am his pupil, is all a
mistake; because I am in and the very Brahma, and the person sitting
here by me, is as the man in the moon or in the cloud.

22. Then thought I of speaking to that great sage of enlightened
understanding; and so thinking, I addressed him saying:--

23. O great sage! I will now go to my own body (from out of the body of
this person), in order to see what I may be doing there.

24. Hearing this, that great sage said smilingly to me, Ah! where are
those bodies of you two; that are blown away afar in their ashes.

25. You may go there yourself if you please, and see the matter
yourself; and by seeing their present state, you will know every thing
relating to them.

26. Being thus advised by him, I thought on entering my former body.

27. I told him, do you remain here, O sage, until I come back to this
place, after seeing my former body; so saying I became a breath of air,
and fled from my abode.

28. Then mounting on the car of wind, I wandered through the air,
and was wafted to a hundred ways like the odour of a flower, carried
rapidly all about by the odoriferous breezes for a long time.

29. Roving long in this manner, I sought to enter that body, by the
passage of its lungs; but finding neither that or any other passage, I
kept floating in the air.

30. Then with deep felt sorrow, I returned to my place, and became tied
again to that stake of the world, by my returning affections to it.

31. Here I saw that venerable sage sitting before me, and asked him
intensely in the following manner in my house in this place.

32. Tell me sir, said I, for thou knowest all the past and future; and
knowest what all this is, by means of thy all seeing sight.

33. How was it that the person in whose body I had entered, as also my
own body likewise, could neither of them be found anywhere.

34. I then wandered throughout the vast expanse of the sphere of this
earth, and searched amidst all fixed and living bodies herein, but
could not find that opening of the throat from which I had come out.

35. Being thus addressed by me, that high minded _muni_ or sage then
said unto me; it is not possible for thee with thy bright and brilliant
eyes to find it out unaided by my advice.

36. If you should search after it with the light of thy yoga
meditation, it is then possible for thee to find it out as fully, as
one sees a lotus placed in his palm.

37. Now therefore if you wish to listen to my words, then attend to my
advice, and I will tell thee all about it.

38. Know then that as it is the sunlight that expands the lotus
blossoms in the lake, so it is the enlightening beams of Brahmá only
that developes the lotus of understanding, and that you can know
nothing of yourself.

39. Know then that as you sat once in your devotion, you dreamt in
your reverie, of entering into the heart of another person, and were
confirmed in your consciousness of that belief.

40. The heart wherein you thought to have entered, you believed to have
seen the three worlds therein; and the great sphere of heaven and earth
contained in its bosom.

41. In this manner as you absorbed in your reverie, and thought
yourself to reside in the body of another person; you happened to fall
asleep, and your hermitage in the forest suddenly caught fire and was
burnt down.

42. The burning hut sent forth clouds of smoke to the sky, and the
blazing cinders, flew to the orbs of the sun and moon.

43. The flying ashes covered the sky, as with a grey cloud or ash
coloured blanket; and the blue vault of heaven was spread over as with
a canopy.

44. Wild animals issuing out of their caves and caverns, sent forth
horrid yells and growling abroad; and the bursting sparks filled the
horizon.

45. The tall palm and other trees, caught the flame and appeared
as trees of fire; and the flying and falling fires, cracked as the
clattering cloud.

46. The flames ascending far above in the air, appeared as fixed
lightenings in the sky; and the firmament assumed a face as that of
molten gold.

47. The fiery sparks flying afar to the starry frame, doubled the
number of stars in heaven; and the flashing fires in the bosom of the
sky, delighted the eyes of damsels (as at the sight of fire works).

48. The blowing and booming fires, rebellowing in the hollow sky;
startled the sleeping foresters in the woods, who rushed out of their
caves and caverns, and wandered about in the forest.

49. The wild beasts and birds being half burnt in their caves and
nests, lay and fell dead on the ground; the lakes and river waters
boiled with heat, and the foresters were suffocated by the fumes.

50. The young _chauri_ bulls, were parched in the flames; and the stink
of the burning fat and flesh of wild beasts, filled the air with a
nasty stench.

51. This all devouring wild fire, raging as a conflagration or diluvian
fire, hath wholly consumed and swallowed up your hermitage, as a
serpent devours its prey.

52. The Huntsman asked:--Tell me sir, what was the real cause of this
fire; and why the Bráhman lads that dwelt in their pupilage there, were
burnt down also.

53. The sage replied:--It is the vibration or effort of the volitive or
designing mind, that is the true cause or incentive of the production
or demolition of the desired object; and so its quiescence is the cause
of the absence of the three worlds.

54. As a sudden fear or passion is the cause of palpitation of the
heart, so an effort or desire of the mind is the mobile force (or
primum mobile) for the causation of the three worlds.

55. It is the pulsation of the Divine Mind, that is the cause of the
imaginary city of the world; as also of the increase of population and
of rains and draughts.

56. The will in the Divine Mind, is the source of the creative mind
of Brahmá, which in its turn gives rise to the minds of the first
patriarchs, who transmit it to others in endless progression, all of
which proceed from the first quiet and calm intellect, through the
medium of vacuum.

57. The learned know well, that the effulgence of the pure and vacuous
Intellect, shines in the vacuum of their intellects; but the ignorant
think it as it appears to them, which is not the reality (which it is
not in reality).




