CHAPTER CLXI.

EXPLANATION OF NIRVÁNA.

    Argument:--Manifestations of the self-existent Intellect. Its
    light guiding to Divine knowledge, and ignorance thereof leading
    to darkness.


Ráma said:--Tell me sir, whether these various events incidental to the
lives of the hermit and hunter, were owing to any cause, or of their
own spontaneity (_i.e._ whether they were the effects of any cause, or
of their spontaneous occurrence as mere dreams and phantasies).

2. Vasishtha replied:--These occurrences are as the appearance of
eddies, in the vast ocean of the unknown soul (or mind); and are known
to be in their continual rotation in the vortex of the soul, of their
own accord and in their airy forms.

3. As the oscillating particles of air, are ever in motion in the
air; so the current of thoughts is continually in action, in the vast
vacuity of intellect (or mind).

4. Whatever issues from its source in any shape, retains its original
form unless it is converted to and restrained in any other form; so
the aerial thoughts of the vacuous mind are always aerial, unless they
are drawn in painting or exhibited in another form. (Just so a clod of
earth is always the earth, till it is moulded to the form of a pot or
any other thing).

5. It is the vacuous essence of the Divine Intellect, that inheres
in every form that is exhibited by and derived from it; so it is the
substance of the body, that permits through out all its members and
limbs; as it is the woody substance of the tree, that is diffused
through all the leaves and branches, that shoot forth from it. (Gloss.
The difference consists in the permanence of the permeating principle,
and the temporiety of the pervaded growth).

6. Brahma appears to remain permanent in some existences, as in the
four elemental forms of earth etc.; while he seems to be transcient and
evanescent in others, as in the frail bodies of mortal bodies, all of
which abide in their aerial state in the vacuous spirit.

7. All these various objects therefore, being but reflections of the
Intellect impressed upon the soul; it is impossible for us to determine
which of these is substantial or unsubstantial or real or unreal.

8. All these are altogether unknowable except that we know them as
reflexions in the inanity of the Intellect; say ye therefore that are
wholly ignorant of all what you think this visible world to be, whether
a reality or unreality.

9. Whatever you behold anywhere in the universe, is but an exhibition
in the vacuum of the Divine Intellect; and what avails it to you that
know the truth, whether you believe it as such or not. Rely therefore
in your belief of it as it is.

10. These forms of reflexions rise of themselves in the Divine Mind,
as the waves and billows exhibit themselves on the surface of the
sea; they are the spontaneous offspring of the Divine Spirit, and are
of themselves both their causes as well as effects (or self caused
effects).

11. It is the display of the transcendent vacuum of the Divine Mind,
that passed under the appellations of its will or volition, or its
imagination and creation, or the creation of its imagination; hence
this world is to be understood under any one of these senses, and not
of its being composed of earth and water.

12. It is this appearance of the Divine Mind, that appears in this
manner and nothing besides; it is the Divine itself that resides in the
Divinity, and passes under the title of Avidyá or Ignorance, from our
ignorance of its nature.

13. There is no material grossness in the integrity of the Divine
Intellect; which is purely vacuous and immaterial; and composes the
whole universe, this is transcendental knowledge, and its perfection is
liberation.

14. It is the reflexion of the vacuous Intellect, which spreads over
the whole universe; it is rare and uncompressed, and ever calm and
quiet, and passes by the name of the world.

15. The meditative man whose eye-sight is fixed in his musing, whose
body is emaciated in devotion, and whose mind is abstracted from the
concrete, and is absorbed in intellection, is only capable of seeing
the Intellectual world.

16. Whatever the vacuous essence of the intellect, exhibits in any form
at any place; the same appears to be present there of its own nature.

17. The unthinking man and unreasonable soul, sees only erroneous
sights in the midst of skies; as one who is dim-sighted and purblind by
birth, does not cease from seeing the double moon in the sky.

18. Whatever is seen anywhere, is no other than the unpolluted Brahma
himself; and the vacuous sphere of the Intellect being for ever clear
and transparent, is never sullied by any foulness (of gross matter).

19. The intellect without forsaking its pure form of
self-consciousness, exhibits varieties of gross objects in the form of
dreams within itself. So also is our consciousness of the world, in the
manner of our dreams.

20. By comparing the dicta of the sástras with one another, and
weighing them well with acute judgement, one will find his rest in
himself; but the man of shallow understanding will not find it so.

21. The ignorance which floats upon the sea of your understanding, does
not contaminate my mind, in the manner of dirt polluting a pure and
clear stream.

22. As there is neither the earth nor any earthly thing, to be met with
in our sleep, though we are conscious of them in our dream; so also the
phenomenal world has no real existence, though we are conscious of it
in our waking.

23. As the clearness of the Intellect, like sunlight or flaming fire,
shows us many things in our sleeping dreams, so doth its light exhibit
the visibles to our view in our waking dreams also by day.

24. There is no difference between the two states of dreaming and
waking, they are both of the same nature, and the difference lies in
the modes of our apprehension of them.

25. The waking man never apprehends his waking state to be a dream; but
the dead man that rises again to life in the next world, thinks his
past life to have been but a state of dreaming.

26. The shortness and length of time, occupied by the two states
of dreaming and waking, is generally considered to constitute the
difference between them; but during the time of their presence, they
are both considered alike the other (_i.e._ the dreaming man thinks
himself as waking).

27. The sleeping and waking dreams, bearing alike the same quality of
presenting false objects to view, are necessarily of the same nature;
and there is no difference whatever in their outward features, as there
is neither elder and younger of two twin brothers. (Dreaming and waking
are twin brothers, like sleep and death neither of which is more or
less).

28. Whatever is the waking dream, just so is the waking in dream also;
neither of which leaves anything--being, behind the two states of
waking and dreaming. (They present many things when present, but leave
nothing lasting in their absence or when they are past and gone).

29. As we know the inconstancy of hundreds of dreams, all along the
length of our life time; so the unredeemed and unenlightened soul, sees
hundreds of waking states (in its repeated transmigrations in life,
_i.e._ in this living world).

30. As the living mortals may well recollect the very many sleeping
dreams, they have seen throughout their lives; so the immortalized
souls of siddhas well remember, the number of waking dreams which they
had seen, in their past transmigrations in different bodies.

31. Thus our waking is equipollent with our dreaming, and our dreams
are equivalent with waking, in their correlation with one another in
like quality, and our perception of both alike.

32. As the word worlds and phenomenal, are significant of the one and
same meaning; so the terms dreaming and waking are homonymous, and
interchangeable to one another--_mutatis mutandis_.

33. As the fairy-land in a dream, is as clear as the open space of the
Intellect; so is this world an inane void and blank, and without the
grossness of _avidyá_ which ignorance imputes to it. (Ignorance views
the fair ideal world as a foul material one).

34. The world is a vacuous substance, and represented as a gross stuff
by ignorance; so I am as free as air and any airy thing in the world,
and it is my imagination only, that binds me to my grossness.

35. Therefore do not confine your free and unconfined nature, in
the bondage of gross matter; and never change the pure vacuum of
your person to a material stuff, nor disfigure your formless and
intellectual self in a gross and finite form.

36. There can be no bondage nor liberation, of aught whatever in this
visible world of our ignorance or _avidyá_; because all things herein
are mere reflexions of the formless void of the Divine Intellect.

37. Here there is no display of ignorance, nor any misconceptions of
ours of any thing; there is neither any bondage nor release of aught
whatever, and nothing that is either existent or inexistent (since all
are but reflexions of Divine Intellect).

38. There is nescience, nor knowing of anything here by us; because it
is the uncreated Intellect alone, that manifests itself in this manner;
it reflects all forms in itself, as if they are all its dreams or
creations.

39. As a man passing from one place to another, has his mind kept in
abeyance in the interim; so should we keep our minds quiet and still
betwixt our sight of the visibles and our dreams. (In action of the
mind is reckoned as _nirvána_).

40. As one has his body and mind, quite quiet and calm in his sleep at
night; and in the respite of his sights and thoughts, in the states of
his waking and dreaming; this very state of insensibility is called
_nirvána_ of the yogi.

41. Know our knowledge of the difference of objects (as the one is
immaterial and the other material), is equally untrue as that of
our waking and dreaming states; because it is impossible for us to
conceive any other thing as matter, to consist in the immaterial
Intellect.

42. Our knowledge of identity and diversity, proceed however from the
same vacuous intellect; which combines the unity and duality also, in
unbroken union or harmony in itself.

43. Knowing all as parts of undivided whole, all these are the same
whatever they appear to be; hence the visible however diversified they
may appear, are all one and the same principle.

44. Hence the etherial sphere of Brahma, contains all in itself; and
who as an aerial point concentrates all in it; and the creation is the
unity of Brahma, together with all its varieties.

45. Knowing all things as full of God, you must however reject them all
(as mere reflexions of the Deity); and rest yourself at last in the
vacuous Intellect, as the great rock of your refuge.

46. Now, O fortunate Ráma, remain to act in conformity with the rules
of your order, and laws of society and the statues of your position
and dignity; continue to go on, eat and drink and rest in your usual
course, rely in your desired object, and ever recline in the glorious
and holy lord of your intellect, and the supreme God of all.




