CHAPTER CLXII.

ANNIHILATION OF IGNORANCE.

    Argument:--Here Duality is reduced to the unity of Brahma; and
    good counsels given for subversion of ignorance.


Vasishtha continued:--All objects being convertible to the conceptions
of the vacuous intellect, the whole universe is supposed to have its
seat in the hollow mind; and therefore both the outward sights of
things, as also the inward thoughts of their forms, are all but ideal
images in the empty mind.

2. The world being but a dream, and of the form of an ideal city in the
mind, has nothing substantial in it; and is therefore a quiet vacuity
in itself, without having anything of any kind, or any diversity
whatsoever contained therein.

3. It is the uniform display of the Intellect, appearing as multiform
unto us; and this variety though unsubjective to the soul, is looked
upon by it within itself, as we view the fairy-land of our dream,
rising from ourselves. (Query:--whether our dreams are subjective or
objective to us?)

4. In the beginning this world appeared, as the aerial castle of a
dream in the vacuum of the Intellect; it was a mere reflexion of the
Divine Mind, and though it was of the form of a false shadow, remained
as substantive to the supreme spirit.

5. The knowing theosophist well knows this mystery, which is mysterious
to the unknowing ignorant; because the word creation bears the sense of
both the reality as well as unreality in it.

6. The knowing spiritualist as well as the unknowing agnostic, both
acknowledge the reality of creation; but they can neither understand
how it exists, nor communicate to one another their right conception of
it.

7. They both know the meaning, of the word creation in their minds; the
one having the sense of its sedateness ever wakeful in their minds
(from their spiritual view of it); and the other having the sense
of its unsteadiness always waking in them (from their sight of the
changeful scenes of the outer world); so they resemble the sober and
drunken men, that view the world in its steady and shaking states.

8. As the liquid waters in a river, rise incessantly in restless waves;
so the rolling worlds, push forward into being, in the vast expanse of
the Divine Mind.

9. These creations which are not of the nature of the intellect, have
yet their sites in the Intellect, like the thoughts that rise and fall
in it; and these though they are invisible in their nature, appear as
visible things, like the fair objects and fairy cities in our dream.

10. It is spreading shadow of the divine Intellect, which pass under
the name of the world; and this formless in itself, appears as having a
form, like the shadow of anything else.

11. It is a gross error, to take the unsubstantial shadow for a
substantial body; as it is a gross error to suppose the empty shadow of
a ghost as an embodied being.

12. The world is as unreal as an imaginary city, and as false as a
string of rain drops; why then do you rely in an unreality, which is
palpable from the testimonies of both the ignorant and knowing men.

13. The words then that are used to express this thing and that, are
mere empty sounds, as those emitted by a splitting block of wood or a
bamboo; or those heard in the dashing of waves or blowing of winds; it
is the current air which conveys the empty sound into the open vacuum
of the sky, but they are all unreal and meaningless, and bear but a
conventional sense, with which it has no connection whatsoever.

14. It is light of the lord that reflects itself in his creation, and
the reflexion of his _fiat_ that reverberates through the whole; while
in reality there is neither any sound nor substance, that is to be
heard or seen in the universe (except the voice and the sight of the
Lord).

15. Whatever shines or exists herein, is the transcendent reality
of the Lord; otherwise there is nothing that could appear at first
without its cause (all being but parts of the one undivided whole--to
_pan_).

16. Therefore from (thy knowledge of) the distinctions of words and
things; know the one as all in all, and remain as quiet and calm as the
indefinite and infinite void itself.

17. Forsake the fickleness of thy mind, by means of the calm repose of
thy soul; the purity of thy understanding, and by an even tenor of thy
disposition; because an inconstant soul is troublesome in life.

18. It is one’s self that is a friend or enemy to himself, and if one
will not try to guard and save himself by his own self, there is no
other to do so for him. (He who is no friend to himself, is his own
enemy himself).

19. Get over the ocean of the world while you are young, and make your
good understanding the ferry boat, to bear your body safely to the
other shore.

20. Do what is good for you today, and why defer till tomorrow; you can
do nothing in oldage, when your body becomes a burden to yourself.

21. Know your<self> as oldage (if it is fraught with learning); and
account decrepitude as death itself in your lifetime. Youth is verily
the life of the living, provided it is fraught with learning.

22. Having obtained thy life in this living world, which is as
transient as the fleeting lightning; you must try to derive the essence
from this dirty earth, by availing yourself of the benefit of good
_sástras_ and the company of the wise.

23. Woe to the ignorant! that will not seek their salvation in life;
that are sinking in the pits of mud and mire; and never striving to
lift themselves above them.

24. As the ignorant rustic is afraid at the sight of the earthen images
of ghosts, and bends down to them; which those that are acquainted with
the meaning of the word ghost never do.

25. So those that see God in an idol or in his visible creation, are
misled to think it their god and adore it as such; but those that know
the true meaning of the term, never pay their adoration to any visible
object.

26. As things in motion come to rest afterwards, and the visible
disappear from the sight of the learned, who are acquainted with their
true meaning. (The world recedes, and the light of God opens to their
view).

27. As the sights in a dream, seeming to be true in the state of
dreaming, disperse at last upon waking, and upon the knowledge of their
unreal nature.

28. So doth this world, which is conceived as something existing in the
vacuum of the understanding; melts at last into empty air and nothing,
upon our knowledge of its intellectual nature.

29. This living world is as a wilderness, burning with the
conflagration of various evils attendant on life; and here we are
exposed as weak antelopes, living upon our precarious sustenances; and
here we are governed by our ungovernable minds and restless passions
and senses of our bodies; all these require to be subdued in order to
obtain our liberation from repeated births and deaths.




