CHAPTER CLXXXX.

ECSTASIS OR INERTNESS OF RÁMA.

    Argument:--Description of liberation, as heedlessness of the past
    and future, ignorance of the knowables, and thoughtlessness about
    the thinkables.


Vasishtha continued:--Gaining the knowledge of knowables, is called our
bondage in this world; but it is our release from the bonds of knowable
objects, that is termed our liberation from it.

2. Ráma rejoined:--But how can it be possible, sir, to get our escape
from the knowledge of the knowables, and how can our rooted knowledge
of things, and our habitual sense of bounden to them, be removed from
us.

3. Vasishtha replied:--It is the perfection of our knowledge, and
feeling of it as such, that removes our misjudgment; and then we get
our liberation from error, after disappearance of our inborn bias.

4. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, what is that simply uniform feeling,
and what is called that complete and perfect knowledge said to be,
which releases the living soul entirely, from its fetters of error.

5. Vasishtha replied:--The soul is full with its subjective knowledge
of intuition, and has no need of the objective knowledge of the
knowables from without; and perfect knowledge is our inward sense of
the same, and not expressible in words.

6. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, whether the knowableness of knowledge,
that is whether the internal knowledge of the knowing soul, is the same
or separate from itself; and whether the word _jnána_ or knowledge, is
taken in its instrumental or abstract sense (_i.e._ whether it is used
to mean the power by means of which we derive our knowledge, or the so
derived knowledge itself).

7. Vasishtha replied:--All perception is knowledge, and this term
is denotative of its causality also (as we say, my knowledge is my
guide, _i.e._ the instrumentality of my guidance). Hence there is no
difference between knowledge and the known or the knowable, as there is
none between the air and its ventilation.

8. Ráma rejoined:--If it be so (that there is no difference between
them); then tell me, whence arises the error of difference in
our conception of them; the conception of the materiality of the
perceptible or objective world, must be as erroneous as that of the
horns of a hare, which had never been _in esse_, nor are likely to be
at any time in future.

9. Vasishtha replied:--The error of the reality of external objects,
gives rise to the error of the reality to our knowledge of them also;
but there is no inward object of thought, nor of the outward senses,
has ever any reality in it.

10. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me, O sage, how can you deny the existence of
those objects, which are evident to the senses of mine, thine and all
others alike; and which are ever present in their thoughts in the minds
of sensible beings.

11. Vasishtha replied:--It was at the time of the first creation of the
world, that the self manifested God Virát, exhibited the outline of the
cosmos in a corner of his all-comprehensive mind; but as nothing was
produced in reality, there is no possibility of our knowing any as a
knowable or real entity.

12. Ráma rejoined:--How can our common sight, of the present, past and
future prospects of this world; and our daily perception of things,
which are felt by all in general, be regarded as nothing by your
teaching. (Common sense can not be controverted by abstruse philosophy).

13. Vasishtha replied:--Just as the dreamer’s vision in sleep, the
deer’s mistake of water in the mirage in sand, the illusory sight of
a moon in the sky, and the prospects of our delusive fancies, do all
disappear on right observation; so the false perceptions of worldly
things, and the mistaken conceptions of our own entities, are as
erroneous as the sights of the false lights in the empty air. (These
dissolve as dreams upon waking, and the testimony of one waking man, is
enough to disperse the deceptive sights of all dreamers and sleepers).

14. Ráma rejoined:--If our knowledge of I and thou and of this and
that, is as false as that of all other things in the womb of the world;
why then were these brought into existence, not left to remain in their
ideas in the mind of their creator, as they had existed before his
creation of them?

15. Vasishtha replied:--It is certain that everything springs from
its cause, and not otherwise; what then could there be the (material)
cause, for the creation of the world therefrom, after the dissolution
of everything at the universal destruction?

16. Ráma replied:--Why sir, cannot that being be the cause of
recreation, which remains undestroyed and indestructible, after
destruction of the prior creation?

17. Vasishtha replied:--Whatever substance there abides in the cause,
the same is evolved in effect also; hence the essence of Brahma being
composed of his intellect only, it could not give rise to the material
world from itself; as the substance of a pot, cannot produce that of a
picture or cloth.

18. Ráma replied:--Why sir, the world existed in its subtile (or ideal)
state, in the person (mind) of Brahma (God); from which it issued forth
anew and again, after dissolution of the former creation.

19. Vasishtha said:--Tell me, O intelligence Ráma, how could the Lord
God (whose nature is composed of pure intelligence), conceive the
entity or quintessence of the world in himself, and which like the
productive seed, sprang out in the form of the future creation. Say
what sort of entity was it.

20. Ráma replied:--It is an entity of Divine intelligence, and is
situated in the subjective soul of God in that form. It is neither a
vacuous nullity, nor an unreal entity.

21. Vasishtha said:--If it be so, O mighty armed Ráma, that the three
worlds are Divine intelligence only; then tell me why bodies formed of
pure intelligence (as those of the gods and angels), and those having
the intelligent soul in them (as those of human beings), are subject to
their birth and death.[5]

22. Ráma said:--If then there has been no creation at all at any time
from the beginning; then tell me sir, whence has this fallacy of the
existence of the world come to be in vogue.

23. Vasishtha replied:--The inexistence of cause and effect, proves
the nullity of being and not being (_i.e._ its annihilation also); all
this that is thought of to exist, is the thought and thinking of the
divine soul, which is the triputi or triple entity of thinker, thinking
and the thought together. (_i.e._ The soul is both the subjective and
objective, as also their connecting predicate by itself).

24. Ráma rejoined:--The thinking soul thinks about the implements and
the acts, as the looker looks on the objects of his sight; but how can
the divine looker be the dull spectacle (and the object the same with
the subject); unless you maintain that the objective fuel burns the
subjective fire (which is impossible).

25. Vasishtha replied:--The viewer is not transformed to the view,
owing to impossibility of the existence of an objective view; it is the
all seeing soul, that shows itself as one solid plenum in itself.

26. Ráma rejoined:--The soul is the pure intellect only, and is without
its beginning and end; it thinks only on its eternal and formless
thoughts; how then can it present the form and appearance of the
visible world.[6]

27. Vasishtha replied:--The thinkables being all causeless of
themselves, have none of them any cause whatsoever; and it is the
privation of the thinkables, that bespeaks the liberation of the
intellect. (The production of the thinkables, is as impossible as the
birth of the offspring of a Barren woman. Gloss).

28. Ráma rejoined:--If it is so, then say how and whence have we the
thought of our conception of ourselves; and our knowledge of the world,
and our sense of motion and the like; (as they are suggested to us by
our common sense, and the universal testimony of all people).

29. Vasishtha replied--The impossibility of cause, precludes the
possibility of any production; how and whence could the thinkables
proceed, when all is quite calm and quiet everywhere, and the knowledge
of creation is but an error and a delusion.

30. Ráma rejoined:--Here tell us sir, how this error comes to
overshadow the unknowable, unthinkable and the immovable being, that
is selfmanifest and ever untainted and clear by itself (Swaprakása or
Swayamprakása).

31. Vasishtha replied:--there is no error or mistake herein, owing to
its want of any causation also; our knowledge of egoism and tuism, is
drowned altogether in that of one unevanescent Unity.

32. Ráma replied:--O venerable sir, I am so bewildered in the error
of my consciousness, that I know not what other question I am here to
make; I am not so enlightened as the learned, to argue any more on this
point.

33. Vasishtha replied:--Do not desist, O Ráma, from making your
inquiries concerning the causality of Brahma; until you are satisfied
with the proof of his causelessness, as they test the purity of gold
on the stone; and then by knowing this, you will be able to repose
yourself, in the blissful state of the supremely Blest.

34. Ráma rejoined:--I grant sir, as you say, that there is no creation
for want of its cause, but tell me now whence is this my error of the
thinkable and its thought (so rooted in me that I can not get rid of
it).

35. Vasishtha replied:--There is no error in the belief of the uncaused
creation, and in its perfect calmness; but it is for want of your habit
of thinking it so (and your bias of the reality of the world), that
really makes you so restless.

36. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, whence rise this habit as well as the
desuetude of this mode of our thinking; and how does our rest proceed
from the one, and our disquiet from the other mode of thought.

37. Vasishtha replied:--Belief in the eternal God, breed no error in
that of the eternity of the world; it is the habit of thinking it
otherwise, that creates the error of creation. Be you therefore as
sound in your mind, as the solid minded sages have been.

38. Ráma rejoined:--Please to tell me sir, in your preaching of these
lectures to your audience, what other mode of practice there may be, in
our attainment of a quietude like that of the living liberated sages.

39. Vasishtha replied:--The lesson that we preach, is to know one’s
self as Brahma and resting in the spirit of Brahma; and this knowledge
is sure to release the soul, both from its longing for liberation, as
also from its dread of bondage in this world.

40. Ráma rejoined:--This doctrine of yours, by its all negative
distinctions of our knowledge of time and space, and of our actions
and thing, serves to drive away our consciousness of all existence
whatsoever from the mind.

41. Vasishtha replied:--Yes, because all our objective knowledge, of
the distinctions of time and place and of actions and things in our
minds; is the effect of our ignorance of the subjectivity of the soul,
beside which there is no other substance--before the liberated spirit.

42. Ráma rejoined:--The absence of our knowledge of an intelligent
agent, and also of an intelligible object; deprives us altogether of
any intelligence at all; the impossibility of the union of the unity
and duality together, must preserve our distinct knowledge of the
knowing principle and the known or knowable object. (The transitive
verb to know must have an object, and cannot like a neuter or
intransitive verb, be confined to or reflect upon its agent. Gloss).

43. Vasishtha replied:--It is by your act of knowing of God, that you
have or get your knowledge of Him; therefore the word is taken in its
active sense by you and others (Who have to know a thing before it is
known to them). But with us (or sages like ourselves), who are possest
of our intuitive knowledge of ourselves as the deity, it is but a
self-reflexive verb. (Gloss. _Buddhi_ with the ignorant, means knowing;
but with the sapient, it means feeling).

44. Ráma rejoined:--But how do you feel your finite selves or egoism,
and your limited knowledge, as same with the infinite soul and
omniscience of the deity; unless it were to ascribe your imperfections
to the transcendental divinity, who is purer than the purest water, and
rarer than the rarefied ether.

45. Vasishtha replied:--It is the feeling of the perfections of
the divine soul in ourselves, that we call our egoism; and not the
ascription of our imperfect personalities unto him. And here the
duality of the living and divine souls, bears resemblance to the unity
of the ventilating breeze with the universal and unfluctuating air.
जीबब्रक्षनोरैक्यं ।

46. As the waves of the ocean, have been continually rising and
subsiding in it; so the objective thoughts of one’s egoism and the
world besides, must be always rising and falling in the subjective soul
of the supreme being, as well as self-liberated persons (Hence the
subjective and objective cannot be the one and same thing).

47. Vasishtha replied:--If so it be, then say what is the fault, that
is so much reprehended in the popular belief of a duality; and in
disregarding the creed of the Unity, which is eternal and infinite,
full and perfect in itself, quite calm and quiet in its nature, and is
termed the transcendent One.

48. Ráma rejoined:--If it be so (that the living soul, is as the breeze
or breath of the calm air of Brahma and same with it), then tell me
sir, who and what power is it, which conceives the ego, tu and others,
which feels and enjoys all as their agent, if the fundamental fallacy
of the world be the root of all. (The whole being false, there is
nothing as one or an another or as bondage or liberation).

49. Vasishtha replied:--The knowledge of the reality of the objective
or knowable things, is the cause of our bondage (in this world); true
knowledge does not recognise their reality, and full intelligence
which assumes the forms of (and shows) all things in itself, sees no
difference of bondage or liberation before it. (All things are alike in
the full light of intelligence).

50. Ráma rejoined:--Intelligence like light, does not show us all
things in the same light; it shows us the difference between a pot and
a picture, as light shows the white and black to view. Again as the
light of our eye sight shows us the different forms of outward objects,
so does our intelligence confirm and attest the reality of our visual
perceptions.

51. Vasishtha replied:--All outward objects having no cause of their
creation, nor any source of their production, are as incredible as
the offspring of a barren woman; and the appearance of their reality
which is presented to our sight, is as false as that of silver in
a conchshell or in the glittering sands, and not otherwise. (The
phenomenal is a mirage, and deception of sight).

52. Ráma rejoined:--The sight of the miserable world, whether it
be true or false, is like the startling apparition in a dream, and
attended with pain only for the time; tell me therefore the best means,
how to avoid and get rid of this error.

53. Vasishtha replied:--The world being never the better than a dream,
it is the reflection of the idea of its reality, that is the best
method of getting rid of the snare of its tempting joys and sorrows.

54. Ráma rejoined:--But how to effect this object, which may redound to
our bliss and rest; say how to put an end to the sight of the world,
which shows the sights of falsities as realities, in the continuous
train of its deluding dreams.

55. Vasishtha replied:--It is the due consideration of the
antecedent and subsequent states of things, which must remove the
erroneous impression of their reality; just as the conception of
the substantiality of sights seen in our dreams, is eliminated upon
reflection of their subsequent disappearance (and bearing no trace of
former forms behind).

56. Ráma rejoined:--But how do the rising apparitions of the world,
disappear in the depth of our minds, and what do we then come to
perceive, after the vestiges of our gross remembrances have faded away?
(The mind is never vacant of its thoughts of visible objects).

57. Vasishtha responded:--After the false appearance of the world, has
vanished like the faded sight of a city from view; the unconcerned mind
of the unconcerned soul, looks upon it as a painting, wholly washed out
by the rain (_i.e._ as a clear blank or vacuity).

58. Ráma asked:--What then becomes of the man, after subsidence of
the worldly sights and desires from his mind; like the gross looking
objects of a dream; and after the mind rests in its state of listless
indifference.

59. Vasishtha replied:--Then the world recedes from his sight, and then
this predilection of it, and his desire for its enjoyment depart and
die away along with it.

60. Ráma rejoined:--How can this blind and deep rooted predilection,
which has accompanied the soul from many previous births, and branched
out into multifarious desires, resign its hold of the human heart all
at once?

61. Vasishtha replied:--As the knowledge of truth, serves to disperse
the rooted error of the material world from the mind, so the sense of
the vanity of human desires, and of the bitterness of their enjoyment,
dissipate their seeds at once from the heart (where they can take root
no more).

62. Ráma rejoined:--After dissipation of the error of materiality, of
the visible spheres of worlds; say, O sage, what is that state of the
mind which follows it, and how its peace and tranquility at last?

63. Vasishtha replied:--After dissipation of the error of the material
world, the mind reverts to its seat in the immaterial soul; where it is
released from all its earthly bonds, and finds its rests in the state
of an indifferent _insouciance_--vairágya.

64. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, if the error of the world is as
little, as that of a child’s idea of sorrow, then what trouble there is
for a man to remedy it?

65. Vasishtha replied:--All our desires, like the fond wishes of boys,
being wholly extinct in the mind, there remains no more any cause of
any sorrow in it; and this you may well know from the association of
desires in all minds.

66. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, what is the mind, and how are we to
know its nature and workings; and what good do we derive, by our best
investigation of the mental powers and properties.

67. Vasishtha replied:--The inclination of the intellect towards the
intelligibles, is called the mind, for its mending the thinkables only;
and the right knowledge of its workings, leads to the extinction of all
our worldly desires. (_i.e._ The thoughts of things, are productive of
our desires for them; banish your thoughts, and you get rid of your
desires at once).

68. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, how long continues this tendency of
the intellect towards the thinkables, and when does the mind come
to have its unmindfulness, which causes our coma or _anæsthesis_ of
Nirvána.

69. Vasishtha replied:--There being a total absence of thinkable
things, what is then left for the intellect to be intent upon; the
mind dwells upon its thoughts only, but the want of thinkable objects,
leaves nothing for it to think upon.

70. Ráma rejoined:--How can there be the absence of thinkables, when we
have the ideas in store to think and reflect upon; nor is there any one
who can deny the existence of ideas, which are ever imprinted in the
mind (_i.e._ the eternal ideas).

71. Vasishtha replied:--Whatever is the ideal world of the ignorant,
has no truth in it and is denied by the learned; and the conception
which the sapient have of it, is that of a nameless and formless unity
only.

72. Ráma rejoined:--What is that knowledge of this triple world of the
ignorant, which has no truth or reality therein; and what is the true
knowledge of the wise about it, which is inexpressible in words?

73. Vasishtha replied:--The knowledge of the ignorant, regarding the
duality of the world, is wholly untrue from first to last; but the
true knowledge of the wise, neither recognizes a duality herein; nor
acknowledges the production hereof; (but views it in the light of a
nullity and void).

74. Ráma rejoined:--Whatever is not produced in the beginning, can
not of course exist at any time; but how is it, that this unreal and
unapparent nothing, could come to produce in us its conception of a
something?

75. Vasishtha replied:--This causeless and uncaused unreality of
the world, appears unto us as a real entity; like the daydream that
presents the false sight of the cosmos as a reality in our waking.

76. Ráma rejoined:--The sights that we see in our dreams, and the
images that we conceive in our imagination; are but perceptions derived
from our impressions of them in our waking state.

77. Vasishtha replied:--Tell me, O Ráma, whether the things that you
see in your dream, or conceive in your imagination, are exactly of the
same forms, that you see in your waking state.

78. Ráma replied:--The things that we see in our dream, and conceive of
in our fancy or imagination; do all of them appear unto us in the same
light, as they show themselves to us in our waking state.

79. Vasishtha questioned:--If the impressions of the waking state,
come to represent themselves in our dreaming (and if our dreams are
alike our waking sights), then tell me Ráma! why do you find your house
standing entire in the morning, which you beheld to have fallen down in
your dream.

80. Ráma answered:--I see that the things seen in waking, do not appear
the same in dreaming; but tell me sir, why they seem to resemble those
that have been seen before.

81. Vasishtha replied:--It is neither the notion nor idea of anything,
that appears as a reality in our minds; but the inherent impression of
the world in the soul, that exhibits it to us from first to last.

82. Ráma said:--I find it now, that this world is no better than a
dream; but tell me sir, how to remedy our fallacy of its reality, which
holds us fast as a goblin.

83. Vasishtha replied:--Now consider how this dream of the world has
come into vogue, and what may be the cause thereof; and knowing that
the cause is not different from its effect, view this visible creation
in the light of its invisible origin.

84. Ráma said:--But as the mind is the cause of the sights, seen in our
dreams in sleep, it must therefore be the same with its creation of
this world, which is equally unsubstantial and undecaying as itself.
(The world is the permeation of the Divine mind--its maker or pervader).

85. Vasishtha replied:--So it is, O most intelligent Ráma, the world is
verily the _manas--mens_ or the mind of God, which is no other than the
consolidation of the Divine Intellect or intelligence. Thus the world
being situated in the mind, and this in that, it is this mind only that
exhibits these dreamlike shows, which originate from it, and have no
other source besides.

86. Ráma rejoined:--But why am I not to think the identity of the
world with Brahma himself, as there is the identity of the divine
mind with him, and that of the mind with the creation. And likewise
as the relation of sameness subsists between a component part and its
_ensemble_ or the integral whole, as there is between the branch of a
tree and the tree itself? (because these are but parts of one undivided
whole). But it would be absurd to identify the undivided and formless
Brahma, with the divided and formal world.

87. Vasishtha replied:--It is impossible, O Ráma, to identify this
frail world with the eternal Brahma, who is increate to identify this
perishable, quite calm and quiescent and intact in his nature.

88. Ráma added:--I come to find at last and by a haphazard, my
erroneous conception of the world from first to last; as also the error
of my attributing the qualities of activity and passivity, to the
nature of the transcendent being.

89. Vasishtha concluded with saying:--Now I have fully exposed
the erroneous views of the world (entertained both by the wise and
ignorant), both by the elegance of my poetical diction, as also by the
enlightening reasonings of the learned; both of which are calculated to
remove the mistaken views of the vacuity and delusion of the world, by
establishment of the truth of the whole, as being composed of essence
of the One sole and Supreme entity.




