CHAPTER CVII.

THE NATURE OF IGNORANCE OR ILLUSION OF THE MIND.

    Argument:--Proof of the cosmos as the reflexion of the gem of the
    Intellect, and the Immateriality of the objective material world.


Vasishtha continued:--The world is the subjective Intellect and inborn
in it, and not the objective which is perceived from without. It is the
empty space of the Intellect which displays the noumenals in itself,
and here the _tripart_ or the triple state of the Intellect, its
intellection and the _chetya_ or intellectual combine together. (_i.e._
The thinking principle, its thinking and thoughts all unite together).

2. Here in its ample exhibition, all living beings are displayed as
dead bodies; and I and you, he and it, are all represented as lifeless
figures in a picture.

3. All persons engaged in active life, appear here as motionless blocks
of wood, or as cold and silent bodies of the dead; and all moving and
unmoving beings, appear to be seen here as in the empty air.

4. The sights of all things are exposed here, like the glare of the
chrystalline surface of the sky; and they are to be considered as
nothing, for nothing substantial can be contained in the hollow mind.

5. The bright sun-beams and the splashing waves, and the gathering
vapours in the air; present us with forms of shining pearls and gems in
them, but never does any one rely on their reality.

6. So this phenomenon of the world, which appears in the vacuum of the
Intellect; and seems to be true to the apprehension of every body, yet
it is never relied on by any one.

7. The Intellect is entangled in its false fancies, as a boy is caught
in his own hobby; and dwells on the errors of unreal material things
rising as smoke before it.

8. Say ye boys, what reliance can you place on your egoism and meity,
so as to say “this is I and that is mine.” Ah, well do I perceive it
now, that it is the pleasure of boys, to indulge themselves in their
visionary flights.

9. Knowing the unreality of the earth and other things, men are yet
prone to pass their lives in those vanities and in their ignorance of
truth, they resemble the miners, who instead of digging the earth in
search of gold, expect it to fall upon them from heaven.

10. When the want of prior and co-ordinate causes, proves _a priori_
the impossibility of the effect; so the want of any created thing,
proves _a posteriori_ the inexistence of a causal agent (_i.e._ there
is no creation nor its creator likewise).

11. They who deal in this uncreated world, with all the unreal shadows
of its persons and things; are as ignorant as madmen, who take a hobby
to nourish their unborn or dead offspring.

12. Whence is this earth and all other things, by whom are they made,
and how did they spring to sight; it is the representation of the
Intellectual vacuum, which shines in itself, and is quite calm and
serene.

13. The minds of those that are addicted to fancy to themselves, a
causality and its effect, and their time and place; are thus inclined
to believe in the existence of the earth, but we have nothing to do
with their puerile reasoning.

14. The world whether it is considered as material or immaterial, is
but a display of the intellectual vacuum; which presents all these
images like dreams to our minds, and as the empty sky shows its hues
and figures to our eyes.

15. The form of the vacuous intellect is without a form, and it is only
by our percipience that we have our knowledge of it; it is the same
which shows itself in the form of the earth &c., and the subjective
soul appears as the subjective world to our sight.




CHAPTER CVIII.

DESCRIPTION OF THE KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE OF THE SOUL.

    Argument:--The Knowledge of the objective continuing with our
    ignorance of the subjective and the story of the wise prince
    Vipaschit, attacked by his rude enemies.


Ráma rejoined:--He whose mind is bound by his ignorance, to the bright
vividness of visible phenomenal; views the palpable scenes of the
noumenal, as mere his idle dreams, and as visionary as empty air.

2. Now, O sage, please to tell me again, the nature and manner of this
ignorance of the noumenal; and to what extent and how long, does this
ignorance of the spiritual bind fast a man.

3. Vasishtha replied:--Know Ráma, those that are besotted by their
ignorance, think this earth and the elementary bodies, to be as
everlasting as they believe Brahma to be. Now O Ráma! hear a tale on
this subject.

4. There is in some corner of the infinite space, another world with
its three _lokas_ of the upper and lower regions, in the manner of this
terrestrial world.

5. There is a piece of land therein, as beautiful as this land of ours;
and is called the _sama bhúmi_ or level land, where all beings had
their free range.

6. In a city of that place, there reigned a prince well known for his
learning, and who passed his time in the company of the learned men of
his court.

7. He shone as handsome as a swan in a lake of lotuses, and as bright
as the moon among the stars; he was as dignified as the Mount Meru or
polar pinnacle among mountains, and he presided over his council as its
president.

8. The strain of bards, fell short in the recital of his praises, and
he was a firm patron of poets and bards, as a mountain is the support
of its refugees.

9. The prosperity of his valour flourished day by day, and stretched
its lustre to all sides of the earth; as the blooming beauty of lotus
blossoms, under the early beams of the rising sun, fills the landscape
with delight every morning.

10. That respectable prince of Bráhmanic faith, adored fire as the lord
of gods, with his full faith; and did not recognize any other god as
equal to him (Because _agni_ is said to be the Brahma or father of the
gods).

11. He was beset by conquering forces, consisting of horse, elephants
and foot soldiers; and was surrounded by his councillors, as the sea is
girt by his whirlpools and rolling waters.

12. His vast and unflinching forces, were employed in the protection of
the four boundaries of his realm; as the four seas serve to gird the
earth on all its four sides.

13. His capital was as the nave of a wheel, the central point of the
whole circle of his kingdom; and he was as invincible a victor of his
foes, as the irresistible discus of Vishnu.

14. There appeared to him once a shrewd herald, from the eastern
borders of his state; who approached to him in haste, and delivered a
secret message that was not pleasing unto him.

15. Lord! may thy realm be never detached, which is bound fastly by
thy arms, as a cow is tied to a tree or post; but hear me relate to
you something, which requires your consideration. (The word go--Gr.
ge.--Pers. gao--cow, means both the earth and a cow and hence their
mutual simile).

16. Thy chieftain in the east is snatched away from his post, by the
relentless hand of a fever where upon he seems to have gone to the
regions of death, to conquer as it were, the god Yama at thy behest.

17. Then as thy chief on the south, proceeded to quell the borderers
thereabouts; he was attacked by hostile forces who poured upon him from
the east and west, and killed by the enemy.

18. Upon his death as the chieftain of the west, proceeded with his
army to wrest those provinces (from the hands of the enemy).

19. He was met on his way, by the combined forces of the inimical
princes of the east and south, who put him to death in his half way
journey to the spot.

20. Vasishtha continued:--As he was relating in this wise, another
emissary driven by his haste, entered the court-hall with as great a
rush, as a current of the deluging flood.

21. He represented, saying:--O lord, the general of thy forces on the
north, is overpowered by a stronger enemy, and is routed from his post,
like an embankment broken down and borne away by the rushing waters.

22. Hearing so, the king thought it useless to waste time, and issuing
out of his royal apartment, he bade as follows.

23. Summon the princes and chiefs and the generals and ministers, to
appear here forthwith in their full armour; and lay open the arsenal,
and get out the horrible weapons (of destruction).

24. Put on your bodies your armours of mail, and set the infantry on
foot; number the regiments, and select the best warriors.

25. Appoint the leaders of the forces, and send the heralds all around;
thus said the king in haste, and such was the royal behest.

26. When the warder appeared before him, and lowly bending down his
head, he sorrowfully expressed: “Lord, the chieftain of the north is
waiting at the gate, and expects like the lotus to come to thy sunlike
sight”.

27. The king answered:--Go thou quickly there, and get him to my
presence; that I may learn from his report the sterling events of that
quarter.

28. Thus ordered, the warder introduced the northern chief to the royal
presence; where he bent himself down before his royal lord, who beheld
the chieftain in the following plight.

29. His whole body and every part and member of it, was full of wounds
and scars; it breathed hard and spouted out blood, and supported itself
with difficulty.

30. While he with due obeisance, and faltering breath and voice, and
contortion of his limbs, delivered this hasty message to his sovereign.

31. The chieftain said:--My lord, the three other chiefs of the three
quarters, with numerous forces under them, have already gone to the
realms of Yama (Pluto), in their attempt to conquer death at thy behest
(_i.e._ to encounter the enemies on every side).

32. Then the clansmen finding my weakness, to defend thy realms alone
on this side, assembled in large numbers, and poured upon me with all
their strength.

33. I have with great difficulty, very narrowly escaped from them to
this palace, all gory and gasping for life as you see; and pray you to
punish the rebels, that are not invincible before your might.

34. Vasishtha continued:--As the yet alive and wounded chieftain,
had been telling his painful story in this manner to the king; there
appeared on a sudden another person entering the palace after him, and
speaking to the king in the following manner.

35. O sovereign of men, the hostile armies of your enemies, likening
the shaking leaves of trees, have all beset in great numbers, the
skirts of your kingdom, on all its four sides.

36. The enemy has surrounded our lands, like a chain of rocks all
around; and they are blazing all about with their brandishing swords
and spears, and with the flashing of their forest-like maces and lances.

37. The bodies of their soldiers, with the flying flags and shaking
weapons on them, appear as moving chariots upon the ground; while their
rolling war-cars, seem as sweeping cities all about.

38. Their uplifted arms in the air, appear as rising forests of fleshy
arbours in the sky; and the resounding phalanx of big elephants, seem
as huge bodies of rainy clouds roaring on high.

39. The grounds seeming to rise and sink, with the bounding and bending
of their snoring horses; give the land an appearance of the sea,
sounding hoarsely under the lashing winds.

40. The land is moistened and whitened around, by the thickening froth
fallen from the mouths of horses; and bears its resemblance to the
foaming main, fell with its salt spray all over.

41. The groups of armed armaments in the field, resemble the warlike
array of clouds in the sky; and likens to the huge surges, rising upon
the surface of the sea, troubled by the gusts of the deluge.

42. The weapons on their bodies, and their armours and coronets, are
shining forth with a flash that equals the flame and fire of thy valour.

43. Their battle array, in the forms of circling crocodiles and long
stretching whales; resemble the waves of the sea, that toss about these
marine animals upon the shore.

44. Their lines of the lancers &c., are advancing with one accord
against us; and flashing with their furious rage and fire, are uttering
and muttering their invectives to us.

45. It is for this purpose, that I have come to report these things
to my lord, so that you will deign to proceed in battle array to the
borders, and drive these insurgents as weeds from the skirts.

46. Now my lord, I take leave of you, with my bow and arrows and club
and sword as I came, and leave the rest to your best discretion.

47. Vasishtha added:--Saying so, and bending lowly to his lord, the
emissary went out forthwith; as the undulation of the sea disappears,
after making a gurgling noise.

48. Upon this the king with his honorable ministers, his knights and
attendants and servants; together with his cavalry and charioteers, the
men and women and all the citizens at large were struck with terror;
and the sentinels of the palace, trembled with fear, as they shouldered
their arms and wielded their weapons, which resembled a forest of trees
shaken by a hurricane.




