CHAPTER CCV.

REFUTATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CAUSALITY OF CREATION.

    Argument:--The existence of the world in its spiritual sense, and
    nullity of its creation, destruction and material existence.


Ráma rejoined:--If it is so, sir, that the whole plenum is vacuum, as
the phenomenon in our dreams; it must follow therefrom, that the world
we see in our wakings is vacuity also, and there can be no doubt in it.

2. But tell me sir, in answer to this important question of mine; how
the formless and bodiless intellect appears to become embodied in all
these various forms of bodies, that we see in the state of our waking
dream. (_i.e._ The vanishing visions of our sleeping dreams, prove
them to be quite vacuous and nil; but not so the lasting scenes of our
waking state which appear to be substantially positive; and how does
the negative intellect assume this positive form).

3. Vasishtha replied:--Ráma, the visibles that appear to view in our
waking dream by day light, are all vacuous bodies; owing to their being
born, resting and supportance in empty vacuity; hence you cannot on any
reason doubt about their vacuousness (whose or when their production,
sustentation, substance and supportance, do all depend on the infinite
and all comprehending vacuum, which is the very attribute of the unity
of the formless deity. Gloss).[7]

4. This infinite and eternal void, being entirely devoid of all the
material causes (_i.e._ earth, air, water and fire, which are necessary
for the production of anything); it is impossible that creation could
come out from this nothing in the beginning. (_Ex nihilo nihil fit_).

5. And as the formless intellect could not bring forth the earth &c.,
for the formation of solid bodies; it is impossible to believe this
phenomenal appearance, to have their real existence in nature. (The
subtile mind cannot make or become any solid body).

6. Therefore the airy intellect sees the visibles in the day time,
in the manner that it sees the visions in its dreams by night. It
sees them all rising, in their intellectual light within itself; but
appearing as real and formal objects, set without it by its delusion.
(Máyá or Illusion).

7. It is the reflexion of the workings of the intellectual soul, that
appears as real within the hollow sphere of the intellect; it resembles
the representations of the memory in the mind in our sleep, and takes
the name of the visible world.

8. It is the clear perception of these intellectual representations, in
the vacuum of the mind only, that is styled by us as a vision or dream,
while it is the gross conception of them in the mind, that is called
the gross or material world.

9. It is thus the different views, of the same internal thought and
ideas, have different names and appellations, given to them by the very
intellect itself; the finer and purer ones being called as thoughts,
and the grosser ones, as sensible and material objects.

10. Thus it is the same reflexion of the intellectual, which takes the
names both of the dream as also of the world; the working of the mind
and its reflexion in itself are natural to intellect, and though the
visions subside with the disappearance of the dream upon waking, yet
the working and reflecting of the mind are never at rest, either in
waking or dreaming.

11. Many such visions of creation rise and set alternately, in the
vacuity of Brahma’s mind, and are never apart from it; just as the
empty air is either in motion or at rest in the hollow of the great
void, and always inseparable from it. (Hence the air, vision, dream
&c., are all void, and the world is but a phantom in it).

12. Ráma said:--Sir, you have spoken of millions of worlds to me
before; tell me now which of them are situated within the sphere of the
mundane egg, and which of them are beyond this egg (or supermundane
ones).

13. Which of them are the terrestrial globes and which the vacuous
spheres; which of them are igneous bodies in the sphere of fire, and
what are the airy bodies in the regions of air.

14. Which are the superfices of the earth, situated in the midst
of vacuity; of which the hills and forests set at the antipodes,
are opposed to one another on both sides, and hang up and down
perpendicular in empty air.

15. Which are the aerial bodies with their living souls, and which the
inhabitants of darkness with their darksome shapes; what are they that
are formed of vacuum only, and what can they be, whose bodies are full
of worms and insects.

16. What sorts of beings settle the etherial sphere, and what are they
that live in the midst of rocks and stones; what are they that dwell in
the vessels and basins of water, and what be they that people the air
like the aerial fowls of air.

17. Tell me, O thou greatest of philosophers, how this mundane egg of
ours is situated among them. (These are questions of cosmogony, and
bear no relation to theology).

18. Vasishtha replied:--These wondrous unknown, unseen and unheard
of worlds, are mentioned and described in the sástras with their
exemplifications also; and they have been received and believed as true
by their students.

19. Ráma, the cosmology of the world, has been described--given by gods
and sages, in hundreds of their sástras called the _Ágamas_; all of
which you are well acquainted with.

20. Now as you are well acquainted with the descriptions, that are
given of them in the sástras; it is not necessary to relate them again
in this place. (The cosmology of the world has been given before in the
narrative of Lílá).

21. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me yet, O Venerable sir, how the great void of
the intellect came to be produced from divine spirit; tell moreover its
extent and duration in time and space.

22. Vasishtha replied:--The great God Brahma, is without beginning and
ever existent and without decay; there is no beginning, midst nor end
of him, nor are there any shapes of figures in his transcendent vacuum.

23. The vacuum of Brahma is without its beginning and end, and is
spread unspent and unbounded to all eternity; it is this which makes
the universe, which is ever without its beginning and end.

24. The reflexion of the intellectual vacuum in its own vacuity, is
called the universe by itself to no purpose (_by itself_ or the human
mind, which views the world in the wrong light of creation, and not as
the Divine Mind itself. Gloss).

25. As a man sees a fair city in his dream by night, so is the sight
of this world to him, in his dream by day light. (The Sanskrit word
_Bhano_ in the text meaning reflexion, corresponds with the Greek Phano
to see, and hence phantom or false sights).

26. Think not the solid rock to have any solidity in it, nor the fluid
waters any fluidity in them; do not think the empty firmament to be a
vacuity, nor the passing time to have any flight or counting of it.
(All these are seemingly so, but they are nothing in reality).

27. All things are fixed in their formless, invariable and ideal states
in the divine intellect; but it is the fallacious and fickle nature of
the human mind, to give and view them in different forms, according to
its own fancy.

28. The mind views the non-created eternal ideas of the intellect, as
created objects before its sight, just as it sees rocks where there are
no rocks, and the sky in a skyless place in its dream.

29. As the formless and insensible mind, sees the formal world in its
sleep, as if it were in its waking state; so does it see the invisible
and formless world in its visible form, during its waking hours of the
day also.

30. As the motion of air always takes place amidst the air at rest
(_i.e._ as the winds fluctuate amidst the still air); so also doth the
spirit of Brahma, oscillate in his own spirit incessantly, and without
its rise or fall.

31. This world resides in the same manner in the divine spirit of
Brahma as the property of fluidity is inherent in water; and vacuity
appertains to vacuum; and as substantiality is essential to all
substances in the abstract.

32. The world is neither adventitious nor extraneous to the soul, and
does not occur to or transpire from it, in the life or deaths of any
body; it is causeless and comes from no cause, and is neither joined
with nor set separate from the divine spirit.

33. The One that has no beginning nor end; nor has any indication of
itself; that is formless and is of the manner of the intellectual
vacuum only, can never become the cause of the visible and material
creation. (Therefore the world is to be supposed to exist in its ideal
and immaterial form, in the vacuity of the divine intellect).

34. Thus as the forms and features of a whole body, are but parts and
properties of its entirety _tout ensemble_; so is this vacuous world
situated, in the undivided and formless vacuity of Brahma (“as parts of
one undivided whole”, Pope).

35. All this is a hiatus and quietus, without its support and
substratum, it is but pure intelligence, without any grossness or
foulness herein; there is no entity nor nonentity here, nor can
anything be said to exist or not exist (independent of the Divine Mind).

36. All this is but an air drawn city, of our imagination and dream;
and everything here, appears to be stretched out in a fairy dance all
about us; but in reality it is only a calm and quiet vacuity, full with
the unchanging and undecaying spirit of God.

37. The whole is the hollowness of the divine heart, and the vacuous
sphere of the Omniscient Intellect; it is its intellection, that
reflects many a transparent image in its own sphere and to no end. This
it is which is called the world or the image of the divine soul, which
continues forever and ever, (and is said--the world without end. Amen).




