CHAPTER CCXII.

ON ASCERTAINMENT OF TRUTH.

    Argument:--Thinking God as the Ego, Brahmá and the creation, and
    the description of God.


Vasishtha resumed:--The man that considers himself as the Ego, from his
possession of the intellect and intellectual powers in him; elevates
him to the rank of Brahmá and contains the whole world in himself.

2. As the Lord Brahmá or Hiranyagarbha remained in this state (of the
totality of souls) he was not then the creator of the world; but was
alike the increate Brahma--the everlasting God, as he continued from
all eternity. (Brahmá assimilating himself to the impersonal God, had
no personality of himself, so the holy trinity was all One, before
the Lord caused his coeternal son to create the world; as nothing was
created but by the son).

3. It is in our consciousness, that the world appears in this manner,
and is like the mirage in a desert, where its very unreality shows
itself as a reality. (Hence our consciousness, is not always the test
of truth).

4. It is since the creation, that the primeval vacuum began to present,
the blunder or falsity of the world in itself; but how and whence
arose this blunder, unless it were the presentation of Brahma himself.
(Delusion is God also).

5. The world is a whirlpool (a revolving sphere), in the vast ocean
of Brahma (_i.e._ in the great expanse of vacuum). Where then is the
question of unity or duality in this, or the talk of the dualism of
the eddy from the waters of the deep, or how can there be the topic of
unity in want of a duality. (The world is therefore Brahma-dharma or an
hypostasis of God. Gloss).

6. The great Brahma is profoundly quiet, and having his intellect
inherent in himself, he is conscious of his being the great or sole
Ego (or the totality of beings) in his mind, and sees himself as the
midst of the vast expanse of vacuity.

7. As fluctuation is inherent in air, and heat is inbred in fire; and
as the moon contains its coolness in itself, so does the Great Brahma
brood over the eternal ideas of things, contained in the cavity of his
fathomless mind.

8. Ráma rejoined:--Tell me sir, how does the divine mind come to think
of and brood upon his creation; when the eternal intellect is ever
employed in its process of intellection. The course of Divine thought
being unobstructed from eternity to eternity, its even tenor cannot
be supposed to be now and then turned to the act of creation, or even
said to be brought in its action and motion, since the time that this
creation first began to exist (There can be no talk of the beginning or
end of the world before eternity).

9. Vasishtha replied:--It is even so, O Ráma! the great Ego of God
always thinks of everything in itself; and the increate and ever
existent spirit of God, has never anything unknown to his knowledge.
(The evolution and involution of the world, are known by the terms of
its creation and annihilation).

10. The vacuous is ever and every where present both in creation and
non-creation (_i.e._ both before as well as after it); and there
is nothing that is known to him as existent or nonexistent at any
time (since the ignorant know the world as existent, and the learned
consider it a nihility; but the Lord knows them all in himself).

11. As the mind is conscious of its fluctuation, and the moon of her
coldness; and as the air knows its voidness, so doth Brahma know
himself as the Ego, and never thinks himself without the other. (They
are Misra or combined together).

12. Such is the entity of God, and never unlike to or otherwise than
this; and whereas the world is without its beginning and end, it must
be as imperishable as Brahma himself. (The world is without end).

13. It is only from your want of sufficient intelligence, and hearing
of or prejudice in the word _non-ego_; that you are led to the belief
of a duality, in the undualistic unity of the Deity.

14. Never does any body nor anything here, think of itself of anything
whatever; there is none and naught whatsoever, that can think unless it
is the same with the Divine Ego.

15. The apparent threefold world, ever appears in this manner; as one
with and inseparable from God that dwells alike and evenly in all,
which composes one uniform whole, without admixture of any diversity or
duality (all which blend together in harmony in one universal unity).

16. Know O Ráma, that is nothing like a rock or tree, is produced in
empty vacuity; so these seeming solid worlds, can never be produced in
the vacuous spirit of Brahma (but are all mere phantoms of what they
appear to be) know this, and go on freely in your own way.

17. Precepts to men of little intelligence and doubtful minds, fail to
persuade them to the knowledge of truth; and so long as they can not
comprehend the unity, they are ever apt to believe in the multiplicity
of objects.

18. Neither precepts nor sástras, can lead the ignorant to the
knowledge of truth, unless they can get rid of their prejudice of
diversity, which the creator Brahmá, has spread over the minds of men.

19. Ráma rejoined:--I understand sir, what you say (regarding the ego
as the agent); but I beseech you to explain it by some illustration,
for my clear knowledge of it.

20. What does the supreme Brahma do, by his assuming the title of
ego or thinking agent to himself; you know all this (by your vast
knowledge), though it is not quite satisfactory to your audience.

21. Vasishtha replied:--The supreme One that was quite indistinct
before (as the undistinguishable chaos); becomes after his assumption
of the title ego to himself, divided and distinguished into the
distinct essences of vacuum, space and its directions and time with all
its divisions. (The ego itself is diversified into these various forms).

22. The ego then assuming its personality, finds many such distinctions
appearing before itself; which are quite imperceptible in its state of
impersonality. (The personal soul only, is conscious of these).

23. The knowledge of these vacuous principles, their qualities and
attributes, which is preserved in the soul in the forms of their
abstract ideas; is expressed afterwards by certain symbolical sounds
or words, which are also as void as air. (A word is a breath, and the
breath is air).

24. It is thus the formless and vacuous principle of the ego,
entertains in itself or its soul, the notions or knowledge of times and
space in their ideal forms.

25. This universe which appears as the _réchauffé_ or reflex of the
ideal of the ego, and seems as the visible and substantial world, is in
reality but the intangible Brahma, and appearing as the tangible non
Brahma to view.

26. The world is verily the quiet spirit of Brahma, it is one with Him,
and without its beginning, middle or end; it is verily the void of
Brahma, who assumes to himself the titles of Ego and the living soul,
vacuous himself in his own vacuous self, as this vast and extensive
phenomenon, and as something otherwise than what He is. (The world is
the mirror of the divine Mind and its thoughts).




