CHAPTER CXIX.

LAMENTATION OF THE LOVELORN TRAVELLER.

    Argument:--The lovesick traveller, relating the woes of his
    separation to his beloved one.


The companions continued:--The traveller having returned home, and
finding his beloved one by the arbour of _mandara_ trees, began to
relate to her the pangs of his protracted separation.

2. Listen to my marvellous tale, said he, and what happened to me one
day, when I sought to send some one to thee with my tidings.

3. I sought long but sought in vain, at the time of my painful
separation, to send one to thee at this house of mine; but where such
a one be found in the world, who would take a severe interest in the
affliction of another, for the sake of charity or mere friendship?

4. Lo, I came to behold even then and there, a big cloud on the top of
a mount, resembling the steed of cupid, that appeared jocundly before
me, accompanied by the swift lightening as his precursor.

5. I advanced before him and addressed unto him, saying: ah brother
cloud, thou bearest the rainbow of Indra, as a collar about thy neck,
and are graceful in thy course, have pity on me for a moment. Please go
to my dear one and tell her my tidings, with thy low voice, sympathetic
tears and breath of sighs; because the tender form of the pliant
creeper, will not be able to bear thy loud uproar.

6. I know not, O dark cloud! to what abode to direct thee to find my
beloved one, who is pictured in the plate of my heart by the pencil of
my mind, and is forever situated in my bosom.

7. But now, O my friendly cloud! my distracted mind has lost that
figure of my beloved in my breast, together with the sight of her
person from my eyes; and now having lost the freedom of my body in a
foreign country, I have become but a wooden framework without my love,
which is its living soul: for what living body can bear the pangs of
separation.

8. People then thought me dead, and with tears in their eyes, began to
prepare my obsequies and collect wood for my funeral.

9. I was borne away to be burnt on a dreadful funeral pile, which was
horribly crackling with the cracking wood, of the blazing fire on the
burning ground.

10. There, O my lotus eyed love, I was laid on the pile by some persons
with their weeping eyes; and the pyre was surrounded by a number of
men, who stood as spectators of the horrible sight.

11. At that time the curling smoke of the pyre, began to enter into my
nostrils like the creepers or stalks of lotus plants; and as when the
dark and lengthy body of the curvilinear snake, enters into a hole in
the ground.

12. But <in> all this, I was defended by the strong armour of my firm
love to thee; as the unborn or selfborn son of god Brahmá, was defended
from the showers of darts, of the whole host of demons and thinking
myself to be plunged in the cooling pool of thy love within my heart; I
was untouched by the flames of fire burning all about me.

13. All this time I lay in the ecstacy of my love to thee, and I felt
raptures of joy rise in my breast, from my fancied association with
thee. I deemed myself as drowned in an ambrosial lake, while I was in
that state of rapture, and thought sovereignty of the whole world, too
insignificant before my ecstatic transport.

14. Methought I felt raptures of inexpressible delight fill my whole
soul, at the thought of all thy blandishments and graces, and in the
allurements of thy speech, sweet smiles and sidelong glances, and all
the gestures and motions of thy person, that spread an ambrosial charm
all around me.

15. Methought we clasped in mutual embraces, and together in amorous
folds; till exhausted with surfeit, I lay upon the cool soft bed, as
if I was drowned in the cold and icy ocean of the lunar disc.

16. At this moment as I lay long in my bed, bedewed with cool sandal
paste, and the cooling beams of the full-moon; I heard a thundering
noise accompanied with flames of fire, rising from the burning pile of
woods under me, as it was the submarine fire, proceeding from the milky
ocean wherein I was lying.

17. The companions resumed:--When the husband had said so far, his
listening spouse cried out aloud; saying “Ah me! I am dead, I am gone,”
and for fear of hearing the sad consequence, fell into a swoon and
became senseless.

18. The husband finding her fainting, began to wave over her <a> fan of
lotus leaves, besprinkled with water; and taking her up to his bosom,
tried to restore her to her senses.

19. Being then desired by her to finish his tale, he began to relate
the remainder by holding her chin with his hand.

20. As I felt the pain of the burning flame touching my body, I cried
out and groaned in affliction; the spectators hastened to extinguish
the blazing pile, and felt delighted to find me alive.

21. The attendants then with loud shouts of joy, like the sound of
drums &c. and with garlands of flowers, raised and embraced me to their
bosoms; and went on shouting and singing and dancing and laughing with
exultation.

22. I then saw the funeral ground resembling the formidable body of
Bhairava--the god of destruction. It was equally covered with ashes,
wreathed with snakes and studded with human skulls: and the scattered
bones that were strewn over the ground, seemed as the beams of the moon
crowning the head of Siva.

23. Here hot winds were blowing from the funeral piles, as from the
burning fire on Hara’s head; and bearing the burnt ashes of the dead
bodies, as a dark mist all around; they bore stink of the rotten bones
to the air, and carried about the rustling noise of the bones jostling
against one another.

24. The burning piles and their flashing flames and flying sparks, and
the fiery winds scorching the trees and herbage; give this place the
appearance of the play ground, of the gods of wind and fire, and of the
sons of sun--Yama and Saturn.

25. Thus I saw the funeral ground full of terrors, and covered with
skeletons of half-burnt bodies and putrid carcasses also; it is
infested by hungry dogs and howling jackals, and other voracious
beasts, and the ravenous ravens and vultures. It is a place where the
Vetála--demons and Pisácha--hobgoblins, revel with fearful shrieks and
jarring sounds.

26. I beheld there the biers of dead bodies, borne by their mourning
friends, with loud cries and lamentations that filled the air all
about. I saw the beasts and birds, that tore their entrails and
arteries, yet moist with blood, and I saw the ground strewn over with
half burnt logs of wood and bushes.

27. In some places the glaring pyres, gave a gloomy light, and in
others the tufts of hair, were heaped as spots of clouds; somewhere
the ground was besmeared with blood, and looked like a lurid sheet of
cloth; and elsewhere the clouds were roaring, as the setting sun went
down the western hill (or horizon).




