CHAPTER CLXXV.

PARAMÁRTHA GÍTÁ OR LECTURE ON TRANCENDENTALISM OR THE SOLITY.

    Argument:--The appearance of the world in our Ignorance, and its
    Disappearance before the light of true knowledge.


Vasishtha continued:--The vacuity of the Intellect which presented the
shadow of a dream at first, could not possibly assume the form of a
causal and sensible body (as that of Brahmá), in order to be visible
and form the visible world. For how is it possible for the intellectual
vacuum, to have a bodily form at all.

2. In the beginning of creation, O Ráma, there was nothing except a
shadow dream in the Intellect. And neither was there this creation nor
the next world in visible existence.

3. The world appeared only in the form, of an unsubstantial notion of
it; and the vacuous intellect remained as quiet with its ideal world,
as the mind rests quietly with the nightmare in its dream.

4. Such is the essence of the Intellect, which is translucent and
without its beginning and end; and though it is a clear void in itself,
yet it bears the ideal model of the world in its mirror.

5. So long as this is unknown, the world appears as a gross substance;
but being known as contained in the Divine spirit, it becomes a
spiritual substance also; because how is it possible for any gross
matter, to attach itself to the transcendent vacuum, of which there is
no beginning and end?

6. This pure and abstract knowledge of the world, is as that of a city
in dreaming; and such being the state of the world ere its creation,
how can any earthly or other matter, be ever joined with the same?

7. The light of the Divine soul, shining amidst the vacuity of the
Intellect, is termed cosmos or the universe; consisting as it is
supposed, of matter, mind and faculties.

8. It is want of understanding only, which makes us suppose a thing,
which is turning round like a whirlpool, and having the force of the
wind in it as the stable earth, although it has no basis or stability
of it.

9. Afterwards the same Divine spirit (jíva), wishing to display its own
glory (thought in its personality of Brahmá), of the ideal forms of the
earth and other things (in its imagination).

10. Then the great minds of (Brahmá), shone with a purer light of
itself; and this is called his creation which is of an aerial form and
no other. (Light being the first work of creation).

11. That pure light, was nothing substantial of itself; but the
brightness of the Intellect only, shining with the effulgence of the
Divine spirit. (This was the psychic light of the soul in itself).

12. This light is the body of the spirit, which shone as intellectual
light in the void of the Intellect; and it presented the appearance of
the world in it, in the manner of dreams floating before the empty mind.

13. There being no other inference to be derived, nor any other cause
to be possibly assigned (to the production of the world), or of its
being produced of itself; it is certain that the divine spirit, sees
itself in the form of creation, within the vacuum of its Intellect in
the beginning. (As anything cannot come by itself or from nothing; the
world must therefore be either a nothing or a form of something that is
ever existent of itself).

14. This body of the world (corpus mundi), having no property of a
tangible body, is never fragile in its nature; but it is as void as the
emptiness of the Intellect, and as inane as the empty air.

15. Its form is that of the supreme Being, which is without any form
whatever; and identic with the Divine form, it comprehends all bodies
in itself, and extends undivided as all in all in its ownself.

16. This will be better understood in the instance of a dream, which
rises of itself and shows itself in various forms; but as all these
varieties are nothing but empty visions, so the diverse scenes and
sights of the world, are no more than shows of the Divine spirit.

17. The Divine soul of Brahma, assumed to itself the state of the
living spirit; and without forsaking its transparent form, became of
the form of mind (in the person of the great Brahmá--the creative
Power).

18. This power extends the universe in its aerial form in air; which
appears to be changed from its unchangeable state of transparency, to
that of a gross nature (_i.e._ the visible and material world).

19. The Mind is Brahmá himself, who gives an external and visible
form to the world, that was seated invisible in his heart; and
is continually employed in the process of repeated creation and
destruction of all.

20. The immaterial mind of Brahma, evolved the world from its
protoplasm, which was originally seated in his heart; and thence it
appeared in a different form as a counterpart of the original, or as
the formless representation of something in a dream.

21. The God Brahmá though in himself dwelling with his formless mind,
in his embodied form of the triple world, and of being diffused in
endless forms of sensible and insensible beings therein.

22. But there was neither the earth, nor any material form, nor even
anything of a visible appearance therein; it was only his mind which
exhibited itself, in the form of the formless and vacuous world. (The
Divine hypostasis of the personified mind of Brahma, was only a mental
and aerial form, and not a material one).

23. Then the lord Brahmá thought that, this mental form of his, was
nothing in substance, as it did not appear to sight; it was the
Intellect only, which shone in this manner within itself, and had no
solidity or substantiality in it. (The Intellect is the omniscience of
God, and the Mind is the intelligence of Brahmá).

24. This mental conception or abstract contemplation of the world,
is inexpressible by words, and makes the meditator remain in mute
astonishment; and causes him to continue as dumb in this ordinary
conduct in life. (This is the state of platonic supineness or
_insouciance_).

25. The Intellect being infinite and unlimited, the mind is lost
in infinity in its reflection; hence Brahmá having long remained
in his silence, became awakened to his knowledge at last. (Brahmá
the Demiurgic Mind having recovered itself from its wonder and
bewilderment, becomes detached at last from the divine mind).

26. After the insensible mind of Brahmá, had come to its sense, it
revolved in itself with its thoughts; as the liquid waters of the sea,
turns in whirlpools by agitation.

27. So the insensible air is put to ventilation by its internal motion,
and so all living souls which are identic with the calm and quiet
supreme soul, slide away like the gliding waters, from their main
source.

28. And as the winds and waves, which are identical with the calm air
and still water, blow and flow in all directions of themselves, so the
minds of living beings which are same with supreme Intellect, run in
several ways in their own accord.

29. Hence the vacuous intellect of all living beings, is the same with
the Divine intellect; and this, O most intelligent Ráma, is otherwise
known as the supreme soul also.

30. The Divine soul appears unto us, to have its twinklings like the
vacillation of air; its closing causes the close or end of the world,
as its flashing exposes the creation to view.

31. Its glancing causes the visibility of creation, and its winking
makes it invisible or extinct to view, while the want of both these
acts (opening and closing of its sight), is tantamount to the formless
void of the world.

32. But the view of the opening and shutting of its sight, or the
visibility and disappearance of the world in one unvaried light, makes
the equality of existence and non-existence in the mind, and bespeaks
the perfection of the soul.

33. Seeing and not seeing, and their results of creation and
extinction, make no difference in the Divine Intellect which is always
the same. (The veda says _Íkshati_ or glancing of God, and not his will
or word is the cause of the world).

34. Know therefore this world, to be as calm and quiet as the Divine
soul; and that it is of the nature of the uncreated vacuum, which is
ever the same and no decay.

35. The sensuous and conscious intellect, exhibits itself as the
insensible and unconscious vacuum; the very intellect shows itself in
the form of the world, which is in a manner its body and residence.

36. The Intellect is neither born or made, nor does it ever grow or
decay; it is never visible nor perceptible, nor have we any notion of
it; it displays its wonders in itself, without any extraneous substance
in it.

37. All that is called the phenomenal, is the brightness of the blazing
gem of the great Intellect, and proceeding from the quarry of its
vacuum; as the sunshine which illumines the world, issues from the orb
of that luminary.

38. It is Brahma himself that shines forth as the creation, just
as our sleep exhibits the visionary world in its dream; so is all
this creation as quiet as sleep, and yet full with the bustle of the
slumbering world.

39. Whatever is known in any manner in the mind, either as existent or
inexistent in the world; the same is the reflexion of the Intellect,
whether it be an entity or non-entity.

40. Should the impossibility of existence, lead us to the supposition
of some cause as of the primary atoms and the like; then what cause
can there be assigned to the appearance of sights in our dream (and of
fabrics without their foundation).

41. If the origin of the world is not ascribed to Brahma, as the
origination of dreams to the Intellect; then neither is there any truth
in the existence of the one, or in the appearance of <the> other, which
is never true.

42. The minds of men are inclined towards the particular objects of
their fancy; hence those that believe and delight in God, take him as
the origin of all things that appear unto them.

43. Whatever is in the minds of men, and to whatever their hearts are
constantly devoted; they know the same as the only objects of their
lives, and the very gist of their souls.

44. He who delights in Brahma, becomes of the same mind in a moment;
and so any one who is gratified in any thing, is incorporated with the
same in his mind.

45. The man who has obtained his rest in God, has found the highest
bliss in his mind; though he shows himself as otherwise in his outward
conduct and social dealings.

46. There is no reason for the supposition of unity or duality herein,
when the whole existence is as I have propounded, and it is in vain to
look at anything else.

47. There <is> nothing as visible or invisible, or anything as formless
or having a form herein; there is nothing as subject or object, nor
aught of reality or unreality here, when the whole is the very Brahma
himself.

48. This world is without a beginning and end, and is known to the
world as soul; but in fact, one Brahma rules over all without any fixed
rule, like a path without a name.

49. That which is conceived as the serene Brahma, is considered as the
bright Brahmá or Demiurgus also; just as what is known as the calm and
clear firmament, the very same is said <to be> the empty void likewise.

50. As the nebulae which seem to bedim the face of the sky, are
something in appearance and nothing in substance; just <so> do our
mental faculties appear to flutter in and obscure the clear atmosphere
of the Intellect, and seem to be as dualities or otherwise than the
serene intellectual principle.

51. But the mental, bodily and all other perceptive and active powers
of living beings, are the common properties of the intellectual soul;
just as the very many gaps and hollows in various bodies, are in common
with the vacuity of the one universal vacuum only. (_i.e._ All these
are the aerial powers of psychic principle).

52. As the quiet soul passing from its sleeping to the dreaming state,
retains its identity and invariableness; so the divine soul passing
into creation after its quiescence, remains the very unchanged unity as
ever.

53. Thus the supreme spirit reflects the shadow of its great Intellect,
in the forms of creation and dream; hence neither is this creation nor
the vision in dreaming, any thing in its substance than a mere shadow
(of the picture in the Divine Mind).

54. It is the bright picture of the Divine Mind, that exhibits its form
in the vacuity of the Great Intellect; and so the ideal appearance as
the visible creation, like the fairy land in dream (and the airy castle
of imagination). (The word cháya--shadow means both the glory of God,
as also the darkness of illusion. Gloss).

55. From the impossibility of the appearance of the world, by any means
as it is conjectured by different schools, and from its want of a prior
cause; it must be that the intellect saw itself thus exhibited in its
own vacuity.

56. In the beginning of creation, the formless void of the Intellect,
showed itself in this visible and intangible form; and represented
itself as a picture of its mind or dream or its imagination.

57. Like the dream it was a blank and without any attribute; it is
changeable but not frangible, and although it was the substance of
intellectual voidness, yet it was vitiated with the stain of our
misapprehension of it, called _avidyá_. (The world is purely of an
intellectual form, and it is our ignorance which imputes a gross form
to it).

58. Like the dream, it seems to possess some properties in its
appearance; but is wholly devoid of any in its substance; it is never
different from the spiritual nature of the Lord, though it appears
otherwise to our misconception of it.

59. The phenomenal world likens a mountain seen in dream, and is
inseparable from the soul wherein it resides; therefore the visibles
appearing in the vacuity of the Intellect, are more vacuous than the
vacuum of the firmament.

60. That which is the supreme soul; and devoid of all form; the very
same and of the same nature is all this, that we call the visible world.

61. Whatever conception we have in our dream, the same is the display
of our intellect; so the cities and castles that we see in the dreams,
are no real existences; but appearances presented unto us by the
intellect.

62. As the recognizance of our acquaintances in dream, and the
remembrance of the impressions in our memory, are altogether
unsubstantial (owing to the absence of their prototypes in us); so the
sight of the visibles and the perception of perceptibles quite unreal
also (because none of those things are present in us).

63. Therefore leaving <these> unrealities of our recognitions,
perceptions and remembrances, which are so much relied upon by the
ignorant; we should take them in the light of the direct manifestations
of the Deity in those forms.

64. As the waves of the sea, continue to roll incessantly on the
surface of the waters; so innumerable worlds that are continually
revolving, on the surface of the supreme soul, are of the same nature
with itself.

65. All laws and their anomalies, as well as all varieties and
complexities unite in harmony in the Divine nature. (There all discord
is concord, and all partial evil is universal good).

66. Therefore that Brahma is all in all, and there is none and nothing
besides; He alone is the soul of all, as all these live in Him.

67. The roving mind thinks the world to be roving about with all its
contents; but the steady minded take it to be quite sedate and quiet;
hence it is impossible for the learned also, to settle their minds
without the habitual sedateness of their attention.

68. There is no other means, for suppressing the mind from the sight of
the visibles; without the constant habit of attending to the lectures
(of the preceptor) on this sacred _sástra_.

69. Though it is difficult to repress the mind from its thoughts of
this world, either in its states of living or death, (_i.e._ either
in its waking or sleeping states); yet it is possible to do so by
effacing its impressions at once, from the study of this spiritual
sástra.

70. The knowledge of the nihility of the visible body, and that of the
mind also in want of the body; both in this world as well as in the
next world, will always serve to preserve our peace and quietism (and
this is attainable by means of studying this _sástra_).

71. The mind, body and the visibles, are all three of them suppressed
under the sense of their nothingness; as the mind, its force and the
moving clouds, do all disappear in absence of their cause (_i.e._
motion).

72. The cause of restlessness is ignorance only, which is altogether
dispelled by the study of this _sástra_; and those whose minds are a
little enlightened, have their composure from attending to the recital
and preaching.

73. The unintelligent will be able to understand the teachings of the
former part from the latter; and he that understands the words and
purports of these lectures, will never return disappointed (in his
expectation of _nirvána_ or ultimate rest).

74. Then know this _sástra_ as the best means, to the dispersion of
the error; and to the production of an universal indifference or
_insouciance_ everywhere.

75. Therefore try your best, to weigh well the precepts of this
_sástra_; and whether you study one or both parts of this work, you
will doubtless be freed from your misery thereby.

76. Should this _sástra_ prove unpalatable, owing to its being the
composition of a holy sage; in that case the student may consult the
sacred srutis, for the perfection of his spiritual knowledge.

77. Do not spend your time in false reasoning, nor offer your precious
life to flames and ashes; but let your sapient understanding commit the
visibles to the invisible soul (_i.e._ view them in their spiritual
light, and bury the gross phenomenal in utter oblivion and appear in
the noumenal soul only).

78. No one can buy a jot or moment of his lifetime, at the cost of
all the gems in the world; and yet how many are there, who foolishly
misspent their time in their worldly dream?

79. Though we have a clear conception of the world, yet it is a false
sight together with that of its beholder--the living soul; it is as
false as the dream of one’s own death in his sleep, and his hearing the
wailing of his friend at his demise.




