CHAPTER CXXXXV.

DESCRIPTION OF THE WAKING, DREAMING AND SLEEPING STATES.

    Argument:--The three Humours of Human body Composing the three
    states of its earthly existence.


The sage continued:--The living soul (or man) perceives the dream of
the outer world, by means of the external organs of sense; and that of
the inner world by the internal senses; but the quickness of both the
internal and external senses, gives the sensations of both these worlds
to the soul.

2. When the outer senses are busily employed with outward objects, then
the perceptions of mental objects and inner functions become faint and
fainter by degrees.

3. When the external senses are all directed to the inside, and the
inner senses are concentrated in the mind; then the object of thought
and the idea of the world however minute they had been before, assume
gradually a more expanded form, and present their extended appearances
to the soul. (Brooding upon a thought, dilates it the more).

4. In this manner the world which is nothing in reality, being once
thought upon as something however small in its idea, dilates itself to
an enormous size in the mind, which cast at last its reflexion on the
external organs of sense also, and make it appear so big and vast to
sight.

5. When the eyes and senses of a living person, are occupied with outer
objects, then the soul beholds the intellect, the form of the exterior
world only (so the external senses carry their impressions to the mind
also).

6. The intellectual and aeriform soul, is composed of the congeries
of all outward sensations; namely of the ears or hearing, touch or
feeling, seeing and smelling, and taste as also of the four internal
sensations of will or volition.

7. Therefore the living soul is always present at every place,
accompanied with all the senses in its intellect, hence the airy
intellect is to be ever unobstructed, because it always knows and sees
every where.

8. When the phlegmatic humour or fluid of the body, fills the veins and
arteries of the living person; the soul is then lulled to sleep and to
see false visions in its dream.

9. It seems to swim in a sea of milk, and to soar in the moonlight
sky; it thinks it sees a limpid lake about it, filled with full blown
lotuses and their blooming buds.

10. It sees in itself the flowery gardens of the vernal season,
and mantled in vest of flowers, vying with the bespangled sky, and
resounding with the warbling of birds, and the buzz of humming humble
bees.

11. It sees all mirth and festivity afoot in its mansion, and the
merry dance of sportive damsels afloat in its compound; and views its
court-yard filled with provisions of food and drink (to its heart’s
content).

12. It beholds profluent streams like adolescent maidens, running
sportfully to join the distant sea; girt with the swimming flowers
and smiling with their flashy foams; and darting about their fickle
glances, in flitting motion of the shrimps, fluttering on the surface
of the water.

13. It views edifices, turrets, rising as high as the summits of
the Himálayan mountains, and the tops of ice bergs (in the frigid
climes); and having their white washed walls, appearing as if they were
varnished with moon-beams.

14. It sees the landscape covered by the dews of the dewy season, or as
hid under the mists of winter, and shrouded by the showering clouds of
the rainy weather, and views the ground below overgrown with herbaceous
plants, and the muddy marshes grown over with blue lotuses.

15. The woodlands were seen to be overspread with flowers, and resorted
to by droves of deer and the weary traveller; that halted under the
cooling umbrage of the thickening foliage of the forest, and were
soothed by soft breezes of the sylvan spot.

16. The flowery arbour had all its alleys and arcades, bestrewn over
with the flaring farina of flowers; and the crimson dusts of _Kunda_,
_Kadamba_ and _Mandara_ blossoms, were blushing and mantling the
scenery all around.

17. The lakes were attired in azure with blue lotuses, and the ground
wore the flowing floral garment of flowers; the woodlands were clear of
clouds, and the firmament was clear and cold under the autumnal sky.

18. The mountain range was crowned with rows of _Kunda_, _Kadamba_
and _Kadalí_ or plantain trees, which waved their leafy fans on their
exalted heads, which appeared to nod at the dancing of the leaflets.

19. The tender creepers were shaking with negligence, with the unblown
buds and blossoms upon them; appeared as young damsels dancing
gracefully, with strings of pearls on their slender persons.

20. It sees the royal hall and the regal synod, shining as brightly as
the blooming lotus-bed in the lake; and he sees also the fanning white
_chouries_ and waving over them, like the feathered tribe, flapping
their wings over the floral lake (or lotus beds).

21. It sees also the running rills softly gliding in playful mood,
with curling creepers and flowers wreathed with their currents; and
murmuring along with mixed music of birds on the spray beside them.

22. The dhará--terra or earth was filled and flooded, by dhára
or torrents of water falling from the _adharas_ or cataracts, of
_dharádharas_ or mountains; and all the sides of heaven were obscured
by the showers of rain and snows, falling all about its vault.

23. When the internal channels of the body are filled with the fluid of
bile (pitta), the soul remains with its internal vigor as an atom in
its cell, and then sees the dreams of the following nature in itself.

24. It sees flames of fire about it, and red _kinsuka_ flowers upon its
withered trees and blasted by the winds; it sees also the forms of red
lotus flowers, burning as flames of fire before it.

25. The inner nerves and veins became as dry of the gastric juice, as
when the limpid streams turn to dry sand banks; and there appear flames
of wild fire, and dark smoke flying over the darkened face of nature.

26. There appear fires to be blazing around, and the disk of the sun
seems to dart its burning rays; wild fires are seen in forests, the
withered and the dried ponds emit a poisonous gas, instead of their
limpid waters.

27. The seas are seen with their boiling waters, and turning to beds
of hot mire and mud; the horizon is filled with sultry winds, and the
forests with flying ashes, while the deserts appeared quite desolate
all about.

28. The moving sands spreading about, and flying like a flight of
storks in the air; the landscape appearing otherwise than before, and
the former verdure of the trees, are no more coming to sight.

29. It sees the fearful wayfarer, covered over by the burning sand of
the parching desert; and looking wistfully on the distant tree by the
way side, spreading its cooling ambrosial shade over the parched ground.

30. It sees the earth burning as a flaming furnace with all its lands
and places hid under the ashes, and a dark cloud of dust covering the
face of the sky on all sides.

31. The world appears in a flame on all sides, with all its planetary
bodies, cities and seas, together with the hills and forests and the
open air, all which seem to be burning in a blaze.

32. It sees the empty clouds of autumn, spring and hot seasons, that
serve to favour the fires instead of quenching them; and beholds the
lands below covered with grass and leafy creepers, which entrap them as
vestures of clouds.

33. It sees the ground glittering as gold on all sides, and the waters
of the lakes and rivers, and the snowy mountains even all tepid and hot.

34. When the channels of the body are dried up, for want of the gastric
juice, they are filled with wind and flatulence; and the soul retaining
its vigour, sees various dreams of the following description.

35. The understanding being disturbed by the wind, sees the earth
and the habitations of men and the forests, and sees in dream, quite
different from what they appeared before.

36. The soul beholds itself as flying in the air, with the hills and
hilly lands all about it; and hears a rumbling noise as that of the
whirling of the wheels of a chariot.

37. It seems to be riding about on horse back, or upon a camel or eagle
or on the back of a cloud, or riding in a chariot drawn by ganders or
swans.

38. It sees the earth, sky and cities and forests, all appearing before
it; and trembling as in fear like bubbles in the water.

39. It finds itself as fallen in a blind ditch, or in some great
danger, or as mounting in the air, upon a tree or hill.

40. When the conduits of the body are filled, with a combination of all
the three humours of phlegm, bile and flatulence; then the soul is led
by the windy humour to see several dreams of the following nature.

41. It sees rainfalls flowing down the mountains, and hailstones
hurling down its sides to its terror; it hears the bursting of the
hills and edifices, and sees the trees to be moving about.

42. Woods and forests, appear to gird the distant horizon; which is
over cast by huge clouds, and traversed by big elephants and lions.

43. The palm and támala trees, appear to be burning around; and the
hollow caves and caverns, to resound with the harsh noise of the
flashing fire and falling trees.

44. The mountain craigs seeming to be clashing and crashing against one
another, and the caverns resounding to their hoarse and harsh crackling.

45. The mountain tops also seem to clash against each other, and emit
a harsh and hideous noise about them; and the streams running amidst
them, appear as wearing necklaces with the loosened creepers and bushes
which they bore away.

46. Fragments of rocks are seen, to be borne away by the mountain
streams to the ocean; and the torn bushes which they carried down,
seemed to spread as far as the utmost pole.

47. Craggy hills seemed to crash each other with their denticulated
edges, and crashed and split themselves with their harsh and hideous
sounds.

48. The forest leaves with creepers were scattered all around by the
strong wind, and the broken stones of the mountain made their bed over
the moss below.

49. The tall _tála_ trees fell to the ground with _marmara_ sound, like
the wars of the Gods and Titans of yore; and all birds flew with a
harsh scream, like the crying of men at the last day of desolation of
the world.

50. All woods, stones and earth mixed together as one mass, like
_jaríkrita jíva_ in dream.

51. Silence reigned there like worm underneath the earth, and frog
underneath a stone, boy within the belly, and the seed within the fruit.

52. Like boiled rice and solidified liquid in the bowel, and the
sapling within the wall of a pillar.

53. The vital air ceased to blow, and the all things are blamed, as if
they are encased within the hollow of the earth.

54. Deep darkness reigned there, and _susupti_ appeared like deep dark
well within the cavern of a mountain.

55. As heavy food is digested by the digestive organ of the body, and
afterward by a separate juice a new energy comes within, so the vital
air which once disappeared, makes its appearance again.

56. As after digestion certain kind of juice appears within the body in
the shape of vitality, so stone begins to fall therein.

57. As fire increases more fire, a little adds little more; so the
combination of triple humours, composes the inward and outward essence
of the body.

58. Thus the living soul being confined within the bonds of the body,
and led by force of the triple humours (phlegm etc.); sees (by means of
its internal senses), the dreams of the absent world, as it beholds
the visions of the visible phenomena, with its external organs of sense.

59. It is according to the more or less excitement of the senses, by
the greater or less irritation of the humours, that the mind is liable
to view its internal vision, in a greater or less degree; but the
action of the humours being equable, the tenor of the mind runs in an
even course.

60. The living soul being beset by irritated humours (from the effects
of intoxication, mantras or poison and the like), looks abroad over the
wide world, and sees the earth and sky and the mountains to be turning
round; and flames of fire issuing from burning piles.

61. It finds itself rising to and moving about the skies, the rising
moon and ranges of mountains; sees forests of trees and hills, and
floods of water washing the face of heaven.

62. It thinks itself to be diving on and floating on the waters, or
rambling in heavenly abodes, or in forests and hilly places, and finds
itself to be floating in the sky, upon the backs of hoary clouds.

63. It sees rows of palms and other trees ranged in the sky, and sees
the false sights of hell punishments, as the sawing and crushing of
sinful bodies.

64. It fancies itself to be hurled down by a turning wheel, and rising
instantly to the sky again; it sees the air full of people, and thinks
itself as diving in the waters upon the land.

65. It sees the business of the daytime, carried on everywhere at
night, the sun shining then as in the day time; and a thick darkness
overspreading the face of the day.

66. The mountainous regions are seen in the skies, and the land is seen
to be full of holes and ditches; rows of edifices are seen in the air,
and amity is found to be combined with enmity (friends turning to foes
and _vice versa_).

67. Relatives are thought as strangers, and wicked people are taken
for friends; ditches and dells are viewed as level land, and flats and
planes appear as caves and caverns.

68. There appear hoary mountains of milky whiteness and crystal gems,
and resonant with the melody of birds; and limpid lakes are seen to
glide below, with their water as sweet as butter.

69. Forests of various trees appear to sight, and houses adorned with
females, appearing as lotuses fraught with bees.

70. The living soul thought it lies hid within, and closed in itself;
yet perceives all these sights without, as if it were awake to them.
(Thus the derangement of the humours, causes these errors of sensation
of perceiving what is not present to the senses).

71. In this manner it is the work of vitiated humours, to represent
many such sights of external objects, in the forms of dream to the
minds of people.

72. It is usual with men of disordered humours, to see many
extraordinary sights and fearful appearances, both within and without
them (_i.e._ in their dreaming and outward sight also).

73. When the internal organs are equable in their action, then the
course of nature and the conduct of people, appear in the usual state.

74. Then the situations of cities and countries, and the positions
of woods and hills, are seen in the same calm, clear and unperturbed
state, as they are known to exist, agreeably to the natural order of
things; such as cool and clear streams, shady forests, and countries
and paths traversed by passengers.

75. Days and nights decorated with the pleasant beams of the sun and
moon, and the rays of the starry array; and all other appearances,
however unreal in their nature, appear as wonders to the sight and
other senses.

76. The perception of phenomenals is as innate in the mind, as
vacillation is inherent in the wind; and viewing the unreal as real,
and the intrinsical or what is derived from within it, as separate and
extrinsic or derived from without, is the essential property of its
nature.

77. It is the calm and quiet spirit of Brahma, that gives rise to
all things which are equally calm and quiet also; the world is mere
vacuum, without having any reality in it. It is the vacuous mind that
represents endless varieties of such forms in the sphere of its own
vacuity, as the endless reflexions of its vacuous person.




