CHAPTER CLXXXXIX.

STATE OF LIVING LIBERATED MAN.

    Argument:--The liberated man neither gains nor loses anything,
    by his observance or neglect of the acts of life; and yet he
    is enjoined to act in conformity with the prescribed rules of
    conduct of his society and country.


Ráma said:--Tell me sir, why the wise and liberated man is not freed
from his subjection to the prescribed rules of conduct, when his soul
is beatified with the spiritual light, and his mind is emancipated from
all earthly cares.

2. Vasishtha replied:--The observance and avoidance of all ritual and
pious acts, are equal and of no avail to the truly enlightened man;
who is indifferent to aught of good or evil to his life (_i.e._ who
is neither solicitous to have anything desirable or leave what is
unfavourable to him into the world).

3. There is nothing whatever in this frail world, which may be
desirable to the man of right understanding, not aught of positive
evil, which deserves the avoidance and abhorrence of the wise man.

4. The wise man derives no positive nor permanent good, by his doing of
any act prescribed by custom or usage; nor does he lose anything by his
neglect of them; wherefore it is best for him to stand in the middle
course, and according to the common rules of society and his country.

5. As long as there is life in the body, it is called a living body and
has its motion also; therefore measure your movements according to the
breathings of your life, nor accelerate nor slacken them beyond their
just measure (_i.e._ neither outrun thy breath, nor halt in thy course).

6. If it is equal to any one, to walk either by this way or that to his
journey’s end, yet it is much better for him, to walk by the beaten
path, than in a strange and unknown one. (So if it be the same thing to
sleep at home or abroad; yet it must be safer and more comfortable to
every one to sleep at his own lodge than elsewhere).

7. Whatever actions are done at any time, with meekness and mildness
of disposition, and with a placid frankness of the mind, is ever held
as perfectly pure and contrite in its nature, and never blameable in
anywise.

8. We have seen many wise, learned and farsighted men, to have
conducted themselves very honorably and blamelessly in this world,
which is full of faults and pitfalls, and beset by traps and snares on
every way.

9. Every one is employed with perfect compliance of his mind, in
discharging the duties of the particular sphere in which he is placed;
some commencing their career in life, in the state of householdership
and others ascending gradually to state of living liberation (when they
are not exempted from observances of particular duties also).

10. There are many wise and well discerning kings and princes, like
yourself and those sitting in this assembly who are vigilantly employed
in the ruling of their respective states, without their attachment or
tenacity to them, and without their desire of reaping any fruition from
them, and by way of the disinterested discharge of duty.

11. There are some that follow the usages, according to the true sense
of the Vedas, and take their food from what is left after their daily
offerings to the sacrificial fire. (The early Aryans ever fed upon
cooked food, after their first offerings to the gods by their mouth of
the fire (_Agner vaidevanam Mukham_)).

12. All men belonging to any of the four classes, are employed in the
observance of their respective rites and duties, and in the acts of the
worship of the gods, and in their meditations with different ends and
views (Kamya-karma).

13. Some men of magnanimous minds, and higher aims of future liberation
or _Moksha_, have renounced all their ritual acts _karma kánda_; and
remain inactive as ignorant people, with their spiritual knowledge of
the only One.

14. Some are seen to be sitting silent and insensitive, in their
posture of deep and unbroken meditation; in dreary and dismal deserts
untraversed by the deer and wild beasts; and in distant and lovely
solitudes, where no trace of a human being was never seen even in a
dream.

15. Some are found to resort to some sacred place of pilgrimage, and
there to perform their acts for future rewards; while others are known
to recline in some holy hermitage or sacred shrine of saints, and there
to pass their lives in the practice of resignation and indifference and
quite unknown to men.

16. Many are seen to leave their own houses, and quit their native
countries, in order to avoid the enmity and scorn of their fellow
countrymen; and betake themselves to other lands, where they settle as
strangers.

17. There are many who being dissatisfied with their families, forsake
their company and desert their homes; and rove about as wanderers, from
forest to forest, over hills and dales, and cities and towns, without
being settled any where.

18. How many are there that travel to the great city of Benares, and
to the holy city of Allahabad and visit the holy hills and cities, and
the sacred shrine of Badarikásrama (for performance of their acts of
righteousness there).

19. How many are seen to resort <to> the holy places at Sálagrama, and
to the sacred cell in Kalapagráma, how many are on their way to the
holy city of Mathura, and the sacred hill at Kalinjar.

20. See the numbers of pilgrims thronging in the woodlands on Mahendra
mountains, and upon table lands of Gandhamádana hills; see also the
pilgrims on the plains of Dardura hills; as those also upon the level
lands of Sahya Mountains.

21. See the pilgrims thronging on the craigs of the Vindhyan range,
and those dwelling in the hollows of the Malaya Mountains; see them
that dwell in the happy groves of Kailása, and those in the caverns of
Rikshavata mounts.

22. In these as well as many other holy places and mounts, you will
find a great many hermits and far-sighted devotees dwelling in peace,
and wholly devoted to their holy devotion.

23. Those among them that have become _sannyasins_, are deserters of
their prescribed duties, while they that are _Brahmacharins_, are
strict observers of the law and their sacred rites: but those that have
the faith of Buddha, are apostates from the holy faith, and fanatics in
their practices.

24. Some of these have left their native homes, and others have quitted
their natal lands altogether; some have their settled habitations in
some place, and others leading their nomadic lives from place to place.

25. Among these, O Ráma, that dwell in the sublunar sphere of this
globe, as also among them that live at the antipodes, and are known as
daityas:--

26. Some are of clear understandings, and well acquainted with the
civil laws of their society; some are of enlightened understanding, and
others again are acquainted with the past, and have a foresight of the
future.

27. Some are of unenlightened understandings, and are always in
suspense, and suspicion of their minds; they are addicted to vice, and
unable to govern themselves, are always under the government of others.

28. Some there are who are half-enlightened, and proud withal of their
knowledge of truth; they break loose from the observance of customary
duties, and are not yet the esoteric yogi or spiritualist.

29. Thus among these great multitudes of men, that are wading in the
vast ocean of life, every one is striving to get the end, according to
his different aim and object.

30. But it is neither one’s confining himself at home, or remaining
in his native country, nor his betaking him to hermitage or dwelling
in some solitary forest; nor the observance of customary duties;
nor practice of painful austerities, whereby one may ford over the
unfordable gulf of this world.

31. Neither dependence on righteous acts nor the forsaking of them;
nor one’s employment in the observance of customary usages, or his
attainment of great powers, can be of any avail to him, in saving him
from the turmoils of the world.

32. It is one’s self-control only, that is the means of his salvation
(lit., getting over the sea of the world); and the man whose mind is
not attached, or tied down to anything in this world, is said to have
got or gone over it.

33. It is no matter whether a man does or neglects, the righteous deeds
of his religion and society; provided he keeps the contriteness of his
mind in both, and is never attached to nor affected by either: such a
man is deemed a sage and saved from his return to this nether world.

34. The man that does neither any righteous or unrighteous action in
his life, but has his mind fixed in this earth, and attached to earthly
objects, is deemed a hypocrite, and destined to revisit this earth in
his repeated births.

35. Our minds again are of the nature of nasty flies, which are prone
to fly about and pour upon the sores of worldly pleasures; from which
it is hard for us to deter them, as it is impossible for us to kill
them at once for attainment of our salvation (or, our minds are as
surfeited bees, cloyed with the honey of their cells from which they
cannot fly away. Gloss).

36. It sometime comes to happen and by the good fortune of a person,
that his mind turns of itself towards its perfection; and then by a
flash of inward light within itself, comes to see the presence of the
divine spirit in the very soul.

37. The mind being enlightened by the flash of spiritual light in the
soul, becomes enrapt at the sight, and losing all earthly attachment,
is unified with the supreme unity.

38. Being unmindful of everything, and conscious of thy entity as a
particle of the infinite vacuity, remain perfectly happy with thyself,
and in the everlasting felicity of thy soul.

39. Being replete with the knowledge of transcendental truth, and
devoid of the faults and frailties of thy nature, have the magnanimity
of thy soul, with the equanimity of thy mind and elevation of thy
spirit; and thus remain O thou support of Raghu’s royal race, without
sorrow and fear of death and rebirth, and be as holy as the holy of
holies.

40. Know the translucent state of the most Holy Brahma, to be quite
clear of all the grossness and foulness of nature, and free from all
the qualities and properties that are attributed to Him. He is beyond
our conception and above the reach of our thought. He is increate and
ever existent of Himself, and manifest in his abode of our intellect.
Knowing him then as thyself, remain quite free and dauntless for ever.

41. There is nothing more that can be gleaned, from greater verbosity
on this subject; nor is there anything remaining to be communicated to
you, for your best instruction in divine knowledge. You are roused, O
Ráma, to your full knowledge of the essential doctrines of divinity,
and you have become cognizant, of whatever is knowable and recondite in
nature.

42. Válmíki says:--After the chief of sages had spoken so far, he
saw Ráma rapt in his ecstasy and bereft of his mental efforts; and
the whole assembly sitting fixed in the one and same tenor of their
meditation. They were all entranced in their reveries and musings, in
the mysterious nature of the Divinity; as the humming bees ramble over
the lotus petals with their soft and silent murmur, and revel upon the
sweetness of the honey cups of flowers.




