CHAPTER CLIII.

ONE SOUL IS THE CAUSE OF ALL.

    Argument:--Arrival of the Huntsman, and the sage’s preceptorship
    of him.


The other sage said:--When both of us shall dwell together in that
forest, and remain in the practice of our austerities; there will
appear upon that spot, a certain huntsman, weary with his fatigue in
pursuing after a deer.

2. You will then reclaim and enlighten him, by means of your
meritorious remonstrance; and he then will commence and continue to
practice his austerities, from his aversion to the world.

3. Then continuing in his austere devotion, he will be desirous of
gaining spiritual knowledge, and make inquiries into the phenomena of
dreaming.

4. You sir, will then instruct him fully in divine knowledge, and he
will be versed in it by your lectures on the nature of dreams.

5. In this manner you will become his religious instructor, and it is
for this reason that I have accosted you with the epithet or title of
the huntsman’s _guru_ or religious guide.

6. Now sir, I have related to you already regarding our errors of this
world; and what I and you are at present, and what we shall turn to be
afterwards.

7. Being thus spoken to by him, and learning all these things from him,
I became filled with wonder, and was he more amazed as I remonstrated
with him on these matters.

8. Thus we passed the night in mutual conversation, and after we got
up in the morning, I honoured the sage with due respect, and he was
pleased with me.

9. Afterwards we continued to live together in the same homely hut
of the same village, with our steady minds and our friendship daily
increasing.

10. In this manner time glided on peacefully upon us, and the
revolutions of his days and nights, and returns of months, seasons and
years; and I have been sitting here unmoved under all the vicissitudes
of time and fortune.

11. I long not for a long life, nor desire to die ere the destined day;
I live as well as I may, without any care or anxiety about this or that.

12. I then looked upon the visible sphere, and began to cogitate in my
mind; as to what and how and whence it was, and what can be the cause
of it.

13. What are these multitudes of things, and is the cause of all these;
it is all but the phenomena of a dream, appearing in the vacuity of the
Intellect.

14. The earth and heaven, the air and the sky, the hills and rivers,
and all the sides of firmament; are all but pictures of the Divine
mind, represented in empty air.

15. It is the moonlight of the Intellect, which spreads its beams
all round the ample space of vacuum; and it is this which shines as
the world, which is an ineffaceable fac-simile or cartography of the
supreme Intellect in the air.

16. Neither is this earth nor sky, nor are these hills and dales really
in existence; nor am I anything at all; it is only the reflexion of the
supreme Mind in empty air.

17. What may be the cause of aggregation of solid bodies, when there is
no material cause for the causation of material bodies in the beginning.

18. The conception of matter and material bodies, is a fallacy only;
but what can be the cause of this error, but delusion of the sight and
mind.

19. The person in the pith of whose heart, I remained in the manner of
his consciousness, was burnt down to ashes together with myself.

20. Therefore this vacuum which is without its beginning and end,
is full with the reflexion of the Divine Intellect; and there is no
efficient or instrumental or material cause of creation, except its
being a shadow of the substance of the Divine Mind.

21. All these pots and pictures, these prints and paints before us,
are but the prints of the Divine Mind; nor can you ever get anything,
without its mould therein.

22. But the Intellect too has no brightness of it, except its pure
lucidity; for how can a mere void as vacuum have any light, except its
transparency.

23. The Intellect is the pure Intelligence, of the extended entity of
Brahma; which shows in itself the panorama of the universe, what else
are the visibles, and where is their view besides.

24. There is but one Omnipresent soul, who is uncaused and uncausing,
and without its beginning, middle and end; He is the essence of the
three worlds and their contents. He is something as the universal
intelligence, and shows all and every thing in itself (and reflects
them in all partial intelligences according to their capacities).




