CHAPTER CXXXIX.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DISSOLUTION OF THE WORLD.

    Argument:--Predominance of the mind over the vital breath, and
    the view of final Dissolution in Dream.


Vasishtha related:--Whatever the mind wills, regarding the creation of
the world, the same immediately appears before it; whether it be the
production of the non-existent to view, or annihilation of existing
ones, or the representation of one as the other--_pratibháshika_.

2. [Now in an answer to Ráma’s question, “how does the mind subsist or
have its action or thought without being moved by the vital breath”, he
says that] whenever the mind fancies itself as the vital breath, and
can neither subsist nor do any thing without its being actuated by the
air of respiration; it is then said to be subject to vitality (_i.e._
to exist with the breath of a living being and no more).

3. It thinks it cannot live long without the association of respiration
(as in the state of transient and breathless dream) but must come
back to its life and living action (of thinking) with the return of
breathing. (The thinking power of the mind is suspended with the
breathing, in the states of dreaming and wondrous sight seeing).

4. Again as the mind fancies itself to be accompanied with the vital
breath in some living body; it finds itself instantly joined with same,
and beholds the world rising as an enchanted city to view.

5. The mind thinks of the convenience of its union with the vital
breath and body; and with this persuasion it is pleased to remain for
ever as a triplicate being, combined with its intellectuality, vitality
and corporeality.

6. Know now that the uncertainty of knowledge, which, keeps the mind in
suspense, is the cause of great woe to mankind; and that there is no
way of getting rid of it except of the true knowledge of _tattwajnána_.

7. He who has the knowledge of the distinction of his self and another
(_i.e._ of the ego and nonego--the subjective and objective as
different from another); can have no redress from his error, save by
means of his spiritual knowledge of the only spirit.

8. There is no way to true knowledge, except by means of the
investigations of liberation; therefore be employed with all vigilance
to inquire into the means of liberation.

9. Verily the very conceptions of ego and _alias_ I and another are
erroneous, and proceed from utter ignorance; and there is no other
means to remove them, except by means of liberation. (The knowledge of
_ego_ and _tu_ is the bondage of the soul: and the want of egoism and
tuism, leads it to its liberation from all).

10. Hence any thought which is habitual to the mind, comes to be firmly
impressed upon it in time; and hence the idea that the vital breath is
one’s life and all, makes his mind dependent upon the breath. (_i.e._
As the thought of one’s being this or that, makes him as such; so the
firm belief of the mind as breath, makes it subject to the same).

11. So also when the body is in a healthful state with its vitality,
the mind is dependent on it and has its free play; but being in ill
health, it feels its life embittered and forgets to know itself in its
true nature.

12. When the respiration is quick in discharging the duties of the
body, and the mind is engaged in its busy thoughts, then neither of
them <is> capable of meditation, unless they are repressed in the
breast.

13. These two the mind and respiration, stand in relation of the car
and driver to one another, and what living being is there, that is not
driven along by them in their train?

14. It was in this manner that the supreme spirit, hath ordained the
mind and vital breath, in the very beginning of creation; and therefore
this law of their co-operation, continues unaltered to this day.

15. Hence the mind and vital airs are acting in concert in all living
bodies, and conducting them at all times in all places in their stated
course or action all along (except those of yogis who have repressed
them under their subjection).

16. The co-equal course of both, serves to the regular conduct of the
functions of life (as in the waking state); but their unequal course,
produces dissimilar effects (as that of dreaming when the mind alone is
active); and the inactivity of both causes the inertness of the body
and soul (as in the state of sound sleep).

17. When the intestines are blocked by the chyle of food taken into
them, and the breathing becomes dull and slow; the mind also becomes
calm and quiet, and then ensues the blissful state of sound sleep.

18. When the stomach is filled with food, and the lungs are languid
with weariness, the breathing then remains without its inflation,
and brings on <a> state of sweet and sound sleep of _susupti_ or
_hypnotism_.

19. Again when the intestinal parts are cool and phlegmatic, or
exhausted by effusion of blood owing to some sore or wound, and the
breathing being stopped in the body, there comes the state of numbness
of sleep.

20. The ascetic said:--Then I had entered into his heart, it became all
dark to me as night; and he fell into a sound sleep, from his satiety
with the fulness of his food.

21. I was there assimilated into one with his mind, and lay in deep
sleep with himself without any effort of my own.

22. Then as the passage of his lungs was re-opened, after digestion
of the food in his stomach; his breathings resumed their natural
vibration, and he began to breathe out slowly and softly in his
slumbering state.

23. After the sound sleep had become light and airy, I beheld the sunny
world arising out of my breast, and appearing manifest before me in my
dream.

24. This world seemed to rise out of the troubled ocean, and to be
filled with water (seas) upon its surface; it was released from the
darkness of diluvian clouds, which had enveloped it, like the mists
overhanging on oceans.

25. There was a hurricane blowing over it, bearing aloft the rocks
and stones, in its whirling and uproarious course; and carrying away
uprooted arbours, with the furze and grassy turfs along with them.

26. It was carrying away and casting all about, the fragments and
remains of the last conflagration of desolation; and hurling down the
detachments of celestial cities from high.

27. Then as I was looking at a certain place, I found my self situated
with my consort in one of the abodes of a splendid city rising at that
spot.

28. And there as I was sitting in company with my consort and children,
and attended by my friends and servants, and supplies with dishes and
cups of food and drink, I was all on a sudden carried away by the waves
of the deluging waters.

29. The flood swept me away together with the edifice and the city,
wherein we were situated; and we were floating on the tops of
mountainous waves, and buffeting in the water.

30. There arose a loud dashing noise louder than the roaring sea; I was
stunned by the stridor, and was insensible of the fates of my family.

31. Men were driven away and hurled down into the whirling eddies, and
were buried deep into the dreadful mud, with their wailings and loud
cries, with the beating of their breasts.

32. The houses and huts were breaking and cracking, their beams and
posts were splitting, the pillars and supports were bursting, and the
roofs and coverings were falling down, while the females were looking
out with their faces fixed at the windows. (_i.e._ Women stared from
within the doors and windows and dared not to stir without).

33. As I was looking awhile at all this, being affected at the sight;
and was weeping sorrowfully at the event, I saw the whole edifice
falling down on the ground.

34. The walls on the four sides broke down, and buried the old and
young and female inmates under them; and these were borne away by the
waves at last, as the impetuous waterfall carries away the shattered
and scattered stones to a hundred different ways.

35. I was then blown away into the waters of the deluge, leaving behind
me my family and friend; and accompanying only my mind and vital breath
with me.

36. I was tossed about by the waves, and borne away to the distance of
leagues after leagues; and was thrown upon the floating woods, which
roasted me by their inburning wildfire.

37. I was dashed against the floating planks and timbers, and slashed
in many parts of my body, then falling into a whirlpool I was hurled
into the abyss of _pátála_.

38. Being thus tossed all about, and hurled up and down, I had been for
a long time, buffeting amidst the waves and waters, and their gurgling,
roaring and rumbling sounds.

39. I was then buried under the mud, caused by the friction of the
drowned mountains against one another; and was again lifted upward like
an elephant, by the influx of a flood of water.

40. As I was halting on a hill covered with foam and froth; immediately
I was run over by a rush of water, as a man is overtaken by his enemy.

41. Being then ingulfed in the water, and carried away by the waves and
current wheresoever they pleased, I lost the sight of whatever I was
seeing, and was greatly dejected in my mind.

42. At this moment there, I had come to know by my reminiscence, that
<a> certain _muni_ will lecture to the public, the Vasishtha’s address
of Ráma hereafter.

43. I remembered my former state of holy trance (_samádhi_) and
exclaimed; O, had I been an ascetic in another world.

44. I have entered into the body of another person, in order to see the
sights in his dreaming; and all that I am now seeing (of this flood
and others), is no more than a dream, and mere error of the mind and
falsehood.

45. It is from our habitual bias in the present scene, that I believed
these falsehoods as true in me; and though I was troubled to see myself
to be borne away by the flood in my dream; yet I feel myself happy at
present to find, it was but the unreality of a dream.

46. What I saw as water, was the whirling eddy in the ocean of the
universal deluge, and as false as the water of mirage; and the hills
and woods, and the cities and towns, that were swept away by the flood,
were as false as any visual deception.

47. There were the gods and aerials, men and women, and huge snakes
also borne away by the flood; and the great cities and mansions of the
rulers of men (_i.e._ royal edifices), all floating upon the waters.

48. I saw the mountain merged in and mixed up with the waters, and
being battered and shattered by the waves; I saw the approaching
dissolution of the world, and thus considered within myself.

49. There is even the god Siva with his three eyes, swimming upon and
swept away as a straw by the waves: O fie for shame! that there is
nothing impossible for the fates.

50. Fragments of houses floating upon the waters, looked like lotus
flowers flaunting under the sun-beams.

51. It was astonishing to see the bodies of Gandharvas, Kinnaras,
and of men and Nágas, floating on the waters, like swarms of bees
fluttering over lotus-beds in the lake.

52. The fragments of the splendid edifices of the gods and demigods and
others, decorated with the ornamental works of the vidyádharas, were
floating like golden vessels on the wide expanse of the ocean.

53. The god Indra was floating on the glassy water, as if he were lying
in his crystal palace; he mounted over the waves, as if he rode on his
elephant; and was swinging on the surges as upon his cradle.

54. The waves rising to the sky, were washing the faces of the stars,
and the winds were scattering them all about; as they drop down the
flowers of the garden of Eden on the mansions of the gods, and as men
strew the ground with fried rice.

55. Waves as high as mountains rose to the sky, and then their breakers
flying aloft like stones flung by ballistas, fell upon the lotus seat
of Brahmá, and turned it about with the god also, who was sitting upon
it in his deep meditation.

56. The clouds were roaring aloud with deep and appalling thunder,
and the billows were flashing like frightful lightnings in the
air; elephants, horses, and ferocious lions were wandering in the
atmosphere, and forests as large as the earth, were floating in the sky.

57. The dark blue waves of over-flowing waters, pushed with such
violent force against one another; as if the god of destruction was
propelling them one after another to the act, of utter annihilation (or
as the powers of destruction were propelling one another).

58. The waves were carrying down into the deep, the gods, men, and
Nágas, together with their abodes in heaven, earth and the regions
below.

59. The irresistible flood having flooded over all sides, of earth,
heaven and the infernal region, the bodies of the gods and demigods,
were all floating together like shoals of fishes; and their heavenly
cars and vehicles were swimming over on the surface of the waters, as
in the field of battle.

60. The body of dark blue waters, resembled the azure form of Krishna;
and their foaming froths, likened the milk white calves about him. (The
text is utterly meaningless).

61. The waves pushed one another, with the _burber_ sound for drowning
every thing; and the females both of the gods and giants were heard to
wail aloud with cries of _hola_ and howling. (Hola is the exclamation
of wailing, corresponding with _waílá_ in Persian).

62. The loud cries raised by all, at the falling down of their houses,
were resounded by the waters on all sides; and the clouds roving over
the rolling waves, appeared as the covers of fallen and floating domes.

63. Ah it was piteous to behold, how the whirling waters of whirlpools,
hurled down even the gods into the deep; and how Indra, Yama, and
Kubera, breathed out their last breaths in the form of flying and
flimsy clouds.

64. There the learned and saintly persons, were carried away with the
ignorant, in the shape of dead bodies and devoid of their pride; and
the cities of the gods Brahmá, Vishnu, and Indra, were swept away, all
broken and crushed to pieces.

65. The bodies of weak women, were washed and carried over by the
waves, and there was no body left to save them from the grasp of death;
which devoured them altogether under his horrid jaws.

66. The floods which flowed at first with their serpentine course into
the caves of mountains, overflooded them to their tops at last; and the
cities of the gods, which floated at first as boats upon the waters on
mountain tops, were hurled to the bottom at last.

67. The gods and giants and all other beings, together with their
residences in heaven, and the continents and mountains on earth, were
all submerged and shattered like lotus-beds by the waters; and the
three worlds were turned to an universal ocean and all their grandeur
and splendour were swallowed up by time, together with all the sovran
powers of earth and heaven.




