CHAPTER CLI.

VIEW OF INEXISTENCE.

    Argument:--The world is a vision, and to be known only by
    conception, perception and meditation.


The other sage rejoined:--Afterwards the whole village together with
all its dwellings and trees, were all burnt down to ashes like the
dried straws.

2. All things being thus burnt away, the two bodies of you two, that
had been sleeping there, were also scorched and burnt, as a large piece
of stone, is heated and split by fire.

3. Then the fire set after satiating itself with devouring the whole
forest, as the sea sat below in its basin, after its waters were sucked
up by the sage Agastya.

4. After the fire was quenched and the ashes of the burnt cinders had
become cold; they were blown away by gusts of wind, as they bear away
the heaps of flowers.

5. Then nothing was known, as to where the hermit’s hut and the two
bodies were borne away; and where was that visionary city, which was
seen as vividly as in waking, and was populous with numbers of people.

6. In this manner the two bodies having disappeared, their existence
remains in the conscious soul, as the memory of externals remains in
the mind, at the insensibility of the body in the state of dreaming.

7. Hence where is that passage of the lungs, and where is that Virajian
soul any more? They are burnt away together with the vigour and
vitality of the dead body.

8. It is on account of this, O sage, that you could not find out those
two bodies; and wandered about in this endless world of dreams, as if
you were in your waking state.

9. Therefore know this mortal state, as a mere dream appearing as
waking, and that all of us are but day dreams, and seeing one another
as we see the visionary beings in our dreams.

10. You are a visionary man to me, and so am I also to you; and this
intellectual sphere, wherein the soul is situated within itself.

11. You have been ere while a visionary being in your life, until you
thought yourself to be a waking man in your domestic life.

12. I have thus related to you the whole matter, as it has occurred
to you; and which you well know by your conception, perception and
meditation of them.

13. Know at last that it is the firm conviction of our consciousness,
which shines for ever as the glitter of gold in the vacuum of our
minds; and the intellectual soul catches the colour of our deeds,
be they fair or foul or a commixture of both, in its state of a
regenerated spirit.




CHAPTER CLII.

THE SAGE’S DISCOURSE AT NIGHT.

    Argument:--Refutation of the Reality of Dreams, and the reason of
    the Preceptorship of the Hunter.


The sage resumed:--Saying so the sage held his silence, and lay himself
in his bed at night; and I was as bewildered in my mind, as if blown
away by the winds.

2. Breaking then my silence after a long time, I spoke to that sage and
said: sir, in my opinion, such dreams appear <to have> some truth and
reality in them.

3. The other muni replied:--If you can believe in the truth of your
waking dreams, you may then rely on the reality of your sleeping dreams
likewise; but should your day dreams prove to be false, what faith can
you then place on your night dreams (which are as fleet as air).

4. The whole creation from its very beginning, is no more than a dream;
and it appears to be comprised of the earth etc., yet it is devoid of
everything.

5. Know the waking dream of this creation is more subtile, than our
recent dreams by night; and O lotus eyed preceptor of the huntsman, you
will shortly hear all this from me.

6. You think that the object you see now, in your waking state in the
day time, the same appear to you in the form of dream in your sleep; so
the dream of the present creation, is derived from a previous creation,
which existed from before as an archetype of this, in the vacuum of the
Divine Mind.

7. Again seeing the falsity of your waking dream of this creation, how
do you say that you entertain doubts regarding the untruth of sleeping
dreams, and knowing well that the house in your dream is not yours, how
do you want to dote upon it any more?

8. In this manner, O sage, when you perceive the falsity of your waking
dream of this world; how can you be doubtful of its unreality any more?

9. As the sage was arguing in this manner, I interrupted him by another
question; and asked him to tell me, how he came to be the preceptor of
the huntsman.

10. The other sage replied:--Hear me relate to you this incident also;
I will be short in its narration, for know O learned sage, I can dilate
it likewise to any length.

11. I have been living here, as a holy hermit for a long time; and
solely employed in the performance of my religious austerities; and
after hearing my speech, I think you too will like to remain in this
place.

12. Seeing me situated in this place, I hope you will not forsake me
here alone; as I verily desire to live in your company herein.

13. But then I will tell you sir, that it will come to pass in the
course of some years hence, and there will occur a direful famine in
this place, and all its people will be wholly swept away.

14. Then there will occur a warfare between the raging border chiefs,
when this village will be destroyed, and all the houses will be thinned
of their occupants.

15. Then let us remain in this place, free from all troubles, and in
perfect security and peace, and live free from all worldly desires, by
our knowledge of the knowable.

16. Here let us reside under the shelter of some shady trees; and
perform the routine of our religious functions, as the sun and moon
perform their revolutions in the solitary sky.

17. There will then grow in this desert land and deserted place, many
kinds of trees and plants, covering the whole surface of this lonely
place.

18. The land will be adorned by fruit trees, with many a singing bird
sitting upon them; and the waters will be filled with lotus beds, with
the humming bees and _chakoras_ chirping amidst them. There shall we
find happy groves like the heavenly garden of paradise for our repose.




