CHAPTER CLXXXVIII.

DESCRIPTION OF THE LIVING SOUL.

    Argument:--The Living soul is identified with Brahma or the
    universal soul; its birth is but a fiction of speech; and the
    erroneous conception of its animal soul and body, is fully
    exposed herein.


Vasishtha continued:--The fiction of the first rise of the living
soul; from the calm and quiet spirit of God as said before, is merely
fictitious and not a true one; but was meant to elucidate the nature of
the animate soul, as the same with and not distinct from the Supreme
soul.

2. In this manner the fiction (of the living soul) means that, this
being a part of the supreme soul is verily the same with it. (As the
air in the pot or _cot_, is the same as universal air or vacuum).
It is when the subjective soul is employed with the thoughts of the
objective, that it is termed the living God or spirit. (Hence the
quiescent and creative souls, are but the states or hypostases of the
same soul).

3. The inclination of the self-intelligent or subjective soul, towards
thinkable objects of thought, garbs it under a great many fictitious
names or epithets, which you shall now hear me, O Ráma, relate to you
in all their varieties.

4. It is called the living soul or jíva, from its power of living and
thinking; and from its addictedness towards the thinkables, it is
termed the thinking principle and the intellect.

5. It is termed intelligence for its intellection of this thing as
that, as well as for its knowledge of what is what; and it is called
the mind from its mending, willing and imagining of many things. (The
three powers of the mind are here reckoned, as retention, volition and
imagination).

6. The reliance in self that, “I am” is what is called egoism; and the
principle of percipience called the mind by the vulgar, is when freed
from everything, styled the intellect by the wise and those acquainted
with the sástras.

7. It is called the aggregate of the octuple principles or totality of
existence, when it is combined with all its wishes of creation; and
then named as subtile nature, before its production of the substantial
world.

8. Being absent from or imperceptible to our perception, it is called
the hidden nature; and in this manner many other fictitious names are
given to it by way of fiction or fabrication of our imagination. (The
word _avidyá_ here meant as absent, is elsewhere explained as unknown
and as ignorance and illusion also).

9. All these fictitious appellations that I have told thee here, are
mere inventions of our fancy, for the one formless and changeless
eternal being.

10. In this manner are all these three worlds, but the fairy lands of
our dream and the castles of our imagination; they appear as objects
made for our enjoyment and bliss, but are in reality an intactible
vacuity.

11. So must you know, O best of embodied beings, that this body of
yours is of a spiritual or intangible nature; it is the intellectual
body formed of the vacuous intellect, which is rarer than the rarified
air.

12. It never rises nor sets (_i.e._ it is neither born nor dies) in
this world, but continue with our consciousness of ourselves, until
our final liberation from the sense of our personalities. This mental
body or mind of ours, is the recipient of the fourteen worlds and all
created objects.

13. It is in the extensive regions of our minds, that millions of
worlds continue to be _created_ and dissolved in the course of time;
and an unnumbered train of created beings, are growing and falling as
fruits in it in the long run of time. (The mind and time, contain all
things).

14. This intellectual body beholds the world, both inside and outside
of it; as the looking glass reflects and refracts, the outward and
its inward images both in as well as out of it; and as the open air
reflects and shows us the upper skies.

15. The mind must bear these images in its mirror, until its final
dissolution with all things at the end of the world; when all minds
and bodies and all the world and their contents, are to be incorporated
in the great vacuum of the Divine Mind.

16. The compactness of the Divine Mind, which comprehends all images
or ideas in itself, imparts them partly in all individual minds, which
are but parts of itself, and which are made to think likewise. (This
passage maintains the innate ideas derived immediately from God).

17. This spiritual body that was employed in viewing the inborn world
in itself; is turned as the form of the Great Brahmá by some, and as
that of the God Virát by others.

18. Some call him the _sanátana_ or sempiternal, and others give him
the name of Náráyana or floating on the surface of the waters. Some
style him as Ísha and by his name as Prajápati--the Lord of creatures
(Patriarch).

19. This being chanced to have, his five organs of sense on a sudden,
and these were seated in the several parts of his body, where they
still retain there seats as before.

20. Then his delusion of the phenomenal, seemed to extend too far and
wide, without any appearance of reality therein, all being a vast waste
and void. (The noumenal only is the true reality).

21. It was all the appearance of that eternal and transcendental
Brahma, and not of the unreal phenomenal which is never real; it is the
very Brahma, which is without its beginning and end, and appearing in a
light quite unintelligible to us. (Being imperceptible in his person,
his reality is hid under the garb of unreality).

22. Our inquiry into the spiritual form of the deity, leads us to take
the delusive world as such; just as the longing of the ardent lover
after his loved one, leads him to the view of its bloated phantom in
his dream (_i.e._ in our search after the spiritual, we are misled to
take the corporeal as such).

23. As we have the blank and formless notion of a pot, presented in
the real shape of the pot in our minds; so have we the notions of our
bodies and the world also, represented as realities in dreams and
imagination.

24. As the dreamed objects of our vacuous minds, seem to be real ones
for the time in our sleep; so all these aerial objects in nature,
appear as solid substances in the delusion of our dreams by daylight.

25. This spiritual and formless body (of the deity), comes to be
gradually perceived in us and by itself also; as we come to see the
aerial forms presenting themselves unto us in our dream.

26. It is then embodied in a gross body, composed of flesh and bones,
and all its members, and its covering of the skin and hairs; and in
this state it thinks (of its carnal appetites and enjoyments).

27. It then reflects on its birth and acts in that body, and upon the
duration and end of that body also; and entertains the erroneous ideas
of the enjoyments and incidents of its life.

28. It comes to know its subjection to decay, decrepitude and death,
and of its wanderings on all sides of the wide sphere of this globe; it
gets the knowledge of the knower and known, and also of the beginning,
middle and of all acts and things.

29. And thus the primordial spirit, being transformed to the living
soul, comes to know the elementary bodies of earth, air, and water
&c, and the varieties of created beings and conduct of men and finds
itself as contained and confined within the limits of its body and
of this earth, after its having been the container of all bodies and
space before. (The difference here spoken of, is that of the personal
soul of the jíva or living being, and that of the impersonal soul of
Brahma--the universal spirit).




