CHAPTER CLXXXXVIII.

EXCELLENCE OF UNIVERSAL TOLERATION.

    Argument:--Sama-darsana or equanimity agreeing with stoic
    fortitude under all the various shades of its meaning,
    elaborately treated here.


Vasishtha continued:--Hear me Ráma, to tell you again for the
perfection of your understanding (after what I have said already in
praise of the virtue of equanimity); because the repetition of a
lesson, serves to impress it the more in the memory of inattentive
persons.

2. Ráma! I have told you before about the existence of the world, after
I had related to you in length regarding its creation or production;
whereby you have come to know, that both the appearance and subsistence
of the world (_i.e._ its coming to and being in existence), are mere
fallacies of our understanding.

3. I have next explained to you also, in the Upasama-Prakarana or my
lecture on Insouciance, of the necessity of observing and maintaining
a total indifference in regard to the whole creation (which is here
repeated as leading to our _nirvána_ or lukewarmness in this our living
state).

4. In my discourse on indifference, I have described to you the
different stages of nonchalance; the attainment of the highest pitch
of which, will conduce ultimately to your obtaining the blissfulness
of the _nirvána_ numbness, which is treated of in this book on
_anæsthesia_. (From the stage of Upasama or allaying of all excitements
to that of _upasánti_ or absence of excitability, there are some
intermediate states spoken of before).

5. You shall have here to hear (or learn) from me, regarding the manner
in which the learned are to conduct themselves in this phenomenal
world, after they have learnt and obtained, whatever there is to be
known and obtainable herein (_i.e._ after their attainment of divine
knowledge and wisdom).

6. A man having received his birth in this world, should habituate
himself from his boyhood, to view the phenomenals as they are of
themselves, and without any concern with himself; in order to have
his security and happiness apart from all others. (_i.e._ Constrain
yourself to yourself, and without any concern of yours with any).

7. Regard all in the one and same light with yourself, and observe
a universal benevolence towards all beings, and then placing your
reliance in your own equanimity, conduct yourself safely and securely
every where.

8. Know the plan of your even-mindedness, to be productive of the
fruits of purest and most delicious taste; and bearing the blossoms of
unbounded prosperity, and the flowers of our unfading good fortune.

9. Meekness of disposition, yields the fruit of universal benevolence,
and makes the prosperity of the whole world wait at its service.
(Blessed are the meek; for they shall enjoy all the blessing &c.).

10. Neither the possession of a kingdom on earth, nor the enjoyment
of the best beauties herein; can yield that undecaying and essential
happiness, which is derived from the equanimity of the meek.

11. The utmost limit of a cool disposition, and the entire want of all
anxious cares, are the two antidotes that set at naught the fervour and
vapours of sorrow from the human mind.

12. It is very rare to meet a person, amidst the spheres of all these
worlds; who is fraught with the ambrosia of cool insouciance, who is
friendly to his enemies and whose enemies are his friends, and who
looks on all alike as he does to himself.

13. The mind of the enlightened man, shines as brightly as the luminous
moon; and dazzles with drops of ambrosial dews; the sages all lived to
drink the cooling draught of immortality, as you learn from the lives
of the royal sage Janaka and others of immortal fame.

14. The man practising his demureness, has his faults described as his
qualities, his sorrows seem as his pleasure (_i.e._ he rejoices in his
misery); and his death is eternal life unto him.

15. Sámyam or stoicism is ever accompanied, with a good grace, good lot
and placidness; all of which are constant attendants on the stoic sage,
as faithful wives fondly cling to the sides of their beloved husbands.

16. Equanimity is the perpetual prosperity of the soul, and not the
transitory hilarity of the mind; therefore there is no treasure (_i.e._
spiritual bliss) whatsoever, which is a stranger to the meekness of
spirit.

17. He that is honest in all his dealings, and steady in his own
professions; and liberal in his minds (_i.e._ taking no heed of the
faults of others); are men as valuable as richest gems, and are deemed
and desired by all as gods upon earth. (Because men with godly virtues,
are deemed and deified as gods).

18. The even minded man, that is righteous and upright in all his
doings and dealings, who is magnanimous in his soul and benevolent
in his mind; such a man is neither burnt by fire, nor ever soiled or
sullied by water (_i.e._ nothing can alter the even tenor of his mind
and the smoothness of his conduct).

19. Who can foil that man that does what is right, and observes things
in their true light; who is not susceptible of joy or grief (but goes
on in the even course of his life).

20. The righteous and unflinching man, is relied upon and esteemed
by all his friends and enemies also; he is honoured by his king and
master, and loved by all wisemen with whom he has any dealing.

21. The wise and even sighted men are of indifferent minds, and do
not try to flee from evil, nor rejoice to receive any good; they are
content with whatever comes to pass upon them, as aught of good or bad,
they care for naught.

22. These meek minded men are unmindful of any good or desirable thing,
which they may happen either to lose or leave from them; because they
have to resort to the happy state of their equanimity (Samatá or stoic
sameness); of which no calamity or chance can deprive them.

23. Men enjoying the felicity of equanimity, laugh to scorn at the
tribulations of the world; and live uninjured under all the varying
circumstances of life; they are venerated by the gods also, for the
invariable samatá or sameness of their minds, (as those of the gods
themselves).

24. If the (unfavorable) course of events, ever happened to ruffle the
countenance of the forbearing man; yet the inward equanimity of his
mind, serves to shed the ambrosial beams, of a placid moon light within
himself.

25. Whatever the even minded man acts or does for himself, and
whatsoever he says in opprobrium of the misdeeds of others; are all
lauded with applause by the majority of men (who like to see the
goodness of others, and to learn of and correct their own faults).

26. Whatever good or evil is known or seen to be done by the impartial
observer, at any time whether past or present; are all approved of by
the public (under the impression of their being done for common good).

27. The man that sees all things in the same light (of indifference),
is never displeased or dejected in his countenance at any calamity or
danger, that may betide him at any time.

28. The prince Sibi of old, is recorded in history to have passed
pieces of flesh from his own body, and to have fed a hawk therewith,
in order to save the life of a captive pigeon from his claws. (This
is an instance of samadristi or fellow feeling even towards the brute
creation).

29. Again mind the impassible prince, who did not sink into despondence
seeing his beloved consort to be maltreated before his sight. (This is
an instance of unimpressible fortitude).

30. Mind also how the king of _Trigarta_, offered his only son who
was accomplished and successful in all his desires to the horrible
_Rákshasa_; upon his being vanquished by the fiend, at a certain wager
he had laid with him.

31. Look at the great king Janaka, how he remained undismayed and
undejected, at the burning of his well decorated city of Mithila.

32. Look at the quiet and submissive prince of Sályadesa, how he
calmly struck off his head from his body, as if it were the plucking
off of a lotus leaf or flower from its stem, in order to satisfy the
demand of a deity for the same.

33. The Sauvíra sovereign, who had won the big Airávata elephant of
the god Indra, in a combat with him; made at last a gift of him to the
very god, with as much unconcern, as one offers a heap of white kundu
flowers, or huge heaps of rotten straws upon the sacrificial fire.

34. You have heard how the elephant named kundapa, employed his trunk
in sympathy to the Bráhman’s kine, in lifting them from being plunged
in the mud; and afterwards devoted his body to the service of the
Bráhman; wherefore he was taken up to heaven in a celestial car.

35. Let your continued observance of toleration, preserve you from acts
of intolerance, which tend at best to the oppression of others; and
know that the spirit of intolerance, is as the goblin of the kadamba
forest (whose business was the havoc and depredation of all living
beings). (_i.e._ By want of forbearance, you make yourself an enemy to
all, and make them as enemies to you).

36. Remember the young and gentle Jadabharata, who by the natural
hebetude of his mind, devoured the firebrand that was thrown into his
almspot, thinking as a piece of meat, and without any injury to himself
(To the meek and tolerant, a furnace of fire, becomes a bed of roses
and flowers).

37. Think of the soberminded kura, who notwithstanding his following
the profession of a huntsman all his lifetime, was at last translated
to heaven, and placed by the souls of the righteous men after his
demise.

38. Think of the listlessness and want of concupiscence, in the person
of the royal sage Kapardana, who being seated in the garden of paradise
in his youth, and beset by celestial damsels all about, felt no desire
for any of them.

39. Know how many princes and Lords of peoples have from the
unperturbed apathy of their souls, resigned their realms and society
of mankind, and betaken themselves to lonely forests and solitary
caves of Vindhyan Mountains, and there spent their lives in motionless
torpidity.

40. Think of the great sages and saints, and of divine and devoted
adepts, who were adored by even the gods, for the steadiness of their
holy devotion, that have passed away in the observance of their rigid
and unruffled vows of an universal indifference.

41. Call to your mind the instances of many a monarch, of ordinary men
and of base and mean huntsmen also, that have been honoured in all ages
and countries, for their observance of an unimpressed equality in all
states and circumstances of their lives.

42. All intelligent men strictly observed the rule, of preserving
their equanimity in their course through life; whether it be for the
achievement of their acts for this life or the next, as also for the
success of their understandings of every kind.

43. They neither long for longevity nor desire their death in
difficulties; but live as long as they have to live, and act as they
are called to act, without any grudge or murmur.

44. It is the business of the wiseman, to conduct himself in the career
of his life, with a contented mind and placid countenance, both in his
favourable and unfavourable circumstances, as well as in the happiness
or misery of himself or others.




