CHAPTER CLXXIII.

BRAHMA GITA OR A LECTURE ON SPIRITUALITY.

    Argument:--The attribution of all physical force to the Divine
    spirit, like the ascribing of all our bodily actions to the Mind.


Ráma rejoined:--If the nature of the Divine spirit is, as the notion
which is Universally entertained of it; that it is common soul of all,
and infinite in its pervasion, why then is it supposed to be the soul
of the living body only, and called the Ego or a personal being?

2. How does the Intellect become inert, as a block of wood or stone in
the state of our sleep, and why is it said to exist or become extinct
in the state of its numbness (when it is said to be universal in its
nature).

3. Vasishtha replied:--It is by common usage and mode of speech, that
the universal soul is said to reside as the ego or personal being in
the body; as it is by common use of language only, to take the hands
of the body as hands, and not to understand the feet as such. (So the
embodied soul only is called the ego).

4. As the leaf of a tree is considered only as a leaf or part of the
tree, so the universal soul residing in the tree (as vegetable life),
passes under the designation of a tree only.

5. And as vacuity in the sky, is styled the sky also; so the universal
soul dwelling in matter, is designated as that matter likewise. (And so
the common vacuum indwelling a pot, passes under the name of the pot
also).

6. And as an aerial castle in a dream, appears as a tangible castle to
the dreamer for the time; so the universal soul living in our sleep,
dream, and waking, is thought to be sleeping, dreaming or being awake
at that time.

7. As stony trees or cliffs are seen to rise on mountains, and waves
on the surface of waters; so the huge mountain also rises as a stony
tree, from the bosom of the all pervading spirit.

8. As the living body gives growth, to dull and dead nails and hairs,
so the living soul of the universe, grows the insensible stones and
trees upon it. (So the spirit produces the matter, and the insensible
rises from sensibles).

9. As the conscious soul becomes unconscious, as a stone or block of
wood in its sleep; so the universal soul becomes inert, before creation
and after its dissolution. And again as the sleeping soul, sees the
train of dreams rising out of it, so the tranquil spirit of God,
beholds the lustre of creation issuing out of it.

10. And as the sensible and insensible soul of man, produces both
sensible offspring and insensible excrements from its body; so the
universal soul, produces both living beings and inert bodies from
itself.

11. The sensible as well as the insensible, are both embodied in the
person of the universal soul; which is possessed of both the movables
and immovables in itself, although it is formless in its substance.

12. All these contraries in nature, disappear before the sight of the
truly learned; as the false sights in dream, disappear from view of the
awakened man, who knows the falsity of dreams.

13. All this is the vacuity of the Intellect, where there is no sight,
view nor its viewer; as a dreamer being awakened from his dreaming,
neither sees his dream nor his dreaming sights any more.

14. Millions and millions of creations, are appearing in and
disappearing from the vacuum of the Intellect, in the manner of
recurring waves, and the revolving whirlpools in the sea.

15. As the waters of the ocean, show various shining forms in the
rising waves; so the Intellect raises many creations, bearing different
names in its own intellectuality.

16. The world as it is, appears as the very Brahma to the truly
learned, while to the ignorant mass of men, it appears as many and
changing, for want of the precise knowledge of it.

17. The wave that knows its nature, of calm and cool water only, thinks
no more of its being a fluctuating wave (so the man that knows himself
as Brahma, thinks no longer of his frail and mortal state).

18. The conception of the undulation of the divine spirit, from the
fluctuating appearance of creation, is a mistaking of the calmness of
the Divine nature; the fluctuation belongs to the powers residing in
the Divinity.

19. The vacuous Intellect never forsakes its tranquility; and the
variety of knowledge that rises in it, like the varying train of
dreams, is attributable to the mind, which they call Brahma or the
great progenitor of all.

20. Thus the prime lord of creatures, was the formless and undecaying
mind; it was of intellectual form like an imaginary being, and supposed
as the cause of all.

21. Who says “thou art nothing,” that saying is like the word gold,
which has no form of itself, but whose purity is gold.

22. The increate Brahma, being of an intellectual and vacuous form, and
an imaginary body endued with volition, appeared as the prime Ego or a
personal being, and containing the world in his person.

23. It is the empty void of the Intellect, which displays these wonders
that are known to constitute the continued bustle, of the alternate
creation, sustentation, and destruction of the world.

24. The clear and increate light, to which the intellect evolves itself
of its own accord; and which bears resemblance to the evolution of airy
dreams from the mind; is termed the first father of all. (Light was
the first work of God, or coeternal with the Eternal spirit. Hail holy
light Heaven’s first-born, or the Eternal coeternal beam. Milton).

25. As a wave assumes one form or other, and rolls on interminably
over the vast expanse of the sea; so runs the heavenly mind, in the
forms of the revolving creations and their dissolutions.

26. The light of the intellectual vacuum, which passes under the
name of Virát; is of the same mind as Brahma, and stretches out the
creation, like a castle or city of imagination.

27. Virát is the combined form of the triple states of waking, dreaming
and sleep; the two first are analogous to the creation and supportance
of the universe, and the last is similar to the utter darkness of
dissolution.

28. From the chaotic state of his dissolution, there sprang light and
darkness (in the forms of days and nights), like dark and white hairs
growing on his head; and the rotations of time resembling the joints of
his body.

29. His mouth represented the fire, his head the upper sky, and the air
below his navel; his foot-stool was the earth, his eyes were the sun
and moon, and the east and west were his two ears. In this manner did
the Lord Virát manifest himself, in the imagination of his mind (Virát
represents the concrete universe).

30. Thus did the expanded vacuous form of Virát, represent the whole
visible world in his ideal person; which was a figure of his own
imagination, as any of the unsubstantial forms of our dream or fancy.

31. Whatever is thought of in the vacuity of the Intellect, the same
comes to be vividly exhibited therein; such is verily the form of this
world, which we conceive in ourself.

32. Virát is verily an aeriform being in himself, and appears to be as
wide extended as the vast extent of the universe; and is in his own
nature, like a city or mountain, that we see in our dreams.

33. Whatever one thinks himself to be, he conceives in him to have
become the same, without his actually being as such, so an actor is
seen to play his part in dream, from the concept of his acting on the
stage.

34. Whatever be the tenets of the Vedánta, Buddhism, Sánkhya and
Saugata systems of the philosophy; and whatsoever may be the doctrine
of Tryaksha, Pashupati and other propounders of Ágama sástras; they
all agree in acknowledging Brahma, as the giver of the boons that they
respectively desire; and all of them obtain the particular object of
bliss from the same. Such is the glory of the great God, whose soul
fills all bodies, and whose bounty supports them all (lit., whose body
comprehends the whole).[3]




