CHAPTER CXXV.

ON THE LIVING LIBERATION OF THE PRINCE.

    Argument:--Mutual assistance of the four persons of the prince to
    one another, and their true meaning.


Vasishtha continued:--Now of the quadripartite bodies of the prince,
that which was transformed to a tree, in the valley called the vale of
fearlessness in _sacadwípa_: supported itself by sucking the better
water of the rock which it drew by its roots.

2. It was then that the western part of the royal person, came up to
the relief of the former or eastern part, and released it from the
curse of its vegetable state of full seventy years, by the power of its
incantations.

3. Again the western person of the king, passing to the frigid clime,
was there transformed to a stone by curse of the chief of the Pisácha
tribe; but was released afterwards from that state by <a> southern
personage, by his offering of meat food to the carnivorous Pisácha.

4. At another time as this western personage, was settled beyond the
western horizon, it was changed to the form of a bull by a female
fiend, that had assumed on her the form of a cow, and was freed at last
from that state by the southern person.

5. Again the southern figure of the prince, was doomed to live as a
demon on a mountain tree in the Kshemaka, and was liberated at last
from it by the yaksha prince.

6. Then again, the eastern person of the prince, was metamorphosed to
the shape of a lion, on a mountain in the province of Vrishaka, and was
delivered for its metamorphoses by the western personality.

7. Ráma rejoined:--How is it sir, that the single individuality of
the prince, which was confined in one spot as that of a yogi; could
be ubiquious at one and the same time, could perform the various
acts of different times and places at once, by the all comprehensive
universality of the mind.

8. Vasishtha replied:--O Ráma! Let the unenlightened think whatever
they may, respecting this world (_i.e._ let them take its unreality for
positive reality); but do you attend to what I say, regarding the light
in which it is viewed by the enlightened yogis (who view it in its
spiritual light, and conduct all their operations in the mind only).

9. According to spiritualists, there is no other essence, except one
universal Intellect; the phenomenal are an utter inexistence, and the
creation or increate entity of the world, blends into nothing. (The
intellect is a formless and all-pervading essence, and acts in many
ways in all places).

10. This universal Intellect is the eternal residence of and one with
the eternal and universal soul; and it is this that constitutes the
essentiality and universality of the Supreme soul at all times.

11. Say, who can obstruct any where or by any force the course of the
great mind, which is ubiquious and all comprehensive, and exhibits
itself in various forms in the endless varieties of its thoughts.
(Hence there is nothing in reality, except they be but representations
of the inward thoughts of the mind; or manifestations of the
omnipresent One in various shapes).

12. What is it to us and what can we call to be ours, when all these
sights are exhibited in the supreme soul or Intellect in all places and
times; and all that is present, past and future, are comprised <in>
that all-comprehending mind.

13. So that the far and near, a moment and an age, are the same to it,
which is never altered in its nature (so says the sruti:--It is both
near and afar, the past and the present &c.).

14. All things are situated in the soul, and yet look at the act of
Ignorance, that they appear to be placed without it, as we behold them
with our naked eyes (as phantasms of the hidden soul).

15. The soul is the substantial omniscience of vacuous form, and
exhibits the three worlds in its vacuity, without changing its
vacuousness (but shows like the magic lantern, the phantasmagoria of
these in itself).

16. The universal soul appears in the universe, as both its viewer and
the view in itself, or as the subjective and objective in its self-same
nature; but how is it possible for the inherent soul of the apparent
world, to admit of a visible form in any way, unless it be by the
delusion of our understanding to think it so.

17. But tell me thou sage that knowest the truth, what thing is
impossible to the active agency of the selfsame Deity, to whom all
things are alike possible at all times and places; and so also to the
wise king Vipaschit, who was alike conscious of his self identity in
all his quadruple forms. (The Lord that spreads unspent, and acts alike
in all. Pope).

18. The enlightened Intellect of the yogi, that has not yet arrived at
its transcendent state of unity with the Deity; and retains the sense
of its individuality; can yet readily unite itself with the souls of
others in all places.

19. There is nothing impossible to the supreme soul; but the half
enlightened soul, that lingers between its knowledge and ignorance, and
has not attained to transcendent wisdom, is confounded in its intellect
regarding the true knowledge of things.

20. The soul that is some what advanced in its knowledge, is said to
have partly progressed towards its perfection (siddhi); hence the four
parts of Vipaschit situated on the four sides, made up a perfect whole.
(The whole number in common calculation, is usually divided into and
made up of four quarters).

21. These four parts were as so many states or degrees of perfection,
which lighted on Vipaschit like the rays of heavenly light; and these
states mutually helped and healed each other, as the members of the
body assist and supply to the defects of one another.

22. Ráma said:--Tell me, O venerable Bráhman, why the quadruple king
Vipaschit, ran on all sides like brutes, if he was so enlightened in
every part, and why he did not sit collected in himself as he was.

23. Vasishtha replied:--What I have related to you regarding
enlightenment, applies only to the case of yogis, who though they
are combined of many parts in their minds, do yet remain sedate in
themselves in the same state.

24. But the Vipaschitas were not so wholly enlightened as the holy
yogis, but being partly enlightened, they remained in the midmost state
between the two, as if hanging betwixt both state of enlightenment and
ignorance at the same time.

25. They bore upon them the marks of both at once, namely of the one by
their discretion and discernment, and of the other by the passions and
affections of their minds, that led them to the two different ways of
liberation as well as of bondage.

26. Those who are ever vigilant in the discharge of their pious acts,
and are wavering between their temporal and eternal concerns, as the
Vipaschitas continued in their course of action, such persons cannot be
perfect and esoteric yogis in this life.

27. The devotees that are devoted to their devotion of a particular
deity as the Vipaschitas were of the god of fire, are styled as the
dháraná yogis; and not transcendent or _param_ yogis, unless they
attain to transcendental knowledge (or jnána yoga, which removes the
_avidyá_--ignorance).

28. The learned yogi does not see any mist of ignorance, to obstruct
his sight of the lights of truth; but the ignorant devotee is blind to
truth, though he may be received into the favour of his favorite deity.

29. The Vipaschitas were all of them subject to ignorance, and they
rejected the knowledge of the true soul, by their attachment to gross
material bodies, which are at best but vain unrealities. Listen
therefore to what I will now relate, regarding those that are liberated
from their grossness even in their lifetime.

30. The yogis retain of course their knowledge of the concrete, in
their conduct of the external affairs of life; but liberation is the
virtue of the mind, consisting in its freedom from subjection to gross
materials, and subsisting in the mind only, and not in the body or its
sensibility.

31. But as the bodily properties are inseparably connected with the
body, and its sensibility can in no way be separated from it; the
liberated soul is therefore <in> no way attached to it, nor doth the
yogi ever take any heed of it in his mind (his thoughts being solely
fixed in the solity of the soul).

32. The mind of the liberated yogi, is never reunited with his body,
any more than pollen is ever rejoined with its parent stalk; although
the bodily properties of the living liberated yogi, ever remain the
same as those of worldly persons. (Freedom consists in the minds and
soul, and not in the bonded body).

33. The bodies of both are of course equally perceptible by all, but
not the minds which are hidden in them; the liberated soul cannot be
seen by others; but the incarcerate spirit is known to every body, by
its addictedness to the discharge of its bounded duties.

34. Self-liberation is as well perceptible to oneself, as his
perception of the sweetness of honey and the taste of other things, are
well known to himself; and one is well acquainted with his liberation
and bondage, from his consciousness of pleasure and pain from the one
or other.

35. It is thus by one’s inward perception of his liberation, that he is
called the liberate; and it is also the inward coolness of his soul, as
well as the indifference of his mind, that constitute his liberation
even in his life time.

36. Neither the bondage, or liberation of the soul, nor the pleasure or
painfulness of one’s mind can be any how known to another; whether you
divide the body into pieces or place it upon a royal throne. (Though
the features of the face, are said to be indicators of the inward mind).

37. Whether laughing or crying, the liberated soul feels no pleasure or
pain therein; because it is situated in both states in the unalterable
spirit of God.

38. The minds of liberated persons, are settled in the divine spirit
and no where else, even when they are in the act of receiving or doing
any thing with their bodies: But the learned men of the different
schools, are seen to be quite otherwise from their unacquaintance with
liberation (and being moved by the circumstances of life).

39. The bodies of liberated persons, are not affected by external
events, and though such a one may appear to be weeping, yet he never
weeps in grief; nor does he die, with the death of his mortal body.

40. The great man that is liberated in his life time, does not smile
though he has a smiling face; nor is he affected by nor angry at any
thing, though he seems to be moved by affections and anger. (_i.e._ His
feelings are never lasting).

41. Undeluded he sees the delusions of the world, and unseen by any he
sees the failings of others; and all pleasure and pain seem as ideal
unto him.

42. Every thing is as _nil_ to the liberate, as flowers growing in the
garden of the sky; and the existence of the world is non-existence unto
him, who sees the unity alone in all existence. (The One being all and
all being one; all others are lost in the only One).

43. The words pleasure and pain, are as aerial flowers to him, who are
indifferent to them, who have become victorious over their feelings, by
their liberation from all sensations in their life time.

44. They that have known the truth, are unaltered in their natures; as
the mouths of Brahmá, are unflinching in the recital of Vedas. (?)

45. And as Siva ripped the upper head of Brahmá, as a bud of lotus,
with the nail of his hand; and the god neither resented it, nor grew
another head instead, which he was well able to do: so the meek yogi
remains unresentful at any harm done to him.

46. Of what use is the upward or sky-looking face to him, whose inner
or intellectual eye shows him the voidness of all things around; hence
the possession of the external organ of sight, is useless to him, who
sees everything within himself.

47. Every one gets as it is allotted to him by his fate, in retribution
of his past actions; and his fatality (of retributive justice), does
not betide mortals only; but binds the god Siva also to the sweet
embraces of Gaurí, as well as to his melancholy contemplation for
ever; and so also doth the milky ocean, bear the ambrosial moon in his
ample bosom. (An irrevocable binds even Jove himself, as Hara to his
nakedness, and Hari to his serpent bed).

48. Good minded men are seldom seen to abandon their passions, though
they are capable of doing so in their life time; but they become quite
dispassionate upon their death, when the five elemental principles of
their bodies, are burnt away upon the funeral pile. (All lie level with
the dust in their silent graves).

49. But the living liberated man, gains nothing by his doing anything,
nor loses aught by his doing of naught; nor has he any concern with any
person, nor interest whatever with anything here on earth.

50. What avails one’s passionateness or dispassionateness in this
world; since what is fated in this life, cannot be averted by any means.

51. The god Hari, who is liberated in his life, does not yet cease from
his work of slaying the Asuras, or to have them slain by the hands of
Indra &c.; he becomes incarnate, to die himself or by hands of demons;
and is repeatedly born and grown up, to be extinct at last. (Such is
the general doom of all).

52. No one can give up his alternate activity and rest at once, nor
is there any good to be reaped by his attachment to the one, or
relinquishment of the other.

53. Therefore let a man remain in whatever state he may be, without
having any desire of his own; because the god Hari is without any
desire in himself, being the form of pure Intellect or Intelligence
only. (Desire subsists in the mind, and not in the intellectual soul).

54. The changing time changes and moves the steady soul, like a ball
on every side; as it turns about the fixed sun round the world in
appearance (and not in reality).

55. The lord of the day, is not able to restrain his body, from its
apparent course; though he is seated in his _nirvána_ as he is, without
any desire of changing his place.

56. The moon also appears to be waning under her wasting disease,
though she remains ever the same in all kalpa ages of the world; so the
soul of the liberated person continues the same, though his body is
subject to decay by age.

57. The fire too is ever free and liberated in itself, because
nothing can extinguish its latent heat at any time; and though it was
suppressed by the sacrificial butter of marutta, and the seminal liquid
of Siva for a while, yet it revived again as it was before. (Light and
heat are coeternal elements).

58. Vrihaspati and Sukra the preceptors of the gods and demigods, were
liberated in their life time, and with all their ambitious views of
predominance, they <appeared> as dull and miserable persons.

59. The sagely prince Janaka is perfectly liberated in his mind,
and yet he is not loathe to rule over his princedom, and to quell
his enemies in battle. (Liberation consists in the mind, and not in
cessation from action).

60. The great kings Nala, Mandháta, Sagara, Dilípa, Nahusa and others,
were all liberated in their lives; and yet they reigned and ruled over
their realms, with all the vigilance of sovereigns.

61. A man acting either wisely or foolishly in life, is neither bound
to or liberated in this world; but it is his ardent desire of or apathy
to worldliness, that constitutes his bondage to or liberation from it.

62. The demoniac princes Vali, Namuchi, Vritra, Andhaka, Mura and
others, lived quite liberated in their lives; though they acted as
unwisely, as if they were elated by their ambition and passions.

63. Therefore the existence or disappearance of the passions, in the
conduct of any body, makes no difference in his spiritual character;
but it is the pure vacancy of the human soul and mind, that constitutes
his liberation in this world.

64. Being possest of the knowledge of God as pure vacuum, the living
liberated person is assimilated to the likeness of vacuity itself; and
is freed from the duality of thinking himself otherwise than the divine
spirit. (The sense of self personality, is lost in the knowledge of
the universality of the divine soul).

65. He is conscious of the fallacy of phenomenal appearances, which he
knows to be no more than as the variegated rainbow reflected in empty
air (by the ineffable light of the glory of God).

66. As the various colours are seen to shine in the rainbow, in the
field of empty air; so these myriads of brilliant worldly bodies, are
but vacuous particles appearing in infinite space. (The great worlds
are as minute atoms in the sight of great God).

67. This world is an unreality, appearing as a reality in view; it is
unborn and increate, and yet it is irresistibly conspicuous to our
sight, like the appearance of the sky in the empty firmament.

68. It is without its beginning or end, and yet appearing to have both
of these; it is a mere void, and seeming as a real substantiality;
it is increate, and yet thought to be a created something; it is
indestructible, though thought to be subject to destruction.

69. Its creation and destruction are phenomena occurring in the
vacuous essence of God, as the structure of a wooden post and statue,
takes place in the substance of the wood. (Here the Divine essence is
considered as the material cause of the world, and the one being void
the other is considered equally void also).

70. The mind being freed from its imagination, and drowned in deep
meditation (samádhi), as in the state of a sleepless sleeper; it comes
to the sight of an even intellectual vacuity, engrossing the sights of
all the worlds, as if absorbed in it.

71. As a man passing from one place to another, is unmindful of the
intermediate scenes; so the attention being directed solely to the
sight of the intellectual void, the thought of all the world and other
existences is wholly lost in the same. (Such sight of the single point
in view is called the _sakhá chandra darsana_. _Nyáya_).

72. In this state of intense meditation, the thought of a duality is
lost in that of the unity; and this idea of oneness disappears in that
of a vast void, which terminates to a state of conscious bliss (which
is the _summum bonum_ of yoga philosophy).

73. In this state of _insouciance_, the duality of the world is lost in
the nullity of vacuity; the knowledge of self personality is dwindled
to spirituality, and all futurity presents itself clearly to the view
of the clairvoyance of the enrapt yogi. (This forms the _púrnatá_ or
perfectibility of yoga practice).

74. The perfect yogi remains with his mind, as clear as the vacuous
sky, enveloping the phenomenals in its ample sphere; he sits silent
and as still and cold as a stone; he views the world in himself, and
remains quiet in rapturous amazement at the view.




