CHAPTER CLXXXIII.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SEVEN CONTINENTS.

    Argument:--Brahmá’s relation of the contending sides of blessing
    and imprecation.


Kunda-Danta rejoined:--I then asked the hermit of Gaurí’s asylum, whose
head was hoary with age, and whose hair resembled the dried blades of
withered grass.

2. There are but seven continents only, that composed this earth; how
then could every one of the eight brothers, become the sole lord of
earth at one and the same time.

3. Again how could a person, that had no egress from his house, conquer
the seven continents abroad, or govern them himself (by sitting quietly
at home).

4. How could they that had the boon on one hand, and its contrary curse
on the other, go in either way which are opposed to one another, as the
cool shade of trees and the heat of sunshine?

5. How can opposite qualities reside together at the same time, which
is as impossible as the container and contained to become the same
thing? (Here the blessing of the gods and the curse of the sage, must
counteract one another, and neither of them could effect anything).

6. The Hermit of the asylum returned:--Attend, O holy man, to my
relation of the sequel of their tale; and you will come to see the
sequence of their contrary fates.

7. As for you two, you will reach to your home, after eight days from
this place; and there meet with your relatives, with whom you will live
happily for some time.

8. These eight brothers also, having joined with their families at
home: will breathe their last in course of time; and have their bodies
burnt by their friends and relations.

9. Then their conscious souls, will remain separately in air for a
little while; and there continue in a state of torpidity, as in the
insensibility of sleep.

10. All this interval their acts will appear, in the vacuous space of
their minds, for the sake of receiving their retributive justice; and
also the blessing of gods and the curse of the sage, will wait on them
at this time.

11. The acts will appear in the shapes of the persons to whom they
were done and the blessings and imprecation likewise will assume their
particular forms, in order to make their appearance before them.

12. The blessings will assume the forms of fair moon-bright bodies,
having four arms on each, and holding a lotus bud, a club and other
weapons in each of them.

13. The curse will take the forms of Siva with his three eyes, and
holding the lance and mace in his either hand; and having a dark
terrific body, with a surly grim and frowning countenance.

14. The Blessings will vauntingly say:--Avaunt thou accursed curse! it
is now our time to work; as it is with the seasons to act their parts
at their proper times.

15. The curse will say in his turn:--Be afar from here; ye blessed
blessings, and do not intrude upon my time; it will take effect as any
one of the seasons, nor is there any body capable of counteracting its
wonted course.

16. The blessings will rejoin and say; Thou cured curse, art but a
creature of an human sage; but we are messengers of the God of day; now
as preference is given to the first born God of light, over a human
being (who is the last work of God); it is proper that we should have
our precedence here (in the present case).

17. Upon the blessings saying so, the personified curse of the sage got
enraged, and returned in reply saying, I am no less the creation of
a God than you are since we are born of the God Rudra by his consort
Rudrání--the Fury.

18. Rudra is the greatest of gods, and the sage was born with a portion
of Rudra’s prowess; saying so the accursed curse lifted up its head, as
high as the exalted summit of a mountain.

19. On seeing the haughty high-headedness of the personation of curse;
the personified image of the boon smiled scornfully at him, and then
made his reply in his speech of well weighed words.

20. O thou miscreant curse, leave thy wickedness and think on the end
of this affair; as also about what is to be done, after termination of
all this altercation of ours.

21. We must have recourse to the father of the gods, for his favourable
decision of the case, is it not therefore better for us to do even now
what must come to be finally determined by him.

22. The curse on hearing these words of the personified boon replied,
well, I agree to what you say; because a fool even cannot decline to
accept the reasonable proposal of a person.

23. Then the curse agreed to resort to the abode of Brahmá; in company
with the divine Blessing; because the great-minded gods are always
resorted to by the wise, for the dissipation of their doubts.

24. They bended down before Brahmá, and related all that had occurred
between them; and the god on hearing the whole on both sides, replied
to them in the following manner.

25. Brahmá said:--Hearken unto me, ye master of blessing and curse,
and let him have the precedence of the other, that is possessed of
intrinsic merit and essence.

26. Upon hearing this from the mouth of the great god, they both
entered in their turn into the heart of one another, in order to sound
their understandings, and descry their respective parts.

27. They then having searched into the eternal essentialities of one
another, and having known their respective characters; came out in
presence of the God, and besought him by turns.

28. The curse said:--I am overcome, O Lord of creatures, by this my
adversary, in my having no internal merit in myself, and finding the
curses of my foe, to be as sound and solid as the hard stony rock and
the strong thunderbolt.

29. But both ourselves and the blessings, being always but
intellectual beings, we have no material body whatever to boast of at
any time.

30. The Blessing replied:--The intellectual blessing, which its giver
(the god in the sun), has given to its askers the Bráhmans, is here
present before you; and this is entrusted to my charge (to be delivered
unto them).

31. The body of every one is the evolution of one’s intelligence, and
it is this body which enjoys the consequence of the curse or blessing
that is passed on one according to his knowledge of it; whether it is
in his eating or drinking or in his feeling of the same, in all his
wandering at all times and places. (_i.e._ The consciousness of one’s
merits and demerits, accompanies him every where, and makes him enjoy
or suffer their results accordingly).

32. The blessing received from its donor, is strengthened in the mind
of the donee in time; and this acting forcibly within one’s self,
overcomes at last the power or effect of the curse. (_i.e._ Firm good
will, turns away the evil ones).

33. The donor’s bestowal of a blessing, to his supplicants for it;
becomes strong and effectual only, when it is deeply rooted and duly
fostered in one’s self. (_i.e._ A good given us by others, is of no
good, unless we cultivate it well ourselves).

34. It is by means of the continued culture of our conscious goodness,
and by the constant habit of thinking of our desert, that these become
perfected in one’s self, and convert their possessor to their form. (It
is the habitual mode of the mind’s thought, that makes the future man,
be it a holy or accursed one).

35. The pure and contrite conscience alone, consummates one’s
consciousness in time; but the impure conscience of the evil minded,
never finds its peace and tranquility. Hence the Bráhmans’ thoughts of
the blessing, had taken the possession of their minds, and not that of
the curse: because the earlier one, has the priority over the latter,
though it be that of a minute only (as the law of primogeniture,
supersedes the claim of youngsters to state); and there is no rule;--

36. Nor force of pride to counteract this law. (Hence the blessing of
the god, being prior to the curse of the sage, must have its precedence
over the latter).

37. But where both sides are of equal force, there both of them have
their joint effect upon the same thing; so the curse and blessing being
conjoined together, must remain as the commingling of milk with water.

38. The equal force of the blessing and curse, must produce a double or
divided effect on the mind of man; as a person dreaming of the fairy
city in his sleep, thinks himself as turned to one of its citizens
(without losing the idea of his own personality: so a man has a
different idea of himself, in different states of his life).

39. Now pardon me, O Lord for my repetition of the same truths before
thee that I have learnt from thee, and permit me now to take leave of
thee, and depart to my place.

40. Upon his saying so, the curse felt ashamed in itself, and fled away
from the presence of the god; as the ghosts and goblins fly away from
the air, at the dispersion of darkness from the sky.

41. Then the other blessing (which was given by the goddess Gaurí to
the ladies of these brothers), concerning the restriction of their
departed ghosts, to the confines of their house, came forward and
presented itself before Brahmá in lieu of the curse, and began to plead
his case, as a substitute does for his constituent.

42. He said:--I know not, O Lord of gods, how human souls can fly over
the seven continents of the earth, after their separation from their
dead bodies (Deign to explain this therefore unto me.)

43. I am the same blessing of the goddess, that promised unto them
their dominion over the seven continents in their own house; and also
their conquest of the whole earth within its confines.

44. Now tell me, O Lord of gods, how am I to restrain their spirits to
the narrow limits of their own abodes; and at the same time confer the
domain of the septuple earth, to each and every one of them (as it is
destined to them by the blessing of the God of day.)

45. Brahmá responded:--Hear me, O thou blessing of conferring the
realms of the seven continents on each of them; and thou the boon of
detaining their departed spirits within the confines of these mansions;
that both of you are successful in executing your respective purposes
on them.

46. Now do you retire from this place with full assurance in
yourselves, that the delivered ghosts of these brothers; will never
quit nor ever depart from their present abodes after their demise; but
continue to reside there forever more; with the belief of their being
the Lords of the seven regions of this earth. (It is the firm belief
of the mind of the possession of anything, that makes it the true
possessor thereof, much more than its actual enjoyment of the same).

47. Their souls will remain at proper distances from each other, after
the loss and extinction of their frail bodies; and will deem themselves
as lords of the seven regions of earth, though dwelling in the empty
air of their own abodes.

48. How could there be the eight regions and seven continents of the
earth, when to all appearance the surface of the earth, presents but a
flat level everywhere.

49. Tell us Lord! where are these different divisions of the earth
situated, and in what part of their petty abode; and is it not as
impossible for the small place of their house to contain this wide
earth in it, as it is for the little cell of a lotus bud to hide an
elephant in its pericarp.

50. Brahmá replied:--It being quite evident to you as to ourselves
also, that the universe is composed of an infinite vacuity only; it is
not impossible for its being contained within the hollow of the human
heart, as in the minute particle of the vacuous mind, which contains
all things in it in the manner of its dreams.

51. If it were possible for the minute granule of their vacuous minds,
to contain the figures of their houses and their domestic circles
within itself, why should it be thought impossible for them, to
compress the greater and lesser circle of this earth also, within their
ample space.

52. After the demise of a person, the world exhibits itself in the
same form as it is, in the minute atom of his mind; and this is but a
vacuous mass of the visible and material world, in its invisible and
imaginary figure.

53. It is in this invisible particle of the mind, that the world is
seen in its abstract form, within the precincts of the body and abode
of every body; and this earth appears to be drawn in it as in a map,
with all its sevenfold continents and the contents thereof.

54. Whatever is manifest in the mind, is a mere mental conception and
inborn in the mind, and there is no such thing as an extraneous or
material world in reality. It is the vacant mind that presents these
vagaries of the world and all other visibles before its vision, as the
vacuous firmament shows the variety of atmospherical appearances to our
sight.

55. The personified benediction, having learnt this abstract truth,
from the mouth of the divine Brahmá, who had conferred this boon to
the Bráhmanical brothers, abandoned his erroneous conception of the
material world, and repaired to the abode of the deceased brethren,
that had been released from the mistake of their mortal bodies.

56. The personated blessing bowed down to the bounteous Brahmá, and
departing from his presence with speed, entered into the parlour of the
eight brother kings, in his eight-fold spiritual personality (called
the ashta siddhi).

57. They beheld the brothers there in their respective residences, each
sitting as the Lord of the earth with its septuple continents, and all
of them employed in the performance of their sacrifices and enjoyment
of their blessings, like the eight Lordly Manus for the whole period of
a day of Brahmá.

58. They were all friendly to each other, though unacquainted with the
respective provinces of one another; each of them was employed in his
concern with the world, without clashing with the authority of another
over it.

59. One of them who was handsome in the bloom of his youth; held his
happy reign over the great city of Ujjain, which was situated in the
precincts of his own house, or rather in the environs of his own mind.

60. Another one of them had his domain over the country of Scythia
(sáka), where he settled himself for his conquest of the Nágas
(saccae); he cruises as a corsair in the wide outlandish seas, for his
victory on every side.

61. Another reigns secure in his capital of Kusadwípa, and confers
perfect security to his subjects from all alarm; and like a hero who
has quelled his enemies, he rests in peace on the bosom of his beloved,
after all his conquest.

62. Some one of them indulges himself to sport, in company with the
celestial Nymphs of Vidyádhara; in skimming over the waters of the
lakes on mountain tops, and in the gushing water falls on their side.

63. Another one is engaged these eight days in conducting his horse
sacrifice in his royal abode at Krauncha dwípa, which he has greatly
aggrandised with his accumulated gold, from the other continents.

64. Another one is employed in waging a battle in the Sálmali
continents, where his war elephants have assembled, and have been
uprooting the boundary mountain from their bases with robust tusks.

65. The Monarch of the Gomedha continent, who had been the eighth and
last of the Bráhman brothers, was smitten with love for the princess
of the Pushkara dwípa; upon which he mustered a large armament for
ravishing her in warfare.

66. The monarch of the Pushkara continent, who was also the master of
the Mountainous regions of Lokáloka; set out with his deputy to inspect
the land of the gold mines.

67. Thus every one of these brothers, thought himself to be the Lord of
his respective province, as his imagination portrayed unto him in the
region of his mind.

68. The Blessings then, having relinquished their several forms and
personalities, became united and one with the consciousness of the
Bráhmans, and felt and saw whatever passed in them, as if they were
passing in themselves likewise. (The divine blessing on them being no
other than the approbation of their conscience).

69. So these brothers became and found in themselves, what they had
long been longing after, in their respective lordship over the seven
regions of the earth, which they continued to enjoy ever since to their
heart’s content.

70. It was in this manner that these men of enlarged understandings,
obtained what they sought in their minds, by means of their austere
devotion and firm devotedness to their purpose. So it is with the
learned that they find everything beside them, whatever they are intent
upon in their minds, by means of their acting upon the same principle,
and using the proper means conducing to that end.




