CHAPTER CX.

BATTLE OF THE WISE PRINCES, WITH THE IGNORANT BARBARIAN.

    Argument:--Description of the warfare before the city gates,
    betwixt the Royal armies and the Rude Invaders of the Realm.


Vasishtha continued:--In the mean time the battle was raging in its
full fury, between the royal forces, and the hostile bands that had
advanced before the city gates.

2. Here the enemies were plundering the city and villages, and there
they set fire to the houses and hamlets; the sky was obscured by clouds
of smoke and dust, and the air was filled by loud cries of havoc and
wailing on every side.

3. The sun was obscured by the thickening shadow, of the network of
arrows spread over the skies; and the disk of the sun now appeared to
view: and was then lost to sight the next moment.

4. The burning fire of the incendiaries, set to flame the leaves of
the forest trees; and the fire brands of burning wood, were falling as
loosely all around, as the iron sleets of arrow breast were hurling
through the air.

5. The flame of the blazing fire, added a double lustre, to the
burnished and brandishing weapons; and the souls of the great
combatants falling in battle, were borne aloft to the regions of Indra,
where they were ministered by the heavenly nymphs.

6. The Thundering peals of fierce elephants, excited the bravery of
bravados: and missile weapons of various kinds, were flung about in
showers.

7. The loud shouts and cries of the combatants, depressed the spirits
of dastardly cowards; and the hoary clouds of dust flying in the air,
appeared as elephants intercepting the paths of the midway skies.

8. Chieftains eager to die in the field, were roving about with loud
shouts; and men were falling in numbers here and there, as if stricken
by lightnings in the battle field.

9. Burning houses were falling below, and fiery clouds dropt from
above; flying arrows in the form of rocks, were rolling on high; and
descending upon and dispatching to death, numbers of soldiers that were
ready to die.

10. The galloping horses in the field gave it the appearance of wavy
ocean afar; and the crashing of the tusks of fighting elephants,
crackled like the clashing clouds in air.

11. The shafts of the arrows of the combatants, filled the forts and
its bastion; and the flashing of the same on the top of it, made a
glare of fire around.

12. The dashing of one another in passing to and fro, tore their
garments into pieces, and the furling of flags in open air and the
clashing of shield between combatants made a pat-pat noise all around.

13. The flash of the tusks of elephant, and the crash of weapons
dashing on stony rocks, and the loud uproar and clangour of the
battlefield, invited the elephants of heaven to join in the fray.

14. The flights of arrows, ran as rivers into the ocean of the sky; and
the flying lances, swords and discuses, which were flung into the air,
resembled the sharks and alligators, swimming in the etherial sea.

15. The concussion of the armours of the clamorous combatants, and the
clashing of the arms in commingled warfare, represented the sounding
main beset by islands.

16. The ground was trodden down to a muddy pool, under the feet of
the foot soldiers; and the blood issuing out of their bodies from the
wounds of the arrows, ran as river carrying down the broken chariots
and slain elephants in its rapid course.

17. The flight of the winged shafts, and the falling of the battle
axes, resembled the waves of the arrowy sea in the air; and the broken
arms of the vanquished, floated as aquatic animals upon it.

18. The sky was set on fire, by the flames issuing forth from the
clashing arms; and the celestial regions were filled with the deified
souls of departed heroes, now released from the fetters of their
wrinkled and decaying frames of earth.

19. Clouds of dingy dust and ashes filled the firmament, with flashes
of lightnings flaming as arches amidst them; the missile weapons filled
the air, as the tractile arms occupied the surface of the earth.

20. The contending combatants hooted at one another, and broke and cut
their weapons in mutual contest; the cars were cleft by clashing at
each other, and the chariots were reft by dashing together.

21. Here the headless trunks of the _kabandhas_ (anthropophagi),
mingled with the gigantic bodies of the _vetála_ demons, were
disastrous on every side; and there the demoniac _vetála_ plucking
their hearts for their hearty meal.

22. The bravos were tearing the arteries of the slain, and breaking
asunder their arms, heads and thighs; while the uplifted and shaking
arms of the Kabandhas, made a moving forest in the air.

23. The demons moving about with their open and jeering mouths, made
their maws and jaws as caskets for carrion; and the soldiers passing
with their helmets and coronets on, looked fiercely on all around.

24. To kill or die, to slay or to be slain, was the soldier’s final
glory in the field; as it was their greatest infamy, to be backward in
their giving or receiving of wounds.

25. He is the gladdener of death, who dries up the boast of soldiers
and chieftains, and drains the flowing ichor of ferocious elephants
(_i.e._ puts an end to them); and one who is entirely bent on
destruction.

26. There were loud applauses given to the victory, of unboasting and
unrenowned heroes; as there were the great censures, which were poured
upon the nameless and dastardly cowards.

27. The rousing of the sleeping virtues of prowess and others, is as
glorious to the great and strong; as the laying out of their treasures,
for the protection of their protégés.

28. The proboscides of the elephants, were broken in the conflict of
elephant riders and charioteers; and oozing of the fragrant fluid of
ichor from their front, was altogether at a stop.

29. Elephants left loose by their flying leaders, fell into the lakes,
and cried like shrill storks in them; and here they were pursued and
overcome by men who inflicted terrible wounds upon them with their
hands.

30. In some place the unprotected as well as the uninvaded people,
being downtrodden and half dead in their mutual scuffle; fled to and
fell at the feet of their king, as the daytime takes its shelter under
the shining sun.

31. They being maddened by pride with the force of giddiness, became
subject to death (_i.e._ they called death, to be re-born); as
millionaires and traders seek a better place in dread of their life.

32. The red coats of soldiers, and the red flags lifted upon their
arms as a wood of trees; spread a rubicund colour all around, like the
adoration of the three worlds.

33. White umbrellas, resembling the waves of the Milky ocean, when
churned by the Mandara mountain; covered the weapons of the soldiers
under them, and made the sky appear as a garden of flowers.

34. The eulogies sung by the bards and Gandharvas, added to the valour
of the warriors; and profluent liquor of the tall palma trees (_i.e._
the toddy juice), infused a vigour to their veins, as that of Baladeva
(who fought dead drunk in battle).

35. There was the clashing of arms of the Rákshasas, who fought
together in bodies; who were as big as lofty trees, and fed on
carcasses, with which they filled their abodes in the caverns of
mountains.

36. There was a forest of spears rising to the sky on one side, with
the detached heads and arms of the slain attached to them; and there
were the flying stones on another, which were flung from the slings of
the combatants, and which covered the ground below.

37. There was the clapping of the arms and hands of the champions,
resembling the splitting and bursting of great trees; and there was
heard also the loud wailings of women, echoing amidst the lofty
edifices of the city.

38. The flight of fiery weapons in the air, resembled the flying fire
brands on high, with a hissing and whistling sound; and the people
betook themselves to flight from these, leaving their homes and
treasures all behind.

39. The lookers were flying away, from the flying darts all about, in
order to save their heads; just as the timid snakes hide themselves,
for fear of the devouring _phoenix_, darting upon them from the sky.

40. Daring soldiers were grinded under tusks of elephants, as if they
were pounded under the jaws of death, or as the grapes are crushed in
their pressing mills.

41. The weapons flying in the air, were repelled and broken by the
stones, flung by the ballistics; and the shouts of the champions,
resounded as the re-echoing yells of elephants, issuing out of the
ragged caverns.

42. The hollow sounding caves of mountains, resounded to the loud
shouts of warriors; who were ready to expose their dear lives and
dearly earned vigour in the battle field.

43. The burning fire of firearms, and the flames of incendiarism
flashed on all sides; these and mutual conflicts and chariot fightings,
went on unceasingly all around.

44. The battle field was surrounded by the surviving soldiers, who
were as staunch hearted as the Mount Kailása, with the strong god Siva
seated therein.

45. The bravemen that boldly expose their lives in battle, enjoy a
lasting life by their death in warfare, and die in their living state,
by their flight from the field. (The text is very curt and says:--The
brave live by dying, and die by their living).

46. Big elephants being killed in the battle field, like lotus flowers
immerging into the waters of lakes; great champions were seen to stalk
over the plains, as towering storks strutted on the banks of lakes.

47. Here showers of stones were falling in torrents, with a whizzing
sound; and the showers of arrows, were running with a whistling noise
around; and the uproar of warriors were growling in the skies. The
flying weapons were hurtling through the air, and the neighing of
horses, the cries of elephants and the whirling of chariot wheels,
together with the hurling of stones from the height of hills, deafened
the ears of men all about.




