CHAPTER CXIII.

DESCRIPTION OF THE OCEAN.

    Argument:--Relation of the cessation of arms, and description of
    majestic ocean.


Vasishtha continued:--The hostile forces of the enemies thus flying
on all sides, were pursued to a great distance by the four forms of
Vihaschit as said before.

2. These four forms of almighty power, and of one soul and mind; went
on conquering the four regions on every side, with one intent and
purpose.

3. They chased the retreating enemies without giving them any respite,
to the shores of the seas on all sides; as the currents of rivers keep
on their course without intermission, to the coast of the far distant
ocean.

4. This long course of the royal forces, as well as of the enemies,
soon put an end to all their provisions and ammunitions, and all their
resources and strength were exhausted at last, as a rill is lost under
the sands ere it reaches the lake.

5. The king beheld his forces and those of his enemies, to be as
exhausted at the end; as the merits and demerits of a man are lost up
on his ultimate liberation.

6. The weapons ceased to fly about, as if they were at rest after they
had done their part in the sky; and as the flames of fire subside of
themselves, for want of fuel and the combustibles.

7. The horses and elephants went under their shelters, and the weapons
stuck to trees and rocks; and they seemed to fall fast asleep, like
birds upon their spray at night fall.

8. As the waves cease to roll in a dried up channel, and the snows to
fall under the clouded sky; and as the clouds fly before the storm, and
the fragrance of flowers is borne away by the wind.

9. So the flying weapons were submerged like fishes, under the falling
showers of rain; and the dripping drops of darts, were thwarted by
the thickening showers of snow (_i.e._ the dropping arrows were driven
away, by the drifts of snow).

10. The sky was cleared of the whirling disks, that were hurled by
hundreds, and hurtling in the hazy atmosphere; and it got a clean sweep
of the gathering clouds, that were soaring up in surges, and pouring
down in floods of rain.

11. The firmament presented the appearance of an immense ocean,
composed of the limpid fuel of the vast void; and containing the
sparkling gems of the stars in its bosom, and the burning submarine
fire of the sun in the midst of it.

12. The great vacuum appeared as extensive and deep, and as bright and
serene, and devoid of the dust of rajas or pride, as the minds of great
men (which are of equal extent and depth of knowledge &c.).

13. They then beheld the oceans, lying as junior brothers of the skies;
being of equal extent and clearness, and stretching to the utmost
limits of the horizon.

14. These with their deep sounding waves and foaming froths, are as
gratifying to the minds of people; as the roaring clouds with their
showers of snow, are ravishing of human hearts.

15. They having fallen down from high heaven, and stretching wide their
huge bodies on the earth below; seem to be rolling grievously on the
ground, with their deep groanings and breathings, and raising up their
billowy arms, in order to lift themselves on high.

16. They are gross and dull bodies, yet full of force and motion, and
though they are mute and dumb, yet full of noise and howling in their
hollow cavities; they are full of dreadful whirlpools, as is this world
with all its dizzy rounds.

17. The gems sparkling on the banks, add to the brightness of the sun
beams (in the morning); and the winds blowing in the conch shells,
resound all along the coast.

18. Here the huge waves are growling, like the big clouds roaring
loudly on high; and the circling eddies are whirling around, as the
shattered corallines were scattered along.

19. The hoarse snorting of sharks and whales, is howling in the bosom
of the deep; and the lashing of the waters by their tails, sounded as
the splashing of the oars of vessels in them.

20. Here are the horrid sharks and alligators, devouring the fleecy
mermaids and marine men in numbers; and a thousand suns shining in
their reflexions on the rising waves.

21. Here are seen fleets of ships floating on the surface of the
waters, and rising aloft on the tops of the waves; and driven forward
by the blowing winds, howling horribly through the furling sails and
cracking cordage.

22. The ocean with his hundreds of arms of the heaving waves, handles
the orbs of the sun and moon; and displays varieties of sparkling gem,
with reflexions of their ’beams in them.

23. Here were the shoals of sharks, skimming over the foaming main; and
there were the water spouts, rising like columns of elephants’ trunks
to the skies, and representing a forest of bamboos.

24. In some places, the rippling waves were gliding, like curling
creepers, with hairy tufts and frothy blossoms on them; and in others,
little rocks resembling the backs of elephants and bearing the vernal
flowers, were scattered in the midst of the waters.

25. Some where were the heaps of froth and frost and hills of icebergs,
resembling the edifices of the gods and demigods; and else where were
the groups of sparkling little billows, that laughed to scorn the
clusters of shining stars in the skies.

26. Here are branches (chains) of rocks concealed in its depth, like
little gnats hidden in the hollows underneath the ground; and there are
the huge surges, which make pigmies and dwarfs of the high hills on
earth.

27. Its coasts are spread over with sparkling gems, like beds of
gemming sprouts and shoots of flowers on the ground (or) as the ground
strewn over with the germinating shoots and sprouts of gemming blossom;
while the glistening pearls bursting out of their silvery shells
sparkle amidst the spreading sands.

28. The sea seems to weave a vest of silken stuff, with its fleecy
waves; and decking it with all its floating gems and pearls; while the
rivers flowing into it from all directions, serve to colour it with
their various waters.

29. The coasts studded with gems and pearls of various hues, display as
it were the beams of a hundred moons, in the versicoloured nails of its
feet.

30. The shadows of the beaching _tali_ forests, falling on the swelling
waves of the sea, were imbued with the hues of the marine gems; and
appeared as moving arbours with their variegated foliage, fruits and
flowers.

31. There are seen the shadows of sundry fruit trees, reflected in the
waters gliding below; and as rising up and falling down with their
reflexions in the moving waves and billows. The false and falling
shadows, gathered numbers of marine beasts under them, for gorging the
falling fruits. (This is pursuing a shadow).

32. Again the greedy fishes were collected some where, and leaping to
catch the birds that were sitting on the fruit trees, and seen in their
reflexions on the waves.

33. Here are seen many sea monsters also, that break the embankments,
and rove about at random in the watery maze, as birds fly freely in the
vacuous air.

34. The ocean being a formless deep, bears the image of the three
worlds impressed on its bosom; it bears also the image of the pure
vacuum in itself, as it bore the image of Náráyana in its breast.

35. Its great depth, clearness and immeasurable extent, gives it the
appearance of the majestic firmament, which is reflected in its bosom,
as it were imprest upon it.

36. It bears the reflexion of the sky and of the flying birds thereof,
as if they were the images of aquatic fowls swimming on its surface, or
resembled the blackbees fluttering about its lotus like waves.

37. Its boisterous waves are borne to the skies by the violent winds,
and washing the welkin’s face with their briny sprays; and the deep
sounding main, resounding from its hollow rocks, is roaring aloud like
the diluvian clods.

38. The gurgling noise of the whirlpools, resembles the loud thunder
claps of heaven; and the submarine fire is sometimes seen to burst out
of the deep, like the latent flame of Agastya, that consumed the waters
of the main.

39. The watery maze presents the picture of a vast wilderness, with its
waves as the waving trees; the billows as its branch boughs, its surfs
as blossoms, and the foams and froths as flowers.

40. The high heaving surges with the shoals of fishes skimming and
skipping upon them; appear as fragments of the sky fallen below, and
carried away by the gliding waters.

41. Thus the hostile forces were driven afar to the shores of the salt
seas; extending far and wide and bounding the earth on every side;
while the lofty mountains rising to the skies with their verdant tops,
intercepted the sight on all sides.




