CHAPTER CXVI.

NARRATION OF THE SPEECH OF CROW AND CUCKOO.

    Argument.--Description of the battle field, and of the hills and
    sky, and the story of the foolish crow.


The companions added:--Look lord, the field of battle, stretching to
the bordering hills; look upon the heaps of shining weapons, and the
scattered forces of elephants, horse, infantry and war chariots.

2. Look at the slain and their slayers, and the combatants attacking
their corrivals; and how their dying souls are borne by celestial
nymphs in heavenly cars to heaven.

3. The victor finding his adversary worsted in warfare, ought not slay
him unjustly, unless he is justified to do so by laws of warfare (as a
youth is justified to take unto him no other woman but his legal wife).

4. As health and wealth and prosperity, are good for men when they
are rightly gained; so it is right to fight for those by whom one is
supported.

5. When one kills his opposing corrival in combat, without violation of
the laws of warfare, he is justly styled a heavenly champion, and not
one who takes undue advantage of his enemy.

6. Behold there the bold champion brandishing his sword, as if he is
swinging a blue lotus in his hand; and casting the dark shadow of the
evening dusk on the ground. Such a hero is courted by Laxmi for her
spousal.

7. Look at those flourishing weapons, flaming as the flying embers of
wild fire, in a mountain forest; or as the dreadful dragons of the sea,
dancing on land with hundreds of their flashing hoods and heads.

8. Look at the sky on one side, resembling the sea with its watery
clouds, and shining with strings of its stars on another; see how it
is covered by dark clouds on one side; and how it is brightened by moon
beams on the other.

9. Look at the firmament, ranged by multitudes of revolving planets,
resembling the rolling chariots of warriors; and crowded by myriads of
moving stars, likening the soldiers in the battle field; and yet it is
the error of the ignorant to think it an empty vacuum; an error which
is hard for the wise to remove.

10. The sky with its over spreading clouds, its fiery lightnings, its
thunder bolts that break down the mountain wings; its starry array,
and the battle of gods and demigods that took place in it; is still
as inscrutable in his nature, as the solid minds of the wise, whose
magnitude no one can measure.

11. O wise man, thou hast been constantly observing before thee, the
sun, moon and all the planets and stars in the firmament, together with
all the luminous bodies of comets, meteors and lightnings; and yet
is astonishing that your ignorance will not let see the Great
Náráyana in it.

12. Thou dark blue sky, that art brightened by moon-light, dost yet
retain thy blackness, like the black spot amidst the lightsome disk of
the moon; and such is the wonder with ignorant minds, that with all
their enlightenment, they will never get rid of their inward bias and
prejudice.

13. Again the clear sky which is full with endless worlds, is never
contaminated by their faults, nor ever changed in its essential state;
and resembles the vast and pure mind of the wise, which is full with
its knowledge of all things, and devoid of all their pollutions.

14. Thou profound sky, that art the receptacle of the most elevated
objects of nature, and containest the lofty clouds and trees and
summits in thy womb; that art the recipient of the sun, moon and
the aerial spirits that move about in thee; art yet inflamed by the
flames of the fiery bodies that rise in thee to our great regret,
notwithstanding thy greatness, which helps them to spread themselves
high in heaven.

15. Thou sky that art replete with pure and transparent light, and
great with thy greatness of giving quarters to all the great and
elevated objects of nature; but it is greatly to be pitied, that the
dark clouds to whom thou givest room to rise under thee, molest us like
base upstarts, with pelting their hailstones at random.

16. Again thou dark sky, art the attestor of all lights; as the
touchstone is the test of gold; and thou art a void in thy essence, yet
thou dost support the substances of stars and planets of clouds and
winds and all real existences at large.

17. Thou art the day light at daytime, and the purple red of evening,
and turnest black at night; thus devoid of all colour of thyself thou
dost exhibit all colours in thee; hence it is impossible even for the
learned, to understand aright thy nature and its convertible conditions
also.

18. As the helpless man is enabled to achieve his purposes, by means
of his patient perseverance; so the inane sky has risen above all, by
means of its universal diffusion. (The gloss says that, extension of
knowledge, is the cause of elevation).

19. The sun that persists in his wonted course, rises to the vertical
point in time; but the unmoving straws and trees, and the dormant hills
and places, and stagnant pools and ponds, are ever lying low on the
ground.

20. The night invests the sky with a sable garb, and sprinkles over
it the fair moonlight like the cooling dust of camphor; with the
decoration of stars like clusters of flowers upon it. The day mantles
the firmament with bright sun beams, and the seasons serve to cover it
in clouds and snows, and in the gaudy attire of vernal flowers. Thus is
time ever busy, to decorate the heavenly paths of his lords the sun and
moon, the two time keepers by day and night.

21. The firmament like the magnanimous mind, never changes the firmness
of its nature; although it is ever assailed by the disturbances of
smokes and clouds of dust and darkness, of the rising and setting sun
and moon and their dawns and dusks: and of the confluence of stars and
combat of gods and demons.

22. The world is an old and decayed mansion, of which the four sides
are its walls, the sky its covering roof above and the earth its ground
floor below; the hills and mountains are its pillars and columns, and
the cities and towns are its rooms and apartments; and all the various
classes of animal beings, are as the ants of this abode.

23. Time and action are the occupants of this mansion from age to age,
and all its ample space presents the aspect of a smiling garden; it is
feared every day to be blown and blasted away, and yet it is a wonder
how this frail flower should last so long and for ever more.

24. It is the air methinks, that puts a stop to the greater height or
rising of trees and hills; for though it does not actually restrain
their growth, yet its influence (pressure from above), like the
authority of noble men, puts a check to the rise of aspiring underlings.

25. O fie for that learning, which calls the air as void and vacuity;
seeing it to contain millions of worlds in its bosom, and producing and
reducing also unnumbered beings in its boundless bosom.

26. We see all things to be born in and to return into the air; and
yet we see the madness of men, that reckon the all containing and all
pervading air, as something different from God.

27. We see the works of creation, to be continually producing, existing
and extinguishing in air, like sparks of fire; I ween this pure and
sole air, which is without beginning, middle and end, as the universal
source and terminus of all, and no other distinct cause as God.

28. The vacuum is the vast reservoir of the three worlds, and bears in
its ample space the innumerable productions of nature; I understand
infinite vacuity as the body of the Intellect, and that transcendent
being, in which this erroneous conception of the world, has its rise
and fall.

29. Therein the woodlands on mountain tops, the solitary forester
chants his charming strains amidst his sylvan retreat; and attracts the
heart of the lonely passenger, who lifts up his head to listen to the
rapturous times.

30. Hearken O Lord, to the sweet music, proceeding from the thick
groves on yonder lofty mountain; and emitted with the heart rending
strains, of love born Vidyádhara nymphs; and behold the lonely and
lovesick passenger, whose lovesick heart being smitten by the sound,
has neither the power to proceed forward or recede backward from the
spot, or utter a word.

31. I hear a lovelorn Vidyádhara damsel, singing her love ditty
amidst the woods of the hill with her heaving sighs and tears flowing
profusely from her eyes. She sang saying: “Lord, I well remember the
day, when thou ledst me to the recess of the bower, holding my chin and
giving kisses on my cheeks with thy smiling face, and now the pleasing
remembrance of that gladsome moment, hath left me to deplore its loss
for years”.

32. I heard her tale, O Lord, thus related to me from the mouth of a
forester on the way. He said:--Her former young lover, was cursed by
a relentless sage to become an arbour for a dozen of years; and it is
since this ill fated change of his, that she has been reclining on that
tree, and singing her mournful ditty unto the same.

33. And now observe the wonder, that on my approach the arborescent
lover, was released of his sad curse, and shedding a shower of flowers
upon her, he changed his form and clasped her unto his arms with his
face smiling as his blooming flowers.

34. The tops of hills are decorated with flowers, as the heads of
elephants are painted with white dye; the sky is whitened with the
stars and falling meteors, as the summit of the mountain is etiolated
with hoar-frost and snows.

35. Behold there the beautiful stream of Kaveri, gliding along with
shoals of fishes skimming in its waters; to its boisterous waves
resounding with the cries of shrill and clamorous cranes; see its banks
mantled in vests of flowers, and its shores freely grazed by timid
fauns without any fear.

36. Look the Bela rock, which is washed by the billows of Varuna--the
god of the sea; its stones shining as gold under the solar rays; and
sparkling as the marine fire when they are laved by the waves.

37. Look at the abodes of the Ghosha shepherds at the foot of the
mountain, which are continually covered under the shrouding clouds;
and behold the beauty of the blossoming _palása_ and _patala_ trees
thereabouts.

38. Look at the plains, whitened by the full-blown whitish flowers;
see the _mandara_ tree with twining and flowering creepers; look at
the banks crowded by cranes and peacocks; look at those villages and
the water falls, resounding as music from the mouths of mountain caves
and forests, and redounding to the joy of the happy inhabitants of the
valley.

39. Here the buzzing bees are sporting about the new blown petals of
plantain flowers; and inspiring fond desire in the breasts of the
Pamara foresters; who enjoy a bliss in their rustic pastures and hidden
hilly caverns, which I ween, is not attainable by the immortal gods in
their garden of Eden. (So says Hafiz:--Thou canst not have in heaven,
the blissful fount of Roknabad, nor the flowery groves of Mossella).

40. Behold the black bees sporting and swinging in their cradles of the
flowery creepers of the forest; and to the Pulinda forester singing
to his beloved, with his eyes fixed upon her face; and mark also the
sportive Kiráta, forgetting to kill the deer roving beside his lonely
cavern.

41. Here the weary traveller is regaled, by the sweet scent of various
full blown flowers, and is cooled in his body by the odorous dust,
wafted by the breeze from the flowering creepers; while the winds
bearing the watery particles of the waves, which lave the vale on all
sides, render the spot more delightful than the spotted disc of the
moon (_i.e._ the people have more of coolness here, than the gods have
in the moist sphere of the moon).

42. Here the unceasing gliding of waters, and the continued waving of
the palm trees; together with the dancing of the blossoming branches,
and the undulation of the spreading creepers in the air; the forest
of lofty sála trees in the borders, and the hanging clouds over the
bordering hills, all combine to add a charm to this village of the
vale, not unlike to that of the gardens in the orb of the moon.

43. The flashing of lightnings, and the deep roaring of clouds; the
merry dance of peacocks and their loud shrieks and screams, and their
trailing trains displayed in the air, decorate the valley with a
variety of variegated gems.

44. The bright orb of the moon appearing on one side, and the dark
clouds rising as huge elephants on the other; serve to embellish the
village in the valley, and the hills in the skirts, with a beauty
unknown in the heavenly kingdom of Brahmá: (which is the empyrean or
city of fire only).

45. O! how I long to lodge myself in the mountain grotto, amidst
the fragrant arbours of the beauteous _Mandána_ forest, and in the
delightsome groves of blooming _santánaha_ blossoms, and where the busy
bees are continually fluttering, over the _mandára_ and _paribhadra_
arborets.

46. O, how much are our hearts attracted, by the cries of the tender
deer, browzing the verdant and delightsome verdure; and by the blooming
blossoms on hills and in dales, as by sight of the cities of mankind.

47. Look on yonder village in the valley, where the waterfall appears
as a column of clear chrysolite; and the peacocks are in their merry
dance, all about the precipitate cascade.

48. See how the joyous peacocks, and the gaysome creepers, bending down
under the burden of their blossoms; are dancing delightfully, beside
the purling water of the cataract.

49. I believe the lusty god of desire (Káma or Cupid), sports here at
his pleasure, in this village of the valley protected by the hills all
around. He is sporting with the handsome _harita_ birds (the green
partridges and parrots) in the verdant groves, and beside the crystal
lakes, resounding with the sweet warblings of water-fowls.

50. O most prosperous and magnanimous lord, that art the centre of all
virtues, and the highest and gravest of men; thou art like the towering
mountain, the refuge of mankind from heat, and the cause of their
plenty (_i.e._ the rainy clouds on mountain tops, are the causes of
plenteous produce).

51. Thou cloud that bathest in holy waters (_i.e._ that resist from the
waters of seas and rivers); that art exalted above all earthly beings,
and choosest to abide in hills and wildernesses like holy hermits,
and art taciturn like them, from the pure holiness of thy nature;
thou appearest also as fair in the form when thou art emptied (of thy
waters) in autumn; all this is good in thee; but say why dost thou
rise in thy fulness with flashing lightnings in thy face, and roaring
thunders in thy breast, like lucky upstarts of low origin?

52. All good things being misplaced (or out of their proper place),
turn to badness; as the water ascending to the clouds, turns to hoar
frost and cold ice.

53. O, wonder! that the drops distilled by the clouds, fill the earth
with water; and wonder it is that this water supports all beings, and
makes the poor grow with plenty (of harvest).

54. Ignorant people are as dogs, in their unsteadiness, impudence, in
their impurity and wayfaringness; hence I know not whether the ignorant
have derived their nature from dogs or these from them.

55. There are some persons, who notwithstanding all their faults, are
yet esteemed for certain qualities in them; as the dogs are taken into
favour, on account of their valour, contentedness and faithfulness
to their masters. (So are men serviceable to their masters for these
virtues in them).

56. We see all worldly people pursuing the course of their worldliness
as madmen, and pushing on in the paths of business at the sacrifice of
their honor, and likely to tumble down with fatigue. I find them flying
to and fro as trifling straws, and know not whether it is of their will
or madness or stupidity, that they have made choice of this foolish
course.

57. Among brute creatures, the brave lion hears the tremendous thunder
claps without shuddering: while the cowardly dog trembles and shuts his
eyes with fear at the sound.

58. I believe, O vile dog, that thou hast been taught to bark at
thy fellows, and to ramble about in the streets, by some surly and
strolling porter or peon (among men).

59. The divine creator, that has ordained varieties in all his works,
has made the nasty breed of his daughter Saromá all equal in their
filthiness. These are the dogs, that make their kennels or dog holes in
dirt, that feed upon filth and carrion and copulate in public places,
and carry about an impure body every where. (This is a slur against the
progeny of one’s daughters, who generally turn to be vicious).

60. “Who is there viler than thee”; says a man to his dog; to which
he answered, “the silly man as thee is the vilest of all”. There are
the best qualities of valour, fidelity and unshaken patience, combined
in the canine tribe; and these are hard to be had in human kind, who
grovel in the darkness of their ignorance amidst greater impurities and
calamities. (The instinctive sagacity of beasts, is a surer safe guard
to them, than the boasted reason of man).

61. The dog eats impure things and lives in impurity; he is content
with what it gets, feeds upon dead bodies and never hurts the living,
and yet men are fond of pelting stones on him every where; thus the dog
is made a plaything by men, contrary to the will of God.

62. Looking at the crow flying there upon the offerings, left on the
_lingam_ or phallus of Siva on yonder bank; and there appearing to
sight to tell its tale to people, saying; “Behold me on high, with all
my degrading sin” (of stealing from the altars of deities).

63. Thou croaking crow, that crowest so harshly, and treadst the marshy
lake; it is no wonder that thou wouldst vex us with thy cries, that
hast put down the sweet buzz of humming bees.

64. We see the greedy rook, devouring ravenously the dirty filth, in
preference to the sweet lotus stalk. It is no wonder that some would
prefer sour to sweet, from their long and habitual taste of it.

65. A white crow sitting in a bush, of white lotus flowers and their
snowy filaments, was taken at first for a _hansa_ or heron, but as it
began to pick up worms, it came to be known as a crow.

66. It is difficult to distinguish a crow, sitting in company with a
cuckoo, both being of the like sable plumes and feathers; unless the
one makes itself known as distinct from the other, by giving out its
own vocal sound.

67. The crow sitting on a forest tree, or on a mould of clay or high
built building, looks on all sides for its prey; as a nightly thief
mounts on a _chaitta_ tree; and sits watching there from the ways of
people.

68. It is impossible for a crow, to abide with cranes and storks by
the side of a lake, which abounds in lotus flowers, that diffuse their
sombre farina all about.

69. For shame that the noisy crow, should have a seat on the soft lotus
bed in company with silent swans, and play his disgraceful part and
tricks among them. (_i.e._ It is impudence on the part of the ignorant,
to open their mouths, where the learned hold their silence).

70. Thou crow that criest as the hardest saw, say where hast thou left
or lost thy former reservedness to-day. Why dost thou brood over the
young cuckoo, the sweetness of whose voice thou canst never attain, and
whom thou canst not retain as thy young.

71. One seeing a dark crow sitting as a black steg, in a bed of white
lotuses, and crowing aloud with delight at that place, said unto him
saying:--It is better for thee O clamorous crow to rend ears of those
with thy cracking voice, that are not tired with splitting the head of
others with their wily verbiage.

72. It is well when the cunning consort with the cunning, as the crow
and the crab meeting at a pool; or the rook and the owl joining in an
arbour; for the two rogues though seemingly familiar, will not fail to
foil one another by their natural enmity (ká ko lu kiká).

73. The cuckoo associating with the crow, and resembling him in figure
and colour; is distinguished by his sweet notes from the other; as the
learned man makes himself known by his speech in the society of the
ignorant.

74. The blossoming branch is well able to bear, the spoliation of its
flowers by the cuckoo; and will not yet suffer the association of crows
and cranes, and cocks and vultures upon its twigs. (_i.e._ It is
possible to bear with an injury from the good, but not to tolerate the
society of bad people).

75. How delightfully do people listen to the sweet notes of the
cuckoo, which unites the separated lovers together; but who can brook
to hearken unto the jarring cries of the crow or hooting of the owl,
without disgust.

76. When the sweet notes of the young _kokila_, serve to ravish the
ears of hearers, with the gladsome tidings of the vernal season; there
is the grating cry of the crow, immediately obtruding upon their ears,
and demanding the melodious cuckoo as its foster child. (It is well
known to all here, that young cuckoos are fostered in the nests of
crows).

77. Why and what hast thou been cooing so long, O thou tender cuckoo,
with so much joy and glee in yonder grove; lo! thy pleasant vernal
season is too soon over with its fading flowers, and behold the stern
winter approaching fast, to blast the blossoming trees with its icy
breath, and bidding thee to hide thy head in thy nest.

78. A separated mistress seeing a sweet kokila, pour forth his notes to
the tender blossoms of the vernal season thus address to him saying:
“say, O sweet cuckoo! who taught thee to tell, that vernal season is
_tava tava tua tua_, _i.e._ “for thee and thy enjoyment,” this is
verily a woeful lie thou tellest me, instead of saying “it is mine and
mine” that art enjoying thy companion.” (It would better rendering in
English to reverse the application of the words mine and thine).

79. The cuckoo sitting silent in an assemblage of crows, appears as one
of them in its form and colour of its feathers; and the graceful gait
of the cuckoo, makes it known from the rest, as the wise man is marked
in the company of fools. It is hence that every body is respected by
his inward talents and outward deportment, more than by outer form and
feathers.

80. O brother kokila! it is in vain that thou dost coo so sweetly, when
there is none to appreciate its value; it is far better therefore, that
thou shouldst sit quiet in thy secluded covert under the shady leaves,
when these flocks of crows are so loud in their cries; and when it is
time for the falling dews, and not of vernal flowers.

81. It is to be wondered, that the young cuckoo forsakes its mother for
its fostering crow; which on her part begins to prick it with its bill
and claws. As I reflect on these, I find the young cuckoo growing in
its form to the likeness of its mother; and hence I conclude, that the
nature of a person prevails over his training every where.




