CHAPTER CCVI.

THE GREAT INQUIRY, OR QUESTIONS OF THE BUDDHIST.

    Argument:--Entity of Brahma and non-entity of the world,
    illustrated in the story of the king of Kushadwípa.


Vasishtha resumed:--The uncreated phenomenon of creation, that appears
to view, is nothing in reality. It is the transcendental principle of
supreme Brahma, that is the only true reality.

2. It was on this subject, that I was once asked by some one, to my
reply to a certain question of his; which I will now relate to you,
O high-minded Ráma, for strengthening your understanding to the full
knowledge thereof.

3. There is the great island of Kushadwípa, surrounded by the seas on
all sides; like a watery belt about it, and this land is renowned (for
its beauty), all over the three regions of the world.

4. There is the city called Ilávatí, situated on its north eastern
side, and is beset by a colonnade of pillars, gilded all over with
gold, and glittering with radiant beams, reaching from earth to the
skies.

5. There formerly reigned a prince, known by the name of Prajnapti; who
ruled on earth as the god Indra in heaven; and to whom this earth or
land paid its homage (as the skies do to the regent of heaven).

6. It was on one occasion, that I happened to alight at the presence of
this prince; as the sun descends on earth on the last day of desolation.

7. The prince hailed and adored me with offerings of flowers and
presents, made me sit by him with due reverence; then in the course of
my conversation with him, he fondly asked me as follows.

8. Tell me sir, said he, what becomes of the world after the
destruction of all things; and when the causalities of recreation are
all extinct and annihilated, in the undefinable vacuum of desolation.

9. What then becomes the prime cause of the causation of things, at the
recreation of the world; and what are accompanying elements for the
reproduction of objects, and how and whence they take their rise.

10. What is the world and what was the beginning of its creation; what
was the primeval chaos, and whence is this earth? What is the air the
support of the seas, and what is hell, which is filled by worms and
insects? (_i.e._ Whence are these varieties from the one source of
Brahma?)

11. What be the creatures contained in the womb of air (_i.e._ the
celestials), and what are they that are contained in <the> bosom of the
mountains (_i.e._ the demons); what are the elementary bodies and their
productions, and how the understanding and its faculties have come to
existence?

12. Who is the maker of all these, and who is their witness; what is
the support of the universe, and what are these that are contained
therein? I am quite certain, that the world can never have its ultimate
destruction.

13. All the Vedas and sástras are opposed to one another, in their
different views and interpretations; and every one of them has made a
supposition, according to its particular view.

14. From our knowledge of the world, we know not whether it is
indestructible or an unreality in itself. (_i.e._ If it is an ideal
unreality, it needs have no cause nor is it destructible at all; but
should it be a reality and destructible thing, then what must be the
cause of the production and destruction thereof? Gloss).

15. Again tell me, O thou chief of sages, what is the form and cause of
those bodies that are doomed to dwell in hell; after the demise of men
on earth, and cremation and destruction of their bodies here.

16. What are the accompanying causes of the regeneration of bodies,
after their destruction on death? The virtues and vices of departed
souls, being both of them formless things, cannot be their
accompanying causes, towards the formation of their corporeal frames.

17. It is quite an absurd reasoning, that want of matter could possibly
produce a material body; just as it is impossible to believe, that
there should be an offspring, without the seminal cause of its parents.

18. Tell me sir, what else should be the cause, of the production of
material bodies (after death); and for want of any such cause, it is
improper also, to deny the existence of a future state.

19. It is contrary to the dictates of Vedas and sástras, as also to the
conviction and common sense of mankind, to deny the future state of
our existence. The resurrection of our bodies is as unavoidable as our
transportation to a distant land by decree of law, though it be against
our wish or will.

20. How are beings born and actuated in the course of their lives, by
invisible causes which are quite unconnected with them (_i.e._ by the
merit or demerit of the acts of their past lives, which are altogether
detached from their present bodies?). Just as the pillars of stone were
converted to gold (by word of the Bráhman), and without being gilded
over by it. Say, sir, how this vast treasure was obtained in a moment
by the Bráhman. (_i.e._ What could be the cause of this preternatural
event).

21. How that to be called a great one, which remains for a moment only?
further what necessity is there to frame strict laws for the present
to reap harvest in future, when that does not stand good on sound
reasoning?

22. Tell me sir, how do you reconcile such discordances in the Vedas,
which mention the existence of a being and not being in the beginning;
and tell us also that, the Not being existed before creation, and
then the Being or creation was born of the not being. (The discordant
passages are असद्बा इदमग्र आसीत् उतो सदजायत । again असदेब इदमग्र आसीत्
सदेब सोम्य इदमग्र आसीत् ।).

23. How could the primeval nonentity become Brahmá, or how could the
latter be produced from the former; or if it were the mighty vacuity
which gave birth to Brahmá, then tell me sir, why there were no other
Brahmás also, born of its spacious womb.

24. Tell me how the vegetable and other creations, could be produced
without their different sources; and how they derived their nature of
propagating their kinds, by their own seeds and property.

25. Tell me why the life and death of one man, are coeval with those of
his friend or adversary; and do people happen to obtain their wishes in
their next lives by dying in the holy places of Prayága &c.

26. Should the wishes of men, be crowned with success in their next
lives; then tell me sir, why the sky is not filled with myriads of
moons, when the worshippers of that luminary, are daily seen to be
dying with the expectation, of becoming a brilliant orb like it, in the
next state of their existence in heaven.

27. Say how can men succeed to their wishes in future, when most of
them desire to gain the same object, and it falls to the lot of one of
them; just as a maid expected to be wedded by many, is destined to and
secured by one man only.

28. Again how can a woman be called a wife, who is either unchaste, or
leads a life of celibacy even when dwelling in her husband’s house?

29. Say sir, what is the difference between the blessing and curse,
which are pronounced on the Bráhman brothers, for their sovereignty
over the seven continents on the one hand, and their having no such
thing on the other; when they remained thinking themselves as monarchs
of the world in their very house.

30. The acts of piety consisting of charities, austerities and
obsequious ceremonies, which are productive of unknown rewards in the
next world, and are of no benefit to their observers on earth; then
what is the good derived from them, if they are not attended with any
earthly benefit to the earthly body, but to a future body with which no
one here has any concern. (Lit. to which none bears any affection).

31. Should it be said that the soul of the pious observer, reaps
the reward in its future state; this also is impossible because the
disembodied soul is incapable of enjoyment; and should it have another
body to enjoy hereafter, but of what use is that distant body to the
person of the present observer (of the pious acts)?

32. Should these acts be accompanied with any reward, either in this
life or in the next, they could be known to the actor, but in want of
this, their observance appears to be an irreconcilable incongruity.

33. These are my doubts (in the sástras and practices of men), which
I beg you will kindly remove by your cool and clear reasoning, as the
moon-light disperses the evening twilight.

34. Now sir, deign to dispel my doubts in my inquiry after
transcendental truth, that it may conduce to my good in both worlds;
because the company of the righteous, is ever fraught with very great
blessings to all people.




