CHAPTER CC.

THE LOUD APPLAUSE OF THE COURT ON THE SAGE’S SPEECH.

    Argument:--Narration of the plaudits of the assembly, accompanied
    with the showering of flowers and uproar of musical instruments,
    at the end of the holy sermon.


Válmíki continued:--Upon the termination of the holy sermon on
Nirvána--anesthesia, there arose loud hubbub without the court house,
which put a stop to the sage’s proceeding further in continuation of
his discourse.

2. But the whole audience in the court hall, was immerged in a state of
stead fast hypnotism, and settled intentiveness in the Supreme; and the
faculties of their mind were quite clear, and their workings at rest.

3. The whole audience on hearing the lecture on investigation after
intellect, became passengers on the raft of _sat_, and they all gained
their salvation.

4. Immediately there arose a loud chorus of applause, from the mouths
of the emancipated sages or siddhas, dwelling in the upper regions of
the skies, and it filled the concave of heaven, with the acclamations
of praise to the venerable sage.

5. In the same manner there rose shouts of praise also, from the holy
sages seated in the assembly; together with the loud acclamation given
by the son of Gádhi--Viswámitra, who sat at their head.

6. Then was heard a swelling sound, filling the face of the four
quarters of the firmament; just as the blasts of wind filled the
hollows of the withered bamboos in the forest, and make them resound
with a sound with a soft sweet melody.

7. Next arose a flourish of trumpets from the celestials, mingling with
the hosannahs of the siddhas; which rumbled together and resounded
loudly, amidst the hollow caves of distant mountains and dale.

8. Along with the flourish of celestial trumpets, there fell showers of
flowers from above, resembling the driving rain of snows, which blocked
the faces on all sides of heaven.

9. The floor of the court hall was strewn over with flowers, and the
fanfare of the drums and timbals, filled the mouths of hollow caves and
caverns; the flying dust covered the face of the sky, and the rising
odours after the rain were borne upon the wings of the winds to all
sides.

10. Then there rose a mingled rumble of the shouts of applause, and
the peal of heavenly trumpets; joined with the whistle of the hissing
showers of flowers, and the rustling of the winds all about.

11. The courtiers all looked around with their uplifted faces and eyes,
and were struck in their minds with wonder and surprise; while the
beasts all about the palace and in the parks, remained amazed at the
event with their pricked up ears.

12. The women and children in the inside, sat staring with their wonder
stricken eyes; and the princes sitting in the court hall, looked
astonished on one another with their smiling faces.

13. The face of the firmament became exceedingly brightened, by the
falling showers of flowers from above; and the great concavity of the
world, was filled with the hissing sound of the falling rains.

14. The showers of flowers and drizzling rain drops, with their hissing
sounds, made the royal palace an appearance of festivity. (With the
scattering of fried rice, sprinkling of rose water and blowing of
conchshells).

15. Not only the palace, but all places in the worlds, seem to
celebrate their festive mirth, with tossing of flower garlands, joined
with celestial music.

16. The shouts of the siddhas and their ejaculations of joy, rolled
and growled as high in the upper sky; as the rolling billows and
rebillowing waves, howled in the depth of the ocean and sea.

17. After the hubbub of the heavenly hosts had subsisted, (in the lull
of the rains and rackets); the following words of the siddhas proceeded
from above, and were heard to be uttered in an audible and distinct
voice.

18. The siddhas said:--We have erewhile since time erst began, listened
to delivered thousands of sermons, in the assembly of siddhas or
perfect beings, on the means of attaining liberation, (which is the
highest pitch of perfection of the living soul); but never heretofore
heard a lecture so impressive on the mind, as this last locution of the
sage.

19. We see boys and women and the bending brute creatures, together
with the creeping and crawling animals, are all enrapt by this soothing
speech, which will doubtless enrapture its readers and hearers in
future.

20. The sage has used every argument and example, for rousing Ráma to
his beatification; such as it is doubtful whether he had ever shewn
such affection to his Arundhatí or not.

21. Hearing this lecture on liberation, even the brute creation of
beasts and birds, become emancipated from the burthen of their base
bodies; and as for men, they forget altogether the trammels of their
bodies in their embodied state.

22. Our draught of these ambrosial drops of divine knowledge, through
the vessels of our ears; has not only satiated our appetite for wisdom,
but renovated our understandings, and added a fresh beauty to our
spiritual bodies.

23. On hearing these words of the heavenly host of siddhas, were struck
with wonder, and looked upward with full open eyes; and then as they
cast their looks below, they beheld the surface of the court-hall, to
be strewn over with flowers and lotuses, falling in showers from above.

24. They saw heaps of _mandara_ and other celestial flowers, piled
up to the roof of the lofty hall; and observed the court yard to be
covered over with blossoming plants and creepers, and with wreaths and
garlands of flowers without an interstice.

25. The surface of the ground, was strewn over with buds and blossoms
of Párijata plants; and thick clouds of Santanaka flowers, shadowed
over the heads and shoulders of the assembled people in the court.

26. The saffron flowers of Harichandana (yellow sandal wood), hung
over the jewelled crests of the princes; and seemed as an awning of
rainy clouds, spread over the glittering chandeliers of the court hall.
(Harichandana is a tree in the garden of Paradise).

27. Seeing these events in the court, the people all gave vent to the
repeated shouts of their loud applause; and talked to one another of
this and that, as was fitted to the solemnity of occasion.

28. They then adored the sage with the prostration of their bodies and
limbs, and made him their obeisances, with offerings of handfuls of
flowers.

29. After the loud peals of applause had somewhat abated; the king also
rose and prostrated himself down and then worshipped the sage, with the
tray of his presents and wreaths of flowers held in his hands.

30. Dasaratha said:--It was by your admonition, O thou Lord of
Arundhati; that I was released from this my mortal frame; and gained
the transcendent knowledge which filled my soul, and joined it with the
supreme essence in perfect bliss.

31. We have nothing in this nether earth, nor is there anything with
the gods in heaven, which I ween is worthy enough to be given, as a
proper offering in thine adoration.

32. Yet I beg to pray you something in order to acquit myself of my
duty to you, and to render my services to thee prove effectual to me,
and hope you will not be irritated at this address of mine.

33. That I adore you myself with my queens and my weal in both worlds,
together with all these dominions and servants of mine (all which I now
offer humbly at your venerable feet).

34. All these possessions of mine are yours entirely at present, so
my lord take them as yours, and make them as parts of your hermitage;
please to dispose of these as you please, or use them as you like.

35. Vasishtha replied:--Know, O great king, that we Bráhmans are
pleased, only with the mere obeisances of people; we are verily
satisfied with receiving reverence of men, and these you have already
done and shown to me.

36. You know to rule the earth, and therefore its sovereignty is
suitable to thee; nor can you show a Brahmin to have ever reigned as a
king, keep therefore what is yours to yourself and prosper therein.

37. Dasaratha answered:--What is this trifle of a realm to me, which I
am ashamed to call and own as mine; it cannot lead me to the knowledge
of its true Lord, therefore do so as I may clearly and truly know the
most high.

38. Válmíki relates:--As the king was saying so, Ráma rose from his
seat, and threw handfuls of flowers on the sacred person of his
preceptor; and then lowly bending himself before him, he addressed him
as follows.

39. Venerable sir, as you have made the king speechless, by telling him
that you are pleased with mere obeisance of men; so I am taught to wait
here, with my bare prostration at your venerable feet.

40. Saying so, Ráma bowed down his head, lowly at the feet of his
guide; and then scattered handful of flowers on his pure person, as the
trees on the sides of a mountain, sprinkle their dew drops at the foot
and base of the mount. (Gloss. The branches of trees serving as their
hands, and the leaves as their palms).

41. Then the pious prince made his repeated bows of reverence to his
venerable preceptor; while his lotus like eyes were suffused with the
tears of his inward joy and piety. (Ánandásru--tears issuing from pious
and joyous feelings).

42. Next rose the brother princes, of Dasaratha’s royal race; namely
Bharata, Satrughna and Lakshmana, together with their equals in kith
and kin; and they all advanced to the sage, and bowed down to him with
their respectful reverence.

43. The other chiefs and nobles and regents, that sat in their order at
a distance; together with the saints, sages and the clergy at large,
rose in groups from their seats, and did their homage to the sage, with
flinging handfuls of flowers upon him.

44. At this instant the sage was almost covered with and hid under the
heap of flowers, that were poured upon him from all sides; in the same
manner as the snowy mountain of Himálaya, is wrapped and concealed
under the snows of water.

45. After clangor of the assembly was over, and the peals of their
_pranáma-hailings_ had ended; Vasishtha remembered his saying with the
assembled sages, of proving to them the truth of his doctrines, and
of removing the doubts of his audience regarding the miracles he had
wrought.

46. He then shoved off with both his arms, the heaps of flowers from
about his sides; and showed out his fair face from amidst them, as when
the disc of the moon, shines forth from within the hoary clouds.

47. Then there ensued a hush over the flourish of the trumpets, and a
silence upon the fanfare of applauses; the falling of flowers was at a
stop, and the murmur of siddhas above, ceased with the clamour of the
assemblage below.

48. After the princes and assembled nobles, had made their obeisances
and greetings, there occurred a calm stillness in the assembly, as when
a lull takes place in the atmosphere after a storm.

49. Then the chief of sages Vasishtha, upon hearing the applauses
poured upon him from all sides; spoke softly to the royal sage
Viswámitra, from the unblemished purity of his soul.

50. Hear me, O sage, that art the lotus of the princely race of Gádhi,
and ye sages that are assembled here, namely Vámadeva, Nimi and Kruta,
together with Bharadwája, Pulastya, Atri, Nárada and Ghrishti, and
Sándilya.

51. Hear me also, O ye sages Bhása, Bhrigu, Bharanda, Vatsa and
Vátsyáyana, with all others that are assembled here at present, and had
the patience to listen to this contemptible discourse of mine.

52. Please now with your well known affability to me, point out to me
whatever you have found as meaningless or unintelligible and ambiguous
in my discourse.

53. The audience responded:--O Venerable sir, we have never heard or
marked in <a> single word in this spiritual and divine discourse of
thine, that is meaningless or unintelligible to anybody.

54. We confess that whatever foulness was inbred in our natures, by our
repeated births in this sinful world; has been all purged out by your
holy lecture, as the alloy in gold is burnt away by the purifying fire.

55. O sir, our minds are as expanded by your divine sermon, as the blue
lotus buds are opened to bloom, by the cold and ambrosial beams of moon
light.

56. We all bow down to thee, O thou chief of sages, as our best guide
in divine knowledge; and the giver of true wisdom to us, with regard to
all things in nature.

57. Válmíki relates:--The sages said so far and then hailed and bowed
down to Vasishtha again, and their united applause of him, rose as high
as the loud roar of raining clouds.

58. Then the speechless siddhas, poured down again their showers of
flowers from above; and these hid the body of the sage under them, as
the clouds of winter cover the rocks under ice and snows.

59. Afterwards the intelligent and learned men in the court, gave
their praises to King Dasaratha and to Ráma also; saying that the four
princes were no other than the four fold incarnation of the God Mádhava
or Vishnu himself.

60. The siddhas said:--We hail the four princes of Dasaratha line, who
are the quadruple forms of the self incarnate Vishnu, and are quite
liberated from the bonds of flesh, in these their living states of
humanity.

61. We hail king Dasaratha, as having the mark of the sovereignty of
the whole world. (Imprinted in his person); that is of this world which
extends to the limits of the four oceans, and lasts forever in his race.

62. We hail the sage Vasishtha, who is as bright as the sun, and
stands at the head of the whole host of sages; and also the royal sage
Viswámitra of renowned fame and dignity.

63. It is through their means (_i.e._ because of their assemblage in
this court), that we had this fair opportunity of hearing this divine
discourse, which is so full of knowledge and fraught with reason, that
it serves to dispel the great gloom of error at once.

64. So saying the siddhas of heaven again let fall their handfuls of
flowers in showers; and made the assembly look up to them in silence,
with their uplifted eyes and gladdened minds.

65. And then there was a mutual greeting of the siddhas from above, and
of the assembled people to them from below.

66. At last the assembly broke, with their respectful greetings to
one another, accompanied with their mutual offerings of flowers and
salutations. And the celestial and terrestrial, the great _Munis_ and
sages, the Pandits and Bráhmans; together with the princes and nobles,
bade adieu to and took leave of one another (in order to repair to
their respective abodes).




