CHAPTER CCXVI.

CONCLUSION OF THE CELESTIAL MESSENGER’S MESSAGE OF LIBERATION.

    Argument:--Acknowledgment of the obligation of _Arishtanemi_ and
    others, to their preceptors and preachers.


Válmíki continued to say:--I have thus related to you, O prince,
whatever the pot born Vasishtha had taught and preached to the princes;
and it is certain that you will attain the same elevated state, as they
did by the hearing of these lectures on sacred knowledge.

2. The Prince Arishtanemi replied:--O Venerable sir, your kind look is
enough to extricate us from bondage in this world; and it is hence that
I am not only brought to light, but saved from the ocean of this world
by your favour.

3. The Heavenly Messenger said:--After saying so, the said prince
seemed to look amazed in his look; and then he began to speak these
words to me with a graceful voice.

4. The Prince said:--I bow down to thee, O Messenger divine, and wish
all safety to attend on thee; it is said that the friendship of the
good is attended with seven benefits, all which hast thou conferred
upon me.

5. Now return in safety to your seat in the heaven of Indra, and well
know that, I am both gladdened as well as grown _insouciant_ of worldly
concerns, by hearing this discourse of thine.

6. I shall continue to remain here for ever more, and without feeling
any anxiety, to think well and ponder deeply into the sense of all
that I have heard from thee. Now I tell thee, O Lady! that I was quite
surprised (to see so much civility on the part of a prince).

7. He said:--I have never heard before, such words and fraught with so
much knowledge, as I have come now to hear from thee; It has filled
my inward spirit with as much joy, as if I have drunk my fill of an
ambrosial draught just now.

8. I then repaired to thee, O thou sinless fairy, at the bidding of
Válmíki; in order to relate unto thee all that thou hast asked of me.
And now I shall bend my course, towards the celestial city of Sakra.

9. The fairy said:--I must thank thee now, O thou very fortunate
emissary of the gods! for all that thou hast related to me; and my
knowledge whereof, has entirely composed my spirit, by its benign
influence.

10. I am now quite satisfied in myself, and will ever remain from
sorrow and all the sickening cares of life; and you may now to your
destination at Indras, with all speed attending on your journey thither.

11. So saying Suruchi--the best of fairies, continued to keep her seat
on the slope of the Himálayas, and contiguous to the Gandhamádana mount
of fragrance, and reflect on the sense of what she had heard (of divine
knowledge).

12. Now as you have fully heard, my son, all the precepts of Vasishtha,
you are at liberty to do as you like, by your weighing well their
purport. (For the effecting of your liberation which is the main object
of man, both in this life as well as in the next).

13. Kárunya said:--The remembrance of the past, the sight of the
present, and the talk of future events, together with the existence of
the world; are all as false as the sights in our dreams or of water in
mirage, or as the birth of a boy of a barren woman.

14. I gain nothing from my deeds, nor lose aught by what is left
undone; I live to do as it happens, or at the impulse of the occasion
and without any assiduity on my part.

15. Agasti said:--Kárunya--The worthy son of Agnibesya, said in the
aforesaid manner, and continued to pass his time in the discharge of
his duties, as they occured to him from time to time.

16. And you O Sutikshana! should never entertain any doubts regarding
the acts, that you shall have to perform after your attainment
of divine knowledge (Lest they entail their retribution on you
afterwards). Because dubitation destroys the virtue of the deed, as
selfishness takes away its merit.

17. Upon hearing this speech of the sage, which reconciles the
duplicity of action and reflection, into the unity of their
combination; he bowed to his preceptor and uttered as follows with due
submission to him.

18. Sutíkshana said:--Any action done in ignorance of the actor, is
reckoned as no act of his, unless it is done in his full knowledge
to be taken into account. (So the brute activities of the giddy mob,
bear no value or blame in them before the wise). But actions done with
reason and reasonable men, are invaluable in their nature. All our
acts are best seen by the light of the intellect as the actions of
stage-players are seen only in the candle light. (So are all our mental
and corporeal acts, actuated by the essence of the great soul in us).

19. It is the presence of the supreme soul in us, that the action
of our hearts, directs the motions of our bodies; as it is the
malleability of gold, that moulds it to the many forms of jewelleries.
(Hence we should never reject the one for the other).

20. As it is the great body of waters, that gives rise to the
boisterous waves, as well as the little playful billows, that heave and
move in our sight; so it is the inbeing of the great soul, that fills
all the great and small alike.

21. I submit to and bear with all that befalls to me, because there is
no escape from destiny, nor slighting of the sound sayings of sages;
and I acknowledge O Venerable sir, to owe my knowledge of the knowable
One to thy good grace only.

22. I own myself to be quite felicitous to thy favour, and bow down
prostrate to thee on the ground, for thy lifting me up from the doleful
pit of the world; because there is no other way to repay my gratitude
to my venerable preceptor.

23. Nay there is no other act, whereby one may give expression to his
obligation to his tutor, for his salvation in this world, save by means
of offering himself to his services; with his whole body and mind and
the words of his mouth.

24. It is by thy good grace, O my good sir, that I have passed over the
Rubicon of this world; I am filled with infinite joy amidst all these
worlds, and am set free from all my doubts.

25. I bow down to that Brahma, who is sung in the Sáma-veda, as filling
all this universe, as the waters of the ocean fill the boundless deep;
and whose remembrance fills our soul with ecstasy.

26. I bow down also to the sage Vasishtha, who is of the form of
incarnate knowledge alone, and who is immerged in the joyous bliss of
divine felicity; who is beyond all duality and sees the only One in the
unity of infinite vacuity. Who is ever alike the pure and immaculate
One, and witnesseth the inmost of all minds; who is beyond all states
and conditions (of so and so or of such and such); and who is quite
devoid of the three qualities (which belong to all bodies) _i.e._ There
is no known quality or property that can be predicated to the Deity.
The qualities of the unknown One, as unknown, peculiar and unique as
own nature.

27. Here ends the Mahárámáyana of the sage Vasishtha, with its
continuation by his recorder Válmíki, and the speech of the celestial
messenger at the latter end of the Book on Nirvána or the ultimate
Extinction of the living soul.


FINIS.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] The mind involved in ignorance, is said to be waking, and the
uncontrouled mind is styled as dreaming: the mind subdued by weariness
is said to be asleep, and when brought under subjection by any
effort, is called _samádhi_ or meditation, lastly its liberation from
ignorance, is known as its state of _mukti_ or emancipation.

[2] Note.--Each of the three states of waking, dreaming and sound sleep
admit of three conditions viz. waking wakefulness, waking dream and the
waking sound sleep; again dreaming watchfulness, dreaming dream and
dreaming sleep; and lastly the sleepy waking, the sleepy dream and the
sleepy sound sleep (see the scholium of Sureshvara for instances of
every Kind).

[3] The founder of Vedánta was Vyása, of Buddhism--Buddha, of
Sánkhya--Kapila, of Saugata--Patanjali. Tryaksha, Pashupati and
Bhairana were professors of Ágama tantras.

[4] Note. The sacred Sanskrit was at once a perfect language, without
any knowledge of us regarding its formative stage, though a _balabhásá_
or infant-language is said to have existed before, of which we have no
relic nor know anything.

[5] Note. If the world be a form of Divine knowledge, and subsistent
in and subjective to the eternal mind of God; it can then be neither
created nor destroyed at any time; but since it is subject to creation
and destruction, it can be a part of Divine knowledge. Nor is it an
object for want of any cause of its creation. Therefore it is a mere
nullity.

[6] Note.--If the thinkables are the produce of their first creation,
then it remains to be said, whence (_i.e._ from what materials) they
were formed.

[7] Note.--According to Vasishtha, Byam, Beom or vacuum, is possest
of all the attributes of Brahm Godhead, in its unity, infinity,
eternity, incorporeality and formlessness, as also in its omnipresence,
omnipotence in its supporting the worlds and in the omniscience of the
vacuous intellect.

