CHAPTER V


THE first time I ‘smelt powder’ was at Amoy.  The ‘Blonde’ carried out
Lord Palmerston’s letter to the Chinese Government.  Never was there a
more iniquitous war than England then provoked with China to force upon
her the opium trade with India in spite of the harm which the Chinese
authorities believed that opium did to their people.

Even Macaulay advocated this shameful imposition.  China had to submit,
and pay into the bargain four and a half millions sterling to prove
themselves in the wrong.  Part of this went as prize money.  My share of
it—the _douceur_ for a middy’s participation in the crime—was exactly
100_l._

To return to Amoy.  When off the mouth of the Canton river we had taken
on board an interpreter named Thom.  What our instructions were I know
not; I can only tell what happened.  Our entry into Amoy harbour caused
an immediate commotion on land.  As soon as we dropped anchor, about half
a mile from the shore, a number of troops, with eight or ten
field-pieces, took up their position on the beach, evidently resolved to
prevent our landing.  We hoisted a flag of truce, at the same time
cleared the decks for action, and dropped a kedge astern so as to moor
the ship broadside to the forts and invested shore.  The officer of my
watch, the late Sir Frederick Nicholson, together with the interpreter,
were ordered to land and communicate with the chief mandarin.  To carry
out this as inoffensively as possible, Nicholson took the jolly-boat,
manned by four lads only.  As it was my watch, I had charge of the boat.
A napkin or towel served for a flag of truce.  But long before we reached
the shore, several mandarins came down to the water’s edge waving their
swords and shouting angrily to warn us off.  Mr. Thom, who understood
what they said, was frightened out of his wits, assuring us we should all
be sawed in half if we attempted to land.  Sir Frederick was not the man
to disobey orders even on such a penalty; he, however, took the
precaution—a very wise one as it happened—to reverse the boat, and back
her in stern foremost.

No sooner did the keel grate on the shingle than a score of soldiers
rushed down to seize us.  Before they could do so we had shoved off.  The
shore was very steep.  In a moment we were in deep water, and our lads
pulling for dear life.  Then came a storm of bullets from matchlocks and
jingals and the bigger guns, fortunately just too high to hit us.  One
bullet only struck the back-board, but did no harm.  What, however,
seemed a greater danger was the fire from the ship.  Ere we were halfway
back broadside after broadside was fired over our heads into the poor
devils massed along the beach.  This was kept up until not a living
Chinaman was to be seen.

I may mention here a curious instance of cowardice.  One of our men, a
ship’s painter, soon after the firing began and was returned by the
fort’s guns, which in truth were quite harmless, jumped overboard and
drowned himself.  I have seen men’s courage tried under fire, and in many
other ways since; yet I have never known but one case similar to this,
when a friend of my own, a rich and prosperous man, shot himself to avoid
death!  So that there are men like ‘Monsieur Grenouille, qui se cachait
dans l’eau pour éviter la pluie.’  Often have I seen timid and nervous
men, who were thought to be cowards, get so excited in action that their
timidity has turned to rashness.  In truth ‘on est souvent ferme par
faiblesse, et audacieux par timidité.’

Partly for this reason, and partly because I look upon it as a remnant of
our predatory antecedents and of animal pugnacity, I have no extravagant
admiration for mere combativeness or physical courage.  Honoured and
rewarded as one of the noblest of manly attributes, it is one of the
commonest of qualities,—one which there is not a mammal, a bird, a fish,
or an insect even, that does not share with us.  Such is the esteem in
which it is held, such the ignominy which punishes the want of it, that
the most cautious and the most timid by nature will rather face the
uncertain risks of a fight than the certain infamy of imputed cowardice.

Is it likely that courage should be rare under such circumstances,
especially amongst professional fighters, who in England at least have
chosen their trade?  That there are poltroons, and plenty of them,
amongst our soldiers and sailors, I do not dispute.  But with the fear of
shame on one hand, the hope of reward on the other, the merest dastard
will fight like a wild beast, when his blood is up.  The extraordinary
merit of his conduct is not so obvious to the peaceful thinker.  I speak
not of such heroism as that of the Japanese,—their deeds will henceforth
be bracketed with those of Leonidas and his three hundred, who died for a
like cause.  With the Japanese, as it was with the Spartans, every man is
a patriot; nor is the proportionate force of their barbaric invaders
altogether dissimilar.

Is then the Victoria Cross an error?  To say so would be an outrage in
this age of militarism.  And what would all the Queens of Beauty think,
from Sir Wilfred Ivanhoe’s days to ours, if mighty warriors ceased to
poke each other in the ribs, and send one another’s souls untimely to the
‘viewless shades,’ for the sake of their ‘doux yeux?’  Ah! who knows how
many a mutilation, how many a life, has been the price of that requital?
Ye gentle creatures who swoon at the sight of blood, is it not the hero
who lets most of it that finds most favour in your eyes?  Possibly it may
be to the heroes of moral courage that some distant age will award its
choicest decorations.  As it is, the courage that seeks the rewards of
Fame seems to me about on a par with the virtue that invests in Heaven.

Though an anachronism as regards this stage of my career, I cannot resist
a little episode which pleasantly illustrates moral courage, or chivalry
at least, combined with physical bravery.

In December, 1899, I was a passenger on board a Norddeutscher Lloyd on my
way to Ceylon.  The steamer was crowded with Germans; there were
comparatively few English.  Things had been going very badly with us in
the Transvaal, and the telegrams both at Port Said and at Suez
supplemented the previous ill-news.  At the latter place we heard of the
catastrophe at Magersfontein, of poor Wauchope’s death, and of the
disaster to the Highland Light Infantry.  The moment it became known the
Germans threw their caps into the air, and yelled as if it were they who
had defeated us.

Amongst the steerage passengers was a Major—in the English army—returning
from leave to rejoin his regiment at Colombo.  If one might judge by his
choice of a second-class fare, and by his much worn apparel, he was what
one would call a professional soldier.  He was a tall, powerfully-built,
handsome man, with a weather-beaten determined face, and keen eye.  I was
so taken with his looks that I often went to the fore part of the ship on
the chance of getting a word with him.  But he was either shy or proud,
certainly reserved; and always addressed me as ‘Sir,’ which was not
encouraging.

That same evening, after dinner in the steerage cabin, a German got up
and, beginning with some offensive allusions to the British army,
proposed the health of General Cronje and the heroic Boers.  This was
received with deafening ‘Hochs.’  To cap the enthusiasm up jumped another
German, and proposed ‘unglück—bad luck to all Englanders and to their
Queen.’  This also was cordially toasted.  When the ceremony was ended
and silence restored, my reserved friend calmly rose, tapped the table
with the handle of his knife (another steerage passenger—an
Australian—told me what happened), took his watch from his pocket, and
slowly said: ‘It is just six minutes to eight.  If the person who
proposed the last toast has not made a satisfactory apology to me before
the hand of my watch points to the hour, I will thrash him till he does.
I am an officer in the English army, and always keep my word.’  A small
band of Australians was in the cabin.  One and all of them applauded this
laconic speech.  It was probably due in part to these that the offender
did not wait till the six minutes had expired.

Next day I congratulated my reserved friend.  He was reticent as usual.
All I could get out of him was, ‘I never allow a lady to be insulted in
my presence, sir.’  It was his Queen, not his cloth, that had roused the
virility in this quiet man.

Let us turn to another aspect of the deeds of war.  About daylight on the
morning following our bombardment, it being my morning watch, I was
ordered to take the surgeon and assistant surgeon ashore.  There were
many corpses, but no living or wounded to be seen.  One object only
dwells visually in my memory.

At least a quarter of a mile from the dead soldiers, a stray shell had
killed a grey-bearded old man and a young woman.  They were side by side.
The woman was still in her teens and pretty.  She lay upon her back.
Blood was oozing from her side.  A swarm of flies were buzzing in and out
of her open mouth.  Her little deformed feet, cased in the high-heeled
and embroidered tiny shoes, extended far beyond her petticoats.  It was
these feet that interested the men of science.  They are now, I believe,
in a jar of spirits at Haslar hospital.  At least, my friend the
assistant surgeon told me, as we returned to the ship, that that was
their ultimate destination.  The mutilated body, as I turned from it with
sickening horror, left a picture on my youthful mind not easily to be
effaced.

After this we joined the rest of the squadron: the ‘Melville’ (a
three-decker, Sir W. Parker’s flagship), the ‘Blenheim,’ the ‘Druid,’ the
‘Calliope,’ and several 18-gun brigs.  We took Hong Kong, Chusan, Ningpo,
Canton, and returned to take Amoy.  One or two incidents only in the
several engagements seem worth recording.

We have all of us supped full with horrors this last year or so, and I
have no thought of adding to the surfeit.  But sometimes common accidents
appear exceptional, if they befall ourselves, or those with whom we are
intimate.  If the sufferer has any special identity, we speculate on his
peculiar way of bearing his misfortune; and are thus led on to place
ourselves in his position, and imagine ourselves the sufferers.

Major Daniel, the senior marine officer of the ‘Blonde,’ was a reserved
and taciturn man.  He was quiet and gentlemanlike, always very neat in
his dress; rather severe, still kind to his men.  His aloofness was in no
wise due to lack of ideas, nor, I should say, to pride—unless, perhaps,
it were the pride which some men feel in suppressing all emotion by
habitual restraint of manner.  Whether his _sangfroid_ was
constitutional, or that nobler kind of courage which feels and masters
timidity and the sense of danger, none could tell.  Certain it is he was
as calm and self-possessed in action as in repose.  He was so courteous
one fancied he would almost have apologised to his foe before he
remorselessly ran him through.

On our second visit to Amoy, a year or more after the first, we met with
a warmer reception.  The place was much more strongly fortified, and the
ship was several-times hulled.  We were at very close quarters, as it is
necessary to pass under high ground as the harbour is entered.  Those who
had the option, excepting our gallant old captain, naturally kept under
shelter of the bulwarks and hammock nettings.  Not so Major Daniel.  He
stood in the open gangway watching the effect of the shells, as though he
were looking at a game of billiards.  While thus occupied a round shot
struck him full in the face, and simply left him headless.

Another accident, partly due to an ignorance of dynamics, happened at the
taking of Canton.  The whole of the naval brigade was commanded by Sir
Thomas Bouchier.  Our men were lying under the ridge of a hill protected
from the guns on the city walls.  Fully exposed to the fire, which was
pretty hot, ‘old Tommy’ as we called him, paced to and fro with
contemptuous indifference, stopping occasionally to spy the enemy with
his long ship’s telescope.  A number of bluejackets, in reserve, were
stationed about half a mile further off at the bottom of the protecting
hill.  They were completely screened from the fire by some buildings of
the suburbs abutting upon the slope.  Those in front were watching the
cannon-balls which had struck the crest and were rolling as it were by
mere force of gravitation down the hillside.  Some jokes were made about
football, when suddenly a smart and popular young officer—Fox, first
lieutenant of one of the brigs—jumped out at one of these spent balls,
which looked as though it might have been picked up by the hands, and
gave it a kick.  It took his foot off just above the ankle.  There was no
surgeon at hand, and he was bleeding to death before one could be found.
Sir Thomas had come down the hill, and seeing the wounded officer on the
ground with a group around him, said in passing, ‘Well, Fox, this is a
bad job, but it will make up the pair of epaulets, which is something.’

‘Yes sir,’ said the dying man feebly, ‘but without a pair of legs.’  Half
an hour later he was dead.

I have spoken lightly of courage, as if, by implication, I myself
possessed it.  Let me make a confession.  From my soul I pity the man who
is or has been such a miserable coward as I was in my infancy, and up to
this youthful period of my life.  No fear of bullets or bayonets could
ever equal mine.  It was the fear of ghosts.  As a child, I think that at
times when shut up for punishment, in a dark cellar for instance, I must
have nearly gone out of my mind with this appalling terror.

Once when we were lying just below Whampo, the captain took nearly every
officer and nearly the whole ship’s crew on a punitive expedition up the
Canton river.  They were away about a week.  I was left behind,
dangerously ill with fever and ague.  In his absence, Sir Thomas had had
me put into his cabin, where I lay quite alone day and night, seeing
hardly anyone save the surgeon and the captain’s steward, who was himself
a shadow, pretty nigh.  Never shall I forget my mental sufferings at
night.  In vain may one attempt to describe what one then goes through;
only the victims know what that is.  My ghost—the ghost of the Whampo
Reach—the ghost of those sultry and miasmal nights, had no shape, no
vaporous form; it was nothing but a presence, a vague amorphous dread.
It may have floated with the swollen and putrid corpses which hourly came
bobbing down the stream, but it never appeared; for there was nothing to
appear.  Still it might appear.  I expected every instant through the
night to see it in some inconceivable form.  I expected it to touch me.
It neither stalked upon the deck, nor hovered in the dark, nor moved, nor
rested anywhere.  And yet it was there about me,—where, I knew not.  On
every side I was threatened.  I feared it most behind the head of my cot,
because I could not see it if it were so.

This, it will be said, is the description of a nightmare.  Exactly so.
My agony of fright was a nightmare; but a nightmare when every sense was
strained with wakefulness, when all the powers of imagination were
concentrated to paralyse my shattered reason.

The experience here spoken of is so common in some form or other that we
may well pause to consider it.  What is the meaning of this fear of
ghosts?—how do we come by it?  It may be thought that its cradle is our
own, that we are purposely frightened in early childhood to keep us calm
and quiet.  But I do not believe that nurses’ stories would excite dread
of the unknown if the unknown were not already known.  The susceptibility
to this particular terror is there before the terror is created.  A
little reflection will convince us that we must look far deeper for the
solution of a mystery inseparable from another, which is of the last
importance to all of us.




