CHAPTER XXX


WHAT was then called Fort Vancouver was a station of the Hudson’s Bay
Company.  We took up our quarters here till one of the company’s
vessels—the ‘Mary Dare,’ a brig of 120 tons, was ready to sail for the
Sandwich Islands.  This was about the most uncomfortable trip I ever
made.  A sailing merchant brig of 120 tons, deeply laden, is not exactly
a pleasure yacht; and 2,000 miles is a long voyage.  For ten days we lay
at anchor at the mouth of the Columbia, detained by westerly gales.  A
week after we put to sea, all our fresh provisions were consumed, and we
had to live on our cargo—dried salmon.  We three and the captain more
than filled the little hole of a cabin.  There wasn’t even a hammock, and
we had to sleep on the deck, or on the lockers.  The fleas, the
cockroaches, and the rats, romped over and under one all night.  Not
counting the time it took to go down the river, or the ten days we were
kept at its mouth, we were just six weeks at sea before we reached
Woahoo, on Christmas Day.

How beautiful the islands looked as we passed between them, with a fair
wind and studding sails set alow and aloft.  Their tropical charms seemed
more glowing, the water bluer, the palm trees statelier, the vegetation
more libertine than ever.  On the south the land rises gradually from the
shore to a range of lofty mountains.  Immediately behind Honolulu—the
capital—a valley with a road winding up it leads to the north side of the
island.  This valley is, or was then, richly cultivated, principally with
_taro_, a large root not unlike the yam.  Here and there native huts were
dotted about, with gardens full of flowers, and abundance of tropical
fruit.  Higher up, where it becomes too steep for cultivation, growth of
all kind is rampant.  Acacias, oranges, maples, bread-fruit, and
sandal-wood trees, rear their heads above the tangled ever-greens.  The
high peaks, constantly in the clouds, arrest the moisture of the ocean
atmosphere, and countless rills pour down the mountain sides, clothing
everything in perpetual verdure.  The climate is one of the least
changeable in the world; the sea breeze blows day and night, and
throughout the year the day temperature does not vary more than five or
six degrees, the average being about eighty-three degrees Fahrenheit in
the shade.  In 1850 the town of Honolulu was little else than a native
village of grass and mat huts.  Two or three merchants had good houses.
In one of these Fred and Samson were domiciled; there was no such thing
as a hotel.  I was the guest of General Miller, the Consul-General.  What
changes may have taken place since the above date I have no means of
knowing.  So far as the natives go, the change will assuredly have been
for the worse; for the aborigines, in all parts of the world, lose their
primitive simplicity and soon acquire the worst vices of civilisation.

Even King Tamehameha III. was not innocent of one of them.  General
Miller offered to present us at court, but he had to give several days’
notice in order that his Majesty might be sufficiently sober to receive
us.  A negro tailor from the United States fitted us out with suits of
black, and on the appointed day we put ourselves under the shade of the
old General’s cocked hat, and marched in a body to the palace.  A native
band, in which a big drum had the leading part, received us with ‘God
save the Queen’—whether in honour of King Tamy, or of his visitors, was
not divulged.  We were first introduced to a number of chiefs in European
uniforms—except as to their feet, which were mostly bootless.  Their
names sounded like those of the state officers in Mr. Gilbert’s ‘Mikado.’
I find in my journal one entered as Tovey-tovey, another as Kanakala.  We
were then conducted to the presence chamber by the Foreign Minister, Mr.
Wiley, a very pronounced Scotch gentleman with a star of the first
magnitude on his breast.  The King was dressed as an English admiral.
The Queen, whose ample undulations also reminded one of the high seas,
was on his right; while in perfect gradation on her right again were four
princesses in short frocks and long trousers, with plaited tails tied
with blue ribbon, like the Miss Kenwigs.  A little side dispute arose
between the stiff old General and the Foreign Minister as to whose right
it was to present us.  The Consul carried the day; but the Scot, not to
be beaten, informed Tamehameha, in a long prefatory oration, of the
object of the ceremony.  Taking one of us by the hand (I thought the
peppery old General would have thrust him aside), Mr. Wiley told the King
that it was seldom the Sandwich Islands were ‘veesited’ by strangers of
such ‘desteenction’—that the Duke of this (referring to Fred’s
relations), and Lord the other, were the greatest noblemen in the world;
then, with much solemnity, quoted a long speech from Shakespeare, and
handed us over to his rival.

His Majesty, who did not understand a word of English, or Scotch, looked
grave and held tight to the arm of the throne; for the truth is, that
although he had relinquished his bottle for the hour, he had brought its
contents with him.  My salaam was soon made; but as I retired backwards I
had the misfortune to set my heel on the toes of a black-and-tan terrier,
a privileged pet of the General’s.  The shriek of the animal and the loss
of my equilibrium nearly precipitated me into the arms of a trousered
princess; but the amiable young lady only laughed.  Thus ended my glimpse
of the Hawaian Court.  Mr. Wiley afterwards remarked to me: ‘We do things
in a humble way, ye’ll obsairve; but royalty is royalty all over the
world, and His Majesty Tamehameha is as much Keng of his ain domeenions
as Victoria is Queen of Breetain.’  The relativity of greatness was not
to be denied.

The men—Kanakas, as they are called—are fine stalwart fellows above our
average height.  The only clothing they then wore was the _maro_, a cloth
made by themselves of the acacia bark.  This they pass between the legs,
and once or twice round the loins.  The _Wyheenes_—women—formerly wore
nothing but a short petticoat or kilt of the same material.  By
persuasion of the missionaries they have exchanged this simple garment
for a chemise of printed calico, with the waist immediately under the
arms so as to conceal the contour of the figure.  Other clothing have
they none.

Are they the more chaste?  Are they the less seductive?  Hear what M.
Anatole France says in his apostrophe to the sex: ‘Pour faire de vous la
terrible merveille que vous êtes aujourd’hui, pour devenir la cause
indifférente et souveraine des sacrifices et des crimes, il vous a fallu
deux choses: la civilisation qui vous donna des voiles, et la religion
qui vous donna des scrupules.’  The translation of which is (please take
note of it, my dear young ladies with ‘les épaules qui ne finissent
pas’):

    ‘Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
    Are sweeter.’

Be this as it may, these chocolate-skinned beauties, with their small and
regular features, their rosy lips, their perfect teeth—of which they take
great care—their luxurious silky tresses, their pretty little hands and
naked feet, and their exquisite forms, would match the matchless
Cleopatra.

Through the kindness of Fred’s host, the principal merchant in the
island, we were offered an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the
_élite_ of the Honolulu nymphs.  Mr. S. invited us to what is called a
_Loohou_ feast got up by him for their entertainment.  The head of one of
the most picturesque valleys in Woahoo was selected for the celebration
of this ancient festival.  Mounted on horses with which Mr. S. had
furnished us, we repaired in a party to the appointed spot.  It was early
in the afternoon when we reached it; none of the guests had arrived,
excepting a few Kanakas, who were engaged in thatching an old shed as
shelter from the sun, and strewing the ground with a thick carpet of
palm-leaves.  Ere long, a cavalcade of between thirty and forty
amazons—they all rode astride—came racing up the valley at full speed,
their merry shouts proclaiming their approach.  Gaudy strips of _maro_
were loosely folded around their legs for skirts.  Their pretty little
straw hats trimmed with ribbons, or their uncovered heads with their long
hair streaming in the wind, confined only by a wreath of fresh orange
flowers, added to their irresistible charm.  Certainly, the bravest
soldiers could not have withstood their charge.  No men, however, were
admitted, save those who had been expressly invited; but each lady of
importance was given a _carte blanche_ to bring as many of her own sex as
she pleased, provided they were both pretty and respectable.

As they rode up, we cavaliers, with becoming gallantry, offered our
assistance while they dismounted.  Smitten through and through by the
bright eyes of one little houri who possessed far more than her share of
the first requirement, and, taking the second for granted, I courteously
prepared to aid her to alight; when, to my discomfiture, instead of a
gracious acknowledgment of my services, she gave me a sharp cut with her
whip.  As, however, she laughed merrily at my wry faces, I accepted the
act as a scratch of the kitten’s claws; at least, it was no sign of
indifference, and giving myself the benefit of the doubt, lifted her from
her saddle without further chastisement, except a coquettish smile that
wounded, alas! more than it healed.

The feast was thus prepared: poultry, sucking-pigs, and puppies—the last,
after being scalded and scraped, were stuffed with vegetables and spices,
rolled in plantain leaves, and placed in the ground upon stones already
heated.  More stones were then laid over them, and fires lighted on the
top of all.  While the cooking was in progress, the Kanakas ground _taro_
roots for the paste called ‘poe’; the girls danced and sang.  The songs
were devoid of melody, being musical recitations of imaginary love
adventures, accompanied by swayings of the body and occasional choral
interruptions, all becoming more and more excited as the story or song
approached its natural climax.  Sometimes this was varied by a solitary
dancer starting from the circle, and performing the wildest bacchanalian
antics, to the vocal incitement of the rest.  This only ended with
physical exhaustion, or collapse from feminine hysteria.

The food was excellent; the stuffed puppy was a dish for an epicure.
Though knives and forks were unknown, and each helped herself from the
plantain leaf, one had not the least objection to do likewise, for the
most scrupulous cleanliness is one of the many merits of these
fascinating creatures.  Before every dip into the leaf, the dainty little
fingers were plunged into bowls of fresh water provided for the purpose.
Delicious fruit followed the substantial fare; a small glass of _kava_—a
juice extracted from a root of the pepper tribe—was then served to all
alike.  Having watched the process of preparing the beverage, I am unable
to speak as to its flavour.  The making of it is remarkable.  A number of
women sit on the ground, chew the root, and spit its juice into a bowl.
The liquor is kept till it ferments, after which it becomes highly
intoxicating.  I regret to say that its potency was soon manifested on
this occasion.  No sooner did the poison set their wild blood tingling,
than a free fight began for the remaining gourds.  Such a scratching,
pulling of hair, clawing, kicking, and crying, were never seen.  Only by
main force did we succeed in restoring peace.  It is but fair to state
that, except on the celebration of one or two solemn and sacred rites
such as that of the _Loohou_, these island Thyades never touch fermented
liquors.




