CHAPTER VII


THE next winter we lay for a couple of months off Chinhai, which we had
stormed, blockading the mouth of the Ningpo river.  Here, I regret to
think, I committed an act which has often haunted my conscience as a
crime; although I had frequently promised the captain of a gun a glass of
grog to let me have a shot, and was mightily pleased if death and
destruction rewarded my aim.

Off Chinhai, lorchers and fast sailing junks laden with merchandise would
try to run the blockade before daylight.  And it sometimes happened that
we youngsters had a long chase in a cutter to overhaul them.  This meant
getting back to a nine or ten o’clock breakfast at the end of the
morning’s watch; equivalent to five or six hours’ duty on an empty
stomach.

One cold morning I had a hard job to stop a small junk.  The men were
sweating at their oars like galley slaves, and muttering curses at the
apparent futility of their labour.  I had fired a couple of shots from a
‘brown Bess’—the musket of the day—through the fugitive’s sails; and
fearing punishment if I let her escape, I next aimed at the boat herself.
Down came the mainsail in a crack.  When I boarded our capture, I found I
had put a bullet through the thigh of the man at the tiller.  Boys are
not much troubled with scruples about bloodguiltiness, and not
unfrequently are very cruel, for cruelty as a rule (with exceptions)
mostly proceeds from thoughtlessness.  But when I realised what I had
done, and heard the wretched man groan, I was seized with remorse for
what, at a more hardened stage, I should have excused on the score of
duty.

It was during this blockade that the accident, which I have already
alluded to, befell my dear protector, Jack Johnson.

One night, during his and my middle watch, the forecastle sentries hailed
a large sampan, like a Thames barge, drifting down stream and threatening
to foul us.  Sir Frederick Nicholson, the officer of the watch, ordered
Johnson to take the cutter and tow her clear.

I begged leave to go with him.  Sir Frederick refused, for he at once
suspected mischief.  The sampan was reached and diverted just before she
swung athwart our bows.  But scarcely was this achieved, when an
explosion took place.  My friend was knocked over, and one or two of the
men fell back into the cutter.  This is what had happened: Johnson
finding no one in the sampan, cautiously raised one of the deck hatches
with a boat-hook before he left the cutter.  The mine (for such it
proved) was so arranged that examination of this kind drew a lighted
match on to the magazine, which instantly exploded.

Poor Jack! what was my horror when we got him on board!  Every trace of
his handsome features was gone.  He was alive, and that seemed to be all.
In a few minutes his head and face swelled so that all was a round black
charred ball.  One could hardly see where the eyes were, buried beneath
the powder-ingrained and incrusted flesh.

For weeks, at night, I used to sit on a chest near his hammock, listening
for his slightest movement, too happy if he called me for something I
could get him.  In time he recovered, and was invalided home, and I lost
my dear companion and protector.  A couple of years afterwards I had the
happiness to dine with him on board another ship in Portsmouth, no longer
in the midshipman’s berth, but in the wardroom.

Twice during this war, the ‘Blonde’ was caught in a typhoon.  The first
time was in waters now famous, but then unknown, the Gulf of Liau-tung,
in full sight of China’s great wall.  We were twenty-four hours battened
down, and under storm staysails.  The ‘Blenheim,’ with Captain Elliott
our plenipotentiary on board, was with us, and the one circumstance left
in my memory is the sight of a line-of-battle ship rolling and pitching
so that one caught sight of the whole of her keel from stem to stern as
if she had been a fishing smack.  We had been wintering in the Yellow
Sea, and at the time I speak of were on a foraging expedition round the
Liau-tung peninsula.  Those who have followed the events of the Japanese
war will have noticed on the map, not far north of Ta-lien-wan in the
Korean Bay, three groups of islands.  So little was the geography of
these parts then known, that they had no place on our charts.  On this
very occasion, one group was named after Captain Elliott, one was called
the Bouchier Islands, and the other the Blonde Islands.  The first
surveying of the two latter groups, and the placing of them upon the map,
was done by our naval instructor, and he always took me with him as his
assistant.

Our second typhoon was while we were at anchor in Hong Kong harbour.
Those who have knowledge only of the gales, however violent, of our
latitudes, have no conception of what wind-force can mount to.  To be the
toy of it is enough to fill the stoutest heart with awe.  The harbour was
full of transports, merchant ships, opium clippers, besides four or five
men-of-war, and a steamer belonging to the East India Company—the first
steamship I had ever seen.

The coming of a typhoon is well known to the natives at least twenty-four
hours beforehand, and every preparation is made for it.  Boats are
dragged far up the beach; buildings even are fortified for resistance.
Every ship had laid out its anchors, lowered its yards, and housed its
topmasts.  We had both bowers down, with cables paid out to extreme
length.  The danger was either in drifting on shore or, what was more
imminent, collision.  When once the tornado struck us there was nothing
more to be done; no men could have worked on deck.  The seas broke by
tons over all; boats beached as described were lifted from the ground,
and hurled, in some instances, over the houses.  The air was darkened by
the spray.

But terrible as was the raging of wind and water, far more awful was the
vain struggle for life of the human beings who succumbed to it.  In a
short time almost all the ships except the men-of-war, which were better
provided with anchors, began to drift from their moorings.  Then wreck
followed wreck.  I do not think the ‘Blonde’ moved; but from first to
last we were threatened with the additional weight and strain of a
drifting vessel.  Had we been so hampered our anchorage must have given
way.  As a single example of the force of a typhoon, the ‘Phlegethon’
with three anchors down, and engines working at full speed, was blown
past us out of the harbour.

One tragic incident I witnessed, which happened within a few fathoms of
the ‘Blonde.’  An opium clipper had drifted athwart the bow of a large
merchantman, which in turn was almost foul of us.  In less than five
minutes the clipper sank.  One man alone reappeared on the surface.  He
was so close, that from where I was holding on and crouching under the
lee of the mainmast I could see the expression of his face.  He was a
splendidly built man, and his strength and activity must have been
prodigious.  He clung to the cable of the merchantman, which he had
managed to clasp.  As the vessel reared between the seas he gained a few
feet before he was again submerged.  At last he reached the hawse-hole.
Had he hoped, in spite of his knowledge, to find it large enough to admit
his body?  He must have known the truth; and yet he struggled on.  Did he
hope that, when thus within arms’ length of men in safety, some pitying
hand would be stretched out to rescue him,—a rope’s end perhaps flung out
to haul him inboard?  Vain desperate hope!  He looked upwards: an
imploring look.  Would Heaven be more compassionate than man?  A mountain
of sea towered above his head; and when again the bow was visible, the
man was gone for ever.

Before taking leave of my seafaring days, I must say one word about
corporal punishment.  Sir Thomas Bouchier was a good sailor, a gallant
officer, and a kind-hearted man; but he was one of the old school.
Discipline was his watchword, and he endeavoured to maintain it by
severity.  I dare say that, on an average, there was a man flogged as
often as once a month during the first two years the ‘Blonde’ was in
commission.  A flogging on board a man-of-war with a ‘cat,’ the nine
tails of which were knotted, and the lashes of which were slowly
delivered, up to the four dozen, at the full swing of the arm, and at the
extremity of lash and handle, was very severe punishment.  Each knot
brought blood, and the shock of the blow knocked the breath out of a man
with an involuntary ‘Ugh!’ however stoically he bore the pain.

I have seen many a bad man flogged for unpardonable conduct, and many a
good man for a glass of grog too much.  My firm conviction is that the
bad man was very little the better; the good man very much the worse.
The good man felt the disgrace, and was branded for life.  His
self-esteem was permanently maimed, and he rarely held up his head or did
his best again.  Besides which,—and this is true of all punishment—any
sense of injustice destroys respect for the punisher.  Still I am no
sentimentalist; I have a contempt for, and even a dread of,
sentimentalism.  For boy housebreakers, and for ruffians who commit
criminal assaults, the rod or the lash is the only treatment.

A comic piece of insubordination on my part recurs to me in connection
with flogging.  About the year 1840 or 1841, a midshipman on the Pacific
station was flogged.  I think the ship was the ‘Peak.’  The event created
some sensation, and was brought before Parliament.  Two frigates were
sent out to furnish a quorum of post-captains to try the responsible
commander.  The verdict of the court-martial was a severe reprimand.
This was, of course, nuts to every midshipman in the service.

Shortly after it became known I got into a scrape for laughing at, and
disobeying the orders of, our first-lieutenant,—the head of the executive
on board a frigate.  As a matter of fact, the orders were ridiculous, for
the said officer was tipsy.  Nevertheless, I was reported, and had up
before the captain.  ‘Old Tommy’ was, or affected to be, very angry.  I
am afraid I was very ‘cheeky.’  Whereupon Sir Thomas did lose his temper,
and threatened to send for the boatswain to tie me up and give me a
dozen,—not on the back, but where the back leaves off.  Undismayed by the
threat, and mindful of the episode of the ‘Peak’ (?) I looked the old
gentleman in the face, and shrilly piped out, ‘It’s as much as your
commission is worth, sir.’  In spite of his previous wrath, he was so
taken aback by my impudence that he burst out laughing, and, to hide it,
kicked me out of the cabin.

After another severe attack of fever, and during a long convalescence, I
was laid up at Macao, where I enjoyed the hospitality of Messrs. Dent and
of Messrs. Jardine and Matheson.  Thence I was invalided home, and took
my passage to Bombay in one of the big East India tea-ships.  As I was
being carried up the side in the arms of one of the boatmen, I overheard
another exclaim: ‘Poor little beggar.  He’ll never see land again!’

The only other passenger was Colonel Frederick Cotton, of the Madras
Engineers, one of a distinguished family.  He, too, had been through the
China campaign, and had also broken down.  We touched at Manila, Batavia,
Singapore, and several other ports in the Malay Archipelago, to take in
cargo.  While that was going on, Cotton, the captain, and I made
excursions inland.  Altogether I had a most pleasant time of it till we
reached Bombay.

My health was now re-established; and after a couple of weeks at Bombay,
where I lived in a merchant’s house, Cotton took me to Poonah and
Ahmadnagar; in both of which places I stayed with his friends, and messed
with the regiments.  Here a copy of the ‘Times’ was put into my hands;
and I saw a notice of the death of my father.

After a fortnight’s quarantine at La Valetta, where two young
Englishmen—one an Oxford man—shared the same rooms in the fort with me,
we three returned to England; and (I suppose few living people can say
the same) travelled from Naples to Calais before there was a single
railway on the Continent.

At the end of two months’ leave in England I was appointed to the
‘Caledonia,’ flagship at Plymouth.  Sir Thomas Bouchier had written to
the Admiral, Sir Edward Codrington, of Navarino fame (whose daughter Sir
Thomas afterwards married), giving me ‘a character.’  Sir Edward sent for
me, and was most kind.  He told me I was to go to the Pacific in the
first ship that left for South America, which would probably be in a week
or two; and he gave me a letter to his friend, Admiral Thomas, who
commanded on that station.

About this time, and for a year or two later, the relations between
England and America were severely strained by what was called ‘the Oregon
question.’  The dispute was concerning the right of ownership of the
mouth of the Columbia river, and of Vancouver’s Island.  The President as
well as the American people took the matter up very warmly; and much
discretion was needed to avert the outbreak of hostilities.

In Sir Edward’s letter, which he read out and gave to me open, he
requested Admiral Thomas to put me into any ship ‘that was likely to see
service’; and quoted a word or two from my dear old captain Sir Thomas,
which would probably have given me a lift.

The prospect before me was brilliant.  What could be more delectable than
the chance of a war?  My fancy pictured all sorts of opportunities,
turned to the best account,—my seniors disposed of, and myself, with a
pair of epaulets, commanding the smartest brig in the service.

Alack-a-day! what a climb down from such high flights my life has been.
The ship in which I was to have sailed to the west was suddenly
countermanded to the east.  She was to leave for China the following
week, and I was already appointed to her, not even as a ‘super.’

My courage and my ambition were wrecked at a blow.  The notion of
returning for another three years to China, where all was now peaceful
and stale to me, the excitement of the war at an end, every port
reminding me of my old comrades, visions of renewed fevers and horrible
food,—were more than I could stand.

I instantly made up my mind to leave the Navy.  It was a wilful, and
perhaps a too hasty, impulse.  But I am impulsive by nature; and now that
my father was dead, I fancied myself to a certain extent my own master.
I knew moreover, by my father’s will, that I should not be dependent upon
a profession.  Knowledge of such a fact has been the ruin of many a
better man than I.  I have no virtuous superstitions in favour of
poverty—quite the reverse—but I am convinced that the rich man, who has
never had to earn his position or his living, is more to be pitied and
less respected than the poor man whose comforts certainly, if not his
bread, have depended on his own exertions.

My mother had a strong will of her own, and I could not guess what line
she might take.  I also apprehended the opposition of my guardians.  On
the whole, I opined a woman’s heart would be the most suitable for an
appeal _ad misericordiam_.  So I pulled out the agony stop, and worked
the pedals of despair with all the anguish at my command.

‘It was easy enough for her to _revel in luxury_ and consign me to a life
worse than a _convict’s_.  But how would _she_ like to live on _salt
junk_, to keep _night watches_, to have to cut up her blankets for
_ponchos_ (I knew she had never heard the word, and that it would tell
accordingly), to save her from being _frozen to death_?  How would _she_
like to be mast-headed when a ship was rolling gunwale under?  As to the
wishes of my guardians, were _their feelings_ to be considered before
mine?  I should like to see Lord Rosebery or Lord Spencer in my place!
They’d very soon wish they had a mother who &c. &c.’

When my letter was finished I got leave to go ashore to post it.  Feeling
utterly miserable, I had my hair cut; and, rendered perfectly reckless by
my appearance, I consented to have what was left of it tightly curled
with a pair of tongs.  I cannot say that I shared in any sensible degree
the pleasure which this operation seemed to give to the artist.  But when
I got back to the ship the sight of my adornment kept my messmates in an
uproar for the rest of the afternoon.

Whether the touching appeal to my mother produced tears, or of what kind,
matters little; it effectually determined my career.  Before my new ship
sailed for China, I was home again, and in full possession of my coveted
freedom as a civilian.




