The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Silesian Horseherd - Questions of the
Hour by Friedrich Max Müller



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Silesian Horseherd - Questions of the Hour

Author: Friedrich Max Müller

Release Date: January 15, 2008 [Ebook #24315]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILESIAN HORSEHERD - QUESTIONS OF THE HOUR***





                         *The Silesian Horseherd*

                           *(Das Pferdebürla)*

                    Questions of the Hour Answered By

                          *Friedrich Max Müller*

                        Translated From The German

                           By Oscar A. Fechter

                              With A Forward

                       By J. Estlin Carpenter, M.A.

                         Longmans, Green, and Co.

                        39 Paternoster Row, London

                           New York and Bombay

                                  *1903*





CONTENTS


Preface
Chapter I.
Chapter II.
Chapter III.
Chapter IV.
Chapter V.
Chapter VI.
Footnotes






PREFACE


The story of this volume is soon told. In July, 1895, Professor Max Müller
contributed to the _Deutsche Rundschau_ an essay on the lost treatise
against Christianity by the philosopher Celsus, known to us through the
reply of Origen of Alexandria. This essay, entitled “The ‘True History’(1)
of Celsus,” contained an exposition of the doctrine of the Logos and its
place in Christian teaching, with reference also to its applications in
our modern thought. Among the comments upon it which in due time found
their way to Oxford, was a vigorous, if familiar, letter (dated February,
1896) from a German emigrant to the United States, residing in
Pennsylvania, who signed himself by the unusual name of the _Pferdebürla_,
or “Horseherd.”(2) His criticisms served as a fair sample of others; and
his letter was published with a reply from Professor Max Müller in the
_Rundschau_ of November, 1896. More letters poured in upon the unwearied
scholar who had thus set aside precious time out of his last years to
answer his unknown correspondent. One of these, from “Ignotus Agnosticus,”
supplied a text for further comment, and the whole grew into a little
popular _apologia_, which was published at Berlin in 1899, and entitled
_Das Pferdebürla_, or “Questions of the Day answered by Friedrich Max
Müller.”

The veteran teacher thus enforced once more his ideas of the relation of
language and thought, in which he had long since recognised the clue to
man’s knowledge of the relation of his spirit to God. This inner union he
found realised in Christ, according to the testimony of the Fourth
Gospel;(3) and the lucid treatment of this great conception, freed from
the technicalities of theology, will possibly prove to some readers the
most helpful portion of this book. Ranging over many topics, once the
themes of vehement controversy, the discussion has often an intimate,
familiar, personal air. The disputants on opposite sides had drawn nearer;
they could better understand each other’s points of view.(4) These pages,
therefore, reveal the inmost beliefs of one who had devoted more than
fifty years to the study of the history of religious thought on the widest
scale, and had himself passed through severe struggles and deep griefs
with unshaken calm. No reader of Max Müller’s writings, or of the _Life
and Letters_, can fail to recognise in these trusts the secret unity of
all his labours. The record of human experience contained in the great
sacred literatures of the world, and verified afresh in manifold forms
from age to age, provided a basis for faith which no philosophy or science
could disturb.

This is the key to the reasonings and appeals of this little book. It was
translated as a labour of love by Mr. Fechter, Mayor of North Yakima, in
the United States. The translation has been revised on this side of the
Atlantic, and is now offered to the public in the belief that this final
testimony of a “voice that is still” to the reality of “things unseen”
will be welcome to many inquiring and perhaps troubled minds.

J. ESTLIN CARPENTER.
OXFORD, April 2, 1903.





