The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Temptation of St. Antony; Or, A Revelation of the Soul
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Temptation of St. Antony; Or, A Revelation of the Soul

Author: Gustave Flaubert


        
Release date: April 12, 2008 [eBook #25053]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/25053

Credits: Produced by Thierry Alberto, Henry Craig and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Thierry Alberto, Henry Craig and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











   THE TEMPTATION
   OF
   ST. ANTONY

   OR,

   _A REVELATION OF THE SOUL_

   BY
   GUSTAVE FLAUBERT

   _VOLUME VII._


   SIMON P. MAGEE
   PUBLISHER
   CHICAGO, ILL.




   COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY
   M. WALTER DUNNE

   _Entered at Stationers' Hall, London_




   CONTENTS

   THE TEMPTATION OF ST. ANTONY


   CHAPTER I.                                                       PAGE

   A HOLY SAINT                                                        1

   CHAPTER II.

   THE TEMPTATION OF LOVE AND POWER                                   16

   CHAPTER III.

   THE DISCIPLE, HILARION                                             40

   CHAPTER IV.

   THE FIERY TRIAL                                                    48

   CHAPTER V.

   ALL GODS, ALL RELIGIONS                                            99

   CHAPTER VI.

   THE MYSTERY OF SPACE                                              143

   CHAPTER VII.

   THE CHIMERA AND THE SPHINX                                        151




   ILLUSTRATIONS


   TEMPTATION OF SAINT ANTONY

                                                             FACING PAGE

   "DO NOT RESIST, I AM OMNIPOTENT!" (See page 157)        _Frontispiece_

   HE LETS GO THE TORCH IN ORDER TO EMBRACE THE HEAP                  26




The Temptation _of_ Saint Antony


[Illustration]




CHAPTER I.

A HOLY SAINT.


It is in the Thebaïd, on the heights of a mountain, where a platform,
shaped like a crescent, is surrounded by huge stones.

The Hermit's cell occupies the background. It is built of mud and reeds,
flat-roofed and doorless. Inside are seen a pitcher and a loaf of black
bread; in the centre, on a wooden support, a large book; on the ground,
here and there, bits of rush-work, a mat or two, a basket and a knife.

Some ten paces or so from the cell a tall cross is planted in the
ground; and, at the other end of the platform, a gnarled old palm-tree
leans over the abyss, for the side of the mountain is scarped; and at
the bottom of the cliff the Nile swells, as it were, into a lake.

To right and left, the view is bounded by the enclosing rocks; but, on
the side of the desert, immense undulations of a yellowish ash-colour
rise, one above and one beyond the other, like the lines of a sea-coast;
while, far off, beyond the sands, the mountains of the Libyan range form
a wall of chalk-like whiteness faintly shaded with violet haze. In
front, the sun is going down. Towards the north, the sky has a
pearl-grey tint; while, at the zenith, purple clouds, like the tufts of
a gigantic mane, stretch over the blue vault. These purple streaks grow
browner; the patches of blue assume the paleness of mother-of-pearl. The
bushes, the pebbles, the earth, now wear the hard colour of bronze, and
through space floats a golden dust so fine that it is scarcely
distinguishable from the vibrations of light.

Saint Antony, who has a long beard, unshorn locks, and a tunic of
goatskin, is seated, cross-legged, engaged in making mats. No sooner has
the sun disappeared than he heaves a deep sigh, and gazing towards the
horizon:

"Another day! Another day gone! I was not so miserable in former times
as I am now! Before the night was over, I used to begin my prayers; then
I would go down to the river to fetch water, and would reascend the
rough mountain pathway, singing a hymn, with the water-bottle on my
shoulder. After that, I used to amuse myself by arranging everything in
my cell. I used to take up my tools, and examine the mats, to see
whether they were evenly cut, and the baskets, to see whether they were
light; for it seemed to me then that even my most trifling acts were
duties which I performed with ease. At regulated hours I left off my
work and prayed, with my two arms extended. I felt as if a fountain of
mercy were flowing from Heaven above into my heart. But now it is dried
up. Why is this? ..."

He proceeds slowly into the rocky enclosure.

"When I left home, everyone found fault with me. My mother sank into a
dying state; my sister, from a distance, made signs to me to come back;
and the other one wept, Ammonaria, that child whom I used to meet every
evening, beside the cistern, as she was leading away her cattle. She ran
after me. The rings on her feet glittered in the dust, and her tunic,
open at the hips, fluttered in the wind. The old ascetic who hurried me
from the spot addressed her, as we fled, in loud and menacing tones.
Then our two camels kept galloping continuously, till at length every
familiar object had vanished from my sight.

"At first, I selected for my abode the tomb of one of the Pharaohs. But
some enchantment surrounds those subterranean palaces, amid whose gloom
the air is stifled with the decayed odour of aromatics. From the depths
of the sarcophagi I heard a mournful voice arise, that called me by
name--or rather, as it seemed to me, all the fearful pictures on the
walls started into hideous life. Then I fled to the borders of the Red
Sea into a citadel in ruins. There I had for companions the scorpions
that crawled amongst the stones, and, overhead, the eagles who were
continually whirling across the azure sky. At night, I was torn by
talons, bitten by beaks, or brushed with light wings; and horrible
demons, yelling in my ears, hurled me to the earth. At last, the drivers
of a caravan, which was journeying towards Alexandria, rescued me, and
carried me along with them.

"After this, I became a pupil of the venerable Didymus. Though he was
blind, no one equalled him in knowledge of the Scriptures. When our
lesson was ended, he used to take my arm, and, with my aid, ascend the
Panium, from whose summit could be seen the Pharos and the open sea.
Then we would return home, passing along the quays, where we brushed
against men of every nation, including the Cimmerians, clad in bearskin,
and the Gymnosophists of the Ganges, who smear their bodies with
cow-dung. There were continual conflicts in the streets, some of which
were caused by the Jews' refusal to pay taxes, and others by the
attempts of the seditious to drive out the Romans. Besides, the city is
filled with heretics, the followers of Manes, of Valentinus, of
Basilides, and of Arius, all of them eagerly striving to discuss with
you points of doctrine and to convert you to their views.

"Their discourses sometimes come back to my memory; and, though I try
not to dwell upon them, they haunt my thoughts.

"I next took refuge in Colzin, and, when I had undergone a severe
penance, I no longer feared the wrath of God. Many persons gathered
around me, offering to become anchorites. I imposed on them a rule of
life in antagonism to the vagaries of Gnosticism and the sophistries of
the philosophers. Communications now reached me from every quarter, and
people came a great distance to see me.

"Meanwhile, the populace continued to torture the confessors; and I was
led back to Alexandria by an ardent thirst for martyrdom. I found on my
arrival that the persecution had ceased three days before. Just as I was
returning, my path was blocked by a great crowd in front of the Temple
of Serapis. I was told that the Governor was about to make one final
example. In the centre of the portico, in the broad light of day, a
naked woman was fastened to a pillar, while two soldiers were scourging
her. At each stroke her entire frame writhed. Suddenly, she cast a wild
look around, her trembling lips parted; and, above the heads of the
multitude, her figure wrapped, as it were, in her flowing hair,
methought I recognised Ammonaria. ... Yet this one was taller--and
beautiful, exceedingly!"

He draws his hand across his brow.

"No! no! I must not think upon it!

"On another occasion, Athanasius asked me to assist him against the
Arians. At that time, they had confined themselves to attacking him with
invectives and ridicule. Since then, however, he has been calumniated,
deprived of his see, and banished. Where is he now? I know not! People
concern themselves so little about bringing me any news! All my
disciples have abandoned me, Hilarion like the rest.

"He was, perhaps, fifteen years of age when he came to me, and his mind
was so much filled with curiosity that every moment he was asking me
questions. Then he would listen with a pensive air; and, without a
murmur, he would run to fetch whatever I wanted--more nimble than a kid,
and gay enough, moreover, to make even a patriarch laugh. He was a son
to me!"

The sky is red; the earth completely dark. Agitated by the wind, clouds
of sand rise, like winding-sheets, and then fall again. All at once, in
a clear space in the heavens, a flock of birds flits by, forming a kind
of triangular battalion, resembling a piece of metal with its edges
alone vibrating.

Antony glances at them.

"Ah! how I should like to follow them! How often, too, have I not
wistfully gazed at the long boats with their sails resembling wings,
especially when they bore away those who had been my guests! What happy
times I used to have with them! What outpourings! None of them
interested me more than Ammon. He described to me his journey to Rome,
the Catacombs, the Coliseum, the piety of illustrious women, and a
thousand other things. And yet I was unwilling to go away with him! How
came I to be so obstinate in clinging to this solitary life? It might
have been better for me had I stayed with the monks of Nitria when they
besought me to do so. They occupy separate cells, and yet communicate
with one another. On Sunday the trumpet calls them to the church, where
you may see three whips hung up, which are reserved for the punishment
of thieves and intruders, for they maintain very severe discipline.

"Nevertheless, they do not stand in need of gifts, for the faithful
bring them eggs, fruit, and even instruments for removing thorns from
their feet. There are vineyards around Pisperi, and those of Pabenum
have a raft, in which they go forth to seek provisions.

"But I should have served my brethren more effectually by being a simple
priest. I might succour the poor, administer the sacraments, and guard
the purity of domestic life. Besides, all the laity are not lost, and
there was nothing to prevent me from being, for example, a grammarian or
a philosopher. I should have had in my room a sphere made of reeds,
tablets always in my hand, young people around me, and a crown of laurel
suspended as an emblem over my door.

"But there is too much pride in such triumphs! Better be a soldier. I
was strong and courageous enough to manage engines of war, to traverse
gloomy forests, or, with helmet on head, to enter smoking cities. More
than this, there would be nothing to hinder me from purchasing with my
earnings the office of toll-keeper of some bridge, and travellers would
relate to me their histories, pointing out to me heaps of curious
objects which they had stowed away in their baggage.

"On festival days the merchants of Alexandria sail along the Canopic
branch of the Nile and drink wine from cups of lotus, to the sound of
tambourines, which make all the taverns near the river shake. Beyond,
trees, cut cone-fashion, protect the peaceful farmsteads against the
south wind. The roof of each house rests on slender columns running
close to one another, like the framework of a lattice, and, through
these spaces, the owner, stretched on a long seat, can gaze out upon his
grounds and watch his servants thrashing corn or gathering in the
vintage, and the cattle trampling on the straw. His children play along
the grass; his wife bends forward to kiss him."

Through the deepening shadows of the night pointed snouts reveal
themselves here and there with ears erect and glittering eyes. Antony
advances towards them. Scattering the wind in their wild rush, the
animals take flight. It was a troop of jackals.

One of them remains behind, and, resting on two paws, with his body bent
and his head on one side, he places himself in an attitude of defiance.

"How pretty he looks! I should like to pass my hand softly over his
back."

Antony whistles to make him come near. The jackal disappears.

"Ah! he is gone to join his fellows. Oh! this solitude! this weariness!"

Laughing bitterly:

"This is such a delightful life--to twist palm branches in the fire to
make shepherds' crooks, to turn out baskets and fasten mats together,
and then to exchange all this handiwork with the Nomads for bread that
breaks your teeth! Ah! wretched me! will there never be an end of this?
But, indeed, death would be better! I can bear it no longer! Enough!
Enough!"

He stamps his foot, and makes his way through the rocks with rapid step,
then stops, out of breath, bursts into sobs, and flings himself upon the
ground.

The night is calm; millions of stars are trembling in the sky. No sound
is heard save the chattering of the tarantula.

The two arms of the cross cast a shadow on the sand. Antony, who is
weeping, perceives it.

"Am I so weak, my God? Courage! Let us arise!"

He enters his cell, finds there the embers of a fire, lights a torch,
and places it on the wooden stand, so as to illumine the big book.

"Suppose I take--the 'Acts of the Apostles'--yes, no matter where!

"'_He saw the sky opened with a great linen sheet which was let down by
its four corners, wherein were all kinds of terrestrial animals and wild
beasts, reptiles and birds. And a voice said to him: Arise, Peter! Kill
and eat!_'

"So, then, the Lord wished that His apostle should eat every kind of
food? ... whilst I ..."

Antony lets his chin sink on his breast. The rustling of the pages,
which the wind scatters, causes him to lift his head, and he reads:

"'_The Jews slew all their enemies with swords, and made a great carnage
of them, so that they disposed at will of those whom they hated._'

"There follows the enumeration of the people slain by them--seventy-five
thousand. They had endured so much! Besides, their enemies were the
enemies of the true God. And how they must have enjoyed their vengeance,
completely slaughtering the idolaters! No doubt the city was gorged with
the dead! They must have been at the garden gates, on the staircases,
and packed so closely together in the various rooms that the doors could
not be closed! But here am I plunging into thoughts of murder and
bloodshed!"

He opens the book at another passage.

"'_Nebuchadnezzar prostrated himself with his face on the ground and
adored Daniel._'

"Ah! that is good! The Most High exalts His prophets above kings. This
monarch spent his life in feasting, always intoxicated with sensuality
and pride. But God, to punish him, changed him into a beast, and he
walked on four paws!"

Antony begins to laugh; and, while stretching out his arms, disarranges
the leaves of the book with the tips of his fingers. Then his eyes fall
on these words:

"'_Ezechias felt great joy in coming to them. He showed them his
perfumes, his gold and silver, all his aromatics, his sweet-smelling
oils, all his precious vases, and the things that were in his
treasures._'

"I can imagine how they beheld, heaped up to the very ceiling, gems,
diamonds, darics. A man who possesses such an accumulation of these
things is not the same as others. While handling them, he assumes that
he holds the result of innumerable exertions, and that he has absorbed,
and can again diffuse, the very life of the people. This is a useful
precaution for kings. The wisest of them all was not wanting in it. His
fleets brought him ivory--and apes. Where is this? It is----"

He rapidly turns over the leaves.

"Ah! this is the place:

"'_The Queen of Sheba, being aware of the glory of Solomon, came to
tempt him, propounding enigmas._'

"How did she hope to tempt him? The Devil was very desirous to tempt
Jesus. But Jesus triumphed because He was God, and Solomon owing,
perhaps, to his magical science. It is sublime, this science; for--as a
philosopher has explained to me--the world forms a whole, all whose
parts have an influence on one another, like the different organs of a
single body. It is interesting to understand the affinities and
antipathies implanted in everything by Nature, and then to put them into
play. In this way one might be able to modify laws that appear to be
unchangeable."

At this point the two shadows traced behind him by the arms of the cross
project themselves in front of him. They form, as it were, two great
horns. Antony exclaims:

"Help, my God!"

The shadows resume their former position.

"Ah! it was an illusion--nothing more. It is useless for me to torment
my soul, I have no need to do so--absolutely no need!"

He sits down and crosses his arms.

"And yet methought I felt the approach ... But why should _he_ come?
Besides, do I not know his artifices? I have repelled the monstrous
anchorite who, with a laugh, offered me little hot loaves; the centaur
who tried to take me on his back; and that vision of a beautiful dusky
maid amid the sands, which revealed itself to me as the spirit of
voluptuousness."

Antony walks up and down rapidly.

"It is by my direction that all these holy retreats have been built,
full of monks wearing hair-cloths beneath their goatskins, and numerous
enough to furnish forth an army. I have healed diseases at a distance. I
have banished demons. I have waded through the river in the midst of
crocodiles. The Emperor Constantine has written me three letters; and
Balacius, who treated with contempt the letter I sent him, has been torn
by his own horses. The people of Alexandria, whenever I reappeared
amongst them, fought to get a glimpse of me; and Athanasius was my guide
when I took my departure. But what toils, too, I have had to undergo!
Here, for more than thirty years, have I been constantly groaning in the
desert! I have carried on my loins eighty pounds of bronze, like
Eusebius; I have exposed my body to the stings of insects, like
Macarius; I have remained fifty-three nights without closing an eye,
like Pachomius; and those who are decapitated, torn with pincers, or
burnt, possess less virtue, perhaps, inasmuch as my life is a continual
martyrdom!"

Antony slackens his pace.

"Certainly there is no one who undergoes so much mortification.
Charitable hearts are growing fewer, and people never give me anything
now. My cloak is worn out, and I have no sandals, nor even a porringer;
for I gave all my goods and chattels to the poor and my own family,
without keeping a single obolus for myself. Should I not need a little
money to get the tools that are indispensable for my work? Oh! not
much--a little sum! ... I would husband it.

"The Fathers of Nicæa were ranged in purple robes on thrones along the
wall, like the Magi; and they were entertained at a banquet, while
honours were heaped upon them, especially on Paphnutius, merely because
he has lost an eye and is lame since Dioclesian's persecution! Many a
time the Emperor has kissed his injured eye. What folly! Moreover, the
Council had such worthless members! Theophilus, a bishop of Scythia;
John, another, in Persia; Spiridion, a cattle-drover. Alexander was too
old. Athanasius ought to have made himself more agreeable to the Arians
in order to get concessions from them!

"How is it they dealt with me? They would not even give me a hearing! He
who spoke against me--a tall young man with a curling beard--coolly
launched out captious objections; and while I was trying to find words
to reply to him, they kept looking at me with malignant glances, barking
at me like hyenas. Ah! if I could only get them all sent into exile by
the Emperor, or rather smite them, crush them, behold them suffering. I
have much to suffer myself!"

He sinks swooning against the wall of his cell.

"This is what it is to have fasted overmuch! My strength is going. If I
had eaten, only once, a morsel of meat!"

He half-closes his eyes languidly.

"Ah! for some red flesh ... a bunch of grapes to nibble, some curds that
would quiver on a plate!

"But what ails me now? What ails me now? I feel my heart dilating like
the sea when it swells before the storm. An overwhelming weakness bows
me down, and the warm atmosphere seems to waft towards me the odour of
hair. Still, there is no trace of a woman here."

He turns towards the little pathway amid the rocks.

"This is the way they come, poised in their litters on the black arms of
eunuchs. They descend, and, joining together their hands, laden with
rings, they kneel down. They tell me their troubles. The need of a
superhuman voluptuousness tortures them. They would like to die; in
their dreams they have seen gods who called them by name; and the edges
of their robes fall round my feet. I repel them. 'Oh! no,' they say to
me, 'not yet! What must I do?' Any penance will appear easy to them.
They ask me for the most severe: to share in my own, to live with me.

"It is a long time now since I have seen any of them! Perhaps, though,
this is what is about to happen? And why not? If suddenly I were to hear
the mule-bells ringing in the mountains. It seems to me ..."

Antony climbs upon a rock, at the entrance of the path, and bends
forward, darting his eyes into the darkness.

"Yes! down there, at the very end, there is a moving mass, like people
who are trying to pick their way. Here it is! They are making a
mistake."

Calling out:

"On this side! Come! Come!"

The echo repeats:

"Come! Come!"

He lets his arms fall down, quite dazed.

"What a shame! Ah! poor Antony!"

And immediately he hears a whisper:

"Poor Antony."

"Is that anyone? Answer!"

It is the wind passing through the spaces between the rocks that causes
these intonations, and in their confused sonorities he distinguishes
voices, as if the air were speaking. They are low and insinuating, a
kind of sibilant utterance:

_The first_--"Do you wish for women?"

_The second_--"Nay; rather great piles of money."

_The third_--"A shining sword."

_The others_--"All the people admire you."

"Go to sleep."

"You will cut their throats. Yes! you will cut their throats."

At the same time, visible objects undergo a transformation. On the edge
of the cliff, the old palm-tree, with its cluster of yellow leaves,
becomes the torso of a woman leaning over the abyss, and poised by her
mass of hair.

Antony re-enters his cell, and the stool which sustains the big book,
with its pages filled with black letters, seems to him a bush covered
with swallows.

"Without doubt, it is the torch that is making this play of light. Let
us put it out!"

He puts it out, and finds himself in profound darkness.

And, suddenly, through the midst of the air, passes first, a pool of
water, then a prostitute, the corner of a temple, a figure of a soldier,
and a chariot with two white horses prancing.

These images make their appearance abruptly, in successive shocks,
standing out from the darkness like pictures of scarlet above a
background of ebony.

Their motion becomes more rapid; they pass in a dizzy fashion. At other
times they stop, and, growing pale by degrees, dissolve--or, rather,
they fly away, and instantly others arrive in their stead.

Antony droops his eyelids.

They multiply, surround, besiege him. An unspeakable terror seizes hold
of him, and he no longer has any sensation but that of a burning
contraction in the epigastrium. In spite of the confusion of his brain,
he is conscious of a tremendous silence which separates him from all the
world. He tries to speak; impossible! It is as if the link that bound
him to existence was snapped; and, making no further resistance, Antony
falls upon the mat.




