PART II

  'The Sun now rose upon the right:
  Out of the sea came he,
  Still hid in mist, and on the left
  Went down into the sea.

  And the good south wind still blew behind,
  But no sweet bird did follow,
  Nor any day for food or play
  Came to the mariners' hollo!

His shipmates cry out against the ancient Mariner for killing the bird
of good luck.

  And I had done an hellish thing,
  And it would work 'em woe:
  For all averr'd, I had kill'd the bird
  That made the breeze to blow.
  Ah wretch! said they, the bird to slay,
  That made the breeze to blow!

But when the fog cleared off, they justify the same, and thus make
themselves accomplices in the crime.

  Nor dim nor red, like God's own head,
  The glorious Sun uprist:
  Then all averr'd, I had kill'd the bird
  That brought the fog and mist.
  'Twas right, said they, such birds to slay,
  That bring the fog and mist.

The fair breeze continues; the ship enters the Pacific Ocean, and
sails northward, even till it reaches the Line.

  The fair breeze blew, the white foam flew,
  The furrow follow'd free;
  We were the first that ever burst
  Into that silent sea.

The ship hath been suddenly becalmed.

  Down dropt the breeze, the sails dropt down,
  'Twas sad as sad could be;
  And we did speak only to break
  The silence of the sea!

  All in a hot and copper sky,
  The bloody Sun, at noon,
  Right up above the mast did stand,
  No bigger than the Moon.

  Day after day, day after day,
  We stuck, nor breath nor motion;
  As idle as a painted ship
  Upon a painted ocean.

And the Albatross begins to be avenged.

  Water, water, everywhere,
  And all the boards did shrink;
  Water, water, everywhere,
  Nor any drop to drink.

  The very deep did rot: O Christ!
  That ever this should be!
  Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs
  Upon the slimy sea.

  About, about, in reel and rout
  The death-fires danced at night;
  The water, like a witch's oils,
  Burnt green, and blue, and white.

A Spirit had followed them; one of the invisible inhabitants of this
planet, neither departed souls nor angels; concerning whom the learned
Jew, Josephus, and the Platonic Constantinopolitan, Michael Psellus,
may be consulted. They are very numerous, and there is no climate or
element without one or more.

  And some in dreams assured were
  Of the Spirit that plagued us so;
  Nine fathom deep he had followed us
  From the land of mist and snow.

  And every tongue, through utter drought,
  Was wither'd at the root;
  We could not speak, no more than if
  We had been choked with soot.

The shipmates in their sore distress, would fain throw the whole guilt
on the ancient Mariner: in sign whereof they hang the dead sea-bird
round his neck.

  Ah! well a-day! what evil looks
  Had I from old and young!
  Instead of the cross, the Albatross
  About my neck was hung.

PART III

  'There passed a weary time. Each throat
  Was parch'd, and glazed each eye.
  A weary time! a weary time!
  How glazed each weary eye!
  When looking westward, I beheld
  A something in the sky.

The ancient Mariner beholdeth a sign in the element afar off.

  At first it seem'd a little speck,
  And then it seem'd a mist;
  It moved and moved, and took at last
  A certain shape, I wist.

  A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist!
  And still it near'd and near'd:
  As if it dodged a water-sprite,
  It plunged, and tack'd, and veer'd.

   At its nearer approach, it seemeth him to be a ship; and at a dear
   ransom he freeth his speech from the bonds of thirst.

  With throats unslaked, with black lips baked,
  We could nor laugh nor wail;
  Through utter drought all dumb we stood!
  I bit my arm, I suck'd the blood,
  And cried, A sail! a sail!

A flash of joy;

  With throats unslaked, with black lips baked,
  Agape they heard me call:
  Gramercy! they for joy did grin,
  And all at once their breath drew in,
  As they were drinking all.

And horror follows. For can it be a ship that comes onward without
wind or tide?

  See! see! (I cried) she tacks no more!
  Hither to work us weal--
  Without a breeze, without a tide,
  She steadies with upright keel!

  The western wave was all aflame,
  The day was wellnigh done!
  Almost upon the western wave
  Rested the broad, bright Sun;
  When that strange shape drove suddenly
  Betwixt us and the Sun.

It seemeth him but the skeleton of a ship.

  And straight the Sun was fleck'd with bars
  (Heaven's Mother send us grace!),
  As if through a dungeon-grate he peer'd
  With broad and burning face.

  Alas! (thought I, and my heart beat loud)
  How fast she nears and nears!
  Are those her sails that glance in the Sun,
  Like restless gossameres?

And its ribs are seen as bars on the face of the setting Sun. The
Spectre-Woman and her Death-mate, and no other on board the skeleton
ship. Like vessel, like crew!

  Are those her ribs through which the Sun
  Did peer, as through a grate?
  And is that Woman all her crew?
  Is that a Death? and are there two?
  Is Death that Woman's mate?

  Her lips were red, her looks were free,
  Her locks were yellow as gold:
  Her skin was as white as leprosy,
  The Nightmare Life-in-Death was she,
  Who thicks man's blood with cold.

Death and Life-in-Death have diced for the ship's crew, and she (the
latter) winneth the ancient Mariner.

  The naked hulk alongside came,
  And the twain were casting dice;
  "The game is done! I've won! I've won!"
  Quoth she, and whistles thrice.

No twilight within the courts of the Sun.

  The Sun's rim dips; the stars rush out:
  At one stride comes the dark;
  With far-heard whisper, o'er the sea,
  Off shot the spectre-bark.

  We listen'd and look'd sideways up!
  Fear at my heart, as at a cup,
  My life-blood seem'd to sip!
  The stars were dim, and thick the night,
  The steersman's face by his lamp gleam'd white;
  From the sails the dew did drip--
  Till clomb above the eastern bar
  The horned Moon, with one bright star
  Within the nether tip.

At the rising of the Moon,
One after another,

  One after one, by the star-dogg'd Moon,
  Too quick for groan or sigh,
  Each turn'd his face with a ghastly pang,
  And cursed me with his eye.

His shipmates drop down dead.

  Four times fifty living men
  (And I heard nor sigh nor groan),
  With heavy thump, a lifeless lump,
  They dropp'd down one by one.

But Life-in-Death begins her work on the ancient Mariner.

  The souls did from their bodies fly--
  They fled to bliss or woe!
  And every soul, it pass'd me by
  Like the whizz of my crossbow!'

