XII.


REFRACTION WITHOUT THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR.


195.

Refraction can visibly take place without our perceiving an appearance
of colour. To whatever extent a colourless or uniformly coloured
surface may be altered as to its position by refraction, no colour
consequent upon refraction appears within it, provided it has no
outline or boundary. We may convince ourselves of this in various ways.

196.

Place a glass cube on any larger surface, and look through the glass
perpendicularly or obliquely, the unbroken surface opposite the eye
appears altogether raised, but no colour exhibits itself. If we look at
a pure grey or blue sky or a uniformly white or coloured wall through a
prism, the portion of the surface which the eye thus embraces will be
altogether changed as to its position, without our therefore observing
the smallest appearance of colour.




XIII.


CONDITIONS OF THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR.


197.

Although in the foregoing experiments we have found all unbroken
surfaces, large or small, colourless, yet at the outlines or
boundaries, where the surface is relieved upon a darker or lighter
object, we observe a coloured appearance.

198.

Outline, as well as surface, is necessary to constitute a figure or
circumscribed object. We therefore express the leading fact thus:
circumscribed objects must be displaced by refraction in order to the
exhibition of an appearance of colour.

199.

We place before us the simplest object, a light disk on a dark ground
(A).[1] A displacement occurs with regard to this object, if we
apparently extend its outline from the centre by magnifying it. This
may be done with any convex glass, and in this case we see a blue edge
(B).

200.

We can, to appearance, contract the circumference of the same light
disk towards the centre by diminishing the object; the edge will then
appear yellow (C). This may be done with a concave glass, which,
however, should not be ground thin like common eye-glasses, but must
have some substance. In order, however, to make this experiment at once
with the convex glass, let a smaller black disk be inserted within
the light disk on a black ground. If we magnify the black disk on a
white ground with a convex glass, the same result takes place as if we
diminished the white disk; for we extend the black outline upon the
white, and we thus perceive the yellow edge together with the blue edge
(D).

201.

These two appearances, the blue and yellow, exhibit themselves in and
upon the white: they both assume a reddish hue, in proportion as they
mingle with the black.[2]

[Illustration]

202.

In this short statement we have described the primordial phenomena of
all appearance of colour occasioned by refraction. These undoubtedly
may be repeated, varied, and rendered more striking; may be combined,
complicated, confused; but, after all, may be still restored to their
original simplicity.

203.

In examining the process of the experiment just given, we find that
in the one case we have, to appearance, extended the white edge upon
the dark surface; in the other we have extended the dark edge upon
the white surface, supplanting one by the other, pushing one over
the other. We will now endeavour, step by step, to analyse these and
similar cases.

204.

If we cause the white disk to move, in appearance, entirely from its
place, which can be done effectually by prisms, it will be coloured
according to the direction in which it apparently moves, in conformity
with the above laws. If we look at the disk _a_[3] through a prism,
so that it appear moved to _b_, the outer edge will appear blue and
blue-red, according to the law of the figure B (fig. 1), the other
edge being yellow, and yellow-red, according to the law of the figure
C (fig. 1). For in the first case the white figure is, as it were,
extended over the dark boundary, and in the other case the dark
boundary is passed over the white figure. The same happens if the disk
is, to appearance, moved from _a_ to _c_, from _a_ to _d_, and so
throughout the circle.

205.

As it is with the simple effect, so it is with more complicated
appearances. If we look through a horizontal prism (_a b_[4]) at a
white disk placed at some distance behind it at _e_, the disk will
be raised to _f_, and coloured according to the above law. If we
remove this prism, and look through a vertical one (_c d_) at the same
disk, it will appear at _h_, and coloured according to the same law.
If we place the two prisms one upon the other, the disk will appear
displaced diagonally, in conformity with a general law of nature, and
will be coloured as before; that is, according to its movement in the
direction, _e.g._:[5]

206.

If we attentively examine these opposite coloured edges, we find that
they only appear in the direction of the apparent change of place.
A round figure leaves us in some degree uncertain as to this: a
quadrangular figure removes all doubt.

207.

The quadrangular figure _a_,[6] moved in the direction _a b_ or _a d_
exhibits no colour on the sides which are parallel with the direction
in which it moves: on the other hand, if moved in the direction _a
c_, parallel with its diagonal, all the edges of the figure appear
coloured.[7]

208.

Thus, a former position (203) is here confirmed; viz. to produce
colour, an object must be so displaced that the light edges be
apparently carried over a dark surface, the dark edges over a light
surface, the figure over its boundary, the boundary over the figure.
But if the rectilinear boundaries of a figure could be indefinitely
extended by refraction, so that figure and background might only pursue
their course next, but not over each other, no colour would appear, not
even if they were prolonged to infinity.


[1] Plate 2, fig. 1.

[2] The author has omitted the orange and purple in the coloured
diagrams which illustrate these first experiments, from a wish probably
to present the elementary contrast, on which he lays a stress, in
greater simplicity. The reddish tinge would be apparent, as stated
above, where the blue and yellow are in contact with the black.--T.

[3] Plate 2, fig. 2

[4] Plate 2, fig. 4

[5] In this case, according to the author, the refracting medium being
increased in mass, the appearance of colour is increased, and the
displacement is greater.--T.

[6] Plate 2, fig. 3.

[7] Fig. 2, plate 1, contains a variety of forms, which, when viewed
through a prism, are intended to illustrate the statement in this and
the following paragraph.




