XVI.


DECREASE OF THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR.


243.

We need only take the five conditions (210) under which the appearance
of colour increases in the contrary order, to produce the contrary or
decreasing state; it may be as well, however, briefly to describe and
review the corresponding modifications which are presented to the eye.

244.

At the highest point of complete junction of the opposite edges, the
colours appear as follows (216):--

    Yellow-red.  Blue.
    Green.       Red.
    Blue-red.    Yellow.

245.

Where the junction is less complete, the appearance is as follows (214,
215):--

    Yellow-red.  Blue.
    Yellow.      Blue-red.
    Green.       Red.
    Blue.        Yellow-red.
    Blue-red.    Yellow.

Here, therefore, the surface still appears completely coloured, but
neither series is to be considered as an elementary series, always
developing itself in the same manner and in the same degrees; on the
contrary, they can and should be resolved into their elements; and, in
doing this, we become better acquainted with their nature and character.

246.

These elements then are (199, 200, 201)--

    Yellow-red.  Blue.
    Yellow.      Blue-red.
    White.       Black.
    Blue.        Yellow-red.
    Blue-red.    Yellow.

Here the surface itself, the original object, which has been hitherto
completely covered, and as it were lost, again appears in the centre of
the colours, asserts its right, and enables us fully to recognise the
secondary nature of the accessory images which exhibit themselves as
"edges" and "borders."--Note N.

247.

We can make these edges and borders as narrow as we please; nay, we
can still have refraction in reserve after having done away with all
appearance of colour at the boundary of the object.

Having now sufficiently investigated the exhibition of colour in this
phenomenon, we repeat that we cannot admit it to be an elementary
phenomenon. On the contrary, we have traced it to an antecedent and
a simpler one; we have derived it, in connexion with the theory of
secondary images, from the primordial phenomenon of light and darkness,
as affected or acted upon by semi-transparent mediums. Thus prepared,
we proceed to describe the appearances which refraction produces on
grey and coloured objects, and this will complete the section of
subjective phenomena.




XVII.

GREY OBJECTS DISPLACED BY REFRACTION.


248.

Hitherto we have confined our attention to black and white objects
relieved on respectively opposite grounds, as seen through the prism,
because the coloured edges and borders are most clearly displayed in
such cases. We now repeat these experiments with grey objects, and
again find similar results.

249.

As we called black the equivalent of darkness, and white the
representative of light (18), so we now venture to say that grey
represents half-shadow, which partakes more or less of light and
darkness, and thus stands between the two. We invite the reader to call
to mind the following facts as bearing on our present view.

250.

Grey objects appear lighter on a black than on a white ground (33);
they appear as a light on a black ground, and larger; as a dark on the
white ground, and smaller. (16.)

251.

The darker the grey the more it appears as a faint light on black, as a
strong dark on white, and _vice versâ_; hence the accessory images of
dark-grey on black are faint, on white strong: so the accessory images
of light-grey on white are faint, on black strong.

252.

Grey on black, seen through the prism, will exhibit the same
appearances as white on black; the edges are coloured according to the
same law, only the borders appear fainter. If we relieve grey on white,
we have the same edges and borders which would be produced if we saw
black on white through the prism.--Note O.

253.

Various shades of grey placed next each other in gradation will exhibit
at their edges, either blue and violet only, or red and yellow only,
according as the darker grey is placed over or under.

254.

A series of such shades of grey placed horizontally next each other
will be coloured conformably to the same law according as the whole
series is relieved, on a black or white ground above or below.

255.

The observer may see the phenomena exhibited by the prism at one
glance, by enlarging the plate intended to illustrate this section.[1]

256.

It is of great importance duly to examine and consider another
experiment in which a grey object is placed partly on a black and
partly on a white surface, so that the line of division passes
vertically through the object.

257.

The colours will appear on this grey object in conformity with the
usual law, but according to the opposite relation of the light to the
dark, and will be contrasted in a line. For as the grey is as a light
to the black, so it exhibits the red and yellow above the blue and
violet below: again, as the grey is as a dark to the white, the blue
and violet appear above the red and yellow below. This experiment will
be found of great importance with reference to the next chapter.


[1] It has been thought unnecessary to give all the examples in the
plate alluded to, but the leading instance referred to in the next
paragraph will be found in plate 3, fig. 1. The grey square when seen
through a prism will exhibit the effects described in par. 257.--T.




