XIV.


CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE APPEARANCE OF COLOUR INCREASES.


209.

We have seen in the foregoing experiments that all appearance of colour
occasioned by refraction depends on the condition that the boundary or
edge be moved in upon the object itself, or the object itself over the
ground, that the figure should be, as it were, carried over itself, or
over the ground. And we shall now find that, by increased displacement
of the object, the appearance of colour exhibits itself in a greater
degree. This takes place in subjective experiments, to which, for the
present, we confine ourselves, under the following conditions.

210.

First, if, in looking through parallel mediums, the eye is directed
more obliquely.

Secondly, if the surfaces of the medium are no longer parallel, but
form a more or less acute angle.

Thirdly, owing to the increased proportion of the medium, whether
parallel mediums be increased in size, or whether the angle be
increased, provided it does not attain a right angle.

Fourthly, owing to the distance of the eye armed with a refracting
medium from the object to be displaced.

Fifthly, owing to a chemical property that may be communicated to the
glass, and which may be afterwards increased in effect.

211.

The greatest change of place, short of considerable distortion of the
object, is produced by means of prisms, and this is the reason why the
appearance of colour can be exhibited most powerfully through glasses
of this form. Yet we will not, in employing them, suffer ourselves to
be dazzled by the splendid appearances they exhibit, but keep the above
well-established, simple principles calmly in view.

212.

The colour which is outside, or foremost, in the apparent change of an
object by refraction, is always the broader, and we will henceforth
call this a _border_: the colour that remains next the outline is the
narrower, and this we will call an _edge_.

213.

If we move a dark boundary towards a light surface, the yellow broader
border is foremost, and the narrower yellow-red edge follows close to
the outline. If we move a light boundary towards a dark surface, the
broader violet border is foremost, and the narrower blue edge follows.

214.

If the object is large, its centre remains uncoloured. Its inner
surface is then to be considered as unlimited (195): it is displaced,
but not otherwise altered: but if the object is so narrow, that under
the above conditions the yellow border can reach the blue edge, the
space between the outlines will be entirely covered with colour. If we
make this experiment with a white stripe on a black ground,[1] the two
extremes will presently meet, and thus produce green. We shall then see
the following series of colours:--

    Yellow-red.
    Yellow.
    Green.
    Blue.
    Blue-red.

215.

If we place a black band, or stripe, on white paper,[2] the violet
border will spread till it meets the yellow-red edge. In this case the
intermediate black is effaced (as the intermediate white was in the
last experiment), and in its stead a splendid pure red will appear.[3]
The series of colours will now be as follows:--

    Blue.
    Blue-red.
    Red.
    Yellow-red.
    Yellow.

216.

The yellow and blue, in the first case (214), can by degrees meet so
fully, that the two colours blend entirely in green, and the order will
then be,

    Yellow-red.
    Green.
    Blue-red.

In the second case (215), under similar circumstances, we see only

    Blue.
    Red.
    Yellow.

This appearance is best exhibited by refracting the bars of a window
when they are relieved on a grey sky.[4]

217.

In all this we are never to forget that this appearance is not to be
considered as a complete or final state, but always as a progressive,
increasing, and, in many senses, controllable appearance. Thus we
find that, by the negation of the above five conditions, it gradually
decreases, and at last disappears altogether.


[1] Plate 2, fig. 5, _left_.

[2] Plate 2, fig. 5, _right_.

[3] This pure red, the union of orange and violet, is considered by the
author the maximum of the coloured appearance: he has appropriated the
term _purpur_ to it. See paragraph 703, and _note_.--T.

[4] The bands or stripes in fig. 4, plate 1, when viewed through a
prism, exhibit the colours represented in plate 2, fig. 5.




