BOOK I

THE CONCEPTS OF PURE REASON[1381]


The distinction here drawn between concepts obtained by reflection and
concepts gained by inference is a somewhat misleading mode of stating
the fact that, whereas the categories of understanding condition
experience and so make possible the unity of consciousness necessary to
all reflection, or, in other words, are conditions of the material
supplied for inference, the concepts of Reason are Ideal constructions
which though in a certain sense resting upon experience none the less
transcend it. The function of the Ideas is to organise experience in its
totality; that of the categories is to render possible the
sense-perceptions constitutive of its content. The former refer to the
unconditioned, and though that is a conception under which everything
experienced is conceived to fall, it represents a type of knowledge to
which no actual experience can ever be adequate.

=Conceptus ratiocinati--conceptus ratiocinantes.= When such transcendent
concepts possess “objective validity,” they are correctly inferred, and
may be entitled _conceptus ratiocinati_. If, on the other hand, they are
due to merely sophistical[1382] reasoning, they are purely fictitious,
_conceptus ratiocinantes_. This distinction raises many difficulties.
Kant’s intention cannot be to deny that the _conceptus ratiocinati_ are
“mere Ideas” (_entia rationis_)[1383]--for such is his avowed and
constant contention--or that the inference to them is dialectical and is
based upon a transcendental illusion. Two alternatives are open. He may
mean that they are only valid when the results of such inference are
Critically reinterpreted, and when the function of the Ideas is realised
to be merely regulative; or his intention may be to mark off the Ideas,
strictly so-called, which are inevitable and beneficial products of
Reason, from the many idle and superfluous inventions of speculative
thought. Kant’s concluding remark, that the questions at issue can be
adequately discussed only at a later stage, may be taken as in the
nature of an apology for the looseness of these preliminary statements,
and as a warning to the reader not to insist upon them too absolutely.
The participles _ratiocinati_ and _ratiocinantes_[1384] are of doubtful
latinity. The distinction of meaning here imposed upon them has not been
traced in any other writer, and is perhaps Kant’s own invention.[1385]


SECTION I

IDEAS IN GENERAL[1386]

Kant connects his use of the term Idea with the meaning in which it is
employed by Plato. He urges upon all true lovers of philosophy the
imperative need of rescuing from misuse a term so indispensable to mark
a distinction more vital than any other to the very existence of the
philosophical disciplines.

     ”[For Plato] Ideas are the archetypes of the things themselves, and
     not, like the categories, merely keys to possible experiences. In
     his view they issued from the Supreme Reason, and from that source
     have come to be shared in by human Reason.... He very well realised
     that our faculty of knowledge feels a much higher need than merely
     to spell out appearances according to a synthetic unity, in order
     to read them as experience. He knew that our Reason naturally
     exalts itself to forms of knowledge which so far transcend the
     bounds of experience that no given empirical object can ever
     coincide with them, but which must none the less be recognised as
     having their own reality and which are by no means mere fictions of
     the brain.”[1387]

Plato found these ideas chiefly, though not exclusively, in the
practical sphere. When moral standards are in question, experience is
the mother of illusion.

     “For nothing can be more injurious or more unworthy of a
     philosopher than the vulgar appeal to so-called adverse experience.
     Such experience would never have existed at all, if those
     institutions had been established at the proper time in accordance
     with Ideas, and if Ideas had not been displaced by crude
     conceptions which, just because they have been derived from
     experience, have nullified all good intentions.”[1388]

Even in the natural sphere Ideas which are never themselves adequately
embodied in the actual must be postulated in order to account for the
actual. Certain forms of existences “are possible only according to
Ideas.”

     “A plant, an animal, the orderly arrangement of the
     cosmos--probably, therefore, the entire natural world--clearly show
     that they are possible only according to Ideas, and that though no
     single creature in the conditions of its individual existence
     coincides with the Idea of what is most perfect in its kind--just
     as little as does any individual man exactly conform to the Idea of
     humanity, which he actually carries in his soul as the archetype of
     his actions--yet these Ideas are none the less completely
     determined in the Supreme Understanding, each as an individual and
     each as unchangeable, and are the original causes of things. But
     only the totality of things, in their interconnection as
     constituting the universe, is completely adequate to the
     Idea.”[1389]

Though Kant avows the intention of adapting the term Idea freely to the
needs of his more Critical standpoint, all these considerations
contribute to the rich and varied meanings in which he employs it.

_Reflexionen_ and passages from the _Lectures on Metaphysics_ may be
quoted to show the thoroughly Platonic character of Kant’s early use of
the term, and to illustrate its gradual adjustment to Critical demands.

     “The Idea is the unity of knowledge, through which the manifold
     either of knowledge or of the object is possible. In the former,
     the whole of knowledge precedes its parts, the universal precedes
     the particular; in the latter, knowledge of the objects precedes
     their possibility, as _e.g._ in [objects that possess] order and
     perfection.”[1390] “That an object is possible only through a form
     of knowledge is a surprising statement; but all teleological
     relations are possible only through a form of knowledge [_i.e._ a
     concept].”[1391] “The Idea is single (_individuum_),
     self-sufficient, and eternal. The divinity of our soul is its
     capacity to form the Idea. The senses give only copies or rather
     _apparentia_.”[1392] “As the Understanding of God is the ground of
     all possibility, archetypes, Ideas, are in God.... The divine
     _Intuitus_ contains Ideas according to which we ourselves are
     possible; _cognitio divina est cognitio archetypa_, and His Ideas
     are archetypes of things. The [corresponding] forms of knowledge
     possessed by the human understanding we may also entitle (in a
     comparative sense) archetypes or Ideas. They are those
     representations of our understanding which serve for judgment upon
     things.”[1393] “Idea is the representation of the whole in so far
     as it necessarily precedes the determination of the parts. It can
     never be empirically represented, because in experience we proceed
     from the parts through successive synthesis to the whole. It is the
     archetype of things, for certain objects are only possible through
     an Idea. Transcendental Ideas are those in which the absolute whole
     determines the parts in an aggregate or as series.”[1394] “The pure
     concepts of Reason have no _exemplaria_; they are themselves
     archetypes. But the concepts of our pure Reason have as their
     archetypes this Reason itself and are therefore subjective, not
     objective.”[1395] “The transcendental Ideas serve to limit the
     principles of experience, forbidding their extension to things in
     themselves, and showing that what is never an object of possible
     experience is not therefore a non-entity [_Unding_], and that
     experience is not adequate either to itself or to Reason, but
     always refers us further to what is beyond itself.”[1396] “The
     employment of the concept of understanding was immanent, that of
     the Ideas as concepts of objects is transcendent. But as regulative
     principles alike of the completion and of the limitation of our
     knowledge, they are Critically immanent.”[1397] “The difficulties
     of metaphysics all arise in connection with the reconciling of
     empirical principles with Ideas. The possibility of the latter
     cannot be denied, but neither can they be made empirically
     intelligible. The Idea is never a _conceptus dabilis_; it is not an
     empirically possible conception.”[1398]

Kant[1399] appends the following ‘Stufenleiter’ (ladder-like)
arrangement of titles for the various kinds of representation.
Representation (_Vorstellung_) is the term which he substitutes for the
Cartesian and Lockian employment of the term idea, now reserved for use
in its true Platonic meaning. To entitle such a representation as that
of red colour an idea is, in Kant’s view, an intolerable and barbaric
procedure; that representation is not even a concept of the
understanding.

  Representation    {
  (_Vorstellung_,   { Perception =
  _Repraesentatio_) {  Representation     --->
  with or without   {  with consciousness
  consciousness     {

  -------------------------------------------------------------------

                                           { Idea (_Idee_) or concept of
                                           { Reason [formed, Kant here
                                           { says, from notions, but
                                    { Pure { transcending the possibility
                                    {      { of experience].
   { Objective =    { Concept       {      { Notion (_notio_) [= category
   { Knowledge      {  (_Begriff_)  {      { of understanding].
-->{ (_Erkenntnis_) {               { Empirical.
   {                { Intuition (_Anschauung_).
   { Subjective = Sensation (_Empfindung_).



SECTION II

THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS[1400]

This section completes the metaphysical deduction of the Ideas. In the
preceding sections on the logical and on the pure use of Reason, Kant
has pointed out that Reason proceeds in accordance with the principle,
that for the conditioned knowledge of understanding the unconditioned,
in which it finds completion, must be discovered. This principle is
synthetic, involving a concept which transcends the understanding; and
as Reason in its logical use is merely formal, that concept must be due
to Reason in its creative or transcendental activity. In the section
before us Kant deduces from the three kinds of syllogism the three
possible forms in which such an Idea of Reason can present itself. The
deduction is, as already noted, wholly artificial, and masks Kant’s real
method of obtaining the Ideas, namely, through combination of the unique
concept of the unconditioned with the three categories of relation. The
deduction is based upon an extremely ingenious analogy between the
logical function of Reason in deductive inference and its transcendental
procedure in prescribing the Ideal of unconditioned totality. In the
syllogism the predicate of the conclusion is shown to be connected with
its subject in accordance with a condition which is stated in its
universality in the major premiss. Thus if the conclusion be: Caius is
mortal, in constructing the syllogism, required to establish it, we seek
for a conception which contains the condition under which the predicate
is given--in this case the conception “man”--and we state that condition
in its universality: All men are mortal. Under this major premiss is
then subsumed Caius, the object dealt with: Caius is a man. And so
indirectly, by reference to the universal condition, we obtain the
knowledge that Caius is mortal. Universality, antecedently stated, is
restricted in the conclusion to a specific object. Now what corresponds
in the synthesis of intuition to the _universality_ (_universalitas_) of
a logical premiss is _allness_ (_universitas_) or _totality_ of
conditions. The transcendental concept of Reason, to which the logical
procedure is to serve as clue, can therefore be no other than that of
the totality of conditions for any given conditioned. And as totality of
conditions is equivalent to the _unconditioned_, this latter must be
taken as the fundamental concept of Reason; the unconditioned is
conceived as being the ground of the synthesis of everything
conditioned. But there are three species of relation, and consequently
there are three forms in which the concept of Reason seeks to realise
its demand for the unconditioned: (1) through categorical synthesis in
one subject, (2) through hypothetical synthesis of the members of a
series, and (3) through disjunctive synthesis of the parts in one
system. To these three correspond the three species of syllogism,
categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive, in each of which thought
passes through a regressive series of prosyllogisms back to an
unconditioned: the first to a concept which stands for what is always a
subject and never a predicate; the second to a presupposition which
itself presupposes nothing further; and the third to such an aggregate
of the members of the division as will make that division complete. It
may be observed that in this proof the threefold specification of the
concept of the unconditioned is really obtained directly from the
categories of relation, or at least from the judgments of relation, and
not from the corresponding species of syllogism.

Totality and unconditionedness, when taken as equivalent, become
synonymous with the _absolute_.[1401] This last term, however,
especially when taken as defining possibility and necessity, is
ambiguous. The absolutely possible may signify either that which in
itself, _i.e._ so far as regards its internal content, is possible; or
else that which is in every respect and in all relations possible. The
two meanings have come to be connected largely owing to the fact that
the internally impossible is impossible in every respect. Otherwise,
however, the two meanings fall completely apart. Absolute necessity and
inner necessity are quite diverse in character. We must not, for
instance, argue that the opposite of what is absolutely necessary must
be inwardly impossible, nor consequently that absolute necessity must in
the end reduce to an inner necessity. Examination will show that, in
certain types of cases, not the slightest meaning can be attached to the
phrase ‘inner necessity.’ As we possess the terms inner and logical to
denote the first form of necessity, there is no excuse for employing the
term absolute in any but the wider sense. That, Kant holds, is its
original and proper meaning. The _absolute_ totality to which the
concept of Reason refers is that form of completeness which is in every
respect unconditioned.

In A 326 = B 383 Kant’s mode of statement emphasises the connection of
the Ideas with the categories of relation. Reason, he claims, “seeks to
extend the synthetic unity, which is thought in the category, to the
absolutely unconditioned.” Such positive content as the Ideas can
possess lies in the experience which they profess to unify; in so far as
they transcend experience and point to an Ideal completion that is not
empirically attainable, they refer to things of which the understanding
can have no concept. It is necessary, however, that they should present
themselves in this absolute and transcendent form, since otherwise the
understanding would be without stimulus and without guidance. Though
mere Ideas, they are neither arbitrary nor superfluous. They regulate
the understanding in its empirical pursuit of that systematic unity
which it requires for its own satisfaction.

In A 327-8 = B 383-4 one and the same ground is assigned for entitling
the Ideas transcendental and also transcendent, namely, that, as they
surpass experience, no object capable of being given through the senses
corresponds to them. But a difference would none the less seem to be
implied in the connotation of the two terms. In being prescribed by the
very nature of Reason, they are transcendental; as overstepping the
limits of experience, they are transcendent. Kant’s use of the terms
subject and object in this passage is also somewhat puzzling. ‘Object’
is employed in the metaphysical sense proper only from the pre-Critical
standpoint of the _Dissertation_, as meaning an existence apprehended
through pure thought. The term ‘subject’ receives a correspondingly
un-Critical connotation. The further phrase “the merely speculative use
of Reason” is somewhat misleading, even though we recognise that for
Kant speculative and theoretical are synonymous terms; we should rather
expect “Reason in its legitimate or Critical or directive function.”
Kant’s intended meaning, however, is sufficiently clear. When we say
that a concept of Reason is an Idea merely, we have in mind the degree
to which it can be _empirically_ verified. We are asserting that it
prescribes an Ideal to which experience may be made to approach, but
which it can never attain. It defines “a problem to which there is no
solution.” In the practical sphere of morals, on the other hand, the
Ideal of Reason must never be so described. Though only partially
realisable, it is genuinely actual. Even those actions which imperfectly
embody it none the less presuppose it as their indispensable condition.
In two respects, therefore, as Kant points out, the statement that the
transcendental concepts of Reason are merely Ideas calls for
qualification. In the first place they are by no means “superfluous and
void.” They supply a canon for the fruitful employment of understanding.
And secondly, they may perhaps be found to make possible a transition
from natural to moral concepts, and so to bring the Ideas of practical
Reason into connection with the principles of speculative thought. The
reader may again note the genuinely Platonic character of Kant’s use of
the term Idea.

In A 330-1 = B 386-7 Kant returns to the problem of the metaphysical
deduction, and analyses the nature of syllogistic reasoning. The
analysis differs from that of A 321 ff. = C 377 ff. only in emphasising
that when a conclusion is given as valid the totality of the premisses
required for its establishment can be postulated as likewise given, and
that when completely stated in the implied prosyllogisms the premisses
form a regressive series. In this way Kant contrives to bring the
logical process into closer connection with the transcendental
principle, which he now definitively formulates as follows: When the
conditioned is given, the series of conditions up to the unconditioned
is likewise given. The series of antecedent conditions may either have a
first term or may be incapable of such. In either case it has to be
viewed as unconditioned, in the one case in virtue of its unconditioned
beginning, in the other in its character as an unending and therefore
unlimited series. In one or other form Reason demands that the
unconditioned be recognised as underlying and determining everything
conditioned.[1402]


SECTION III

SYSTEM OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS[1403]

The three Ideas of Reason, as derived from the three kinds of syllogism,
are now brought into connection with the three possible relations in
which representations are found to stand: first, to the thinking
subject; secondly, to objects as appearances; thirdly, to objects of
thought in general. Kant argues that the completed totalities towards
which Reason strives are likewise three in number. Reason seeks: (1) in
regard to the subject known, as constituting the fact of inner
experience, a representation of the self or soul that will render
completely intelligible what is peculiar to the inner life; (2) in
regard to the object known, a conception of the completed totality of
the world of phenomena, the cosmos; (3) in regard to the ultimate
synthesis of the subject known and the object known, such a conception
of all existing things as will render intelligible the co-operation of
mind and external nature in one experience. In this way Kant professes
to obtain transcendental justification for the threefold division of
metaphysical science into rational psychology, rational cosmology, and
rational theology. The absolute unity of the thinking subject is dealt
with by psychology, the totality of all appearances by cosmology, and
the Being, which contains the condition of the possibility of all that
can be thought, by theology.

In thus proceeding, Kant is assuming that the concepts of unconditioned
substance and of unconditioned necessity can be interpreted only in
spiritualist and theological terms.[1404] This assumption stands in
direct conflict with what the history of philosophy records. The
Absolute has frequently been materialistically defined, and, as Kant
himself admits, we cannot prove that the thinking subject may not be
naturalistically conditioned. Architectonic is again exercising its
baleful influence. That the argument is lacking in cogency is indeed so
evident that Kant takes notice of the deficiency,[1405] and promises
that it will be remedied in the sequel. This promise he is unable to
fulfil. Such further reasons as he is able to offer are of the same
external character.[1406]

“Of these transcendental Ideas, _strictly speaking, no objective
deduction, such as we were able to give of the categories, is
possible_.”[1407] As Kant indicates by use of the phrase ‘strictly
speaking,’ this statement is subject to modification. He himself
formulates a transcendental deduction of the Ideas, as principles
regulative of experience.[1408] The deduction from the three forms of
syllogism, which Kant here entitles subjective, ought properly to be
named ‘metaphysical.’[1409]




