CHAPTER III

THE ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON[1743]


Adickes[1744] very justly remarks that “this is a section after Kant’s
own heart, in which there is presented, almost unsought, the
opportunity, which he elsewhere so frequently creates for himself, of
indulging in his favourite hobby.” The section is of slight scientific
importance, and is chiefly of interest for the light which it casts upon
Kant’s personality. Moreover the distinctions which Kant here draws are
for the most part not his own philosophical property, but are taken over
from the Wolffian system.

The distinctions may be exhibited in tabular form as follows:[1745]


                                KNOWLEDGE

  +---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Historical|                                                               |
  |    or     |                                                               |
  | empirical |                 Rational (_cognitio ex principiis_)           |
  | (_cognitio_ |                                                             |
  | _ex datis_) |-------------------------------------------------------------|
  |-----------|Mathe- |Philosophical[1746] (based on pure concepts):--meta-   |
  |     |     |matics,| physics in the widest sense.                          |
  |Empi-|Empi-|based  |-------------------------------------------------------|
  |rical|rical|on the |Prop- |System of pure reason, both practical and       |
  |phys-|anth-|constr-|aedeu-|speculative: metaphysics in the wider sense.    |
  |iolo-|ropo-|uction |tic:  |------------------------------------------------|
  |gy   |logy |of con-|Cri-  |Metaph-|Metaphysics (in a more limited sense) of|
  |     |     |cepts. |tique.|ysics  | nature,[1747] _i.e_. of all that is.   |
  |     |     |       |      |of mor-|----------------------------------------|
  |     |     |       |      |als, _i.e._|Trans- |Physiology of pure reason.  |
  |     |     |       |      |of all |cend-  |--------------------------------|
  |     |     |       |      |ought  |ental  |  Immanent. |     Transcendent. |
  |     |     |       |      |to be. |phil-  |------------+-------------------|
  |     |     |       |      |       |osophy |Rat- |Rat-  |Cosmology| Theology|
  |     |     |       |      |       |of pure|ional|ional |    |    |   |     |
  |     |     |       |      |       |reason:|phy- |psych-|    -----|-----    |
  |     |     |       |      |       |ontol- |sics.|ology.|Metaphysics in the |
  |     |     |       |      |       |ogy.[1748]|          most limited sense.|
  +---------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Kant further distinguishes between the “scholastic” and the “universal”
or traditional meaning of the term philosophy.[1749] In the former sense
philosophy is viewed from the point of view of its _logical_ perfection,
and the philosopher appears as an _artist_ of Reason.[1750] Philosophy
in the broader and higher sense is “the science of the relation of all
knowledge to the essential ends of human Reason.”[1751] The philosopher
then appears as the _lawgiver_ of human Reason. Of the essential ends,
the _ultimate_ end is man’s moral destiny; to this the other essential
ends of human Reason are subordinate means. For though the legislation
of human Reason concerns nature as well as freedom, and has therefore to
be dealt with by a philosophy of nature, _i.e._ of _all that is_, as
well as by a philosophy of morals, _i.e._ of _that which ought to be_,
the former is subordinate to the latter in the same degree in which in
human life knowledge is subordinate to moral action. Whereas speculative
metaphysics serves rather to ward off errors than to extend
knowledge,[1752] in the metaphysics of morals “all culture [_Kultur_] of
human Reason”[1753] finds its indispensable completion.

Empirical psychology is excluded from the domain of metaphysics. It is
destined to form part of a complete system of anthropology, the pendant
to the empirical doctrine of nature.[1754]




CHAPTER IV

THE HISTORY OF PURE REASON[1755]


This title, as Kant states, is inserted only to mark the place of the
present chapter in a complete system of pure reason. The very cursory
outline, which alone Kant here attempts to give, merely repeats the main
historical distinctions of which the _Critique_ has made use. The
contrast between the sensationalism of Epicurus and the intellectualism
of Plato has been developed in A 465 ff. = B 493 ff.[1756] The contrast
between Locke and Leibniz is dwelt upon in A 43 ff. = B 60 ff. and A 270
ff. = B 326 ff. Under the title ‘naturalist of pure Reason’ Kant is
referring to the ‘common sense’ school, which is typically represented
by Beattie.[1757] In his _Logic_[1758] Kant gives a fuller account of
his interpretation of the history of philosophy.




APPENDIX B

A MORE DETAILED STATEMENT OF KANT’S RELATIONS TO HIS PHILOSOPHICAL
PREDECESSORS[1759]


The development of philosophy, prior to Kant, had rendered two problems
especially prominent--the problem of sense-perception and the problem of
judgment. The one raises the question of the interrelation of mind
knowing and objects known; the other treats of the connection holding
between subject and predicate in the various forms of judgment. The one
enquires how it is possible to know reality; the other seeks to
determine the criterion of truth. These two problems are, as Kant
discovered, inseparable from one another; and the logical is the more
fundamental of the two. Indeed it was Hume’s analysis of the judgment
involved in the causal principle that enabled Kant to formulate his
Critical solution of the problem of perception. In this Appendix I
propose to follow these problems as they rise into view in the systems
of Descartes and his successors.

Galileo’s revolutionary teaching regarding the nature of motion was the
immediate occasion of Descartes’ restatement of the problem of
perception. That teaching necessitated an entirely new view of the
nature of matter, and consequently of the interrelation of mind and
body. Questions never before seriously entertained now became pressing.
The solutions had to be as novel as the situation which they were
designed to meet.

These new problems arose in the following manner. According to the
medieval view, motion may properly be conceived on the analogy of human
activity. It comes into being, exhausts itself in exercise, and ceases
to be. It is a fleeting activity; only its “material” and “formal”
conditions have any permanence of existence. According to Galileo’s
teaching, on the other hand, motion is as different from human activity
as matter is from mind. It is ingenerable and indestructible. We know it
only through the effect which in some incomprehensible fashion it
produces in those bodies into which it enters, namely, their translation
from one part of space to another. That this translatory motion is
called by the same name as the power which generates it, doubtless in
some degree accounts for the fact that our understanding of the one
tends to conceal from us our entire ignorance of the other.[1760] We
have only to reflect, however, in order to realise that motion is
completely mysterious in its intrinsic dynamical nature. We cannot, for
instance, profess to comprehend, even in the least degree, how motion,
though incapable of existing apart from matter, should yet be
sufficiently independent to be able to pass from one body to another.

Descartes, following out some of the chief consequences of this new
teaching, concluded that matter is passive and inert, that it is
distinguished neither by positive nor by negative properties from the
space which it fills, and that it is to motion that all the articulated
organisation of animate and inanimate nature is due. Descartes failed,
indeed, to appreciate the dynamical character of motion, and by
constantly speaking as if it were reducible to the translatory motion,
in which it manifests itself, he represented it as known in all its
essential features. None the less, the rôles previously assigned to
matter and motion are, in Descartes’ system, completely reversed. Matter
is subordinated to motion as the instrument to the agency by which it is
directed and shaped. On the older view, material bodies had, through the
possession of formative and vital forces, all manner of intrinsic
powers. By the new view these composite and nondescript existences are
resolved into two elements, all the properties of which can be
quantitatively defined--into a matter which is uniform and homogeneous,
and into motion whose sole effect is the translation of bodies in space.
Matter is the passive and inert substance out of which motion, by its
mere mechanical powers, can produce the whole range of material forms.

This revolutionary change in the physical standpoint involved
restatement of the philosophical issues. But the resulting difficulties
were found thoroughly baffling. Though Descartes and his successors were
willing to adopt any hypothesis, however paradoxical, which the facts
might seem to demand, their theories, however modified and restated, led
only deeper into a hopeless _impasse_. The unsolved problems of the
Cartesian systems formed the discouraging heritage to which Kant fell
heir. If matter is always purely material, and motion is its sole
organising power, there can be no real kinship between body and mind.
The formative and vital forces, which in the Scholastic philosophy and
in popular thought serve to maintain the appearance of continuity
between matter and mind, can no longer be credited. Motion, which alone
is left to mediate between the opposites, is purely mechanical, and (on
Descartes’ view) is entirely lacking in inner or hidden powers. The
animal body is exclusively material, and is therefore as incapable of
feeling or consciousness as any machine made by human hands. The bodily
senses are not ‘sensitive’; the brain cannot think. Mental experiences
do, of course, accompany the brain-motions. But why a sensation should
thus arise when a particular motion is caused in the brain, or how a
mental resolution can be followed by a brain state, are questions to
which no satisfactory answer can be given. The mental and the material,
the spiritual and the mechanical, fall entirely apart.

The difficulties arising out of this incomprehensibility of the causal
interrelations of mind and body are not, however, in themselves a valid
argument against a dualistic interpretation of the real. The
difficulties of accounting for the causal relation are, in essential
respects, equally great even when the interaction is between homogeneous
existences. The difficulties are due to the nature of causal action as
such, not to the character of the bodies between which it holds. This,
indeed, was clearly recognised by Descartes, and was insisted upon by
his immediate successors. The transference of motion by impact is no
less incomprehensible than the interaction of soul and body. If motion
can exist only in matter, there is no possible method of conceiving how
it can make the transition from one discrete portion of matter to
another. Causal action is thus a problem which no philosophy can pretend
to solve, and which every philosophy, whether monistic or dualistic,
must recognise as transcending the scope of our present knowledge.

It is in another and more special form that Descartes’ dualism first
reveals its fatal defects, namely, in its bearing upon the problem of
sense-perception. Descartes can solve the problem of knowledge only by
first postulating the doctrine of representative perception. That
doctrine is rendered necessary by the dualism of mind and body. Objects
can be known only mediately by means of their action upon the
sense-organs, and through the sense-organs upon the brain. The resulting
brain states are in themselves merely forms of motion. They lead,
however, in a manner which Descartes never professes to explain,[1761]
to the appearance of sensations in the mental field. Out of these
sensations the mind then constructs mental images of the distant bodies;
and it is these mental images alone which are directly apprehended.
Material bodies are invisible and intangible; they are knowable only
through their mental duplicates. Thus, according to the doctrine of
representative perception, each mind is segregated in a world apart. It
looks out upon a landscape which is as mental and as truly inward as are
its feelings and desires. The apparently ultimate relation of mind
knowing and object known is rendered complex and problematic through the
distinction between mental objects and real things. Mental objects are
in all cases images merely. They exist only so long as they are
apprehended; and they are numerically and existentially distinct in each
individual mind. Real things are not immediately perceived; they are
hypothetically inferred. To ordinary consciousness the body which acts
on the sense-organ is the object known; when reflective consciousness is
philosophically enlightened, the object immediately known is recognised
as a merely mental image, and the external object sinks to the level of
an assumed cause.

The paradoxical character of this doctrine is accentuated by Galileo’s
distinction between primary and secondary qualities.[1762] Those
physical processes, which are entitled light and heat, bear no
resemblance to the sensations through which they become known. The
many-coloured world of ordinary consciousness is an illusory appearance
which can exist only in the human mind. We must distinguish between the
sensible world which, though purely mental, appears, through an
unavoidable illusion, to be externally real, and that very different
world of matter and motion which reveals its independent nature only to
reflective thinking. In the latter world the rich variety of sensuous
appearance can find no place. There remain only the quantitative,
mechanical properties of extension, figure and motion; and even these
have to be interpreted in the revolutionary fashion of physical science.

The doctrine of representative perception cannot, however, defend
successfully the positions which it thus involves. It wavers in unstable
equilibrium. The facts, physical and physiological, upon which it is
based, are in conflict with the conclusions in which it results. This
has been very clearly demonstrated by many writers in recent
times.[1763] The conflict manifested itself in the period between
Descartes and Kant only through the uneasy questionings of Locke and
Berkeley. The problem, fundamental though it be, is almost completely
ignored by Spinoza, Leibniz, and Wolff.

Stated in modern terms, the inherently contradictory character of the
doctrine consists in its unavoidable alternation between the realist
attitude to which it owes its origin, and the idealist conclusion in
which it issues. Such oscillation is due to the twofold simultaneous
relation in which it regards ideas as standing to the objects that they
are supposed to represent. The function of sensations is cognitive;
their origin is mechanical. As cognitive they stand to objects in a
relation of inclusion; they reveal the objects, reduplicating them in
image before the mind. Yet in their origin they are effects,
mechanically generated by the action of material bodies upon the
sense-organs and brain. As they are effects mechanically generated,
there is no guarantee that they resemble their causes; and if we may
argue from other forms of mechanical causation, there is little
likelihood that they do. They stand to their first causes in a relation
of exclusion, separated from them by a large number of varying
intermediate processes. There is thus a conflict between the function of
sensations and their origin. Their origin in the external objects is
supposed to confer upon them a representative power; and yet the very
nature of this origin invalidates any such claim.

This irreconcilability of the subjectivist consequences of the doctrine
with its realist basis was seized upon by Berkeley. To remove the
contradiction, he denied the facts from which the doctrine had been
developed. That is to say, starting from its results he disproved its
premisses. Arguing from the physical and physiological conditions of
perception Descartes had concluded that only sensations can be directly
apprehended by the mind. Berkeley starts from this conclusion, and
virtually adopts it as an assumption which cannot be questioned, and
which does not call for proof. Since, he contends, we know only
sensations, the assertion that they are due to material causes is mere
hypothesis, and is one for which there may be no valid grounds. As
Descartes himself had already suggested, there is a second possible
method of interpreting the relevant facts. There may exist an
all-powerful Being who produces the sensations in our minds from moment
to moment; and provided that they are produced in the same order as now,
the whole material world might be annihilated without our being in the
least aware that so important an event had taken place. Since we can
experience only sensations, any hypothesis which will account for the
order of their happening is equally legitimate. The whole question
becomes one of relative simplicity in the explanation given. The simpler
analysis, other things being equal, must hold the field.

Berkeley reinforces this argument by pointing to the many embarrassing
consequences to which Descartes’ dualism must lead. We postulate bodies
in order to account for the origin of our sensations, and yet are unable
to do so by their means. The dualistic theory creates more difficulties
than it solves, without a single counter-advantage, save perhaps--so
Berkeley argues--that it seems to harmonise better with the traditional
prejudices of the philosophic consciousness.

If we grant Berkeley his premisses, the main lines of his argument are
fairly cogent, however unconvincing may be his own positive views. The
crux, however, of the Berkeleian idealism lies almost exclusively in the
establishment of its fundamental assumption, that only ideas (_i.e._
images) can be known by the mind. This assumption Berkeley, almost
without argument, takes over from his predecessors. It was currently
accepted, and from it, therefore, he believed that he could safely
argue. It rests, however, upon the assumption of facts which he himself
questions. In rejecting the Cartesian dualism he casts down the ladder
by which alone it is possible to climb into his position. For save
through the facts of physics and physiology there seems to be no
possible method of disproving the belief of ordinary consciousness, that
in perception we apprehend independent material bodies. And until that
belief can be shown to be false and ungrounded, the Berkeleian idealism
is without support. It cannot establish the fundamental assumption upon
which its entire argument proceeds. Thus, though Berkeley convincingly
demonstrates the internal incoherence of the doctrine of representative
perception--the inconsistency of its conclusions with the physical and
physiological facts upon which alone it can be based--he cannot himself
solve the problem in answer to which that doctrine was propounded. His
services, like those of so many other reformers, were such as he did not
himself foresee. In simplifying the problem, he prepared the way for the
more sceptical treatment of its difficult issues by Hume.

At this point, in the philosophy of Hume, the problem of perception
comes into the closest possible connection with the logical problem,
referred to above. The question, how mind knowing is related to the
objects known, is found to depend upon the question, how in certain
crucial cases predicates may legitimately be referred to their subject.
This logical problem arises in two forms, a narrower and a wider. The
narrower issue concerns only the principle of causality. With what right
do we assert that every event must have a cause? What is the ground
which justifies us in thus predicating of events a causal character?
Obviously, this logical question is fundamental, and must be answered
before we can hope to solve the more special problem, as to our right to
interpret sensations as effects of material bodies. Hume was the first
to emphasise the vital interconnection of these two lines of enquiry.

The wider issue is the generating problem of Kant’s _Critique_: How in a
judgment can a predicate be asserted of a subject in which it is not
already involved? In other words, what is it that in such a case
justifies us in connecting the predicate with the subject? Though this
problem was never directly raised by any pre-Kantian thinker, not even
by Hume, it is absolutely vital to all the pre-Kantian systems. Thus
Descartes’ philosophy is based upon a distinction, nowhere explicitly
drawn but everywhere silently assumed, between abstract and fruitful
ideas. The former contain just so much content and no more; this content
may be explicitly unfolded in a series of judgments, but no addition is
thereby made to our knowledge. The latter, on the other hand, are
endowed with an extraordinary power of inner growth. To the attentive
mind they disclose a marvellous variety of inner meaning. The chief
problem of scientific method consists, according to Descartes, in the
discovery of these fruitful ideas, and in the separation of them from
the irrelevant accompaniments which prevent them from unfolding their
inner content. Once they are discovered, the steady progress of
knowledge is assured. They are the springs of knowledge, and from them
we have only to follow down the widening river of truth.

Descartes professed to give a complete list of the possible fruitful
ideas. They are, he claimed, better known than any other concepts. They
lie at the basis of all experience, and no one can possibly be ignorant
of them; though, owing to their simplicity and omnipresence, their
philosophical importance has been overlooked. When, however, Descartes
proceeded to classify them, he found that while such ideas as space,
triangle, number, motion, contain an inexhaustible content that is
progressively unfolded in the mathematical sciences, those ideas, on the
other hand, through which we conceive mental existences,--the notions of
mind, thought, self--do not by any means prove fruitful upon attentive
enquiry. As Malebranche later insisted, we can define mind only in
negative terms; its whole meaning is determined through its opposition
to the space-world, which alone is truly known. Though it is the
function of mind to know, it cannot know itself. And when we remove from
our list of ideas those which are not really fruitful, we find that only
mathematical concepts remain.[1764] They alone have this apparently
miraculous property of inexhaustibly developing before the mind.
Scientific knowledge is limited to the material world; and even there,
the limits of our mathematical insight are the limits of our knowledge.

Malebranche believed no less thoroughly than Descartes in the asserted
power and fruitfulness of mathematical concepts. Under the influence of
this belief, he developed, as so many other thinkers from Plato onwards
have done, a highly mystical theory of scientific knowledge. It is a
revelation of eternal truth, and yet is acquired by inner reflection,
not laboriously built up by external observation. It comes by searching
of the mind, not by exploration of the outer world. But Malebranche was
not content, like Descartes, merely to accept this type of knowledge. He
proceeded to account for it in metaphysical terms. The fruitfulness of
mathematical ideas is due, he claimed, to the fundamental concept of
extension in which they all share. This idea, representing, as it does,
an infinite existence, is too great to be contained within the finite
mind. Through it the mind is widened to the apprehension of something
beyond itself; we know it through consciousness of its archetype in the
mind of God. It is the one point at which consciousness transcends its
subjective limits. Its fruitfulness is due to, and is the manifestation
of, this divine source. The reason why we are condemned to remain
ignorant of everything beyond the sphere of quantity is that extension
alone holds this unique position. It is the only fruitful idea which the
mind possesses, and other concepts, such as triangle, circle, or number,
are fruitful only in proportion as they share in it. We can acquire no
genuine knowledge even of the nature of the self. Being ignorant of
mind, we cannot comprehend the self which is one of its modes. It is as
if we sought to comprehend the nature of a triangle, in the absence of
any conception of space. Were we in possession of the archetypal idea of
mind, we should not only be able to deduce from it those various
feelings and emotions which we have already experienced, and those
sensations of the secondary qualities which we falsely ascribe to the
influence of external objects, but we should also be able to discover by
pure contemplation innumerable other emotions and qualities, which
entirely transcend our present powers. And all of these would then be
experienced in their ideal nature, and not, as now, merely through
feeble and confused feeling. If mathematicians destroy their bodily
health through absorption in the progressive clarification of the
mysteries of space, what might not happen if the archetypal idea of mind
were revealed to us? Could we attend to the preservation of a body which
would incessantly distract us from the infinite and overwhelming
experiences of our divine destiny?

This romantic conception of the possibilities of rational science
reveals more clearly than any other Cartesian doctrine the real bearing
and perverse character of the rationalistic preconceptions which
underlie the Cartesian systems. The Cartesians would fain make rational
science, conceived on the analogy of the mathematical disciplines,
coextensive with the entire realm of the real. This grotesque enterprise
is conceived as abstractly possible even by so cautious a thinker as
John Locke. His reason for condemning the physical sciences as logically
imperfect is that they fail to conform to this rationalistic ideal.
Hence those sentences which sound so strangely in the mouth of Locke,
the sensationalist.

     “It is the contemplation of our abstract ideas that alone is able
     to afford us general knowledge.”[1765] “The true method of
     advancing knowledge is by considering our abstract ideas.”[1766]
     ”[Did we know the real essence of gold] it would be no more
     necessary that gold should exist, and that we should make
     experiments upon it, than it is necessary for the knowing of the
     properties of a triangle, that a triangle should exist in any
     matter: the idea in our minds would serve for the one as well as
     for the other.”[1767] “In the knowledge of bodies, we must be
     content to glean what we can from particular experiments, since we
     cannot, from a discovery of their real essences, grasp at a time
     whole sheaves, and in bundles comprehend the nature and the
     properties of whole species together.”[4]

Locke’s empirical doctrine of knowledge is thus based upon a
rationalistic theory of the real. It is not, he holds, the constitution
of reality, but the _de facto_ limitations of our human faculties which
make empirical induction the only practicable mode of discovery in
natural science. Indeed, Locke gives more extreme expression than even
Descartes does, to the mystically conceived mathematical method. Being
ignorant of mathematics, and not over well-informed even in the physical
sciences, Locke was not checked by any too close acquaintance with the
real character and necessary limits of this method; and he accordingly
makes statements in that unqualified fashion which seldom fails to
betray the writer who is expounding views which he has not developed for
himself by first-hand study of the relevant facts.

But though the unique character of mathematical knowledge thus forced
itself upon the attention of all the Cartesian thinkers, and in the
above manner led even the most level-headed of Descartes’ successors to
dream strange dreams, no real attempt was made (save in the neglected
writings of Leibniz) to examine, in a sober spirit, the grounds and
conditions of its possibility. In the English School, Locke’s eulogy of
abstract ideas served only to drive his immediate successors to an
opposite extreme. Both Berkeley and Hume attempted to explain away, in
an impossible manner, those fundamental differences, which, beyond all
questioning, profoundly differentiate mathematical from empirical
judgments.[1768] It is not surprising that Kant, who had no direct
acquaintance with Hume’s _Treatise_, should have asserted that had Hume
realised the bearing of his main teaching upon the theory of
mathematical science, he would have hesitated to draw his sceptical
conclusions. Such, however, was not the case. Hume’s theory of
mathematical reasoning undoubtedly forms the least satisfactory part of
his philosophy. He did, however, perceive the general bearing of his
central teaching. It was in large degree his ignorance of the
mathematical disciplines that concealed from him the thorough
unsatisfactoriness of his general position, and which prevented him from
formulating the logical problem in its full scope--the problem, namely,
how judgments which make additions to our previous knowledge, and yet do
not rest upon mere sensation, are possible. He treated it only as it
presents itself in those judgments which involve the concept of
causality.[1769] But this analysis of causal judgments awoke Kant from
his dogmatic slumber, and so ultimately led to the raising of the
logical problem in its widest form:--how synthetic _a priori_ judgments,
whether mathematical, physical, or metaphysical, are possible.

Hume discussed the causal problem both in regard to the general
principle of causality and in its bearing upon our particular judgments
of causal relation. The problems concerned in these two discussions are
essentially distinct. The first involves immensely wider issues, and so
far as can be judged from the existing circumstantial evidence,[1770] it
was this first discussion, not as has been so often assumed by Kant’s
commentators the second and more limited problem, which exercised so
profound an influence upon Kant at the turning-point of his
speculations. In stating it, it will be best to take Hume’s own words.

     “To begin with the first question concerning the necessity of a
     cause: ‘Tis a general maxim in philosophy, that _whatever begins to
     exist_, must have a cause of existence. This is commonly taken for
     granted in all reasonings, without any proof given or demanded.
     ‘Tis supposed to be founded on intuition, and to be one of those
     maxims, which though they may be deny’d with the lips, ‘tis
     impossible for men in their hearts really to doubt of. But if we
     examine this maxim by the idea of knowledge above explain’d we
     shall discover in it no mark of any such intuitive certainty; but
     on the contrary shall find, that ‘tis of a nature quite foreign to
     that species of conviction.”[1771]

The principle that every event must have a cause, is neither intuitively
nor demonstratively certain. So far from there existing a _necessary_
connection between the idea of an event as something happening in time
and the idea of a cause, no connection of any kind is discoverable by
us. We can conceive an object to be non-existent at this moment, and
existent the next, without requiring to conjoin with it the altogether
different idea of a productive source.

This had been implicitly recognised by those few philosophers who had
attempted to give demonstrations of the principle. By so doing, however,
they only reinforce Hume’s contention that it possesses no rational
basis. When Hobbes argues that as all the points of time and place in
which we can suppose an object to begin to exist, are in themselves
equal, there must be some cause determining an event to happen at one
moment rather than at another, he is assuming the very principle which
he professes to prove. There is no greater difficulty in supposing the
time and place to be fixed without a cause, than in supposing the
existence to be so determined. If the denial of a cause is not
intuitively absurd in the one case, it cannot be so in the other. If the
first demands a proof, so likewise must the second. Similarly with the
arguments advanced by Locke and Clarke. Locke argues that if anything is
produced without a cause, it is produced by nothing, and that that is
impossible, since nothing can never be a cause any more than it can be
something, or equal to two right angles. Clarke’s contention that if
anything were without a cause, it would produce _itself_, _i.e._ exist
before it existed, is of the same character. These arguments assume the
only point which is in question.

     “When we exclude all causes we really do exclude them, and neither
     suppose nothing nor the object itself to be the causes of the
     existence, and consequently can draw no argument from the absurdity
     of these suppositions to prove the absurdity of that
     exclusion.”[1772]

The remaining argument, that every effect must have a cause, since this
is implied in the very idea of an effect, is “still more frivolous.”

     “Every effect necessarily presupposes a cause; effect being a
     relative term, of which cause is the correlative. But this does not
     prove that every being must be preceded by a cause; no more than it
     follows, because every husband must have a wife, that therefore
     every man must be married.”[1773]

The far-reaching conclusion, that the principle of causality has no
possible rational basis, Hume extends and reinforces through his other
doctrines, viz. that synthetic reason[1774] is merely generalised
belief, and that belief is in all cases due to the ultimate instincts
and propensities which _de facto_ constitute our human nature. The
synthetic principles which lie at the basis of our experience are
non-rational in character. Each is due to a ‘blind and powerful
instinct,’ which, demanding no evidence, and ignoring theoretical
inconsistency for the sake of practical convenience, necessitates
belief.

     “Nature by an absolute and uncontrollable necessity has determined
     us to judge as well as to breathe and feel.”[1775] “All these
     operations are a species of natural instincts, which no reasoning
     or process of the thought and understanding is able either to
     produce or to prevent.”[1776]

Reason is “nothing but a wonderful and unintelligible instinct in our
souls.”[1777] It justifies itself by its practical uses, but can afford
no standard to which objective reality must conform.

It is from this point of view that Hume states his answer to the problem
of perception. Our natural belief in the permanence and identity of
objects, as expressed through the principle of substance and attribute,
leads us to interpret the objects of sense-perception as independent
realities. We interpret our subjective sensations as being qualities of
independent substances. Our other natural belief, in the dynamical
interdependence of events, as expressed through the principle of
causality, leads, however, to the opposite conclusion, that the known
objects are merely mental. For by it we are constrained to interpret
sensations, not as objective qualities, but only as subjective effects,
expressive of the reactions of our psycho-physical organism. The
Cartesian problems owe their origin to the mistaken attempt to
harmonise, in a theoretical fashion, these two conflicting principles.
The conflict is inevitable and the antinomy is insoluble, so long as the
two principles are regarded as objectively valid. The only satisfactory
solution comes through recognition that reason is unable to account,
save in reference to practical ends, even for its own inevitable
demands. The principle of substance and attribute and the principle of
causality co-operate in rendering possible such organisation of our
sense-experience as is required for practical life. But when we carry
this organisation further than practical life itself demands, the two
principles at once conflict.

Kant shows no interest in this constructive part of Hume’s philosophy;
and must, indeed, have been almost entirely ignorant of it, since it
finds only very imperfect expression in the _Enquiry_, and is ignored in
Beattie’s _Nature of Truth_. Accordingly, Kant does not regard Hume as
offering a positive explanation of knowledge, but rather as representing
the point of view of thoroughgoing scepticism. But even had he been
acquainted at first hand with Hume’s _Treatise_, he would undoubtedly
have felt little sympathy with Hume’s naturalistic view of the function
of reason. His training in the mathematical sciences would have enabled
him to detect the inadequacy of Hume’s treatment of mathematical
knowledge, and his strong moral convictions would have led him to rebel
against the naturalistic assumptions which underlie Hume’s entire
position. The Berkeley-Hume comedy is thus repeated with reversed rôles.
Just as Berkeley’s anti-materialistic philosophy was mainly influential
as a step towards the naturalism of Hume, and as such still survives in
the philosophies of John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, Huxley, Mach and
Karl Pearson, so in turn Hume’s anti-metaphysical theory of knowledge
was destined to be one of the chief contributory sources of the German
speculative movement.

We may now turn to Hume’s treatment of the narrower problem--that of
justifying our _particular_ causal judgments. Hume’s attitude towards
this question is predetermined by the more fundamental argument, above
stated, which precedes it in the _Treatise_, but which is entirely
omitted from the corresponding chapters of the _Enquiry_. As the general
principle of causality is of an irrational character, the same must be
true of those particular judgments which are based upon it. Much of
Hume’s argument on this question is, indeed, merely a restatement of
what had already been pointed out by his predecessors. There is no
necessary connection discoverable between _any_ cause and its effect.
This is especially evident as regards the connection between brain
states and mental experiences. No explanation can be given why a motion
in the brain should produce sensations in the mind, or why a mental
resolution should produce movements in the body. Such sequences may be
empirically verified; they cannot be rationally understood. That this
likewise holds, though in less obvious fashion, of the causal
interrelations of material bodies, had been emphasised by Geulincx,
Malebranche, Locke, and Berkeley. The fact that one billiard ball should
communicate motion to another by impact is, when examined, found to be
no less incomprehensible than the interaction of mind and body. Hume, in
the following passage, is only reinforcing this admitted fact, in terms
of his own philosophy.

     “We fancy that were we brought on a sudden into this world we could
     at first have inferred that one billiard ball would communicate
     motion to another upon impulse; and that we needed not to have
     waited for the event, in order to pronounce with certainty upon it.
     Such is the influence of custom, that, where it is strongest, it
     not only covers our natural ignorance, but even conceals itself,
     and seems not to take place merely because it is found in the
     highest degree.”[1778]

Nor are we conscious of any causal power within the self. When Berkeley
claims that mind has the faculty of producing images at will, he is
really ascribing to it creative agency. And such creation, as
Malebranche had already pointed out, is not even conceivable.

     “I deny that my will produces in me my ideas, for I cannot even
     conceive how it could produce them, since my will, not being able
     to act or will without knowledge, presupposes my ideas and does not
     make them.”[1779] “Is there not here,” Hume asks, “either in a
     spiritual or material substance, or both, some secret mechanism or
     structure of parts, upon which the effect depends, and which, being
     entirely unknown to us, renders the power or energy of the will
     equally unknown and incomprehensible?”[1780]

But the fact that Hume thus restates conclusions already emphasised by
his predecessors will not justify us in contending (as certain
historians of philosophy seem inclined to do) that in his treatment of
the causal problem he failed to make any important advance upon the
teaching of the Occasionalists. Hume was the first to perceive the
essential falsity of the Cartesian, rationalistic view of the causal
nexus. For Descartes, an effect is that which can be deduced with
logical necessity from the concept of its cause. The Occasionalists
similarly argued that because natural events can never be deduced from
one another they must in all cases be due to supernatural agency; like
Descartes, they one and all failed to comprehend that since by an effect
we mean that which follows _in time_ upon its cause, and since,
therefore, the principle of causality is the law of _change_, the nature
of causality cannot be expressed in logical terms. Hume was the first to
appreciate the significance of this fundamental fact; and an entirely
new set of problems at once came into view. If causal connection is not,
as previous thinkers had believed, logical in character, if it does not
signify logical dependence of the so-called effect upon its cause, its
true connotation must lie elsewhere; and until this has been traced to
its hidden source, any attempted solution of metaphysical problems is
certain to involve many false assumptions. The answer that is given to
the problem of the origin and content of the causal concept must
determine our interpretation alike of sense-experience and of pure
thought.

The problem presents on examination, however, a most paradoxical aspect.
As Hume has already shown, every effect is an event distinct from its
cause, and there is never any connection, beyond that of mere sequence,
discoverable between them. We observe only sequence; we assert necessary
connection. What, then, is in our minds when this latter assertion is
made? And how, if the notion of necessitated connection cannot be gained
through observation of the external events, is it acquired by us? Hume
again propounds a naturalistic solution. Causation, _i.e._
_necessitated_ sequence in time, is not in any sense a conception; it is
not a comprehended relation between events, but a misunderstood feeling
in our minds. We cannot form any, even the most remote, conception of
how one event can produce another. Neither imagination nor pure thought,
however freely they may act, are capable of inventing any such notion.
But nature, by the manner in which it has constituted our minds, deludes
us into the belief that we are in actual possession of this idea. The
repeated sequence of events, in fixed order, generates in us the feeling
of a tendency to pass from the perception or idea of the one to the idea
of the other. This feeling, thus generated by custom, and often in
somewhat confused fashion combined with the feeling of ‘animal nisus,’
which is experienced in bodily effort, is mistaken by the mind for a
definite concept of force, causality, necessary connection. As mere
feeling it can afford no insight into the relation holding between
events, and as merely subjective can justify no inference in regard to
that relation. The terms force, causality, necessitated sequence in
time, have a practical value, as names for our instinctive, natural
expectations; but when employed as instruments for the _theoretical_
interpretation of experience, they lead us off on a false trail.

This is one of the fundamental points upon which Hume reveals a deeper
speculative insight than either Malebranche, Geulincx, or Locke. Though
these latter insist upon our ignorance of the relation holding between
events, they still assume that causation and natural necessity are
concepts which have a quite intelligible meaning; and in consequence
they fail to draw the all-important conclusion, that the general
principle of causality has neither intuitive nor demonstrative validity.
For that is the revolutionary outcome of Hume’s analysis of the notion
of necessitated connection. The principle of causality is a synthetic
judgment in which no connection is discoverable between its subject and
its predicate. That is the reason why it is neither self-evident nor
capable of being established upon more ultimate grounds.

As has already been stated, the wider problem concerning the _principle_
of causality is developed only in the _Treatise_; the problem regarding
the _concept_ of causality is discussed both in the _Treatise_ and in
the _Enquiry_. An appreciation of the wider problem is required,
however, in order to set this second problem in its true light, for it
is only through its connection with the wider issue that Hume’s
reduction of the concept of causality to a merely instinctive,
non-rational expectation acquires its full significance. Hume’s analysis
then amounts, as Kant was the first to realise, to an attack upon the
objective validity of all constructive thinking. Not only rationalism,
but even such metaphysics as may claim to base its conclusions upon the
teaching of experience, is thereby rendered altogether impossible. The
issue is crucial, and must be honestly faced, before metaphysical
conclusions, no matter what their specific character may be, whether _a
priori_ or empirical, can legitimately be drawn. If we may not assert
that an event must have some cause, even the right to enquire for a
cause must first be justified. And if so fundamental a principle as that
of causality is not self-evident, are there any principles which can
make this claim?

The account which we have so far given of Hume’s argument covers only
that part of it which is directed against the rationalist position, and
which was therefore so influential in turning Kant on to the line of his
Critical speculations. But Hume attacked with equal vigour the
empiricist standpoint; and as this aspect of his teaching, constituting
as it did an integral part of Kant’s own philosophy, must undoubtedly
have helped to confirm Kant in his early rationalist convictions, we may
profitably dwell upon it at some length. In opposition to the
empiricists, Hume argues that experience is incapable of justifying any
inference in regard to matters of fact. It cannot serve as a basis from
which we can inductively extend our knowledge of facts beyond what the
senses and memory reveal. Inductive inference, when so employed,
necessarily involves a _petitio principii_; we assume the very point we
profess to have proved.

The argument by which Hume establishes this important contention is as
follows. All inductive reasoning from experience presupposes the
validity of belief in causal connection. For when we have no knowledge
of causes, we have no justification for asserting the continuance of
uniformities. Now it has been shown that we have no experience of any
necessary relation between so-called causes and their effects. The most
that experience can supply are sequences which repeat themselves. In
regarding the sequences as causal, and so as universally constant, we
make an assertion for which experience gives no support, and to which no
amount of repeated experience, recalled in memory, can add one jot of
real evidence. To argue that because the sequences have remained
constant in a great number of repeated experiences, they are therefore
more likely to remain constant, is to assume that constancy in the past
is a ground for inferring it in the future; and that is the very point
which demands proof. In drawing the conclusion we virtually assume that
there is a necessary connection, _i.e._ an absolutely constant
relation, between events. But since no _single_ experience of causal
sequence affords ground for inferring that the sequence will continue in
the future, no number of repeated experiences, recalled in memory, can
contribute to the strengthening of the inference. It is meaningless to
talk even of likelihood or probability. The fact that the sun has
without a single known exception arisen each day in the past does not
(if we accept the argument disproving all knowledge of necessary
connection) constitute _proof_ that it will rise to-morrow.

     “None but a fool or a madman will be unaffected in his expectations
     or natural beliefs by this constancy, but he is no philosopher who
     accepts this as in the nature of evidence.”[1781]

Since, for all that we know to the contrary, bodies may change their
nature and mode of action at any moment, it is vain to pretend that we
are scientifically assured of the future because of the past.

     “My practice, you say, refutes my doubts.[1782] But you mistake the
     purport of my question. As an agent, I am quite satisfied in the
     point; but as a philosopher, who has some share of curiosity, I
     will not say scepticism, I want to learn the foundation of this
     inference. No reading, no enquiry has yet been able to remove my
     difficulty or give me satisfaction in a matter of such importance.
     Can I do better than propose the difficulty to the public, even
     though, perhaps, I have small hopes of obtaining a solution? We
     shall at least, by this means, be sensible of our ignorance, if we
     do not augment our knowledge.”[1783]

Kant was the first, after thirty years, to take up this challenge.
Experience is no source of evidence until the causal postulate has been
_independently_ proved. Only if the principle of causality can be
established prior to all specific experience, only if we can
predetermine experience as necessarily conforming to it, are empirical
arguments valid at all. Hume’s enquiry thus directly leads to the later,
no less than to the earlier form of Kant’s epoch-making question.[1784]
In its earlier formulation it referred only to _a priori_ judgments; in
its wider application it was found to arise with equal cogency in
connection with empirical judgments. And as thus extended, it generated
the problem: How is sense-experience, regarded as a form of _knowledge_,
possible at all?[1785] By showing that the principle of causality has
neither intuitive nor demonstrative validity, Hume cuts the ground from
under the rationalists; by showing that sense-experience cannot by
itself yield conclusions which are objectively valid, he at the same
time destroys the empiricist position. In this latter contention Kant
stands in complete agreement with Hume. That the sensuously given is
incapable of grounding even probable inferences, is a fundamental
presupposition (never discussed, but always explicitly assumed) of the
Critical philosophy. It was by challenging the sufficiency of Hume’s
other line of argument, that which is directed against the rationalists,
that Kant discovered a way of escape from the sceptical dilemma. The
conditions of experience can be proved by a transcendental method,
which, though _a priori_ in character, does not lie open to Hume’s
sceptical objections. Each single experience involves rational
principles, and consequently even a single empirical observation may
suffice to justify an inductive inference. Experience conforms to the
demands of pure _a priori_ thought; and can legitimately be construed in
accordance with them.

We may now pass to the philosophy in which Kant was educated. It gave to
his thinking that rationalist trend, to which, in spite of all
counter-influences, he never ceased to remain true.[1786] It also
contributed to his philosophy several of its constructive principles.
Only two rationalist systems need be considered, those of Leibniz and of
Wolff. Kant, by his own admission,[1787] had been baffled in his
attempts (probably not very persevering) to master Spinoza’s philosophy.
It was with Wolff’s system that he was most familiar; but both directly
and indirectly, both in his early years and in the ’seventies, the
incomparably deeper teaching of Leibniz must have exercised upon him a
profoundly formative influence. In defining the points of agreement and
of difference between Hume and Leibniz,[1788] we have already outlined
Leibniz’s general view of the nature and powers of pure thought, and may
therefore at once proceed to the relevant detail of his main tenets.

Upon two fundamental points Leibniz stands in opposition to Spinoza. He
seeks to maintain the reality of the contingent or accidental. These
terms are indeed, as he conceives them, synonymous with the actual.
Necessity rules only in the sphere of the possible. Contingency or
freedom is the differentiating characteristic of the real. This point of
view is bound up with his second contention, namely, that the real is a
kingdom of ends. It is through divine choice of the best among the
possible worlds that the actual present order has arisen. There are thus
two principles which determine the real: the principle of contradiction
which legislates with absolute universality, and the principle of the
best, or, otherwise formulated, of sufficient reason, which
differentiates reality from truth, limiting thought, in order that,
without violating logic, it may freely satisfy the moral needs. Leibniz
thus vindicates against Spinoza the reality of freedom and the existence
of ends.

Though Leibniz agrees with Spinoza that the philosophically perfect
method would be to start from an adequate concept of the Divine Being,
and to deduce from His attributes the whole nature of finite reality, he
regards our concept of God as being too imperfect to allow of such
procedure. We are compelled to resort to experience, and by analysis to
search out the various concepts which it involves. By the study of these
concepts and their interrelations, we determine, in obedience to the law
of contradiction, the nature of the possible. The real, in
contradistinction from the possible, involves, however, the notion of
ends. The existence of these ends can never be determined by logical,
but only by moral considerations. The chief problem of philosophical
method is, therefore, to discover the exact relation in which the
logical and the teleological, the necessary and the contingent, stand to
one another.

The absence of contradiction is in itself a sufficient guarantee of
possibility, _i.e._ even of the possibility of real existence. How very
far Leibniz is willing to go on this line is shown by his acceptance of
the ontological argument. The whole weight of his system rests, indeed,
upon this proof. The notion of God is, he maintains, the sole concept
which can determine itself in a purely logical manner not only as
possible but also as real. If we are to avoid violating the principle of
contradiction, the _Ens perfectissimum_ must be regarded as possessing
the perfection of real existence. And since God is perfect in moral as
in all other attributes, His actions must be in conformity with moral
demands. In creating the natural order God must therefore have chosen
that combination of possibilities which constitutes the best of all
possible worlds. By means of this conceptual bridge we are enabled to
pass by pure _a priori_ thinking from the logically possible to the
factually real.

Pure logical thinking is thus an instrument whereby ultimate reality can
be defined in a valid manner. _Pure thought is speculative and
metaphysical in its very essence._ It uncovers to us what no experience
can reveal, the wider universe which exists eternally in the mind of
God. Every concept (whether mathematical, dynamical, or moral), provided
only that it is not self-contradictory, is an eternal essence, with the
intrinsic nature of which even God must reckon in the creation of
things. When, therefore, we are determining the unchanging nature of the
eternally possible, there is no necessary reference to Divine existence.
The purely logical criterion suffices as a test of truth. Every judgment
which is made in regard to such concepts must express only what their
content involves. All such judgments must be analytic in order to be
true.

When, however, we proceed from the possible to the real, that is to say,
from the necessary to the contingent, the logical test is no longer
sufficient; and only by appeal to the second principle, that of
sufficient reason, can judgments about reality be logically justified.
Whether or not the principle of sufficient reason is deducible, as Wolff
sought to maintain, from the principle of contradiction, is a point of
quite secondary importance. That is a question which does not deserve
the emphasis which has been laid upon it. What is chiefly important is
that for Leibniz, as for Wolff, both principles are principles of
analysis. The principle of sufficient reason is not an instrument for
determining necessary relations between independent substances. The
sufficient ground of a valid predicate must in all cases be found in the
concept of the subject to which it is referred. The difference between
the two principles lies elsewhere, namely, in the character of the
connection established between subject and predicate. In the one case
the denial of the proposition involves a direct self-contradiction. In
the other the opposite of the judgment is perfectly conceivable; our
reason for asserting it is a moral (employing the term in the
eighteenth-century sense), not a logical ground. The subject is so
constituted, that in the choice of ends, in pursuit of the good, it must
by its very nature so behave. The principle of sufficient reason, which
represents in our finite knowledge the divine principle of the best,
compels us to recognise the predicate as involved in the subject--as
involved through a ground which inclines without necessitating. Often
the analysis cannot be carried sufficiently far to enable us thus to
transform a judgment empirically given into one which is adequately
grounded. None the less, in recognising it as true, we postulate that
the predicate is related to the subject in this way. There are not for
Leibniz two methods of establishing truth, sense-perception to reveal
contingent fact, and general reasoning to establish necessary truth. A
proposition can be accepted as true only in so far as we can at least
_postulate_, through absence of contradiction and through sufficient
reason, its analytic character. It must express some form of identity.
The proposition, Caesar crossed the Rubicon, is given us as historical
fact. The more complete our knowledge of Caesar and of his time, the
further we can carry the analysis; and that analysis if completely
executed would displace the merely factual validity of the judgment by
insight into its metaphysical truth. Thus experience, with its
assertions of the here and now about particulars inexhaustibly concrete,
sets to rational science an inexhaustible task. We can proceed in our
analysis indefinitely, pushing out the frontiers of thought further and
further into the empirical realm. Only by the Divine Mind can the task
be completed, and all things seen as ordered in complete obedience to
the two principles of thought.

Leibniz, in propounding this view, develops a genuinely original
conception of the relation holding between appearance and reality. Only
monads, that is, spiritual beings, exist. Apart from the representative
activity of the monads there are no such existences as space and time,
as matter and motion. The mathematical and physical sciences, in their
present forms, therefore, cannot be interpreted as revealing absolute
existences. But, if ideally developed, they would emancipate themselves
from mechanical and sensuous notions; and would consist of a body of
truths, which, as thus perfected, would be discovered to constitute the
very being of thought. Pure thought or reason consists in the
apprehension of such truths. To discover and to prove them thought does
not require to issue out beyond itself. It creates this conceptual world
in the very act of apprehending it; and as this realm of truth thus
expresses the necessary character of all thought, whether divine or
human, it is universal and unchanging. Each mind apprehends the same
eternal truth; but owing to imperfection each finite being apprehends it
with some degree of obscurity and confusion, fragmentarily, in terms of
sense, and so falls prey to the illusion that the self stands in
mechanical relations to a spatial and temporal world of matter and
motion.

Leibniz supports this doctrine by his theory of sense-experience as
originating spontaneously from within the individual mind. Thereby he is
only repeating that pure thought generates its whole content from within
itself. Sense-experience, in its intrinsic nature, is nothing but pure
thought. Such thought, owing to the inexhaustible wealth of its
conceptual significance, so confuses the mind which thus generates it,
that only by prolonged analysis can larger and larger portions of it be
construed into the conceptual judgments which have all along constituted
its sole content. And in the process, space, time, and motion lose all
sensuous character, appearing in their true nature as orders of relation
which can be adequately apprehended only in conceptual terms. They
remain absolutely real as objects of thought, though as sensible
existences they are reduced to the level of mere appearance. Such is the
view of thought which is unfolded in Leibniz’s writings, in startling
contrast to the naturalistic teaching of his Scotch antagonist.

As already indicated, Kant’s first-hand knowledge of Leibniz’s teaching
was very limited. He was acquainted with it chiefly through the
inadequate channel of Wolff’s somewhat commonplace exposition of its
principles. But even from such a source he could derive what was most
essential, namely, Leibniz’s view of thought as absolute in its powers
and unlimited in its claims. How closely Wolff holds to the main tenet
of Leibniz’s system appears from his definition of philosophy as “the
science of possible things, so far as they are possible.” He thus
retains, though without the deeper suggestiveness of Leibniz’s
speculative insight, the view that thought precedes reality and
legislates for it. By the possible is not meant the existentially or
psychologically possible, but the conceptually necessary, that which,
prior to all existence, has objective validity, sharing in the universal
and necessary character of thought itself.

As Riehl has very justly pointed out,[1789] Wolff’s philosophy had,
prior even to the period of Kant’s earliest writings, been displaced by
empirical, psychological enquiries and by eclectic, popular philosophy.
Owing to the prevailing lack of thoroughness in philosophical thinking,
“Problemlosigkeit” characterised the whole period. The two exclusively
alternative views of the function of thought stood alongside one another
within each of the competing systems, quite unreconciled and in their
mutual conflict absolutely destructive of all real consistency and
thoroughness of thought. It was Kant who restored rationalism to its
rightful place. He reinvigorated the flaccid tone of his day by adopting
in his writings, both early and late, the strict method of rational
science, and by insisting that the really crucial issues be boldly
faced. In essentials Kant holds to Wolff’s definition of philosophy as
“the science of possible things, so far as they are possible.” As I have
just remarked, the possible is taken in an objective sense, and the
definition consequently gives expression to the view of philosophy upon
which Kant so frequently insists, as lying wholly in the sphere of pure
_a priori_ thought. Its function is to determine prior to specific
experience what experience must be; and obviously that is only possible
by means of an _a priori_, purely conceptual method. His _Critique_, as
its title indicates, is a criticism of pure reason by pure reason.
Nothing which escapes definition through pure _a priori_ thinking can
come within its sphere. The problem of the “possibility of experience”
is the problem of discovering the conditions which _necessarily_
determine experience to be what it is. Kant, of course, radically
transforms the whole problem, in method of treatment as well as in
results, when in defining the subject-matter of enquiry he substitutes
experience for things absolutely existent. This modification is
primarily due to the influence of Hume. But the constant occurrence in
Kant’s philosophy of the term “possibility” marks his continued belief
in the Idealist view of thought. Though pure thought never by itself
amounts to knowledge--therein Kant departs from the extreme rationalist
position--only through it is any knowledge, empirical or _a priori_,
possible at all. Philosophy, in order to exist, must be a system of _a
priori_ rational principles. Nothing empirical or hypothetical can find
any place in it.[1790] Yet at the same time it is the system of the _a
priori_ conditions only of experience, not of ultimate reality. Such is
the twofold relation of agreement and difference in which Kant stands to
his rationalist predecessors.




INDEX


Absolute. _See_ Unconditioned

Absolutist aspect of human consciousness, xxx-xxxiii, liii, liv-lv, lvi-lvii,
    270-1, 274, 282, 285-7, 331 _n._, 423 _n._

Actuality, 391 ff.

Adamson, R., 38, 311, 314

Addison, 156

Adickes, E., xx-xxi, 76, 166, 200, 215 _n._, 233 _n._, 234, 304, 363,
     376, 397, 406 _n._, 423, 439-40, 441, 464 _n._, 466, 479,
     579 _n._, 601 _n._

Affinity, objective, 224, 253-7, 266-7

“_Als ob_” doctrine, 524, 553 ff.

Analogy, Kant’s use of the term, 356-8

Analytic and synthetic judgment, xxv ff., xxxv-xxxvi, xxxviii,
    28 ff., 37 ff., 59-60, 65;
  existential judgment, 530-1;
  distinction perhaps suggested by examination of ontological argument, 531.
  _See_ Judgment

Analytic and synthetic methods, 44 ff., 111, 117 _n._
  _See_ Transcendental method

_Analytic_, distinguished from the _Dialectic_, 172-4, 438-42

_Anthropologie_, Kant’s, 81 _n._, 100 _n._

Antinomies, lii, liii, 432, 478 ff., 519-20

Appearance, Kant’s views regarding, xxxvii, xlvi-xlvii, liii-liv, 18-22, 83-5,
    120-2, 147 ff., 205 ff., 215 ff., 279-284, 293 ff., 301 ff., 312 ff., 321
    ff., 330-1, 372-3, 404 ff., 427 ff.;
 criticism of Leibnizian view of, 143-6;
 criticism of Locke’s view of, 146-7;
 ideality of, 147 ff.;
 outer and inner appearances reduce to relations, 147-8;
 appearance and illusion, 148 ff.;
 causal efficacy of appearances, 216, 217-18, 351, 373-4;
 distinction between appearance and reality based not on
    categories of understanding but on Ideas of Reason,
    liii-liv, 217-18, 326 _n._, 331, 390-1, 414-17, 426-31,
    473-7, 511-12, 519-21, 541-2, 558-61

Apperception, and memory, 251;
  in what sense original, xxxiv, xliii-xlv, l-lii, 260-3, 461-2, 472-7;
  transcendental unity of, l-lii, 207 ff., 212, 250-3, 260-3, 270, 277-9, 322
    ff., 455 ff., 473-7;
  absent from the animal mind, xlvii-l;
  objective unity of, 270-1, 274, 282, 285-7;
  and inner sense, 295-8, 321 ff., 512 _n._
  _See_ Self

_A priori_, Kant’s views regarding the, xxvi-xxviii, xxxiii-xxxvi,
    lii-lv, 1-2, 39-40, 42, 54 ff.;
  problem of _a priori_ synthetic judgment, 26 ff., 39-40, 43 ff.;
  its validity merely _de facto_, xxxv-xxxvi, xliv, 30, 57, 118, 142, 185-6,
    257-9, 291, 391-2, 393, 400-1, 411;
  the faculties in which it originates, xliii-xlv, l-lii, 1-2, 50-1, 237-8,
    263 ff., 391-2, 393, 398, 563-5;
  semi-Critical view of the, 188-9, 232, 263-4.
  _See_ Understanding, Reason

Aquinas, 73

Architectonic, xxii, 100, 184, 332-6, 340-1, 342, 343, 345, 347, 390, 392, 394,
    419 ff., 434, 437, 440, 439-40, 454, 463, 464, 474, 479-80, 496, 498, 542,
    563, 579

Aristotle, xlv, 196, 198, 390. _See_ Logic

Arithmetic, 32, 40-1, 65-6, 128 ff., 337-8, 347, 566

Association, and judgment, xxxiv-xxxv, xlviii-l;
  and consciousness, xli-xlii; rests on objective affinity, 253-7, 266-7

Attributive judgment, Kant’s exclusive emphasis upon, 37-8, 180-1, 197

Augustine, St., 73, 110, 565

Avenarius, 587 _n._

Axioms, Kant’s view of, 50, 127, 348, 565-7


Bacon, Francis, 4-5, 74

Bain, A., 86 _n._

Balfour, A. J., 314

Baumgarten, 192-3, 441, 522

_Beantwortung der Frage: Was heisst Aufklärung?_ Kant’s, 15

Beattie, James, xxviii-xxix, xxxi _n._, 207, 582, 595, 600 _n._

Beck, 80

Belief, Kant’s view of, lv ff., 576-7

Beloselsky, Fürst von, xlix

Bergson, 86, 142, 359-60 _n._, 587 _n._

Berkeley, xxxii, xl, xlvi, 112, 153-4, 155 ff., 272, 298 ff., 587-8, 592, 595,
    596

Borowski, 63, 156

Bosanquet, B., 36, 181, 197

Bradley, F. G., 36, 181, 197

Bruno, Giordano, 74

Bülffinger, 155


Caird, E., xx, 1 _n._, 23, 51, 102 _n._, 114, 117, 183, 194,
     195, 262, 296, 314, 328, 340, 357 _n._, 359 _n._, 373, 378, 399, 462, 468

Campanella, 74

Canon, 72, 169-70, 174, 332-3, 438, 569 ff.

Cassirer, E., 132

Categorical imperative, xxxvi, lvi-lviii, 571 ff.

Categories, distinction from generic concept, 178 ff.;
  _de facto_ nature of the, xxxv-xxxvi, xxxviii, xliv, 30, 57, 185-6, 257-8,
    291, 391-2, 398, 400-1, 411;
  definition of the, 195-6, 198, 339-42, 404-5;
  semi-Critical view of the, 188-9, 217-18, 232, 263-4;
  merely logical forms, xxxv-xxxvi, xxxviii, 30 _n._, 32, 39, 108, 176 ff.,
     185-6, 191, 195-196, 257-8, 290-1, 325 ff., 339-40, 398, 404-5, 409-10,
     413-14, 467;
  valid only for appearances, 259-60;
  and schemata, 195-6, 311, 333, 339-342, 467 _n._;
  metaphysical deduction of the, 183 ff., 192 ff., 287-8;
  transcendental deduction of the, 234 ff., 287-8;
  all categories involved in every act of consciousness, xli-xlv, liii-liv
     199-200, 356, 368, 370, 377, 387-91;
  have wider scope than the forms of sense, lv-lvi, 20, 25, 290-1,
     331, 404 ff.;
  restricted by time and space, 342, 357;
  in relation to outer and inner experience, 311-12;
  how far predicable of the ‘I think,’ 325 ff.;
  how far applicable to sensations, desires, etc., xlvi _n._, 275-6, 279 ff.,
    312 ff., 384-5, 476;
  proof of specific, 242-3, 252-3, 258-9, 287-8, 333, 343-4;
  determinate and indeterminate application of the, 325 ff., 405 ff.;
  may be intrinsically inapplicable to things in themselves, 290,
     409-10, 413-14;
  category of existence, 322, 415 _n._;
  category of totality and Idea of the unconditioned, 199-200, 433, 451, 480,
    529;
  mathematical and dynamical, 198, 345-7, 510-11.
  See _A priori_, Understanding

Catharticon, 169, 174

Causality, Kant influenced by Hume’s teaching regarding, xxv ff.,
     61-4, 364 ff., 593-600;
  Kant’s treatment of the principle of, 363 ff.;
  Kant’s subjectivist and phenomenalist views of, 216, 217-18,
     318-21, 351, 373-4;
  sensations, feelings, etc. subject to principle of, xlvi _n._, 275, 279-82,
    312, 384-5;
  category of, involved in consciousness of time, liii-liv, 365 ff., 377 ff.,
    387;
  and freedom, 492 ff.
  _See_ Hume

Clarke, 140, 539, 594

Cohen, H., 51, 102 _n._, 195, 262, 340

Coherence theory of truth, xxxvi-xxxix, 36 ff., 173 _n._;
  criterion of truth bound up with the Ideas of Reason, 217-18, 326 _n._, 331,
    390-1, 414-17, 426-31, 473-7, 511-12, 519-21, 541-2, 558-61

Concept, Kant’s generic or class view of the, 99-100, 105-7, 118-19, 126, 132-3
    , 177-84, 338-9, 370-1, 377-84, 390-1;
  intuition and conception, 38-42, 93-4, 105-9, 118-20, 126, 128-134, 165-6,
    167-8, 194, 370, 390-1, 564-6;
  construction of concepts, 41, 131-3, 338-9, 418 ff., 564-6;
  concepts and images, 337-9;
  Kant’s doctrine of the pure concept, xxxix, 394-400, 418 ff.
  _See_ Understanding

_Concerning the Advances, made, etc._
  See _Fortschritte_

Consciousness, Kant’s views regarding, xxxiv-xxxv, xxxix-xlv,
     xliii-xlvii, l-lii;
  and the animal mind, xlvii-l;
  may be a resultant, xxxiv, xliii-xlv, l-lii, 261-3, 277-9, 327,
     459-62, 473-7;
  no immediate consciousness of mind’s own activities, xliii-xlv, l-lii, 263
    ff., 273 ff., 293, 295 ff., 322 ff.;
  consciousness of time Kant’s datum, xxxiv, 120, 241 ff., 365 ff., 381 ff.;
  absolutist aspect of, xxx-xxxiii, liii, lvi-lvii, 270-1, 274,
     282, 285-7, 331 _n._
  See Apperception, Judgment

Contingency, assertion of, 39 ff., 55, 286-9

Continuity, Kant’s views regarding, 352-355, 488 ff., 509;
  principle of, 380-1;
  transcendental principle of, 551

Copernicus, 18-19, 22-5

Cosmological Argument, 531 ff.

Criterion of truth. _See_ Coherence theory of truth

Criticism, Kant’s use of term, 1, 9, 13-14, 21;
  Age of, 15

_Critique of Practical Reason_, lvi, lvii, lx, 77-8, 569 ff., 572

_Critique of Judgment_, lxi, 77, 83, 97-8, 191, 265, 537, 539, 561, 569 _n._,
    574, 575 _n._, 576, 577 _n._

Crusius, xxviii, xxxii, 47

Curtius, E., 336


Deduction of categories, distinction between subjective and objective,
     xliv _n._, 235 ff.;
  subjective, 245 ff., 263 ff.; objective, 248 ff.;
  metaphysical, 175 ff., 192 ff.;
  stages in Kant’s development of metaphysical, 186 ff.
  _See_ Transcendental method of proof

Deduction of Ideas, metaphysical, 426, 433 ff., 450-4, 478-80, 522-3;
  transcendental, 426, 430, 436, 454, 552-4, 572 ff.
  _See_ Ideas of Reason

Definition, Kant’s view of, 564-5

Deist, as contrasted with Theist, 541;
  Kant’s deistic interpretation of the Ideas of Reason, 418, 436, 439-40, 454,
    473-7, 520-1, 537, 542, 575.
  _See_ Idealist view of Reason.

Democritus, 354 _n._

Demonstration, Kant’s view of, 566-7

Descartes, xxxi, xxxix-xliii, xlvi, 155, 157, 272-3, 279 ff., 298 ff.,
     354 _n._, 421, 449, 583-7, 589-90, 597

Desires, Kant’s view of the, xlvi _n._, 276, 279-82, 312, 384-5

Dewey, J., 36

_Dialectic_, distinguished from the _Analytic_, 172-4, 438-42;
  the problems of the, 425 ff.;
  development of Kant’s views regarding the, 431 ff.

_Dilucidatio Principiorum primorum_, etc., Kant’s, 155, 299

Discipline, 170, 174, 438, 563 ff.

_Dissertation_, Kant’s Inaugural, xx, 26, 40, 46, 81, 86, 87, 89 ff., 96, 99,
    101, 117, 123, 128, 131, 135, 137, 140-1, 144-5, 147, 159-60, 163-5, 185,
    186-9, 208, 260, 263, 299, 382, 419, 427, 432, 482, 486, 489 _n._, 548

Divine Existence, in relation to space and time, 159-61;
  and intuitive understanding, 160;
  Idea of, 434-7;
  how far can be concretely pictured, 536-7, 541-2, 556 ff.
  _See_ God

Dogmatism, as distinguished from Criticism, 9, 13-14, 21

_Dreams of a Visionseer_, Kant’s, 155 _n._, 299

Duns Scotus, 73-4


Eberhard, Kant’s reply to, 90 ff., 143 _n._

Ego, transcendental. _See_ Apperception

Eleatics, the, 159

Emotions, Kant’s view of the, xlvi _n._, 276, 279-82, 312, 384-5

Empirical, relation to the _a priori_, 36 ff.;
  problem of empirical knowledge, 39-40, 53;
  empirical object intermediate between subjective representations and thing
    in itself, 206 ff., 223, 270 ff., 308 ff.
  _See_ Experience

_Enquiry into the Clearness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morals_,
    Kant’s, 15, 40, 563 ff.

_Ens realissimum_, 522 ff., 529-30, 532, 534, 541-2, 556

Epicurus, lix, 436, 499, 582

Erdmann, B., xx, xxviii _n._, 46, 142 _n._, 158, 161, 163, 200-1,
     208 _n._, 294 _n._, 314, 373, 382 _n._, 412, 431-2, 471, 601 _n._

Erhardt, F., 484 _n._, 494

Error, _See_ Appearance, Illusion

Euler, 162

Existence, and the “I think,” 322 ff.;
  judgment of, always synthetic, 527 ff.;
  necessary existence, 533-7

Experience, proof by reference to the possibility of, xxxvi, xxxvii-xxxviii,
    45, 238-9, 241-3, 259-60, 344, 426, 430, 454, 552-4, 572 ff.;
  meaning of term, 52; problem of, 57-8;
  as datum is equivalent to consciousness of time, xxxiv, 120,
     241 ff., 365 ff., 381 ff.

Exposition, Kant’s use of term, 109-10


Faith, Kant’s view of, lv-lvi, lxi, 571 ff., 575-6

Feeling, Kant’s use of term, 82-3;
  Kant’s view of, xlvi _n._, 276, 279-82, 312, 384-5

Fichte, l

Fischer, K., 46, 75, 113-14, 140, 601 _n._

Form and matter, importance of distinction between, xxxiii-xxxiv, xxxvi, 85 ff.

Forms of the understanding. _See_ Categories

_Fortschritte, Welches sind die wirklichen_, etc., Kant’s, li _n._, 59, 60, 84,
    578 _n._, 580 _n._

_Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals_, Kant’s, lviii, lix, 569, 572

_Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse_, Kant’s, lvii, 578

Freedom of the will, problem of, 20-1, 435, 512 ff., 569-70;
  and causality, 492 ff.;
  transcendental and practical freedom, 497, 512-13, 517-18, 569-70, 573-4


Galileo, 18, 583-4, 586

Garve, xix, 150; Garve-Feder review, 158

_Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung der lebendigen Kräfte_, Kant’s, 117, 161-2

Geometry, the fundamental mathematical science, 96 _n._;
  pure and applied, 111-12, 147, 349, 565-6;
  Kant’s attitude to modern, 117 ff.

Geulincx, 596, 598

God, ontological proof of existence of, 527 ff.;
  cosmological proof, 531 ff.;
  physico-theological proof, 538 ff.;
  problem of God’s existence, 569 ff.;
  how far an indispensable Idea of Reason, 439-40, 536-7, 541-2, 556 ff.

Green, T. H., l _n._, 23, 36

Groos, K., xxviii _n._


Hamann, 157, 539-40 _n._;
  describes Kant as “a Prussian Hume,” 305

Hegel, xxxvii, xlv, l, 36, 190, 194, 274, 554 _n._

Herbart, 86 _n._, 124

Herz, Marcus, xxii-xxiii, xxix, xlix, 6, 26, 28, 46, 51, 114 _n._, 138, 187,
    189, 198, 206-7, 219-22, 432

Hicks, G. Dawes, 415 _n._

Hobbes, 593

Höffding, H., 23

Home, Henry, 1

Homogeneity, transcendental principle of, 550-1

Hume, date of first influence on Kant, xx, xxviii;
  Kant’s relation to, xxv-xxxiii, xxxv, xxxvii, xlvi;
  his view of consciousness, xl-xliii;
  anticipates Kant’s phenomenalism, 21-2;
  maintains that experience cannot prove universality or necessity, 27, 57-8;
  shows causal axiom to be synthetic, 30-1;
  Hume’s problem a deepening of Kant’s earlier problem, 46;
  Kant’s relation to, 61-4;
  on the self, 207 _n._;
  his subjectivism, 272-3, 284, 300;
  Kant “a Prussian Hume,” 305;
  much of Hume’s teaching in regard to causality accepted by Kant, 364;
  Kant’s reply to Hume, 369-71;
  Hume’s philosophy the perfected expression of the empirical
     and sceptical position, 421;
  influence on Kant, 432;
  on existential judgment, 528;
  influence on Kant of Hume’s _Dialogues on Natural Religion_, 539-540, 557,
    567 _n._;
  influence on Kant, 583;
  the philosophical teaching of, 588-601;
  influence on Kant, 606

Humility, lvi, lviii-lix, 554 _n._

Hypotheses, and postulates, xxxvii-xxxviii, 541, 543 ff., 571 ff.;
  how far valid in metaphysics, lxi, 9-12, 543 ff.

Hypothetical employment of Reason, 549-50


Idealism, objective or Critical, 274;
  Kant’s refutations of subjective idealism. 298 ff., 462-3;
  transcendental idealism as key to solution of the antinomies, 503 ff.
  _See_ Phenomenalism and subjectivism

Ideal of Reason, 522 ff., 536-7, 541-2, 554 _n._, 556-61

Idealist view of Reason, xxxviii-xxxix, xliv, liii, 97-8, 102, 331-2, 390-1,
    414-17, 426 ff., 433 ff., 447 ff., 473-7, 478 ff., 500-6, 511-12,
     519-21, 547 ff., 552 ff., 558-61

Ideality, of space and time, 76, 111, 116-17, 138, 147, 154, 308

Ideas of Reason, Kant’s sceptical and Idealist views of the, xxxviii-xxxix,
     xliii, xliv, lii-lv, lvi ff., 330-1, 390-1, 414-17. 426 ff., 433 ff.,
     446 ff., 473-7, 478 ff., 500-6, 511-12, 520-1, 547 ff., 558-61;
  involved in consciousness of space and time, liii-liv, 96-8, 102 _n._, 165-6,
    390-1;
  Kant’s deistic interpretation of the, 418, 436, 439-40, 454, 473-477, 520-1,
    537, 575;
  as limiting concepts, 408, 413-17, 426 ff.;
  as regulative, xxxviii-xxxix, xliii, liii, 473-7, 500 ff., 547 ff.;
  and categories of relation, 451-2;
  distinction between mathematical and dynamical, 510-11;
  Kant’s criticism of Idea of unconditioned necessity, 527 ff., 533-7, 541-2;
  metaphysical and practical validity of the Ideas, 570-6;
  concluding comments on Kant’s views of the, 558-61;
  condition distinction between appearance and reality, liii-liv, 217-18, 326
    _n._, 331, 391, 414-17, 426-31, 473-7, 511-12, 519-21, 541-2, 558-61.
  _See_ Deduction of Ideas

Illusion, and appearance, 148 ff.;
  Berkeley regards objects of outer sense as, 157, 307-8;
  inner experience not illusory, 323-4;
  transcendental, 13, 427-9, 437, 456 ff., 480, 552, 555

Imagination, may be the common root of sensibility and understanding, 77, 225,
    265;
  productive, 224 ff., 264 ff., 337, 348, 375-6

Immanent and transcendent metaphysics. _See_ Metaphysics

Immortality, problem of, 569 ff.

Incongruous counterparts, 161 ff.

Infinitude, of space, 105 ff.;
  of time, 124 ff.;
  Kant’s view of, 483 ff.;
  distinction between _in infinitum_ and _in indefinitum_, 507 ff.

Inner Sense, xliii _n._, 148, 291 ff., 360, 464, 468-9;
  and apperception, 321 ff.

Intuition, Kant’s doctrine of pure, 40 ff., 79-80, 118-20, 128 ff.,
     167-8, 468-9;
  intuition and conception, 38-42, 93-98, 105-9, 118-20, 126, 128-34, 165-166,
    167-8, 194, 390-1, 564-6;
  formal intuition and form of intuition, 109, 114-16

Intuitive understanding, Kant’s view of, 160, 291, 408 ff., 468 _n._ 542


Jacobi, 300

Jakob, xxviii _n._

James, W., 86, 277-8, 459 _n._, 461 _n._

Janitsch, 155, 156

Jones, Sir Henry, 36

Judgment, Kant’s doctrine of the, xxxiv-xxxv, xxxviii, xli-xliv, xlviii-l, 177
    ff., 192 ff., 286 ff.;
  the fundamental activity of the understanding, xxxiv-xxxv, xxxviii, xli-xlii,
    133, 181-2, 288, 332, 370;
  _a priori_ and empirical, 27-8;
  analytic and synthetic, xxv ff., 28 ff., 37 ff., 59-60;
  judgment 7 + 5 = 12, 65;
  relational types ignored by Kant, 37 ff.;
  Kant’s attributive view of, 37-38, 180-1, 197;
  as assertion of contingency, 39 ff., 55, 286-9;
  Kant’s distinction between judgments of perception and judgments of
     experience, 288-9;
  existential, 527-31

Knowing and thinking, distinction between, lv-lvi, 20, 25, 290-1, 331, 404 ff.
  _See_ Categories

Knowledge, the narrow meaning assigned to term by Kant, lv-lvi, lxi, 25

Knützen, 161


Lambert, xx, xxviii, xxxii, 74, 138, 150, 193

Lange, F., 23

_Lectures on Metaphysics_, Kant’s, 261, 275 _n._, 299, 448-9, 475 _n._

_Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion_ Kant’s, 261

Leibniz, Kant’s relation to, xxx-xxxiii, xxxv, xxxvii, xlvi, l, lvii;
  his absolutist view of thought, xxx-xxxii;
  anticipates Kant’s phenomenalism, 21-2;
  his rejection of empiricism, 27, 58;
  his pre-established harmony, 28;
  regards synthetic judgments as always empirical, 30;
  his conceptual atomism, 38;
  Kant probably influenced by the _Nouveaux Essais_ of, 92, 186;
  referred to by Kant, 112;
  Kant’s relation to, 140-1;
  Kant’s criticism of his interpretation of sensibility and appearance, 143-6;
  his view of space, 161 ff.;
  Kant influenced by the spiritualism of, 208-9, 243, 260-1, 263;
  his subjectivism and doctrine of _petites perceptions_, 272-3, 298-9, 306;
  his alternative views of the reality of the material world, 298-9;
  continuing influence of his rationalism on Kant, 394-5, 398-9, 418 ff.;
  his view of the possible as wider than the actual, 401-2;
  antinomies formulated by Kant from the standpoint of the Leibnizian
     rationalism, 481 ff.;
  Kant’s formulation of the ontological argument Leibnizian, 522 ff., 556;
  contrast between Locke and, 146-7, 421, 582;
  on mathematical method, 592;
  the philosophical teaching of, 601-6;
  on the nature of sense-experience, 604-5;
  influence on Kant, 605-6

Limiting concepts, Ideas as, 408, 413-17, 426 ff.
  _See_ Ideas of Reason

Locke, xxxii, xl, xlvi, 15;
  Kant’s criticism of his view of appearance, 146-7;
  Kant’s restatement of his distinction between primary and secondary
     qualities, 120-2, 146, 149 ff., 306;
  subjectivism of, 272, 306;
  on inner sense, 148, 292-3;
  contrast between Leibniz and, 146-7, 421, 582;
  his use of term idea rejected by Kant, 449;
  on primary and secondary qualities, 586 _n._;
  rationalism of, 591-2;
  his proof of causal axiom, 594;
  on the causal relation, 596, 598

Logic, Kant’s contribution to the science of, xxxvi-xxxix;
  Kant’s view of the traditional, 10, 21, 33-6, 100, 181, 183, 184-6,
     259, 332;
  the various kinds of, 167 ff.;
  distinction between general and transcendental, xxxix, 170 ff.,
     176 ff., 178
    _n._, 181, 183, 184-5, 194-5, 196, 335

_Logic_, Kant’s, 1, 110, 170 ff., 180-1, 576 _n._, 577 _n._,
     580 _n._, 581 _n._, 582

_Lose Blätter aus Kant’s Nachlass_, xx-xxi, 112 _n._, 202-3,
     209, 211 _n._, 232-4, 261

Lotze, 1 _n._, 36, 181


Mach, E., 596

Mairan, J. J. Dortous de, 496

Malebranche, xxxi, xxxii, xliii _n._, 15, 28, 47;
  Kant’s phenomenalism anticipated by, 21-2;
  rationalism of, 590-1;
  on the causal relation, 596-8

Manifolds, of appearance, 84-5;
  empirical, 267, 274 ff.;
  pure _a priori_, 88-90, 92 ff., 95, 96-7, 134, 142 _n._, 148 _n._,
     171, 194-5, 226, 228-9, 267, 269-70, 289, 337, 344, 375, 385 _n._

Mathematics, methods of, 17-18;
  judgments in, not all synthetic, 64;
  principle of contradiction in mathematical reasoning, 60, 64-5, 344;
  Kant’s intuitional view of, 40-1, 65-6;
  distinction between mathematical and philosophical knowledge, 15, 563 ff.;
  pure and applied, 68, 111-12, 114-15, 140, 166, 566;
  use of schemata in, 337-9.
  _See_ Arithmetic, Geometry

Matter, Kant’s dynamical theory of, 354-5;
  principle of conservation of, 361-2

Meier, 441

Mendelssohn, Moses, xix, xxxii, 6, 11, 58, 138 _n._, 139 _n._,
     150, 153, 160-1,
    458-9 _n._, 467, 470-1

_Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science_, Kant’s, 56 _n._, 66, 97,
    127-8, 164-5 _n._, 312 _n._, 354 _n._, 361 _n._, 380-1,
     384 _n._, 491, 579 _n._

Metaphysics, distinction between immanent and transcendent,
     liv-lv, 15, 19, 22,
    26-7, 33, 50, 52, 53, 55-6, 58-9, 66-70, 244-5, 257-8,
     545, 580-1; in disrepute, 8-9;
  Kant professes to establish a quite final, 10, 35, 543 ff.;
  “Copernican hypothesis” and, 18 ff.;
  as natural disposition, 12-13, 68 ff.;
  as science, 68 ff.;
  hypotheses not valid in, 543 ff.;
  the problems of, 569-76, 579-81

Method, the sceptical, 545-6;
  mathematical, 563-7.
  _See_ Analytic and Synthetic Methods

Mill, J. S., 86, 364-5, 377, 596

Mind, Kant’s use of term, 81

_Mistaken Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures_, Kant’s, 181-2

Modality, 391 ff.

_Monadologia physica_, Kant’s, 354

Moral attitude, the, xxxvi, xlv, lv ff., 515-16, 571 ff.

Moral belief, lvi ff., 577

Moral law, consciousness of the, _de facto_, xxxvi, xlv, 572-3

Motion, doctrine of, 127-9, 133;
  Galileo’s revolutionary doctrine of, 583-4

Müller, Max, 75


Natural Science, pure, 66-8;
  and immanent metaphysics, 70. _See_ Metaphysics

Nature, means “all that is,” 16

Necessity, and universality, 56-7;
  definition of, 391 ff.;
  of thought and of existence, 402-3, 527, 533, 536;
  limited being may exist by unconditioned, 527, 533, 536;
  absolute necessity not purely logical, 528;
  unconditioned, Idea of, 527 ff., 533-7, 541-2, 555, 558-61;
  and contingency, concepts of, not applicable to things in themselves, 535;
  relative, 541, 555, 571 ff.

_Negative Quantity_, Kant’s essay on, 381, 403 _n._

_New Doctrine of Motion and Rest_, Kant’s, 354, 381 _n._

Newton, his influence on Kant, lv-lvi, 96 _n._, 140-2, 161 ff., 354 _n._;
  Kant modifies Newton’s cosmology, 539

Noumenon, positive and negative conception of, 408 ff., 413.
  _See_ Appearance

Number, schema of, 347-8. _See_ Arithmetic


Object, Kant’s use of term, 79-81, 167 _n._, 174;
  transcendental, 203 ff.;
  empirical, 206 ff., 223, 270 ff., 308 ff.

Objective, not the opposite of the subjective, 279 ff., 313-14;
  validity of Ideas, 558-61

Occasionalism, 465, 596-7, 598

_On the Radical Evil in Human Nature_, Kant’s treatise, lviii, lix

Ontological argument, 527 ff.

Opinion, Kant’s use of term, 543, 576-7

Organon, 71-2, 169-70, 174

Oswald, xxviii _n._

Outer Sense, 147, 276, 293 ff., 360


Paralogisms, 455 ff.;
  nature of fallacy of the, 466, 470

Paulsen, 46-7, 64, 373, 601 _n._

Pearson, K., 596

_Perpetual Peace_, Kant’s treatise on, lvii _n._

Phenomenalism and subjectivism, xxxix ff.,
     xlv-xlvii, 82-4, 120-2, 136-8, 138-9, 140, 150-4,
     155-9, 223, 227, 270 ff., 312 ff., 349-51,
     357-8, 373-4, 407 _n._, 414-17

Phenomenon, distinction between appearance and, 83.
  _See_ Appearance

Philosophy, causes of failure of, 59;
  Kant reinterprets its function and aims, lvi, 571-6, 577-8;
  the domains of, 579-81;
  Kant’s view of history of, 582

Physico-theological argument, 538 ff.

Physics, method of, 17-18;
  Kant’s views regarding, 354-5, 361-2, 379-81

Pistorius, 305, 307-8, 323, 467

Plato, xlv, 47, 158, 301, 390, 436, 496, 582

Pope, 156

Possibility, Kant’s definition of, 391 ff.

Postulates. _See_ Hypotheses

Practical employment of Reason, lvi-lix, 569 ff.

Pragmatic belief, lvi, 577

Prantl, 73

Pre-established harmony, 28, 47, 114, 141-2, 267-8, 290, 465, 590

Priestley, J., xxviii _n._, 11, 567 _n._

Primary and secondary qualities, 82, 120-2, 146, 149 ff., 306

Principles never self-evident, xxvi-xxviii,
  xxxv-xxxviii, 36 ff., 53, 185-6, 340.
  See _A priori_

Probabilities, inference from. _See_ Hypotheses

_Prolegomena to Every Future Metaphysics_, Kant’s, xxv,
     xxviii _n._, xxix _n._,
    12, 13, 46, 47, 49, 59-60, 61-4, 65, 66-7, 68 ff.,
     80, 84, 91, 106, 109-11, 116, 121, 129, 146, 149,
     152, 153, 155, 156, 158, 159, 161, 163, 165, 178-9,
     184, 188, 234, 288-9, 299, 300-1, 305-8, 346,
     361 _n._, 376-7

Psychology, Kant’s views regarding, xliii-xlvii, 50-1,
     235 ff., 263 ff., 269-270, 311 _n._, 312 _n._, 384-5,
     455 ff., 473-7, 580-1

Pure, Kant’s use of term, 1-2, 54-6, 64


Quality, and intensive magnitude, 352.
  _See_ Primary and secondary qualities


Rationalism, Kant’s type of, xxxv-xxxvi, 257-8;
  relation to the rationalism of Leibniz, 418 ff.
  See _A priori_

Reason, meanings of the term, liii-lv, lvi, 2-3, 71, 426 ff., 520-1, 558-61;
  ineradicably metaphysical, liii-lv, lvi, 8;
  condition of free actions, 515-16;
  as practical, lvi ff., 515-17;
  as causing antinomy, liii, 519 ff.;
  hypothetical employment of, 549-50;
  Ideal of, 556 ff.
  _See_ Idealist and sceptical views of Reason, Ideas of Reason

_Rechtslehre_, Kant’s, 190

Reciprocity, category of, 197, 381 ff., 434-5, 439-40, 451-4

_Reflexionen Kants zur Kritik der reinen Vernunft_, xx,
     xxiii, xlix, lv, 85,
    86, 106, 127, 182, 188 ff., 196, 197, 198, 200-1, 202-3
    , 208, 231-2, 261, 334 _n._, 399, 433-40, 448-9, 543

Regulative. _See_ Ideas of Reason

Reicke, xx. See _Lose Blätter_

Reimarus, 193

Representation, Kant’s use of term, 81, 104;
  distinction between representation and its object, 135,
     136-7, 272 ff., 308
    ff., 317-18, 365.
  _See_ Phenomenalism and subjectivism

Representative perception, doctrine of, xxxix-xliii, xlvi, 272 ff., 298 ff.,
    585-8

Riehl, A., xliv _n._, 46, 51, 88, 102 _n._, 195, 303-4,
     317-18, 340-1, 342, 357-8, 372 _n._, 373, 601 _n._, 605

Rousseau, lvii, lviii-lix, 436, 567 _n._, 578

Rule, two kinds of, 372

Russell, B., 491-2, 568 _n._


Sceptical method, Kant’s, 481, 545-6

Sceptical view of Reason, 481, 500-3, 511-12, 519-21, 528-9, 533-7, 541-2, 547
    ff., 558-61

Scepticism, 9, 13-15, 545-6, 567

Schematism, 195-6, 265-7, 289, 311, 333, 334 ff., 467 _n._;
  and images, 337-9

Schopenhauer, 75, 197, 315-16, 365-7, 377-9, 387-9, 407 _n._, 482-3 _n._, 493
    _n._, 495 _n._

Schulze, Johann, 129-31, 138, 198-9, 480 _n._

Schütz, 153

Segner, 66

Self, Kant’s semi-Critical, spiritualist view of the, l,
     207-9, 212, 243, 260-3, 327-8, 473-7, 515;
  may not be an ultimate form of existence, l-lii, 260-3,
     277-9, 327, 459-62,
    473-7;
  Idea of the, 439-40, 455-62, 471, 472-7, 554;
  Kant’s view of nature and destiny of, 472-7.
  _See_ Apperception, Soul

Self-consciousness. _See_ Apperception, Consciousness

Self-evidence, Kant’s rejection of, xxvi-xxviii, xxxv-xxxviii,
     36, 53, 118, 142, 185-6, 563-4, 565-6.
  See _A priori_

Sensation, Kant’s views of, 81-2, 84-8, 274-7, 349-52;
  non-spatial, 85-8, 100-1, 105;
  required for determining actuality, 391 ff.;
  sensations, feelings, etc., subject to law of causality,
     xlvi _n._, 275, 279-82, 311-12, 313-14, 384-5

Sensibility, may have a common root with understanding, 77;
  definition of, 81, 167-8;
  as a limitation, 116;
  criticism of Leibniz’s view of, 143-6;
  Kant’s view of, 274-7

_Seven Small Papers_, Kant’s, 298

Sidgwick, H., 314

Sigsbee, R. A., 11

Sigwart, 36, 181, 197

Simultaneity. _See_ Time

Soul, and body, Kant’s view of their relation, 275-6,
     279-84, 312 ff., 384-5,
    464-6, 467, 471, 476.
  _See_ Apperception, Self

Space, Kant’s views of, xxxv-xxxvi, lii, 85 ff., 188;
  involves an Idea of Reason, liii-liv, 96-8, 102 _n._, 165-6, 390-1;
  metaphysical exposition of, 99 ff., 109-10, 112 ff., 134 ff.;
  transcendental exposition of, 109 ff., 344-5;
  not a property of things in themselves, 112 ff.;
  is the form of outer sense, 114-16;
  transcendental ideality of, 76, 116-17;
  uniform for all human beings, 116-18, 120, 241-2, 257;
  possibility of other spaces, 117 ff.;
  criticism of Newtonian and Leibnizian views of, 140-2;
  merely _de facto_ character of, 57, 118, 142, 185-6, 257;
  as _Unding_, 154;
  in relation to Divine Existence, 159-61;
  and incongruous counterparts, 161 ff.;
  involved in consciousness of time, 309 ff., 384-6, 390-1;
  ignored by Kant in doctrine of schematism, 341, 348, 360;
  involves category of reciprocity, liii-liv, 385-7, 390-1;
  and antinomy, 480 ff.
  _See_ Geometry

Specification, transcendental principle of, 501-2

Spencer, Herbert, 87, 584 _n._, 596

Spinoza, 74, 273 _n._, 440, 587, 601-2

Stadler, 197, 378-9, 389 _n._

Stirling, J. Hutchison, 23, 75, 366 _n._, 377

Stout, G. F., 87, 367 _n._, 387

Subconscious, the, Kant’s view of, 263 ff., 273-4

Subjectivism, in Kant’s doctrine of the transcendental
     object, xxxix ff., xlv-xlvii, 206 ff., 217-18.
  _See_ Phenomenalism and subjectivism, Idealism

Substance and attribute, category of, 362-3

Sulzer, xxviii _n._

Summum Bonum, 575, 577

Swedenborg, 155 _n._, 158 _n._, 299

Swift, Benjamin, 74

Synthetic, problem of knowledge _a priori_ and, xxv ff.,
     xxxv-xxxvi, xxxviii,
    28 ff., 37 ff., 59 ff.;
  knowledge from mere concepts, 64;
  decomposing synthesis, 95;
  ambiguities in Kant’s formulation of problem of _a priori_
     synthetic judgments, 43 ff.;
  processes, xliii-xlv, l-lii, 245-8, 261-2, 263 ff.,
     277-8, 293, 295 ff., 322,
    327 ff.
  _See_ Analytic and synthetic judgments, and methods

System of pure reason, 71-3, 579-80


Teleological argument, 536-7, 538-42, 556-8

Terrasson, Jean, 15

Tetens, 82, 148, 294 _n._, 475

Thales, 18

Theist, as contrasted with deist, 541

Things in themselves, Kant’s first use of phrase, 112 _n._;
  transcendental object equivalent to thing in itself, 204 ff.
  _See_ Appearance

Thinking, discursive and creative. _See_ Understanding

Thomasius, 193

Time, consciousness of, Kant’s datum, xxxiv, 120, 241-2;
  metaphysical exposition of, 123 ff.;
  as infinite, 125;
  transcendental exposition of, 126 ff., 344-5;
  as form of inner sense, 134-5, 293 ff.; axioms of, 127;
  not a determination of outer appearance, 134 ff.;
  merely _de facto_ character of, xxxv-xxxvi, lii, 142, 565-7;
  simultaneity not a mode of, 135 ff., 356, 358-9;
  and simultaneous apprehension, 135-6, 348, 358-9, 367-8, 371-2, 381-2;
  and reality of inner changes, 138-40;
  transcendental ideality of, 76, 138;
  Kant’s view of, not a mere hypothesis, 147;
  space involved in consciousness of, 134-6, 309 ff., 341, 347-8;
  subjective and objective order of, 358 ff., 365 ff., 381 ff.;
  time relations determined by the given, 34-5, 267-8, 367, 370, 371-2, 377;
  does not itself change, 142, 359-60;
  category of causality involved in consciousness of, liii-liv, 365 ff., 377
    ff., 387;
  cannot be experienced in and by itself, 375-6;
  category of reciprocity involved in consciousness of, 381-91;
  Idea of Reason involved in consciousness of, liii-liv, 96-8, 390-1;
  infinitude and infinite divisibility of, 390-1, 481, 483 ff.

Totality. _See_ Unconditioned

Transcendent. _See_ Transcendental and Metaphysics

Transcendental, meaning of term, 73-6, 116-17, 302; illusion, 13, 427-9, 552,
    555;
  method of proof, xxxv, xxxvii-xxxviii, 45, 238-9, 241-3, 259-60, 344, 568,
    572 ff.;
  ideality of space and time, 76, 116-17, 138;
  exposition of space and time, 109 ff., 126 ff., 344-5;
  object, Kant’s doctrine of, xlvi _n._, 203, 204 ff., 322, 328, 371-3, 406-7,
    412, 414, 415, 513-14, 518;
  unity of apperception, Kant’s pre-Critical view of, 207 ff., 212;
  unity of apperception, Kant’s doctrine of, l-lii, 250-3, 260-3, 270, 277-9,
    322 ff., 455 ff., 473-7;
  psychology, xliii-xlvii, l-lii, 50-1, 235 ff., 253, 263 ff.; Ideal, 522 ff.;
  principles of Reason, 550-1;
  illusion, 13, 427-9, 437, 456 ff., 480, 552, 555.
  _See_ Deduction of Categories and of Ideas

_Transition from the Metaphysical First Principles of Natural
     Science to Physics_, Kant’s treatise, 275 _n._, 283 _n._,
     482 _n._, 514 _n._

Trendelenburg, 113-14, 140

Truth. _See_ Coherence theory of truth


_Ueber das Organ der Seele_, Kant’s, 81 _n._, 275 _n._

_Ueber eine Entdeckung_, etc., Kant’s reply to Eberhard, 90 ff., 143 _n._

_Ueber Philosophie überhaupt_, Kant’s, 83 _n._, 128

Ulrichs, 467, 471

Unconditioned, Idea of the, its relation to category of totality,
     199-200, 433-4, 451, 480, 529, 559-60;
  our awareness of the conditioned presupposes the, 416-17, 429 ff.;
  in connection with Kant’s view of the self, 473-7;
  Kant’s criticism of the Idea of the, 498, 527 ff., 533-7,
     541-2, 555, 558-61.
  _See_ Idealist and Sceptical views of Reason

Understanding, and Reason, lii-lv, 2, 52;
  defined, 81;
  may have common root with sensibility, 77;
  distinction between its discursive and its originative
     activities, 172, 176
    ff., 182-3, 263 ff., 277-8, 334-5, 370, 377;
  viewed by Kant as a unity, 174 ff., 185-6;
  its primary function, xxxiv-xxxv, xxxviii, xli-xlii, 93-94,
     133, 181-2, 288-9, 332, 370, 377;
  as intuitive, 160, 291, 408 ff., 468 _n._, 542.
  _See_ Concept

_Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens_, Kant’s, 539

_Untersuchung über die Deutlichkeit der Grundsätze_, Kant’s, 110 _n._, 131


Vaihinger, Hans, xx, xxv, xxviii _n._, xliv _n._, 2, 13, 23, 43,
     45 ff., 52,
    53, 59, 60, 64, 65, 66, 81, 87, 104, 105, 109, 112, 113, 117,
    127, 130, 139, 140, 143, 147, 148, 156, 161, 162, 202 ff.,
     261, 268-9, 298-9, 301, 314-315, 579 _n._, 601 _n._

Value, problems of, lvi, lx-lxi

Void, Kant’s doctrine of the, 354-5

Voltaire, xxxi, 436, 539

_Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume_, Kant’s, 40,
    86 _n._, 140, 162


Watson, J., 1 _n._, 23 _n._, 75, 102 _n._, 117, 183, 195, 196, 198, 262, 328,
    462, 468 _n._, 564

Windelband, 46

Wolff, 192-3, 272, 436, 440, 522, 579, 587, 601-6


Zedlitz, Freiherr von, 6-7

THE END

_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Headings not in Kant’s Table of Contents are printed in italics.

[2] _W._ x. p. 323.

[3] _W._ x. p. 316.

[4] Cf. Kant’s letter to Lambert, September 2, 1770: _W._ x. p. 93.

[5] Embodied in his edition of the _Kritik_ (1889).

[6] From letter to Marcus Herz, June 7, 1777: _W._ x. pp. 116-17.

[7] From letter to Marcus Herz, February 21, 1772: _W._ x. p. 127.

[8] _Reflexionen_ ii. 5.

[9] These passages are by no means unambiguous, and are commented upon
below, p. 61 ff.

[10] For justification of this interpretation of Hume I must refer the
reader to my articles on “The Naturalism of Hume” in _Mind_, vol. xiv.
N.S. pp. 149-73, 335-47.

[11] To this fact Kant himself draws attention: “But the perpetual hard
fate of metaphysics would not allow Hume to be understood. We cannot
without a certain sense of pain consider how utterly his opponents,
Reid, Oswald, Beattie, and even Priestley, missed the point of the
problem. For while they were ever assuming as conceded what he doubted,
and demonstrating with eagerness and often with arrogance what he never
thought of disputing, they so overlooked his inclination towards a
better state of things, that everything remained undisturbed in its old
condition.”--_Prolegomena_, p. 6; Mahaffy and Bernard’s trans. p. 5.

[12] Sulzer’s translation of Hume’s _Essays_ (including the _Enquiries_)
appeared in 1754-56.

[13] The word which Kant uses is _Erinnerung_ (cf. below, p. xxix, _n._
4). There are two main reasons for believing that Kant had not himself
read the _Treatise_. He was imperfectly acquainted with the English
language, and there was no existing German translation. (Jakob’s
translation did not appear till 1790-91. On Kant’s knowledge of English,
cf. Erdmann: _Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie_, Bd. i. (1888) pp.
62 ff., 216 ff.; and K. Groos: _Kant-Studien_, Bd. v. (1900) p. 177 ff.:
and below, p. 156.) And, secondly, Kant’s statements reveal his entire
ignorance of Hume’s view of mathematical science as given in the
_Treatise_.

[14] Cf. Vaihinger, _Commentary_, i. p. 344 ff. Beattie does, indeed,
refer to Hume’s view of mathematical science as given in the _Treatise_,
but in so indirect and casual a manner that Kant could not possibly
gather from the reference any notion of what that treatment was. Cf.
Beattie’s _Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth_ (sixth
edition), pp. 138, 142, 269.

[15] These Hume had himself pointed out both in the _Treatise_ and in
the _Enquiry_; and because of them he rejects scepticism as a feasible
philosophy of life. Kant’s statement above quoted that Hume’s critics
(among whom Beattie is cited) “were ever assuming what Hume doubted, and
demonstrating with eagerness and _often with arrogance_ what he never
thought of disputing,” undoubtedly refer in a quite especial degree to
Beattie.

[16] _Werke_, x. p. 123 ff. It is dated February 21, 1772. Cf. below,
pp. 219-20.

[17] In _Prolegomena_, p. 6 (above quoted, p. xxviii, _n._ 1), and p. 8
(trans. p. 6): “I should think Hume might fairly have laid as much claim
to sound sense as Beattie, and besides to a critical understanding (such
as the latter did not possess).”

[18] Cf. _Prolegomena_, p. 8: “I honestly confess that my recollection
of David Hume’s teaching (_die Erinnerung des David Hume_) was the very
thing which many years ago [Kant is writing in 1783] first interrupted
my dogmatic slumber, and gave my investigations in the field of
speculative philosophy quite a new direction.” Kant’s employment of the
term _Erinnerung_ may perhaps be interpreted in view of the indirect
source of his knowledge of Hume’s main position. He would bring to his
reading of Beattie’s quotations the memory of Hume’s other sceptical
doctrines as expounded in the _Enquiry_.

[19] Kant, it should be noted, classifies philosophies as either
dogmatic (= rationalistic) or sceptical. Empiricism he regards as a form
of scepticism.

[20] Quoted by Beattie (_op. cit._, sixth edition, p. 295), who, however
incapable of appreciating the force of Hume’s arguments, was at least
awake to certain of their ultimate consequences.

[21] For a more detailed statement of Kant’s relation to his
philosophical predecessors, cf. below, Appendix B, p. 583 ff.

[22] The term “recognition” is employed by Kant in its widest sense, as
covering, for instance, recognition of the past as past, or of an object
as being a certain kind of object.

[23] Consciousness of time, consciousness of objects in space,
consciousness of self, are the three modes of experience which Kant
seeks to analyse. They are found to be inseparable from one another and
in their union to constitute a form of conscious experience that is
equivalent to an act of judgment--_i.e._ to be a form of awareness that
involves relational categories and universal concepts.

[24] As we have noted (above, pp. xxvi-xxvii), it was Hume’s insistence
upon the synthetic, non-self-evident character of the causal axiom that
awakened Kant from his dogmatic slumber. Cf. below, pp. 61 ff., 593 ff.

[25] Cf. below, pp. lvi ff., 571 ff.

[26] Cf. below, pp. 36-7.

[27] Cf. below, p. 543 ff.

[28] Cf. below, pp. liii-iv.

[29] Cf. below, pp. 45, 238-43.

[30] Cf. below, pp. 33-6, 181, 183-6.

[31] Cf. below, pp. 33-42, 394-5, 398.

[32] With the sole exception of Malebranche, who on this point
anticipated Kant.

[33] This is the position that Kant endeavours to expound in the very
unsatisfactory form of a doctrine of “inner sense.” Cf. below, pp. l-ii,
291 ff.

[34] This was Kant’s chief reason for omitting the so-called “subjective
deduction of the categories” from the second edition. The teaching of
the subjective deduction is, however, preserved in almost unmodified
form throughout the _Critique_ as a whole, and its “transcendental
psychology” forms, as I shall try to show, an essential part of Kant’s
central teaching. In this matter I find myself in agreement with
Vaihinger, and in complete disagreement with Riehl and the majority of
the neo-Kantians. The neo-Kantian attempt to treat epistemology in
independence of all psychological considerations is bound to lead to
very different conclusions from those which Kant himself reached. Cf.
below, pp. 237 ff., 263-70.

[35] This subjectivism finds expression in Kant’s doctrine of the
“transcendental object” which, as I shall try to prove, is a doctrine of
early date and only semi-Critical. That doctrine is especially prominent
in the section on the Antinomies. See below p. 204 ff.

[36] Cf. pp. 270 ff., 298 ff., 308-21, 373-4, 414-17.

[37] That this statement holds of feelings and desires, and therefore of
all the emotions, as well as of our sense-contents, is emphasised by
Kant in the _Critique of Practical Reason_. Cf. below, pp. 276, 279-80,
312, 384-5.

[38] The connection of this teaching with Kant’s theory of consciousness
may be noted. If consciousness in all its forms, however primitive, is
_already_ awareness of meaning, its only possible task is to define,
modify, reconstruct, and develop such meaning, never to obtain for bare
contents or existences objective or other significance. Cf. above, pp.
xli-ii, xliv.

[39] _Reflexionen zur Anthropologie_, 207.

[40] In sketch of a letter (summer 1792) to Fürst von Beloselsky (_W._
xi. p. 331).

[41] May 26, 1789 (_W._ xi. p. 52).

[42] That Kant has not developed a terminology really adequate to the
statement of his meaning, is shown by a parenthesis which I have omitted
from the above quotation.

[43] This interpretation of Kant appears in a very crude form in James’s
references to Kant in his _Principles of Psychology_. It appears in a
more subtle form in Lotze and Green. Caird and Watson, on the other
hand, have carefully guarded themselves against this view of Kant’s
teaching, and as I have maintained (pp. xliii-v), lie open to criticism
only in so far as they tend to ignore those aspects of Kant’s teaching
which cannot be stated in terms of logical implication.

[44] It may be objected that this is virtually what Kant is doing when
he postulates synthetic activities as the source of the categories. Kant
would probably have replied that he has not attempted to define these
activities save to the extent that is absolutely demanded by the known
character of their products, and that he is willing to admit that many
different explanations of their nature are possible. They _may_ be due
to some kind of personal or spiritual agency, but also they may not. On
the whole question of the legitimacy of Kant’s general method of
procedure, cf. below, pp. 235-9, 263 ff., 273-4, 277 ff., 461-2, 473-7.

[45] Cf. _Concerning the Advances made by Metaphysics since Leibniz and
Wolff_ (_Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. 530-1): “I am conscious to myself
of myself--this is a thought which contains a twofold I, the I as
subject and the I as object. How it should be possible that I, the I
that thinks, should be an object ... to myself, and so should be able to
distinguish myself from myself, it is altogether beyond our powers to
explain. It is, however, an undoubted fact ... and has as a consequence
the complete distinguishing of us off from the whole animal kingdom,
since we have no ground for ascribing to animals the power to say I to
themselves.”

[46] Cf. above, p. xxxiv; below, pp. 250-3, 260-3, 285-6.

[47] Cf. A 651 = B 679: “The law of Reason, which requires us to seek
for this unity, is a necessary law, as without it we should have no
Reason at all, and without Reason no coherent employment of the
understanding, and in the absence of this no sufficient criterion of
empirical truth.” Cf. also below, pp. 390-1, 414-17, 429-31, 519-21,
558-61.

[48] Regarding a further complication, due to the fact that the
_Dialectic_ was written before the teaching of the _Analytic_ was
properly matured, cf. above, p. xxiv.

[49] Cf. below, pp. 331, 390-1, 414-17.

[50] Cf. below, pp. 22, 33, 56, 66 ff.

[51] _Reflexionen_ (B. Erdmann’s edition) ii. 204.

[52] For an alternative and perhaps more adequate method of describing
Kant’s general position, cf. below, p. 571 ff.

[53] Above, pp. xxxviii-ix, xlii, xliv.

[54] Cf. below, p. 577.

[55] _Critique of Practical Reason_, W. v. p. 32; Abbott’s trans. pp.
120-1.

[56] _Op. cit._ p. 86; Abbott’s trans. p. 180.

[57] _Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse (Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. p. 624).
Cf. below, pp. 577-8. Kant claims for all men equality of political
rights, and in his treatise on _Perpetual Peace_ maintains that wars are
not likely to cease until the republican form of government is
universally adopted. He distinguishes, however, between republicanism
and democracy. By the former he means a genuinely representative system;
the latter he interprets as being the (in principle) unlimited despotism
of majority rule. Kant accordingly contends that the smaller the staff
of the executive, and the more effective the representation of
minorities, the more complete will be the approximation to the ideal
constitution. In other words, the less government we can get along with,
the better.

[58] _On the Radical Evil in Human Nature, W._ vi. p. 20; Abbott’s
trans. p. 326. “This opinion [that the world is constantly advancing
from worse to better] is certainly not founded on experience if what is
meant is _moral_ good or evil (not civilisation), for the history of all
times speaks too powerfully against it. Probably it is merely a
good-natured hypothesis ... designed to encourage us in the unwearied
cultivation of the germ of good that perhaps lies in us....”

[59] _Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, W._ iv. p. 407; Abbott’s
trans. p. 24.

[60] _Critique of Practical Reason, W._ v. pp. 84-5; Abbott’s trans. pp.
178-9.

[61] Cf. _Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, W._ iv. p. 463;
Abbott’s trans. p. 84: “While we do not comprehend the practical
unconditional necessity of the moral imperative, we yet comprehend its
_incomprehensibility_, and this is all that can be fairly demanded of a
philosophy which strives to carry its principles up to the very limit of
human reason.”

[62] _On the Radical Evil in Human Nature, W._ vi. pp. 49-50; Abbott’s
trans. pp. 357-8.

[63] Cf. Pringle-Pattison: _The Idea of God in the Light of Recent
Philosophy_, p. 25 ff.

[64] _Einleitung_, i.

[65] Henry Home, Lord Kames, published his _Elements of Criticism_ in
1762.

[66] _W._ ii. p. 311. In referring to his course in logic, Kant states
that he will consider the training of the power of sound judgment in
ordinary life, and adds that “in the _Kritik der Vernunft_ the close
kinship of subject-matter gives occasion for casting some glances upon
the _Kritik des Geschmacks, i.e._ upon _Aesthetics_.” This passage
serves to confirm the conjecture that the term _Kritik_ was borrowed
from the title of Home’s work.

[67] For Kant’s other uses of the term _pure_, cf. below, p. 55.

[68] _Commentar zu Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft_, i. pp. 117-20.

[69] For a definition, less exclusively titular, and more adequate to
the actual scope of the _Critique_, cf. below, p. 56. Reason, when
distinguished from understanding, I shall hereafter print with a capital
letter, to mark the very special sense in which it is being employed.

[70] _Philosophical Works of Francis Bacon_ (edited by J. M. Robertson,
1905), p. 247.

[71] For Zedlitz’s severe strictures (Dec. 1775) upon the teaching in
Königsberg University, and his incidental appreciative reference to
Kant, cf. Schubert’s edition of Kant’s _Werke_, xi. pt. ii. pp. 59-61.

[72] Cf. _W._ x. p. 207.

[73] _Op. cit._ pp. 212-13.

[74] Cf. _op. cit._ pp. 208-9.

[75] _Op. cit._ p. 219.

[76] A v.-vi.

[77] A v. _n._

[78] Cf. above on title, pp. 2-3.

[79] Cf. below, pp. 543, 576-7.

[80] A vii.-viii.

[81] A xiv.

[82] Cf. below, pp. 543 ff.

[83] Cf. A 86 = B 118-19.

[84] Morgenstunden; _Gesammelte Schriften_, 1863 edition, ii. pp. 246,
288. Cf. below, pp. 160-1.

[85] Cited by R. A. Sigsbee, _Philosophisches System Joseph Priestleys_
(1912), p. 33.

[86] A v. _n._

[87] A viii.

[88] _Prolegomena_, _Anhang_, Trans. of Mahaffy and Bernard, p. 147.

[89] A 1.

[90] B 21. Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 60 ff., and below, pp. 427-9, 552.

[91] A 297-8 = B 353-5. Cf. below, pp. 427-9.

[92] A iii.

[93] i. p. 50.

[94] P. 9.

[95] This statement, as we shall find, calls for modification. Kant’s
Critical position is more correctly described as phenomenalism than as
subjectivism. Cf. above, pp. xlv-vii; below, p. 270 ff.

[96] A 769 = B 797.

[97] A 761 = B 789-90. Cf. Sections I.-III. in the _Methodology_.

[98] A iii.

[99] A v. _n._

[100] A v. _n._

[101] Cf. Kant’s _Beantwortung der Frage: Was heist Aufklärung?_ 1784.

[102] A v.

[103] Cf. above, pp. 2-3.

[104] Cf. above, pp. xliv-v; below, pp. 19, 33, 56, 66 ff.

[105] A ix.

[106] A x.-xi.

[107] A xii.-xiii.

[108] A xv.

[109] A xv. Cf. below, pp. 66-7.

[110] B xiv.

[111] B ix.

[112] B xi.

[113] Cf. below, pp. 22-5.

[114] Cf. above, p. lvi; below, p. 571 ff.

[115] _Dissertation_, § 7.

[116] All these assertions call for later modification and restatement.

[117] B xxx.

[118] B xxxii.

[119] B xxxvii.

[120] B xxxviii.

[121] B vii.

[122] B viii.

[123] B xvi.

[124] Cf. above, pp. xxvi-vii; below, pp. 594-5.

[125] Cf. “Malebranche’s Theory of the Perception of Distance and
Magnitude,” in _British Journal of Psychology_ (1905), i. pp. 191-204.

[126] Cf. below, pp. 143 ff., 604.

[127] B xviii.-xix.

[128] Cf. below, pp. 33, 56, 66 ff.

[129] B xx.

[130] B xxii.

[131] B xvi.; B xxii. _n._

[132] Watson’s _The Philosophy of Kant Explained_ (p. 37) is the only
work in which I have found correct and unambiguous indication of the
true interpretation of Kant’s analogy.

[133] _Prolegomena to Ethics_, bk i. ch. i. § 11.

[134] _Text-Book to Kant_ (1881), p. 29.

[135] _History of Materialism_, Eng. transl., ii. pp. 156, 158, 237.

[136] _Geschichte der neueren Philosophie_ (1896), ii. p. 64.

[137] _Hibbert Journal_, October 1910, p. 49.

[138] _De Revolutionibus_, I. v.

[139] _Ibid._ I. x.

[140] B xxii. _n._

[141] Cf. below, p. 543 ff.

[142] B xxvi. Cf. above, pp. lv-vi, 20; below, pp. 290-1, 331, 342, 404
ff.

[143] This restatement will continue up to p. 33. In pp. 33-43 I shall
then give general comment on the _Introduction_ as a whole. In p. 43 ff.
I add the necessary detailed treatment of special points.

[144] Cf. below, p. 219 ff.

[145] Cf. above, p. xxv ff.; below, pp. 61 ff., 593 ff.

[146] This statement is first made in the _Introduction_ to the second
edition. It is really out of keeping with the argument of the
_Introduction_ in either edition. Cf. below, pp. 39-40, 57, 85, 168,
222, 245 ff. (especially pp. 278, 288).

[147] This is the argument of the _Introduction_ to the second edition.
In the first edition Kant assumes without question the existence of the
_a priori_. He enquires only whether it is also valid in its
metaphysical employment beyond the field of possible experience.

[148] The argument of the first edition, though briefer, is
substantially the same.

[149] Quoted below, pp. 219-20.

[150] Cf. below, pp. 114, 290, 590.

[151] A 6 = B 10. I here follow the wording of the second edition.

[152] Kant’s view of the _a priori_ differs from that of Leibniz in
_two_ respects. For Kant _a priori_ concepts are merely logical
functions, _i.e._ empty; and secondly, are always synthetic. Cf. above,
pp. xxxiii-vi, 186, 195-6, 257-8, 290-1, 404 ff.

[153] Cf. above, pp. xxv-vii; below, pp. 61 ff., 593 ff.

[154] B 24.

[155] Cf. above, pp. xliv-xlv, 22; below, pp. 52-3, 55-6, 66 ff.

[156] Needless to say, this “Aristotelian” logic, in the traditional
form in which alone Kant was acquainted with it, diverges very widely
from Aristotle’s actual teaching.

[157] Cf. above, pp. xxxvi-ix; below, pp. 36, 181, 184-6.

[158] A vii.

[159] B xxiii-iv.

[160] Above, pp. xxv-vii, 26; below, p. 593 ff.

[161] Cf. above, p. xxxvi ff.

[162] Cf. above, pp. xxxvii-viii; below, pp. 238-42.

[163] Cf. below, pp. 176 ff., 181, 191, 257.

[164] A 6 = B 10.

[165] Leibniz’s interpretation of the judgment seems to result in an
atomism which is the conceptual counterpart of his metaphysical monadism
(cf. Adamson, _Development of Modern Philosophy_, i. p. 77 ff.; and my
_Studies in the Cartesian Philosophy_, p. 160 ff.; also below, p. 603).
Each concept is regarded as having exclusive jurisdiction, so to speak,
over a content wholly internal to itself. The various concepts are like
sovereign states with no mediating tribunals capable of prescribing to
them their mutual dealings. Cf. below, pp. 394-400, 418 ff.

[166] A 9 = B 13.

[167] _Erste Betrachtung_, §§ 2, 3; _dritte Betrachtung_, § 1.

[168] Cf. below, p. 162.

[169] § 12, 15 C.

[170] Cf. B 15-16.

[171] Cf. below, p. 128 ff., on Kant’s views regarding arithmetical
science.

[172] Cf. below, p. 117 ff., on Kant and modern geometry, and p. 128
ff., on Kant’s views regarding arithmetical science.

[173] Cf. below, pp. 131-3, 338-9, 418 ff.

[174] That certain parts of the _Introduction_ were written at different
dates is shown below, pp. 71-2. That other parts may be of similarly
composite origin is always possible. There is, however, no sufficient
evidence to establish this conclusion. Adickes’ attempt to do so (_K._
pp. 35-7 _n._) is not convincing.

[175] Cf. above, pp. xxxiii ff., 1-2, 26 ff.

[176] i. pp. 317 and 450 ff.

[177] i. p. 412 ff.; cf. p. 388 ff.

[178] Cf. below, pp. 219-20.

[179] Cf. Vaihinger, i. p. 394. Cf. above, p. 28.

[180] Cf. Vaihinger, i. pp. 415-17.

[181] Paulsen objects that if synthetic _a priori_ judgments are valid
without explanation, they do not need it. For two reasons the objection
does not hold. (_a_) Without this explanation it would be impossible to
repel the pretensions of transcendent metaphysics (cf. A 209 = B 254-5;
A 283 = B 285). (_b_) This solution of the theoretical problem has also,
as above stated, its own intrinsic interest and value. Without such
explanation the validity of these judgments might be granted, but could
not be understood. (Cf. _Prolegomena_, §§ 4-5 and § 12 at the end. Cf.
Vaihinger, i. p. 394.)

[182] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 336. The argument of the _Analytic_, which
is still more complicated, will be considered later.

[183] Cf. A 46-9 = B 64-6. The corresponding sections of the
_Prolegomena_, Vaihinger contends, were developed from this first
edition passage, and the transcendental exposition of space in the
second edition from the argument of the _Prolegomena_.

[184] The synthetic method of argument is, as we shall see later,
further extended in the _Analytic_ by being connected with the problem
of the validity of ordinary experience. But as the mathematical sciences
are proved to have the same conditions as--neither more nor less
than--the consciousness of time, this also allows of a corresponding
extension of the analytic method. The mathematical sciences can be
substituted for the _de facto_ premiss by which these conditions are
proved.

[185] Cf. above, p. 43.

[186] What follows should be read along with p. 235 ff. below, in which
this distinction between the “subjective” and “objective” deductions is
discussed in greater detail.

[187] A x-xi.

[188] This is a criticism to which Cohen, Caird, and Riehl lay
themselves open.

[189] Cf. below, pp. 219-20.

[190] Cf. above, pp. 49-50.

[191] Cf. Vaihinger, i. p. 405. The existing sciences can, as Vaihinger
says, be treated _en bloc_, whereas each of the principles of the new
philosophy must be separately established.

[192] A 1.

[193] A 1-2.

[194] B 6 = A 2.

[195] A 2.

[196] Cf. above, pp. xxxv, 36 ff.; below, pp. 565-7.

[197] A 2.

[198] A 2.

[199] B 1.

[200] Cf. below, p. 55.

[201] B 1.

[202] Cf. below, p. 54.

[203] B 2-3.

[204] Cf. below, p. 55.

[205] B 1.

[206] B 1.

[207] B 1.

[208] Cf. below, p. 88 ff.

[209] Cf. below, p. 237 ff.

[210] B 1.

[211] Cf. below, pp. 55-6.

[212] B 2.

[213] Cf. above, p. 27 _n._

[214] B 2.

[215] Cf. above, pp. 39 ff., 53; below, pp. 57-8, 222 ff., 241, 286-9.

[216] B 2-3.

[217] Cf. above, p. 53.

[218] A 9-10 = B 13.

[219] Cf. above, p. 39 ff., and below, pp. 286-9.

[220] P. 53; cf. also pp. 1-2.

[221] Cf. also above, pp. 2-3.

[222] B 3.

[223] Cf. _Metaphysische Anfangsgründe_, Hauptstück ii. Lehrs. 8, Zus.
2, in which elasticity and gravity are spoken of as the only universal
properties of matter which can be apprehended _a priori_.

[224] B 3-4.

[225] Cf. above, p. 27 ff.

[226] B 4.

[227] Cf. above, pp. xxxiii-iv, 27, 599 ff.

[228] Cf. above, pp. xxxv-vi, 30; below, pp. 185-6, 257-9.

[229] _Loc. cit._

[230] B 5.

[231] Cf. above, pp. xxx, 599 ff.

[232] Cf. above, pp. 39, 54.

[233] A 2 = B 6.

[234] B 7.

[235] Cf. _Kritik der Urtheilskraft_, § 91, _W._ v. p. 473.
_Fortschritte_, _Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. pp. 572-3.

[236] Cf. above, pp. 22, 49-50, 52.

[237] Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 40; _Fortschritte_, pp. 577-8.

[238] i. p. 238.

[239] P. 579.

[240] A 712 ff. = B 740 ff.; cf. also _Fortschritte_, p. 522.

[241] A 4 = B 8; cf. below, p. 563 ff.

[242] A 4 = B 8.

[243] A 5 = B 9.

[244] Cf. B 18.

[245] Cf. above, p. 29.

[246] A 6 ff. = B 10 ff.

[247] _Prolegomena_, § 2, _b_, _c_; Eng. trans, pp. 15-16. On the
connection of mathematical reasoning with the principle of
contradiction, cf. below, pp. 64-5.

[248] P. 582; cf. _Logik_, § 37.

[249] ii. p. 257.

[250] _Prolegomena_, § 4.

[251] Cf. B 290.

[252] § 2, _c_.

[253] B 161.

[254] B 218.

[255] A 9 = B 13.

[256] Cf. above, pp. xxv ff., 26; below, p. 593 ff.; cf. Vaihinger, i.
p. 340 ff.

[257] A 9 = B 13, B 11, B 19.

[258] In A 9 = B 13, B 11, B 19.

[259] Cf. Borowski’s _Darstellung des Lebens und Charakters Im. Kants_
(Hoffmann’s edition, 1902), p. 252. The German translation of Hume’s
_Enquiry concerning the Human Understanding_ appeared in 1755, and Kant
probably made his first acquaintance with Hume through it. Cf. above, p.
xxviii; below, p. 156.

[260] Cf. below, _Appendix B_, p. 593 ff.

[261] A 9 = B 13.

[262] A 733 = B 761.

[263] A 737 = B 764.

[264] i. p. 291.

[265] B 14.

[266] B 14. Cf. above, pp. 59-60.

[267] i. p. 294.

[268] B 15.

[269] B 15. Cf. above, p. 41.

[270] Cf. Vaihinger, i. p. 296.

[271] A 164.

[272] A 164.

[273] In _Prolegomena_ and in second edition.

[274] B 15.

[275] § 2 _c_.

[276] Cf. below, p. 128 ff.

[277] Cf. A 713 = B 741.

[278] A 140 = B 179. Cf. below, p. 337 ff.

[279] B 15.

[280] B 17.

[281] i. p. 304 ff.

[282] § 15.

[283] This latter Kant developed in his _Metaphysische Anfangsgründe_
(1786).

[284] Cf. A 840 = B 869. “Nature” means, in the Kantian terminology,
“all that is.”

[285] Cf. above, pp. xliv-v, 19, 22, 33, 52-3, 55-6.

[286] § 4.

[287] The propositions of pure natural science are not separately
treated in § 4 of the _Prolegomena_, though the subsequent argument
implies that this has been done. Vaihinger’s inference (i. p. 310) that
a paragraph, present in Kant’s manuscript, has been dropped out in the
process of printing the fourth section (the section which contains the
paragraphs transposed from the end of § 2) seems unavoidable. The
missing paragraph was very probably that which is here given in B 17.

[288] B 18.

[289] In § 4 (at end of paragraphs transposed from § 2).

[290] B 19.

[291] B 19.

[292] B 20.

[293] B 20.

[294] Cf. B 17.

[295] B 20.

[296] B 21.

[297] B 22.

[298] Vaihinger’s analysis (i. p. 371 ff.) is invaluable. I follow it
throughout.

[299] When corrected as above, pp. 51-2, 66-7.

[300] Cf. above, p. 38 ff.

[301] By J. Erdmann (cited by Vaihinger, i. p. 371).

[302] By B. Erdmann, _Kriticismus_, p. 183.

[303] As above noted, pp. 66-7.

[304] Above, p. 66.

[305] A 11.

[306] A 11 = B 24.

[307] Cf. _Dissertation_, § 23: _usus logicus_--_usus realis_.

[308] Cf. above, p. 2.

[309] A 11 = B 24.

[310] i. p. 459 ff.

[311] _Entwickelungsgeschichte der Kantischen Erkenntnistheorie_, p.
113.

[312] Cf. A 795 = B 823. Cf. below, pp. 170, 174.

[313] Cf. A 796 = B 824.

[314] Cf. Vaihinger, i. pp. 461-2 for the very varied meanings in which
Kant “capriciously” employs the terms _Organon_, _Canon_, _Doctrine_,
and _Discipline_.

[315] A 11 = B 25.

[316] _Erklärung in Beziehung auf Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre_ (1799),
_Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. p. 600.

[317] B 25.

[318] Cf. A xv.

[319] Cf. B xxiv.

[320] A 11 = B 25.

[321] _De vera religione_, 72; _De civitate Dei_, viii. 6. Cited by
Eisler, _Wörterbuch_, p. 1521.

[322] Cf. Prantl, _Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande_, iii. pp. 114,
244-5.

[323] _Ethica_ (Vloten and Land), ii. prop. xl. schol. 1.

[324] _Principles of Human Knowledge_, cxviii. The above citations are
from Eisler, _loc. cit._ pp. 1524-5. I have also myself come upon the
term in Swift’s _Gulliver’s Travels_ (Dent, 1897, p. 166): “And as to
‘ideas, entities, abstractions, and transcendentals,’ I could never
drive the least conception into their heads.”

[325] _Organon_, i. 484, cited by Eucken in _Geschichte der
philosophischer Terminologie_, p. 205.

[326] A 11 = B 25, A 56 = B 80.

[327] Cited by Vaihinger, i. p. 468.

[328] Cf. _Text-Book to Kant_, p. 13.

[329] Cf. _Kant Explained_, p. 89.

[330] Cf. below, p. 238.

[331] Cf. below, pp. 116-17, 302.

[332] Adickes has taken the liberty in his edition of the _Critique_ of
substituting in A 297 = B 354 transcendental for transcendent. The
Berlin edition very rightly retains the original reading.

[333] B 27.

[334] A vi.

[335] A 14-15 = B 28. Cf. below, p. 570_n._

[336] This alteration is not given in Max Müller’s translation.

[337] Cf. the corresponding alteration made in the second edition at end
of note to A 21 = B 35.

[338] A 15 = B 29.

[339] _Loc. cit._

[340] _Loc. cit._ Cf. A 835 = B 863.

[341] Cf. A 124, B 151-2, and below, pp. 225, 265.

[342] Cf. A 141 = B 180-1. Cf. _Critique of Judgment_, § 57: “Thus here
[in the _Critique of Aesthetic Judgment_], as also in the _Critique of
Practical Reason_, the antinomies force us against our will to look
beyond the sensible and to seek in the supersensible the point of union
for all our _a priori_ faculties; because no other expedient is left to
make our Reason harmonious with itself.” Cf. also below, p. 473 ff., in
comment on A 649 = B 677.

[343] A 16 = B 30.

[344] Introduction (_W._ v. p. 16). Cf. below, p. 438.

[345] Cf. also above, p. 25.

[346] Cf. A 51 = B 75.

[347] That thought finds in intuition its sole possible content is, of
course, a conclusion first established in the _Analytic_. Kant is here
defining his terms in the light of his later results.

[348] A 51 = B 75.

[349] Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 12, Remark ii. at the beginning.

[350] Cf. below, p. 88 ff.; B 146-7.

[351] _Prolegomena_, § 8 (Eng. trans. p. 33).

[352] Quoted by Vaihinger, ii. p. 4.

[353] Cf. _Ueber das Organ der Seele_ (1796) and _Anthropologie_, § 22.

[354] § 3.

[355] A 27 = B 43, A 34 = B 51, A 42 = B 59, A 51 = B 75.

[356] Cf. B 72.

[357] In the second paragraph, A 20 = B 34.

[358] _Dissertation_, § 4.

[359] A 320 = B 376.

[360] _Dissertation_, § 4.

[361] A 50 = B 74.

[362] This view, as I shall endeavour to show, is only semi-Critical,
and is profoundly modified by the more revolutionary conclusions to
which Kant finally worked his way. Cf. below, p. 274 ff.

[363] In this he was anticipated by Tetens, _Philosophische Versuche
über die menschliche Natur_, Bd. i. (1777), _Versuch_ X. v. Cf. below,
p. 294.

[364] _Critique of Judgment_, § 3 (Eng. trans, p. 49). Kant was the
first to adopt the threefold division of mental powers--“the faculty of
knowledge, the feeling of pleasure and pain, and the faculty of desire.”
This threefold division is first given in his _Ueber Philosophie
überhaupt_ (Hartenstein, vi. p. 379), which was written some time
between 1780 and 1790, being originally designed as an Introduction to
the _Critique of Judgment_.

[365] A 248 (occurs in a lengthy section omitted in B).

[366] This distinction between intuition and appearance practically
coincides with that above noted between intuition and its object.

[367] For statement of the precise meaning in which these terms are here
employed, cf. above, pp. xlv-vii; below, pp. 270 ff., 312 ff.

[368] This would harmonise with the view developed in A 166 (in its
formulation of the principle of the _Anticipations_), A 374 ff., B 274
ff., A 723 = B 751.

[369] Cf. A 50 = B 74: “We may name sensation the matter of sensuous
knowledge.” Similarly in A 42 = B 59; _Prolegomena_, § 11;
_Fortschritte_, (Hartenstein, viii. p. 527).

[370] Cf. below, p. 274 ff.

[371] Cf. below, pp. 366-7, 370-2, 377.

[372] ii. p. 59.

[373] A 42 = B 60.

[374] Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. note to 469; also note to 357.

[375] Cf. above, p. xxxiii ff.

[376] A 266 = B 322.

[377] In discussing _a_ and _b_ we may for the present identify form
with space. The problem has special complications in reference to time.

[378] Cf. B 207.

[379] Herbart’s doctrine of space, Lotze’s local sign theory, also the
empiricist theories of the Mills and Bain, all rest upon this same
assumption. It was first effectively called in question by William
James. Cf. Bergson: _Les Données immédiates_, pp. 70-71, Eng. trans. pp.
92-3: “The solution given by Kant does not seem to have been seriously
disputed since his time: indeed, it has forced itself, sometimes without
their knowledge, on the majority of those who have approached the
problem anew, whether nativists or empiricists. Psychologists agree in
assigning a Kantian origin to the nativistic explanation of Johann
Müller; but Lotze’s hypothesis of local signs, Bain’s theory, and the
more comprehensive explanation suggested by Wundt, may seem at first
sight quite independent of the _Transcendental Aesthetic_. The authors
of these theories seem indeed to have put aside the problem of the
nature of space, in order to investigate simply by what process our
sensations come to be situated in space and to be set, so to speak,
alongside one another: but this very question shows that they regard
sensations as inextensive, and make a radical distinction, just as Kant
did, between the matter of representation and its form. The conclusion
to be drawn from the theories of Lotze and Bain, and from Wundt’s
attempt to reconcile them, is that the sensations by means of which we
come to form the notion of space are themselves unextended and simply
qualitative: extensity is supposed to result from their synthesis, as
water from the combination of two gases. The empirical or genetic
explanations have thus taken up the problem of space at the very point
where Kant left it: Kant separated space from its contents: the
empiricists ask how these contents, which are taken out of space by our
thought, manage to get back again.” Bergson proceeds to argue that the
analogy of chemical combination is quite inapplicable, and that some
“unique act very like what Kant calls an _a priori_ form” must still be
appealed to. With the Kantian standpoint in this matter Bergson does
not, of course, agree. He is merely pointing out what the consequences
must be of this initial assumption of inextensive sensations.

[380] Cf. _Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im
Raume_, in its penultimate paragraph.

[381] Cf. _Dissertation_, last sentence of § 4, quoted below, p. 87.

[382] A 291 = B 347; A 429 = B 457.

[383] _Reflexionen_, ii. 334.

[384] ii. p. 73.

[385] Cf. Stout: _Manual of Psychology_ (3rd edition), pp. 465-6. “We
find that the definite apprehension of an order of coexistence, as such,
arises and develops only in connection with that peculiar aspect of
sense-experience which we have called _extensity_, and more especially
the extensity of sight and touch. Two sounds or a sound and a smell may
be presented as coexistent in the sense of being simultaneous; but taken
by themselves apart from association with experiences of touch and
sight, they are not apprehended as spatially juxtaposed or separated by
a perceived spatial interval or as having perceived spatial direction
and distance relatively to each other. Such relations can only be
perceived or imagined, except perhaps in a very rudimentary way, when
the external object is determined for us as an extensive whole by the
extensity of the same presentation through which we apprehend it.”

[386] _Principles of Psychology_, § 399, cited by Vaihinger.

[387] § 4.

[388] _Sich ordnen_ has here, in line with common German usage, the
force of a passive verb.

[389] Riehl: _Kriticismus_ (1876-1879) ii. _Erster Theil_, p. 104. As
already noted, Kant tacitly admits this in regard to time relations of
coexistence and sequence. He continues, however, to deny it in regard to
space relations.

[390] Cf. below, pp. 101-2, 105.

[391] A 20 = B 34.

[392] A 20 = B 34.

[393] A 42 = B 60. Cf. _Dissertation_, § 12: [“Space and time, the
objects of pure mathematics,] are not only formal principles of all
intuition, but themselves original intuitions.”

[394] A 196 = B 241; A 293 = B 349.

[395] That is to say, in his published writings. It finds expression in
one, and only one, of the _Reflexionen_ (ii. 410: “Both space and time
are nothing but combinations of sensuous impressions”).

[396] § 15, Coroll. at the end.

[397] Cf. § 12, quoted above, p. 89 _n._ 2.

[398] There also Kant teaches that the representation of space is gained
from the space-endowed objects of experience.

[399] Cf. B 1.

[400] § 43.

[401] _Ueber eine Entdeckung nach der alle neue Kritik der reinen Kritik
durch eine ältere entbehrlich gemacht werden soll._

[402] _Op. cit. W._ viii. pp. 221-2.

[403] _Loc. cit._ p. 222.

[404] Especially those which he had offered in support of the contention
that pure mathematical science is intuitive, not merely conceptual.

[405] Cf. below, p. 291 ff., on Kant’s reasons for developing his
doctrine of inner sense.

[406] As no one passage can be regarded as quite decisively proving
Kant’s belief in a pure manifold of intuition, the question can only be
decided by a collation of all the relevant statements in the light of
the general tendencies of Kant’s thinking.

[407] This at least would seem to be implied in the wording of his later
positions; it is not explicitly avowed.

[408] Cf. A 76-7 = B 102.

[409] Cf. above, pp. xlii, 38-42; below, pp. 118-20, 128-34.

[410] The last statement may be more freely translated: “Only in this
way can I get the intuition before me in visible form.” Cf. below, pp.
135-6, 347-8, 359.

[411] B 202-3.

[412] Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. 393, 409, 465, 630, 649.

[413] This, indeed, is Kant’s reason for describing space as an Idea of
reason. Cf. below, pp. 97-8.

[414] Geometry is for Kant the fundamental and chief mathematical
science (cf. A 39 = B 56 and _Dissertation_, § 15 _c_). In this respect
he is a disciple of Newton, not a follower of Leibniz. His neglect to
take adequate account of arithmetic and algebra is due to this cause.
Just as in speaking of the manifold of sense he almost invariably has
sight alone in view, so in speaking of mathematical science he usually
refers only to geometry and the kindred discipline of pure mechanics.

[415] A 76-7 = B 102. Cf. B 160-1 _n._

[416] Cf. above, pp. 90, 92 ff.; below, pp. 171, 226-9, 267-70, 337.

[417] Cf. B 160.

[418] _Metaphysical First Principles_, _W._ iv. p. 559, cf. p. 481.

[419] _Op. cit._ p. 560.

[420] _Critique of Judgment_, §§ 26-7, Eng. trans. pp. 115-16 and 121.

[421] Cf. below, pp. 102 _n._, 165-6, 390-1.

[422] The title of this section, and the points raised in the opening
paragraph, are commented upon below. Cf. pp. 110, 114-15, 134 ff. I pass
at once to the first space argument.

[423] Added in second edition.

[424] This argument is an almost verbal repetition of the first argument
on space in the _Dissertation_, § 15.

[425] Cf. below, pp. 106-7, 126, 132-3, 177-84, 338-9.

[426] Cf. above, p. 37 ff.; below, p. 178 ff.

[427] That is particularly obvious in Kant’s formulation of his problem
in the _Introduction_. For that is the assumption which underlies his
mode of distinguishing between analytic and synthetic judgments. Cf.
above, p. 37.

[428] Cf. above, p. xxii.

[429] Cf. especially, pp. 184, 332-6, 419, 474, 479.

[430] I here use the more modern terms. Kant, in _Anthropologie_, § 14,
distinguishes between them as _Organenempfindungen_ and
_Vitalempfindungen_.

[431] ii. p. 165.

[432] Cf. above, pp. 85-8.

[433] Cf. _Dissertation_, § 15 D: “Space is not anything objective and
real. It is neither substance, nor accident, nor relation, but is
subjective and ideal, proceeding by a fixed law from the nature of the
mind, and being, as it were, a schema for co-ordinating, in the manner
which it prescribes, all external sensations whatsoever.” And § 15,
corollary at end: “Action of the mind co-ordinating its sensations in
accordance with abiding laws.”

[434] Especially in view of the third and fourth arguments on space, and
of Kant’s teaching in the transcendental exposition.

[435] _E.g._ Cohen, Riehl, Caird, Watson.

[436] Cf. Watson, _The Philosophy of Kant explained_, p. 83: “Kant,
therefore, concludes from the logical priority of space that it is _a
priori_.”

[437] Upon it Kant bases the assertion that space is an Idea of reason;
cf. above, pp. 96-8, and below, pp. 165-6, 390-1.

[438] This second argument is not in the _Dissertation_.

[439] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. pp. 196-7. The corresponding argument on time,
in the form in which it is given in the second edition, is, as we shall
find, seriously misleading. It has caused Herbart and others to
misinterpret the connection in which this corollary stands to the main
thesis. Herbart’s interpretation is considered below, p. 124.

[440] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 220.

[441] _Reflexionen_, ii. 403.

[442] “That in space there are no more than three dimensions, that
between two points there can be but one straight line, that in a plane
surface from a given point with a given straight line a circle is
describable, cannot be inferred from any universal notion of space, but
can only be discerned in space as in the concrete.” Cf. also
_Prolegomena_, § 12.

[443] In the second edition, the third.

[444] For a different view cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 233.

[445] Cf. above, pp. 99-100; below, pp. 126, 180-1, 184, 338-9.

[446] Cf. below, p. 180.

[447] Cf. above, p. xxxvi; below, pp. 176 ff., 191, 195-6, 257, 290-1,
404 ff., 413.

[448] This statement occurs in a parenthesis; it has already been dwelt
upon in the fourth (third) argument.

[449] It has led Kant to substitute _erörtern_ for _betrachten_ in A 23
= B 38.

[450] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 151.

[451] § 1 (Eng. trans, p. 13). Cf. above, p. 64.

[452] This is, no doubt, one reason why Kant employs, in reference to
space, the unfortunate and confusing term concept (_Begriff_) in place
of the wider term representation (_Vorstellung_). Cf. B 37, and above,
p. 64.

[453] Cf. A 729 = B 757: “In place of the term _definition_ I should
prefer to employ the term exposition. For that is a more guarded
expression, the claims of which the critic may allow as being in a
certain degree valid even though he entertain doubts as to the
completeness of the analysis.” Cf. _Logic_, §§ 99 ff., 105. Cf. also
_Untersuchung über die Deutlichkeit der Grundsätze, W._ ii. pp. 183-4:
“Augustine has said, ‘I know well what time is, but if any one asks me,
I cannot tell.’”

[454] For explanation of the phrase “construction of concepts” cf.
below, pp. 132-3.

[455] Cf. below, p. 117. ff.

[456] Cf. conclusion of fourth argument on space.

[457] _A priori_ is here employed in its ambiguous double sense, as _a
priori_ in so far as it precedes experience (as a _representation_), and
in so far as it is valid independently of experience (as a
_proposition_). Cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 268.

[458] Cf. below, p. 114 ff.

[459] Cf. below, pp. 115-16.

[460] Cf. _Lose Blätter_, i. p. 18: “This is a proof (_Beweis_) that
space is a subjective condition. For its propositions are synthetic and
through them objects can be known _a priori_. This would be impossible
if space were not a subjective condition of the representation of these
objects.” Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. p. 396, in which this _direct_ proof of
the ideality of space is distinguished from the _indirect_ proof by
means of the antinomies.

[461] By “concepts” Kant seems to mean the five arguments, though as a
matter of fact other conclusions and presuppositions are taken into
account, and quite new points are raised.

[462] This, according to Vaihinger (ii. p. 287), is the first occurrence
of the phrase _Dinge an sich_ in Kant’s writings.

[463] Cf. Vaihinger’s analysis of this discussion, ii. pp. 290-313.

[464] ii. pp. 289-90.

[465] Cf. below, pp. 415 ff., 515 ff., 558 ff.

[466] In B 166 ff.

[467] This is likewise true of the references in the letter to Herz,
21st Feb. 1772. Cf. below, pp. 219-20.

[468] _The Critical Philosophy of Kant_, i. pp. 306-9.

[469] Cf. letter to Herz, _W._ x. p. 126. It is, Kant there says, the
most absurd explanation which can be offered of the origin and validity
of our knowledge, involving an illegitimate _circulus in probando_, and
also throwing open the door to the wildest speculations. Cf. above, p.
28; below, pp. 141-2, 290, 590.

[470] Cf. B 167-8.

[471] That is, in the first edition. Cf. above, p. 85 ff.; and below, p.
116.

[472] Above, pp. 111-12.

[473] ii. p. 335.

[474] §§ 6-11.

[475] This identification of the two is especially clear in A 39 = B 56.

[476] A 27 = B 43.

[477] Cf. above, p. xxxv; below, pp. 117-20, 142, 185-6, 241-2, 257,
290-1.

[478] A 28 = B 44, cf. A 35 = B 52.

[479] Cf. Vaihinger, i. pp. 351-4; and above, p. 76; below, p. 302. Cf.
Caird, _The Critical Philosophy_, i. pp. 298-9, 301; and Watson, _Kant
Explained_, p. 91.

[480] _Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung der lebendigen Kräfte_ (1747),
§ 10.

[481] This important and far-reaching assertion we cannot at this point
discuss. Kant’s reasoning is really circular in the bad sense. Kant may
legitimately argue from the _a priori_ character of space to the
apodictic character of _pure_ mathematical science; but when he proceeds
similarly to infer the apodictic character of _applied_ mathematics, he
is constrained to make the further assumption that space is a fixed and
absolutely uniform mode in which alone members of the human species can
intuit objects. That, as we point out below (p. 120), is an assumption
which Kant does not really succeed in proving. In any case the
requirements of the strict synthetic method preclude him from arguing,
as he does both in the _Dissertation_ (§ 15) and in the third space
argument of the first edition, that the _a priori_ certitude of applied
mathematics affords proof of the necessary uniformity of all space.

[482] § 15 D.

[483] Cf. above, p. 111.

[484] Cf. above, pp. 40-2, 93-4; below, pp. 131-3, 338-9, 418 ff.

[485] A 99-100.

[486] A 78 = B 104. Cf. A 159 = B 198, B 147.

[487] § 38, Eng. trans, p. 81.

[488] Cf. p. 241 ff.

[489] A 28-9. Cf. B 1; _Prolegomena_, § 13, Remark II. at the end:
“Cinnabar excites the sensation of red in me.” Cf. above, pp. 80-8;
below, pp. 146 ff., 274 ff.

[490] Kant continues the discussion of this general problem in A 45 ff.
= B 62 ff.

[491] Kant himself again uses the confusing term conception.

[492] § 14, 1.

[493] Herbart, _Werke_, ii. 30. Quoted by Vaihinger, iii. p. 198.

[494] The third argument on time will be considered below in its
connection with the transcendental exposition.

[495] The chief omission goes, as we shall see, to form the concluding
argument on time.

[496] In the second edition, the third.

[497] In the second edition, the third.

[498] In the second edition, the fourth.

[499] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. pp. 380-1.

[500] Cf. second part of fourth (third) argument on space.

[501] Kant’s _Logik, Einleitung_, § 8, Eng. trans, p. 49.

[502] Cf. above, pp. 99-100.

[503] These axioms are: (1) time has only one dimension; (2) different
times are not simultaneous but successive. In the fourth argument the
synthetic character of these axioms is taken as further evidence of the
intuitive nature of time. This passage also is really part of the
transcendental exposition. That exposition has to account for the
synthetic character of the axioms as well as for their apodictic
character; and as a matter of fact the intuitive and consequent
synthetic character of the _a priori_ knowledge which arises from time
is much more emphasised in the transcendental exposition than its
apodictic nature.

[504] Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. 374 ff.

[505] Vaihinger, ii. p. 387.

[506] Cf. A 41 = B 58: “Motion which combines both [space and time]
presupposes something empirical.”

[507] _W._ iv. p. 471.

[508] _Ueber Philosophie überhaupt_ (Hartenstein, vi. p. 395).

[509] § 12.

[510] _Loc. cit._

[511] A 78 = B 104.

[512] A 142-3 = B 182. It should be observed that in Kant’s view
schemata “exist nowhere but in thought” (A 141 = B 180). It may also be
noted that time is taken as conditioning the schemata of _all_ the
categories.

[513] A 717 ff. = B 745 ff.

[514] § 10.

[515] _Erläuterungen über des Herrn Professor Kant Critik der reinen
Vernunft_ (Königsberg, 1784), p. 24. Johann Schulze (or Schultz) was
professor of mathematics in Königsberg. He was also _Hofprediger_, and
is frequently referred to as Pastor Schulze. Kant has eulogised him
(_W._ x. p. 128) as “the best philosophical head that I am acquainted
with in our part of the world.” In preparing the _Erläuterungen_, which
is a paraphrase or simplified statement of the argument of the
_Critique_, with appended comment, Schulze had the advantage of Kant’s
advice in all difficulties. Kant also read his manuscript, and suggested
a few modifications (_op. cit._ pp. 329, 343).

[516] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. pp. 388-9.

[517] _Werke_ (Frauenstädt’s ed., 1873), i. p. 133.

[518] P. 129.

[519] _W._ x. p. 530. Italics not in Kant.

[520] _Untersuchung über die Deutlichkeit der Grundsätze: Erste
Betrachtung_, §§ 2, 3; _dritte Betrachtung_, § 1; _Dissertation_, §§ 12,
15 C.

[521] P. 128.

[522] _Dissertation_, § 15 C.

[523] Cf. above, pp. 40-2, 118-20; below, pp. 338-9.

[524] _Kant und die moderne Mathematik in Kant-Studien_, xii. (1907) p.
34 _n._

[525] Cf. A 713 ff. = B 741 ff.; A 4 = B 8; B 15-16; A 24; A 47-8 = B
64-5.

[526] Cf. below, pp. 337-8.

[527] Cf. above, pp. 112 n. 4.

[528] The content of the second _Conclusion_ in regard to space.

[529] This expresses the matter a little more clearly than Kant himself
does. The term representation is ambiguous. In the first paragraph it is
made to cover the appearances as well as their representation.

[530] Cf. _Dissertation_, § 15 Coroll.: “Space properly concerns the
intuition of the _object_; time the _state_, especially the
_representative_ state.”

[531] Cf. below, pp. 309 ff., 347-8, 359.

[532] Cf. _Reflexionem_, ii. 365 ff.

[533] § 14, 5 and note to 5.

[534] The opposite is, however, asserted in B 67.

[535] Cf. A 427-8 _n._ = B 456 _n._

[536] A 99. Cf. A 162 = B 203: “I cannot represent to myself a line,
however small, without drawing it in thought, _i.e._ generating from a
point all its parts one after another.” Cf. pp. 94, 347-8.

[537] Cf. _Lose Blätter_, i. 54: “Without space time itself would not be
represented as quantity (_Grösse_), and in general this conception would
have no object.” Cf. _Dissertation_, § 14. 5.

[538] Cf. below, p. 365 ff.

[539] In the _Dissertation_ time is treated before space.

[540] Cf. above, pp. xxxiv, 120; below, pp. 241-2, 365, 367-70, 390-1.

[541] Cf. _Dissertation_, § 15 C.

[542] Cf. below, pp. 272 ff., 294-5, 308 ff., 365 ff.

[543] A 23 = B 37.

[544] They correspond to the third paragraph dealing with space. Cf.
above, p. 116.

[545] Cf. above, pp. 116-17.

[546] Cf. _W._ x. p. 102. Mendelssohn had also protested; cf. _op. cit._
x. p. 110.

[547] _W._ x. pp. 128-9. Italics not in Kant. Kant is entirely justified
in protesting against the view that in denying things in themselves to
be in time he is asserting that they remain eternally the same with
themselves. To make a dancer preserve one and the same posture is not to
take him out of time, but to bring home to him the reality of time in an
extremely unpleasant manner. Duration is one of the modes of time.

[548] This is Kant’s reply to Mendelssohn’s objection (December 1770,
_W._ x. p. 110): “Succession is at least a necessary condition of the
representations of finite spirits. Now the finite spirits are not only
subjects but also objects of representations, both for God and for our
fellow-men. The succession must therefore be regarded as something
objective.”

[549] Cf. A 277 = B 333: “It is not given to us to observe even our own
mind with any intuition but that of our inner sense.”

[550] Quoted by Vaihinger, ii. p. 406.

[551] In the fourth _Paralogism_, A 366, and in the _Refutation of
Idealism_, B 274.

[552] Cf. A 42 = B 59.

[553] Above, pp. 113-14.

[554] Cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 114.

[555] The date of Kant’s _Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der
Gegenden im Raume_.

[556] Cf. below, p. 161 ff.

[557] Cf. _Dissertation_, § 15 D: “Those who defend the reality of space
conceive it either as an absolute and immense _receptacle_ of possible
things--a view which appeals not only to the English [thinkers] but to
most geometricians--or they contend that it is _nothing but a relation_
holding between existing things, which must vanish when the things are
removed, and which is thinkable only in actual things. This latter is
the teaching of Leibniz and of most of our countrymen.” That the account
of Leibniz’s teaching given in the paragraphs under consideration is not
altogether accurate, need hardly be pointed out. Kant, following his
usual method in the discussion of opposing systems, is stating what he
regards as being the logical consequences of certain of Leibniz’s
tenets, rather than his avowed positions.

[558] Cf. A 275-6 = B 331-2: “Leibniz conceived space as a certain order
in the community of substances, and time as the dynamical sequence of
their states. But that which both seem to possess as proper to
themselves, in independence of things, he ascribed to the confused
character of their concepts, asserting this confusion to be the reason
why what is a mere form of dynamical relations has come to be regarded
as a special intuition, self-subsistent and antecedent to the things
themselves. Thus space and time were [for Leibniz] the intelligible form
of the connection of things (substances and their states) in
themselves.” Cf. also _Prolegomena_, § 13, _Anm._ i.

[559] Kant has stated that both views conflict with “the principles of
experience.” But his criticisms are not altogether on that line. The
statement strictly applies only to his criticism of the Leibnizian view.
Cf. _Dissertation_, § 15 D: “That first inane invention of reason,
assuming as it does the existence of true infinite relations in the
absence of all interrelated entities, belongs to the realm of fable. But
those who adopt the other view fall into a much worse error. For whereas
the former place an obstacle in the way only of certain rational
concepts, _i.e._ concepts that concern noumena, and which also in
themselves are extremely obscure bearing upon questions as to the
spiritual world, omnipresence, etc., the latter set themselves in direct
antagonism to the phenomena themselves and to geometry, the most
faithful interpreter of all phenomena. For--not to dwell upon the
obvious circle in which they necessarily become involved in defining
space--they cast geometry down from its position at the highest point of
certitude, and throw it back into the class of those sciences the
principles of which are empirical. For if all modifications of space are
derived only through experience from external relations, geometrical
axioms can have only comparative universality, like that acquired
through induction, in other words, such as extends only as far as
observation has gone. They cannot lay claim to any necessity save that
of being in accordance with the established laws of nature, nor to any
precision except of the artificial sort, resting upon assumptions. And
as happens in matters empirical, the possibility is not excluded that a
space endowed with other original modifications, and perhaps even a
rectilineal figure enclosed by two lines, may sometime be discovered.”
Cf. above, p. 114; below, p. 290.

[560] In B 155 _n._ Kant distinguishes between motion of an object in
space, and motion as generation of a geometrical figure. The former
alone involves experience; the latter is a pure act of the productive
imagination, and belongs not only to geometry but also to transcendental
philosophy. This note, as Erdmann has pointed out (_Kriticismus_, pp.
115, 168), was introduced by Kant into the second edition as a reply to
a criticism of Schütz. The distinction as thus drawn is only tenable on
the assumption of a pure manifold distinct from the manifold of sense.

[561] A 230 = B 283. Cf. above, pp. 57, 118; below, pp. 185-6, 257.

[562] A 41 = B 58.

[563] Cf. below, pp. 359-60.

[564] _Les Données Immédiates_, p. 75.

[565] ii. p. 446.

[566] §§ 4 and 27.

[567] Cf. _Ueber eine Entdeckung_, etc.: _W._ viii. p. 220.

[568] A 44 = B 61.

[569] A 277 = B 334. Cf. A 278-9 = B 335-6.

[570] When Kant says that the distinction is not logical (that of
relative clearness and obscurity) but transcendental, the latter term is
taken as practically equivalent to epistemological. It does not mean
‘relating to the _a priori_,’ but relating to transcendental philosophy,
just as logical here means relating to logic. Cf. Vaihinger, ii. p. 452.

[571] Cf. A 270 ff. = B 326 ff.

[572] § 7 (I read _autem_ for _autor_). Cf. below, p. 187.

[573] Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 13, Remark II.

[574] Cf. above, pp. 120-1.

[575] Cf. A 257 = B 313.

[576] A 46 = B 63. This is the first occurrence in the _Critique_ of the
phrase transcendental object. Transcendental is employed as synonymous
with transcendent. Cf. below, p. 204 ff.

[577] Cf. above, pp. 120-2.

[578] A 271 = B 327.

[579] A 46-9 = B 63-6.

[580] A 48 = B 65-6. Vaihinger (ii. pp. 470-2) gives what appears to be
a sufficient explanation of what Kant had in mind in its employment.

[581] A 46 = B 64. Cf. _Dissertation_, § 15 C. In the concluding
sentence of the first edition’s _Aesthetic_, Kant for the first time
uses the singular _Ding an sich_ in place of the more usual _Dinge an
sich_ and also refers to it in problematic terms as what _may_ underlie
appearances.

[582] B 66-73.

[583] _a_ does not contain anything not to be found elsewhere in the
first edition. It is a restatement of A 265 ff. = B 321 ff., A 274 = B
330, A 277 ff. = B 333 ff., A 283-5 = B 339-41.

[584] An assertion, it may be noted, which conflicts with Kant’s view of
it as a pure manifold.

[585] Kant was probably influenced by Tetens. Cp. below, p. 294.

[586] Cf. below, p. 291 ff. _b_ together with B 152-8 is a more explicit
statement of the doctrine of inner sense than Kant had given in the
first edition.

[587] Vaihinger (ii. p. 486 ff.), who has done more than any other
commentator to clear up the ambiguities of this passage, distinguishes
only two views.

[588] A 38 = B 55.

[589] Cf. _Prolegomena_, _W._ iv. p. 376 _n._, Eng. trans. p. 149: “The
reviewer often fights his own shadow. When I oppose the truth of
experience to dreaming, he never suspects that I am only concerned with
the _somnium objective sumtum_ of Wolff’s philosophy, which is merely
formal, and has nothing to do with the distinction of dreaming and
waking, which indeed has no place in any transcendental philosophy.”

[590] Cf. below, p. 270 ff.

[591] B 69. For explanation of the references to time and
self-consciousness, cf. below, pp. 308, 323.

[592] This view of illusion likewise appears in A 293 = B 349, A 377-8,
A 396, and _Prolegomena_, § 13, III., at the beginning.

[593] _Prolegomena_, _loc. cit._

[594] Cf. in the 1863 edition, Bd. ii. 267 ff. The examples of illusion
employed by Mendelssohn are reflection in a mirror and the rainbow.

[595] _W._ x. p. 405.

[596] _Schein_ is so used by Kant himself (_W._ x. p. 105) in a letter
to Lambert in 1770.

[597] A 38.

[598] Cf. above, A 39 = B 57. This is, however, merely asserted by
implication; it is not proved. As already noted, Kant does not really
show that space and time, viewed as absolute realities, are
“inconsistent with the principles of experience.” Nor does Kant here
supply sufficient grounds for his description of space and time as
_Undinge_. Kant, it must be observed, does not regard the conception of
the actual infinite as in itself self-contradictory. Cf. below, p. 486.

[599] B 275.

[600] Cf. below, p. 298 ff., on Kant’s _Refutations of Idealism_. This
is also the meaning in which Kant employs the term in his pre-Critical
writings. Cf. _Dilucidatio_ (1755), prop. xii. _usus_; _Träume eines
Geistersehers_ (1766), ii. 2, _W._ ii. p. 364. These citations are given
by Janitsch (_Kant’s Urtheile über Berkeley_, 1879, p. 20), who also
points out that the term is already used in this sense by Bülffinger as
early as 1725, _Dilucidationes philos._ This is also the meaning in
which the term is employed in B xxxiv. Cf. A 28 = B 44.

[601] _Prolegomena_; _Anhang. W._ iv. pp. 374-5.

[602] In his _Kleine Aufsätze_ (3. _Refutation of Problematic Idealism_,
Hartenstein, v. p. 502) Kant would seem very inconsistently to accuse
Berkeley of maintaining a solipsistic position. “Berkeley denies the
existence of all things save that of the being who asserts them.” This
is probably, however, merely a careless formulation of the statement
that thinking beings alone exist. Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 13, Anm. ii.

[603] _Prolegomena_, _W._ iv. p. 375; Eng. trans. p. 148.

[604] Borowski (_Darstellung des Lebens und Charakters Immanuel Kant_,
in Hoffman’s ed. 1902, p. 248 ff.) gives a list of English writers with
whom Kant was acquainted. They were, according to Janitsch (_loc. cit._
p. 35), accessible in translation. Cf. above, pp. xxviii _n._ 3, 63 _n._
1.

[605] Cf. _W._ i. pp. 318, 322. When Kant cites Hume in the
_Prolegomena_ (Introduction), the reference is to the German
translation.

[606] This was the first of Berkeley’s writings to appear in German. The
translation was published in Leipzig in 1781.

[607] Cf. below, pp. 307-8. The opposite view has, however, been
defended by Vaihinger: _Philos. Monatshefte_, 1883, p. 501 ff.

[608] _Enquiry Concerning the Human Understanding_ (sec. xii. pt. ii. at
the end).

[609] Sixth edition, pp. 132, 214, 243 ff.

[610] A 38.

[611] A 377.

[612] A 377-8. Though Kant here distinguishes between perceptions and
their “outer objects,” the latter are none the less identified with
mental representations.

[613] Cf. below, p. 305 ff.

[614] _Prolegomena_, § 13, _Remark_ III.; and _Anhang_ (_W._ iv. p.
374).

[615] Kant’s description of Berkeley’s idealism as visionary and
mystical is doubtless partly due to the old-time association of idealism
in Kant’s mind with the spiritualistic teaching of Swedenborg (_W._ ii.
p. 372). This association of ideas was further reinforced owing to his
having classed Berkeley along with Plato.

[616] _Prolegomena_, _Anhang_, _W._ iv. p. 374; Eng. trans. p. 147.

[617] Cf. above, pp. 140-1.

[618] § 27. In translating Kant’s somewhat difficult Latin I have found
helpful the English translation of the _Dissertation_ by W. J. Eckoff
(New York, 1894).

[619] Besides the internal evidence of the passage before us, we also
have Kant’s own mention of Mendelssohn in this connection in notes (to A
43 and A 66) in his private copy of the first edition of the _Critique_.
Cf. Erdmann’s _Nachträge zu Kant’s Kritik_, xx. and xxxii.; and above,
p. 11.

[620] Cf. _Morgenstunden_, Bd. ii. of _Gesammelte Schriften_ (1863), pp.
246, 288.

[621] Cf. above, p. 116.

[622] B 72.

[623] Upon this subject cf. Vaihinger’s exhaustive discussion in ii. p.
518 ff.

[624] _Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung der lebendigen Kräfte_ (1747).

[625] _Op. cit._ § 10. Cf. above, p. 117 ff.

[626] _Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume._

[627] Euler, _Réflexions sur l’espace et le temps_ (1748). Vaihinger
(ii. p. 530) points out that Kant may also have been here influenced by
certain passages in the controversy between Leibniz and Clarke.

[628] _Loc. cit._, at the end.

[629] In the Dorpater manuscript, quoted by Erdmann in his edition of
the _Prolegomena_, p. xcvii _n._

[630] § 15 C.

[631] So also in the _Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science_
(1786), _Erstes Hauptstück_, _Erklärung 2_, _Anmerkung 3_.

[632] Cf. above, p. 105.

[633] A 289 = B 345.

[634] More exactly between the writing of the _Metaphysical First
Principles_ (in which as above noted the argument of the _Prolegomena_
is endorsed) and 1787.

[635] Cf. A 260 ff. = B 316 ff. on the _Amphiboly of Reflective
Concepts_.

[636] The _Dissertation_ cites the argument only with this purpose in
view. And yet it is only from the _Dissertation_ standpoint that the
wider argument of the _Prolegomena_ can be legitimately propounded.

[637] Above, pp. 96-8, 102 _n._ 4; below, pp. 390-1.

[638] B 73.

[639] A 50 = B 74.

[640] Cf. below, p. 176 _n._ 1.

[641] K. p. 99 _n._

[642] A 64 = B 89.

[643] The definition of intuition given in A 19 = B 33 also applies only
to empirical intuition.

[644] For discussion of Kant’s view of sensation as the matter of
sensuous intuition, cf. above, p. 80 ff.

[645] Second paragraph, A 51 = B 75.

[646] Object (_Gegenstand_) is here used in the strict sense and no
longer as merely equivalent to content (_Inhalt_).

[647] Cf. above, p. 79 ff.

[648] P. 85.

[649] Third paragraph, A 52 = B 77.

[650] K. p. 100.

[651] Kant’s _Logik: Einleitung_, i. (Abbott’s trans. p. 4).

[652] Cf. A 796 = B 824; A 130 = B 169; also above, pp. 71-2.

[653] A 709 = B 737.

[654] Logik: _Einleitung_, i. (Eng. trans. p. 3).

[655] Cf. below, p. 194.

[656] _Einleitung_, i. (Eng. trans. p. 4).

[657] Cf. A 796 = B 824.

[658] _Logik_: _Einleitung_, i. (Eng. trans. p. 5).

[659] A 57 = B 81.

[660] _Einleitung_, vii. (Eng. trans. p. 40 ff.).

[661] Kant might have added that transcendental logic defines further
conditions, those of possible experience, and that by implication it
refers us to coherence as the ultimate test even of material truth.

[662] A 60-2 = B 84-6.

[663] _Einleitung_, ii. (Eng. trans. pp. 6-7).

[664] Cf. above, pp. 71-2, 170; below, pp. 438, 563.

[665] Cf. below, p. 425 ff.

[666] Kant employs _Gegenstand_ and _Object_ as synonymous terms.

[667] Cf. below, p. 426.

[668] A 64 = B 89.

[669] A 65 = B 90.

[670] The opening statement, A 67 = B 92, that hitherto understanding
has been defined only negatively, is not correct, and would seem to
prove that this section was written prior to the introduction to the
_Analytic_, cf. above, p. 167.

[671] See above, pp. 170-1.

[672] A 79 = B 105. ‘Element’ translates the misleading term ‘Inhalt.’

[673] Kant’s definition of transcendental logic as differing from
general logic in that it does not abstract from _a priori_ content must
not be taken as implying that the categories of understanding are
contents, though of _a priori_ nature. As we shall find, though that is
Kant’s view of the forms of sense, it is by no means his view of the
categories. They are, he repeatedly insists, merely functions, and are
quite indeterminate in meaning save in so far as a content is yielded to
them by sense. In A 76-7 = B 102, in distinguishing between the two
logics, Kant is careful to make clear that the _a priori_ content of
transcendental logic consists exclusively of the _a priori_ manifolds of
sense.

[674] § 20, Eng. trans. p. 58.

[675] The view of the two as co-ordinate reappears in the _Prolegomena_
(§ 20) in a section the general tendency of which runs directly counter
to any such standpoint.

[676] A 78 = B 103.

[677] Cf. below, pp. 196, 204, 226.

[678] _Einleitung_, viii., Eng. trans. p. 48.

[679] Cf. above, pp. 37-8.

[680] _The Mistaken Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures_ (1762).
_W._ ii. p. 47, Eng. trans. p. 79.

[681] Cf. above, pp. 99-100, 106-7.

[682] _W._ ii. pp. 58-9, Eng. trans. pp. 92-3.

[683] Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. 599.

[684] Below, pp. 185-6.

[685] The same indefiniteness of statement is discernible in Caird’s (i.
p. 322 ff.) and Watson’s (_Kant Explained_, pp. 121-2) discussions of
the principle supposed to be involved.

[686] Cf. A 80 = B 106.

[687] § 39.

[688] P. 176 ff.

[689] B 145-6. Cf. above, pp. xxxv-vi, xliv, 57, 142; below, pp. 257,
291.

[690] §§ 5-6.

[691] §§ 7-8. Cf. above, pp. 144-5.

[692] W. x. p. 126. Italics not in Kant.

[693] The relevant _Reflexionen_ have been carefully discussed by
Adickes (_Kant’s Systematik_, p. 21 ff.). In what follows I have made
extensive use of his results, though not always arriving at quite the
same conclusions.

[694] § 15, Coroll.

[695] In his later writings Kant recognises that the representations of
space and time involve an Idea of Reason. Cf. above, pp. 97-8; below,
pp. 390-1.

[696] § 39.

[697] _Reflexionen_, ii. 513, cf. 502, 525-7.

[698] _Op. cit._ ii. 513.

[699] Cf. _op. cit._ ii. 537.

[700] Cf. above, p. 90 ff.

[701] Only in one passage, _Rechtslehre_, i., Anhang 3, 2, cited by
Adickes, _op. cit._ p. 13, does Kant so far depart from his own
orthodoxy as to speak of the possibility of an _a priori_ tetrachotomy.
But he never wavers in the view that the completeness of a division
cannot be guaranteed on empirical grounds.

[702] Introduction, § 9 _n._ Eng. trans. p. 41.

[703] §§ 4-6, 9.

[704] A 70-6 = B 95-101.

[705] Cf. Adickes, Kant’s _Systematik_, p. 36 ff.

[706] Cf. Adickes, _op. cit._ p. 89 ff.

[707] _Organon_, § 137. Cited by Adickes.

[708] i. p. 343 ff.

[709] Cf. below, p. 391 ff.

[710] A 76-79 = B 102-5.

[711] Cf. above, p. 171.

[712] A 55.

[713] Cf. also B 160.

[714] _Kant’s Theorie der Erfahrung_, 2nd ed. p. 257 ff.

[715] _The Critical Philosophy of Kant_, i. p. 327 ff.

[716] _Philosophischer Kriticismus_, 2nd ed. i. p. 484 ff.

[717] _Kant explained_, p. 124 ff.

[718] Cf. below, p. 198.

[719] P. 226.

[720] A 79 = B 105.

[721] Cf. above, p. 177 ff.

[722] A 79-80.

[723] Cf. above, p. 192.

[724] Cf. B 111.

[725] Cf. Adickes, _Systematik_, pp. 42-3.

[726] _Kant Explained_, p. 128.

[727] Cf. above, p. 37.

[728] Cf. _Dissertation_, §§ 16 to 28, and below, p. 381 ff.

[729] Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. 795.

[730] B 111-13.

[731] _World as Will and Idea, Werke_ (Frauenstädt), ii. p. 544; Eng.
trans. ii. p. 61.

[732] Cf. Stadler, _Grundsätze der reinen Erkenntnisstheorie_(1876), p.
122. Cf. also below, pp. 387-9.

[733] Cf. below, p. 391 ff.

[734] A 81.

[735] Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 39.

[736] Cf. above, p. 186 ff.

[737] _Kant Explained_, p. 120.

[738] A 81.

[739] A 82.

[740] A 82.

[741] B 110.

[742] B 110-11.

[743] Cf. below, pp. 199-200.

[744] _W._ x. p. 344-5.

[745] Cf. below, p. 382 ff.

[746] Cf. below, pp. 433-4, 451, 480, 529, 559-60.

[747] B 114.

[748] Cf. 904-5.

[749] Cf. 907-10.

[750] Cf. B. Erdmann, _Mittheilungen_ in _Phil. Monatshefte_, 1884, p.
80, and Adickes, _Systematik_, pp. 55-9.

[751] _Reflexionen_, ii. p. 252 _n._

[752] “Die transcendentale Deduktion der Kategorien” in the
_Gedenkschrift für Rudolf Haym_. Published separately in 1902.

[753] Readers who are not immediately interested in the analysis of the
text or in the history of Kant’s earlier semi-Critical views may omit
pp. 203-34, with exception of pp. 204-19, on Kant’s doctrine of the
transcendental object, which should be read.

[754] The reader is recommended to mark off the passages in a copy of
the _Critique_.

[755] Its first occurrence in the _Critique_ is in the _Aesthetic_ A 46
= B 63. It there signifies the thing in itself.

[756] A 104.

[757] A 109.

[758] A 109.

[759] A 104.

[760] Cf. above, p. 28; below, pp. 219-20.

[761] _W._ x. pp. 124-5.

[762] Cf. below, pp. 209-10.

[763] Hume’s view of the self is not developed in the _Enquiry_, and is
not mentioned by Beattie.

[764] A 107.

[765] Cf. _Reflexionen_, ii. 952 (belonging, as Erdmann notes, to the
earliest Critical period): “Appearances are representations whereby we
are affected. The representation of our free self-activity
(_Selbsttätigkeit_) does not involve affection, and accordingly is not
appearance, but apperception.” Cf. below, p. 296.

[766] § 8. Cf. above, pp. l-ii; below, pp. 243, 260-3, 272-3, 327-8,
473-7, 515.

[767] A 107. It is significant that Kant in A 107 uses, in reference to
apperception, the very unusual phrase, “_unwandelbares Bewusstsein_.”

[768] A 108.

[769] A 107.

[770] Reicke, _Lose Blätter_, p. 19. The bearing and date of this
passage is discussed below, p. 233.

[771] _Op. cit._ p. 20.

[772] _Op. cit._ p. 22 (written on a letter dated May 20, 1775).

[773] This last statement cannot possibly be taken literally. In view of
the manner in which the transcendental object is spoken of elsewhere in
this section, and also in the _Dialectic_, we must regard it as standing
for an independent existence, and the relation of representations to it
as being, therefore, something else than simply the unity of
consciousness.

[774] It may be observed that when Kant in A 107, quoted above, refers
to “_a priori_ concepts,” he adds in explanation, and within brackets,
“space and time.”

[775] A 105-6.

[776] The actual nature of Kant’s teaching as to the origin and
constitution of the notion of the transcendental object is largely
masked by the fact that he places this proof of its validity so
prominently in the foreground. The general nature of this proof is, of
course, identical with that of his later positions.

[777] A 109.

[778] As in the _Lose Blätter_. Cf. below, p. 233.

[779] Cf. below, pp. 227, 233-4, 268-9.

[780] Cf. below, pp. 322-8; also pp. 260-3.

[781] As above noted (p. 204 _n._) it also occurs in the _Aesthetic_ (A
46 = B 63), as signifying the thing in itself.

[782] A 238 = B 298.

[783] Cf. below, p. 238.

[784] A 238 ff. = B 298 ff.

[785] A 250-1.

[786] Cf. below, p. 407 ff.

[787] A 253.

[788] A 191 = B 236.

[789] A 277-8 = B 333-4; A 288 = B 344.

[790] Cf. _mundus phaenomenon_ in A 272 = B 328.

[791] It is so dated by Adickes (K. p. 272 _n._), owing to a single
reference to schemata in A 286 = B 342.

[792] A 358 and A 361 (cf. A 355); A 366; A 372 and A 379-80; A 390-1, A
393, and A 394.

[793] A 366.

[794] “Transcendental” here means “transcendent.” Cf. A 379.

[795] A 372; so also in A 613-14 = B 641-2.

[796] The passage in A 393 is given below, p. 464.

[797] A 494 = B 522. Cf. A 492 = B 521: “The true self (_das eigentliche
Selbst_) as it exists in itself, _i.e._ the transcendental subject.”

[798] A 495 = B 523.

[799] A 496 = B 524.

[800] _Loc. cit._

[801] Cf. also A 538 = B 566; A 540 = B 568; A 557 = B 585; A 564 = B
592; A 565-6 = B 593-4; A 613 = B 641-2.

[802] Above, p. 206.

[803] Cf. above, pp. liii-v; below, pp. 280, 331, 373-4, 390-1, 414-17,
429-31, 558-61.

[804] Viz. the first layer of the deduction of the first edition, the
relevant sections in the chapter on phenomena and noumena (A 250 ff.),
and the _Paralogisms_ with the subsequent _Reflection_.

[805] Viz. the _Note on Amphiboly_, the chapter on the _Antinomies_, and
the chapter on the _Ideal_.

[806] To the statement that the alterations in the second edition cease
at the close of the chapter on the _Paralogisms_, there is only one
single exception, namely, the very brief note appended to A 491 = B 519.
This exception, however, supports our general thesis. It is of polemical
origin, referring to the nature of the distinction between
transcendental and subjective idealism, and was demanded by the new
_Refutation of Idealism_ which in the second edition he had attached to
the _Postulates_.

[807] It follows immediately upon the passage quoted above, p. 206.

[808] _W._ x. pp. 125-6.

[809] A 89 = B 121. I adopt B. Erdmann’s reading of _auf_ for _als_.

[810] A 88 = B 120.

[811] A 90.

[812] As we have already found (above, p. 27 _n._ 1), it had not been
attained at the time when the _Introduction_ to the first edition was
written.

[813] A 95-96.

[814] A 97.

[815] A. 95; cf. A 96.

[816] A 111.

[817] _Loc. cit._

[818] A 112.

[819] A 111.

[820] A 112-14.

[821] A 110-14.

[822] I. § 14 C Vaihinger regards as intermediate in date, but it is a
comparatively unimportant paragraph, and may for the present be left out
of account. Cf. below, pp. 225-6.

[823] A 118-19.

[824] A 124.

[825] _Loc. cit._

[826] A 115.

[827] A 76-9 = B 102-4. Not yet commented upon.

[828] Cf. Vaihinger, _loc. cit._ p. 63.

[829] A 77 = B 102. Cf. above, pp. 96-7.

[830] _Loc. cit._

[831] For explanation of the exact meaning in which these terms are
employed and for discussion of the complicated issues involved, cf.
below, p. 270 ff.

[832] Cf. A 118.

[833] A 102.

[834] A 99-100.

[835] A 102.

[836] A 100.

[837] A 101. Cf. below, p. 255.

[838] Pp. 238, 263 ff.

[839] Cf. above, p. 211.

[840] For Vaihinger’s own statement of it, cf. _op. cit._ pp. 79-98.

[841] Nos. 64-5, 117, 140-5.

[842] No. 146.

[843] Nos. 41, 81.

[844] No. 104.

[845] Cf. Nos. 964-5.

[846] No. 947.

[847] No. 948.

[848] No. 949.

[849] No. 952.

[850] This is Erdmann’s reading. Vaihinger substitutes _allgemein_ for
_allein_, but without reason given.

[851] No. 935. The translation is literal. Kant in the last sentence
changes from singular to plural.

[852] No. 964.

[853] Cf. also Nos. 957, 961. The latter shows how Kant already
connected the categories of relation with the logical functions of
judgment.

[854] Reicke, Nos. 7, 8, 10-18 (pp. 16-26, 29-49).

[855] The chief relevant passages have been quoted above, p. 209.

[856] The letter is given in _W._ x. p. 173.

[857] Reicke, pp. 113-16.

[858] According to Adickes the _Critique_ was “brought to completion” in
the first half of 1780; in Vaihinger’s view, on the other hand, Kant was
occupied with it from April to September. Cf. above, p. xx.

[859] In two respects, however, fragment B 12 anticipates the teaching
of the fourth stage: (_a_) in suggesting (p. 114) the necessity of a
pure synthesis of pure intuition, and (_b_) in equating (p. 115)
synthesis of apprehension with synthesis of imagination.

[860] Pp. 231-3.

[861] Cf. below, pp. 268-9.

[862] In B 160 Kant states that the synthesis of apprehension is only
empirical; and in B 152 we find the following emphatic sentence: “In so
far as the faculty of imagination is spontaneously active I sometimes
also name it [i.e. in addition to entitling it transcendental and
figurative] _productive_, and thereby distinguish it from the
_reproductive_ imagination whose synthesis is subject only to empirical
laws, i.e. those of association, and which therefore contributes nothing
in explanation of the possibility of _a priori_ knowledge. Hence it
belongs, not to transcendental philosophy, but to psychology.” Cf. the
directly counter statement in A 102: “The reproductive synthesis of the
faculty of imagination must be counted among the transcendental actions
of the mind.”

[863] Though, as we shall find, the deduction of the second edition is
in certain respects more mature, it is in other respects less complete.

[864] A 314 = B 370.

[865] A x-xi. Cf. above, pp. 50-1.

[866] Cf. below, pp. 543 ff., 576-7.

[867] Whether it was the chief reason is decidedly open to question. The
un-Critical character of its teaching as regards the function of
empirical concepts and of the transcendental object, and the
unsatisfactoriness of its doctrine of a threefold synthesis, would of
themselves account for the omission. The passage in the chapter on
phenomena and noumena (A 250 ff.) in which the doctrine of the
transcendental object is again developed was likewise omitted in the
second edition.

[868] Cf. below, pp. 238, 263 ff.

[869] Cf. also in _Methodology_, below, p. 543 ff.

[870] Cf. above, pp. xxxvi, xxxvii-viii, 36; below, pp. 241-3.

[871] Cf. below, p. 543 ff.

[872] A xi.

[873] A 100-1.

[874] Kant’s failure either to distinguish or to connect the two
deductions in any really clear and consistent manner is a defect which
is accentuated rather than diminished in the second edition. Though the
sections devoted to the subjective enquiry are omitted, and the argument
of the objective deduction is so recast as to increase the emphasis laid
upon its more strictly logical aspects, the teaching of the subjective
deduction is retained and influences the argument at every point. For
the new deduction, no less than that of the first edition, rests
throughout upon the initial assumption that though connection or
synthesis can never be given, it is yet the generative source of all
consciousness of order and relation.

[875] It appears most clearly in Kant’s proof of the category of
causality in the second _Analogy_. Cf. below, p. 364 ff.

[876] Cf. below, pp. 252-3, 258, 287, 333, 343.

[877] Cf. above, p. 208 ff.

[878] Cf. above, pp. l-ii, 207-12; below, pp. 260-3, 272-3, 327-8,
473-7, 515.

[879] P. 239.

[880] A 99.

[881] A 102.

[882] A 103.

[883] _Loc. cit._

[884] _Loc. cit._

[885] A 100-1.

[886] A 106.

[887] A 101.

[888] Such statements are in direct conflict with his own repeated
assertions in other passages that reproduction and recognition are
always merely empirical. Cf. above, pp. 227-31, and below, pp. 264,
268-9.

[889] B 139-40.

[890] In the first edition the subjective and objective deductions shade
into one another; and this question is raised in the section on
synthesis of recognition (A 104), where, as above noted (p. 204 ff.),
Kant’s argument is largely pre-Critical, empirical concepts exercising
the functions which Kant later ascribed to the categories. But as we
have already considered the resulting doctrine of the transcendental
object both in its earlier and in its subsequent form, we may at once
pass to the more mature teaching of the other sections.

[891] Cf. above, p. 204 ff.

[892] Memory is only one particular mode in which recognition presents
itself in our experience; Kant’s purpose is to show that it is not more
fundamental, nor more truly constitutive of apperception, than is
recognition in any of its other manifestations. Indeed the central
contention of the objective deduction is that it is through
consciousness of _objects_, _i.e._ through consciousness of _objective_
meanings, that self-consciousness comes to be actualised at all. Only in
contrast with, and through relation to, an objective system is
consciousness of inner experience, past or present, and therefore
self-consciousness in its contingent empirical forms, possible to the
mind. Cf. above, pp. li-ii; below, pp. 260-3.

[893] B 134.

[894] A 116.

[895] Cf. above, p. 242; below, pp. 258, 332-3.

[896] Cf. A 111.

[897] A 117 _n._

[898] This transcendental psychology is considered below (p. 263 ff.),
in its connection with the later stages of the subjective deduction. Cf.
above, p. 238.

[899] A 113-14.

[900] Cf. above, p. 229.

[901] Cf. A 100-1.

[902] A 122-3.

[903] Cf. B 140-3; B 151-2; B 164-5 5 and below, p. 286.

[904] Here again the second edition text is more explicit than the
first: “This peculiarity of our understanding, that it can produce _a
priori_ unity of apperception solely by means of the categories, and
only by such and so many, is as little capable of further explanation as
why we have just these and no other functions of judgment, or why space
and time are the sole forms of our possible intuition.”--B 145-6. Cf.
above, pp. xxxiii-vi, xliv, 57, 142, 186; below, pp. 291, 411.

[905] Cf. above, pp. 252-3.

[906] The second _Analogy_ embodies the argument which is implied in,
and necessary to, the establishment of the assertions dogmatically made
in A 111-12.

[907] A 119.

[908] Cf. A 128. On this whole question cf. above, p. 242; below, pp.
287-8.

[909] Cf. A 113, 125-9.

[910] A 107, 111.

[911] The explanation given in the second edition (B 132) is artificial,
and does not reveal Kant’s real reasons. It is also obscure owing to its
employment of dynamical terms to denote the relation of apperception to
self-consciousness.

[912] Cf. above, pp. 251-3.

[913] Cf. A 112, 113, 128.

[914] A 114.

[915] A 94, 115, 118. Cf. also end of note to B 134.

[916] Cf. above, pp. lii, 207-12, 243; below, pp. 327-8, 473-7, 515.

[917] This is shown, not only by Kant’s ethical writings, but also by
his less formal utterances, especially in his _Lectures on Metaphysics_
and on _Religion_, in his _Reflexionen_, and in his _Lose Blätter_.

[918] Cf. below, pp. 277-8.

[919] Cf. above, pp. l-lii; below, pp. 277 ff., 461-2, 473-7.

[920] In note to B 162 they are indeed identified.

[921] Kant’s vacillating attitude appears in the added phrase “of whose
activity we are _hardly ever_ conscious.” Cf. A 78: it is a “blind”
power.

[922] Cf. above, p. 225; below, p. 337.

[923] A 138 = B 177.

[924] A 118.

[925] Cf. above, p. 253 ff.

[926] A 123.

[927] A 121-3.

[928] A 125-6.

[929] Above, pp. 74 ff., 238, 252.

[930] Cf. above, pp. 96-7.

[931] Cf. below, pp. 367, 371-2.

[932] Cf. above, pp. 211, 227, 233-4.

[933] In direct contradiction of his previous view of transcendental
imagination as purely productive, it is now stated that it is
reproductive. Cf. A 102.

[934] Cf. above, pp. 225 ff., 264.

[935] It must be remembered that this was also rendered necessary by the
archaic character of their teaching in regard to the transcendental
object and the function of empirical concepts.

[936] Cf. B 151-2. There is no mention, however, of objective affinity.

[937] B 160-1. Cf. above, pp. 226-9.

[938] In what follows I make use of an article, entitled “The Problem of
Knowledge,” which I have contributed to the _Journal of Philosophy,
Psychology, and Scientific Methods_ (1912), vol. ix. pp. 113-28.

[939] The same wide sense in which Kant employs “empirical idealism.”

[940] Cf. above, pp. xliii-v, 208; below, pp. 295-6, 298 ff. Hume and
Spinoza are the only pre-Kantian thinkers of whose position the last
statement is not strictly descriptive, but even they failed to escape
its entangling influence.

[941] Cf. A 28-9; also _Lectures on Metaphysics_ (Pölitz’s edition,
1821), p. 188 ff. In Kant’s posthumously published work, his _Transition
from the Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science to Physics_,
it is asserted in at least twenty-six distinct passages that sensations
are due to the action of “the moving forces of matter” upon the
sense-organs. Cf. below, p. 283 _n_. 2. In his _Ueber das Organ der
Seele_ (1796) (Hartenstein, vi. p. 457 ff.), Kant agrees with Sömmerring
in holding that the soul has virtual, _i.e._ dynamical, though not
local, presence in the fluid contained in the cavity of the brain.

[942] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason_, Bk. i. ch. i. § iii.

[943] Cf. below, pp. 279 ff., 293-6, 312 ff., 321, 361 _n._ 3, 384-5,
464-5, 476.

[944] Cf. below, pp. 279-80, and pp. 293-4, on inner sense.

[945] i. p. 339: “Each pulse of cognitive consciousness, each Thought,
dies away and is replaced by another.... Each later Thought, knowing and
including thus the Thoughts which went before, is the final
receptacle--and appropriating them is the final owner--of all that they
contain and own. Each Thought is thus born an owner, and dies owned,
transmitting whatever it realized as its Self to its own later
proprietor. As Kant says [cf. below, pp. 461-2], it is as if elastic
balls were to have not only motion but knowledge of it, and a first ball
were to transmit both its motion and its consciousness to a second,
which took both up into _its_ consciousness and passed them to a third,
until the last ball held all that the other balls had held, and realized
it as its own.”

[946] I here use “objective” in its modern meaning: I am not concerned
with the special meaning which Descartes himself attached to the terms
_objective_ and _formaliter_.

[947] Pp. 277-8.

[948] On this whole matter cf. above, p. xlv; below, pp. 312-21 on
Kant’s _Refutation of Idealism_; pp. 373-4 on the _Second Analogy_; pp.
407 ff., 414 ff. on _Phenomena and Noumena_; p. 461 ff. on the
Paralogisms; and p. 546. Cf. also A 277-8 = B 334.

[949] P. 267 ff.

[950] Though the posthumously published work of Kant’s old age, his
_Transition from the Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science to
Physics_, bears the marks of weakening powers, and is much too
incomplete and obscure to allow of any very assured deductions from its
teaching, it is none the less significant that it is largely occupied in
attempting to define the relation in which the objective world of
physical science stands to the sensible world of ordinary consciousness.
As above noted (p. 275 _n._), it is there asserted in at least
twenty-six distinct passages that sensations are due to the action of
“the moving forces of matter” upon the sense-organs. What is even more
significant is the adoption and frequent occurrence (_Altpreussische
Monatsschrift_ (1882), pp. 236, 287, 289, 290, 292, 294, 295-6, 300,
308, 429, 436, 439) of the phrase “_Erscheinung von der Erscheinung_.”
Kant would seem to mean by _“Erscheinung vom ersten Range”_ (_op. cit._
p. 436) (_i.e._ appearance as such), the objective world as determined
by physical science; and by “_Erscheinung vom zweiten Range_” (_i.e._
appearance of the appearance), this same objective world as known in
terms of the sensations which material bodies generate by acting on the
sense-organs. Kant adds that the former is known directly, and the
latter indirectly--meaning, apparently, that the former is known through
_a priori_ forms native to the understanding, and the latter only in
terms of sense-data which are mechanically conditioned (cf. _loc. cit._
pp. 286, 292, and 444 _n._ The terms latter and former on p. 300 have
got transposed).

[951] Cf. below pp. 312-21, 373-4, 414 ff., 425 ff., 558 ff.

[952] B 129.

[953] B 161 _n._

[954] B 130-1.

[955] B 131.

[956] B 131-4.

[957] B 131.

[958] Cf. B 138.

[959] B 135.

[960] B 136-40.

[961] B 140-2.

[962] B 143.

[963] §§ 21-27.

[964] Above, pp. 252-3, 258, 287.

[965] _Prolegomena_, § 18.

[966] _Op. cit._ § 20.

[967] _Op. cit._ §§ 18-19; Eng. trans. pp. 54-5.

[968] Cf. above, pp. 39-40, 286-7.

[969] Cf. below, p. 370.

[970] _Op. cit._ § 22. Cf. below, p. 311 n. 4.

[971] §§ 21-7.

[972] B 143.

[973] This leads on in the second paragraph of § 21 to further
statements, already commented upon above, pp. 186, 257-8. Cf. also § 23.

[974] Cf. also § 24.

[975] Cf. above, pp. 90 ff., 171, 226-9, 267-70; below, p. 337.

[976] Cf. above, pp. 28, 47, 114, 141-2.

[977] Cf. § 21, second paragraph.

[978] Cf. above, pp. 160, 186, 257, and below, pp. 325-6, 330-1, 390-1,
404 ff.

[979] Cf. below, pp. 324, 329.

[980] Above, p. 148.

[981] Cf. above, pp. xliii-v, l-ii, 238, 261-2, 263 ff., 273 ff.; below,
pp. 295 ff., 322 ff.

[982] Cf. B 67-8; A 33 = B 49.

[983] B 67.

[984] B xxxix _n._

[985] Kant very probably arrived at this view of inner sense under the
influence of Tetens who teaches a similar doctrine in his
_Philosophische Versuche über die menschliche Natur und ihre
Entwickelung_. Cf. Bd. i.; _Versuch_ i. 7, 8. The first volume of
Tetens’ work was published in 1777 (re-issued by the _Kantgesellschaft_
in 1913), and had been carefully read by Kant prior to the final
preparation of the _Critique_. Cf. B. Erdmann, _Kriticismus_, p. 51.

[986] Cf. A. 128-9.

[987] As just noted, it is in the second edition that the above view of
the content of inner sense is first definitely formulated.

[988] A 33 = B 49-50.

[989] A 34 = B 50.

[990] Cf. above, pp. 208-9, 251-2, 260-4; below, 311 _n._ 4. It may be
observed that Caird (i. pp. 625-7) interprets inner sense as equivalent
to inner _reflection_. This is one of the respects in which Caird’s
Hegelian standpoint has led him to misrepresent even Kant’s most central
doctrines.

[991] Cf. below, pp. 399-400, and A 277-8 = B 333-4.

[992] Above, p. 292.

[993] Cf. above, p. 155.

[994] Cf. Vaihinger in _Strassburger Abhandlungen zur Philosophie_
(1884), p. 106 ff.

[995] Section III., Prop. _XII Usus_.

[996] Theil II. Hauptstück II. _W._ ii. p. 364.

[997] § 11.

[998] Pölitz’s edition (1821), pp. 100-2.

[999] _W._ iv. p. 373 ff.

[1000] It may be noted that in the _Aesthetic_ (A 38 = B 55) Kant
employs the term idealism, without descriptive epithet, in the same
manner as in his pre-Critical writings, as signifying a position that
must be rejected.

[1001] Cf. below, p. 301 ff.

[1002] Pp. 307-8.

[1003] Cf. A 368-9 and 372.

[1004] A 377: a passage which bears signs of being a later
interpolation.

[1005] B 274.

[1006] A 368-9.

[1007] A 369.

[1008] A 28 = B 44. Cf. above, pp. 76, 116-17.

[1009] A 370.

[1010] _Loc. cit._

[1011] A 372.

[1012] A 373: _Weil indessen_, etc.

[1013] Adickes regards them as _later_ additions. To judge by their
content (cf. above, pp. 204 ff., 215-16, on Kant’s doctrine of the
transcendental object), they are more probably of quite early origin.

[1014] A 377-8.

[1015] Adickes argues that this paragraph is subsequent to the main body
of the _Analytic_, but that is in keeping with the tendency which he
seems to show of dating passages, which cannot belong to the “Brief
Outline,” later rather than earlier.

[1016] A 375.

[1017] The remaining passages in the fourth _Paralogism_, together with
the corresponding passages in B 274 ff., in Kant’s note to B xxxix, and
in B 291-3, are separately dealt with below, pp. 308 ff., 322 ff.,
462-3.

[1018] A 377.

[1019] _Loc. cit._

[1020] _E.g._ Garve.

[1021] § 13, _W._ iv. pp. 288-9: Eng. trans. p. 42.

[1022] _Loc. cit._

[1023] _Op. cit._ pp. 289-90: Eng. trans. pp. 43-4.

[1024] In Note II.

[1025] § 49, _W._ iv. 336: Eng. trans. p. 99.

[1026] _Anhang_, _W._ iv. p. 375 n.

[1027] _W._ iv. p. 374: Eng. trans. p. 147.

[1028] Cf. above, p. 155 ff.

[1029] _W._ iv. p. 375.

[1030] _W._ iv. p. 375: Eng. trans. p. 147-8.

[1031] Cf. above, p. 156.

[1032] As already noted above, p. 299, it is employed by Kant in his
lectures on Metaphysics.

[1033] Kant’s phrase “in space outside me” is on Kant’s principles
really pleonastic. Cf. _Prolegomena_, § 49; Eng. trans, p. 101: “the
notion ‘outside me’ only signifies existence in space.” Cf. A 373.

[1034] Cf. text as altered by note to B xxxviii.

[1035] B xxxix.

[1036] B 291-2. The remaining points in B 274 ff. as well as in B xxxix
_n._ are separately dealt with below, p. 322 ff.

[1037] The nearest approach to such teaching in the first edition is in
A 33 = B 50. Cf. above, pp. 135-8.

[1038] Cf. below, pp. 333, 341, 360, 384-5.

[1039] Adamson (_Development of Modern Philosophy_, i. p. 241) takes the
opposite view as to what is Kant’s intended teaching, but remarks upon
its inconsistency with Kant’s own fundamental principles. “Now, in
truth, Kant grievously endangers his own doctrine by insisting on the
absence of _a priori_ elements from our apprehension of the mental life;
for it follows from that, if taken rigorously, that according to Kant
sense and understanding are not so much sources which unite in producing
knowledge, as, severally, sources of distinct kinds of apprehension. If
we admit at all, in respect to inner sense, that there is some kind of
apprehension without the work of understanding, then it has been
acknowledged that sense is _per se_ adequate to furnish a kind of
apprehension.” As pointed out above (p. 296), by the same line of
reasoning Kant is disabled from viewing inner consciousness as merely
reflective. In other words it can neither be more immediate nor less
sensuous than outer perception. Cf. below, pp. 361, _n._ 3, 384-5.

[1040] Above, pp. xlvi, 275-82; below, pp. 313-14, 384-5.

[1041] Above, pp. 276, 279-80; below, pp. 312, 384-5.

[1042] Cf. below, p. 361.

[1043] Cf. _Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science_ (1786),
_W._ iv. pp. 470-1. It should be observed, however, that the reasons
which Kant gives in this treatise for denying that psychology can ever
become more than a merely historical or descriptive discipline are not
that the objects of inner sense fall outside the realm of mechanically
determined existence. Kant makes no assertion that even distantly
implies any such view. His reasons are--(1) that, as time has only one
dimension, the main body of mathematical science is not applicable to
the phenomena of inner sense and their laws; (2) that such phenomena are
capable only of a merely ideal, not of an experimental, analysis; (3)
that, as the objects of inner sense do not consist of parts outside each
other, their parts are not substances, and may therefore be conceived as
diminishing in intensity or passing out of existence without prejudice
to the principle of the permanence of substance (_op. cit._ p. 542,
quoted below, p. 361, _n._ 2); (4) that inner observation is limited to
the individual’s own existence; (5) that the very act of introspection
alters the state of the object observed.

[1044] A 370.

[1045] B 275. These two sentences are cited in this connection by
Vaihinger: _Strassburger Abhandlungen zur Philosophie_ (1884), p. 131.

[1046] Above, pp. xlv-vii, 279 ff.

[1047] Cf. also above, pp. 275-7.

[1048] § 13, _Anmerkung II_.

[1049] _Kriticismus_, p. 197 ff.

[1050] _Mind_ (1879), iv. p. 408 ff.; (1880), v. p. 111.

[1051] _A Defence of Philosophic Doubt_ (1879), p. 107 ff.; _Mind_
(1878), iii. p. 481; iv. p. 115; vi. p. 260.

[1052] _Op. cit._ p. 128 ff.

[1053] _Critical Philosophy_, i. 632 ff.; _Mind_ (1879), iv. pp. 112,
560-1; v. p. 115.

[1054] _The Philosophy of Kant_, p. 249 ff.

[1055] The one fundamental question to which Erdmann would seem to allow
that Kant gives conflicting answers is as to whether or not categories
can be transcendently employed. The assumption of a uniform teaching is
especially obvious in Sidgwick’s comments; cf. _Mind_ (1880), v. p. 113;
_Lectures on the Philosophy of Kant_ (1905), p. 28.

[1056] Cf. above, pp. 303-4.

[1057] A 491 = B 520.

[1058] A 225-6 = B 273.

[1059] A 495-6 = B 523-4.

[1060] Cf. below, p. 506.

[1061] Viz. A 225-6 = B 273.

[1062] B 277.

[1063] Above, p. 208 ff.

[1064] A 346 = B 404.

[1065] A 224-5 = B 272-3.

[1066] Cf. B 277.

[1067] Quoted by B. Erdmann: _Kriticismus_, p. 107.

[1068] B xxxix _n._, 67-8, 70, 157-8 with appended note, 276-8, 422
_n._, 427-9.

[1069] B 70, 157, 428.

[1070] B 157.

[1071] B 157 _n._ Regarding the un-Critical character of Kant’s language
in this passage, and of the tendencies which inspire it, cf. below, p.
329.

[1072] B 157.

[1073] B 429.

[1074] Cf. B 277-8 and B 157.

[1075] B 278.

[1076] B 420 and B 422 _n._

[1077] B 422 _n._

[1078] Cf. above, pp. 204 ff., 404 ff.

[1079] Cf. above, p. 204 ff.

[1080] B 406.

[1081] B 422 _n._ Though both concepts are denoted by the same term,
they may not--such is the implication--be for that reason identified.

[1082] B 429. Kant does not, however, even in the second edition, hold
consistently to this position. In the sentence immediately preceding
that just quoted he equates the transcendental self with the notion of
“object in general.” “I represent myself to myself neither as I am nor
as I appear to myself, but think myself only as I do any object in
general from whose mode of intuition I abstract.”

[1083] The broader bearing of this view may be noted. If consistently
developed, it must involve the assertion that noumenal reality is
apprehended in terms of the Ideas of reason, for these are the only
other concepts at the disposal of the mind. Cf. above, pp. liii-v,
217-18; below, pp. 331, 390-1, 414-17, 426 ff., 558-61.

[1084] A 402.

[1085] It is doubtful whether A 401-2 represents a genuinely Critical
position. Several of its phrases seem reminiscent of Kant’s
semi-Critical view of the nature of apperception. This is especially
true of the assertion that self-consciousness is “itself unconditioned.”

[1086] A 346 = B 404. Cf. below, pp. 456, 461-2.

[1087] Cf. A 345.

[1088] That he does not really do so is clear from the context and also
from the manner in which he restated this argument in the second edition
(B 421-2).

[1089] A 401-2, B 421-2; below, pp. 461-2.

[1090] A 402; cf. B 407.

[1091] Cf. B 421-2.

[1092] Cf. above, pp. l-ii, 208-9, 260-3.

[1093] Cf. above, _loc. cit._

[1094] Cf. B 157-8 and 157 _n._, B 278, B 428-9.

[1095] Above, pp. 295-6, 311 _n._ 4.

[1096] There is this difference between the category of existence and
the categories of relation, namely, that it would seem to be impossible
to distinguish between a determinate and an indeterminate application of
it. Either we assert existence or we do not; there is no such third
alternative as in the case of the categories of substance and causality.
The category of substance, determinately used, signifies material
existence in space and time; indeterminately applied it is the purely
problematic and merely logical notion of something that is always a
subject and never a predicate. The determinate category of causality is
the conception of events conditioning one another in time;
indeterminately employed it signifies only the quite indefinite notion
of a ground or condition. Also, Kant’s explicit teaching (A 597 ff. = B
625 ff.) is that the notion of existence stands in an altogether
different position from other predicates. It is not an attribute
constitutive of the concept of the subject to which it is applied, but
is simply the positing of the content of that concept as a whole. Nor,
again, is it a relational form for the articulation of content. These
would seem to be the reasons why no distinction is possible between a
determinate and an indeterminate application of the notion of existence,
and why, therefore, Kant, in defending the possible dual employment of
it, has difficulty in holding consistently to the doctrines expounded in
the _Postulates_. He is, by his own explicit teaching, interdicted from
declaring that the notion of existence is both a category and not a
category, or, in other words, that it may vary in meaning according as
empirical or noumenal reality is referred to, and that only in the
former case is it definite and precise. Yet such a view would, perhaps,
better harmonise with certain other lines of thought which first obtain
statement in the _Dialectic_. For though it is in the _Dialectic_ that
Kant expounds his grounds for holding that existence and content are
separate and independent, it is there also that he first begins to
realise the part which the Ideas of Reason are called upon to play in
the drawing of the distinction between appearance and reality.

[1097] In the _Fortschritte_ (_Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. p. 548 ff.)
this final step is quite definitely taken. Cf. below, pp. 390-1, 414-17,
426 ff., 558-61. We have, as we shall find, to recognise a second
fundamental conflict in Kant’s thinking, additional to that between
subjectivism and phenomenalism. He alternates between what may be
entitled the sceptical and the Idealist views of the function of Reason
and of its relation to the understanding, or otherwise stated, between
the regulative and the absolutist view of the nature of thought. But
this conflict first gains explicit expression in the _Dialectic_.

[1098] For Kant’s use of the terms ‘canon’ and ‘dialectic’ cf. above,
pp. 72, 77-8, 173-4, and below, p. 425 ff.

[1099] Above, pp. 181-2.

[1100] As we shall have occasion to observe below (p. 336), when Kant
defines judgment as “the faculty of subsumption under rules,” he is
really defining it in terms of the process of reasoning, and thus
violating the principle which he is professedly following in dividing
the _Transcendental Logic into the Analytic of Concepts_, the _Analytic
of Judgment_, and the _Dialectic of Reasoning_.

[1101] A 132 = B 171.

[1102] Pp. 252-3, 258-9, 287-8.

[1103] The passages that have gone to constitute this chapter are
probably quite late in date of writing. This would seem to be proved by
the view taken of productive imagination, and also by the fact that in
the _Reflexionen_ there is no mention of schematism.

[1104] Cf. above, p. 176 ff.

[1105] Cf. A 137 = B 176. “The empirical concept of a plate is
homogeneous with the pure geometrical concept of a circle, since the
roundness which is thought in the former can be intuited in the latter.”

[1106] A 138 = B 177.

[1107] Above, p. 334.

[1108] Cf. E. Curtius, _Das Schematismuskapitel in der Kritik der reinen
Vernunft (Kantstudien_, Bd. xix. p. 348 ff.).

[1109] _Op. cit._ § 58.

[1110] A 138 = B 177. Cf. above, pp. 96-7.

[1111] A 141 = B 180.

[1112] Cf. above, pp. 268-9.

[1113] Cf. above, pp. 133-4.

[1114] A 140 = B 179.

[1115] _Loc. cit._

[1116] Cf. E. Curtius, _op. cit._ p. 356.

[1117] Kant’s other definition of the schema as “a rule for the
determination of our intuition in accordance with a certain universal
concept” (A 141 = B 180) is open to similar objections. When, however,
Kant states that “schemata, and not images, _underlie_ our pure sensuous
concepts,” he seems to be inclining to the truer view that the schema
_is_ the concept.

[1118] Above, pp. 131-3.

[1119] Cf. Riehl, _Philos. Krit._ 2nd ed. i. pp. 488, 533. Cf. above,
pp. 195-6, 198; below, pp. 404-5.

[1120] _Critical Philosophy_, i. bk. i. chap. v., especially pp. 437 and
440.

[1121] _Theorie der Erfahrung_, second edition, p. 384.

[1122] _Op. cit._ p. 532.

[1123] Cf. above, pp. 240-3.

[1124] For comment upon the definition of number, which Kant takes as
being the schema of quantity, and upon the view of arithmetic which this
definition may seem to imply, cf. above, p. 128 ff.

[1125] Cf. above, p. 192.

[1126] Cf. above, pp. 339-40, and below, pp. 357, 404 ff.

[1127] Cf. above, pp. 20, 25, 290-1; below, pp. 407, 412, 414-17.

[1128] _E.g._ Riehl, _Philos. Krit._ 2nd ed. i. pp. 535-6.

[1129] Above, pp. 258, 332-3.

[1130] A 148 = B 188.

[1131] A 156 = B 195.

[1132] A 157 = B 196.

[1133] A 24.

[1134] § 13, _Anmerkung_ i.

[1135] B 40-1.

[1136] B 110.

[1137] A 160 = B 199-200.

[1138] Cf. above, pp. 288-9.

[1139] A 161-2 = B 201-2.

[1140] Cf. below, pp. 510-11.

[1141] A 178-9 = B 221.

[1142] Cf. above, pp. 94-5.

[1143] Cf. below, pp. 358-9, 367-8, 371-2, 381-2.

[1144] Above, p. 309 ff.

[1145] Cf. Adickes, _K._ p. 190 _n._

[1146] Cf. above, p. 127 ff.

[1147] That is to say, in the first edition.

[1148] The phrase is followed, it may be observed, by a verb in the
irregular.

[1149] A 143 = B 182.

[1150] _Loc. cit._ in the chapter on _Schematism_.

[1151] _Loc. cit._ Italics not in Kant.

[1152] Cf. A 175 = B 217. Cf. above, pp. 350-1.

[1153] B 217-18.

[1154] Cf. above, pp. 192, 341.

[1155] A 169-70 = B 211-12. For comment upon Kant’s view of the point as
a limit, cf. below, p. 489 ff.

[1156] Though Kant maintains in A 171 = B 212-13 that owing to our
dependence upon empirical data and our necessary ignorance of the nature
of the causal relation we cannot similarly demonstrate the principle of
the continuity of change, he has himself, in characteristically
inconsistent fashion, given three such demonstrations. Cf. below, pp.
380-1.

[1157] Cf. Kant’s _Monadologia physica_ (1756), and _New Doctrine of
Motion and Rest_ (1758). Kant’s final statement of this dynamical theory
is given in his _Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science_
(1786).

[1158] In this matter Kant regards himself as defending the Newtonian
theory of an attractive gravitational force. The mechanistic view admits
only one form of action, viz. transference of motion through impact and
pressure. “From ... Democritus to Descartes, indeed up to our own day,
the mechanistic method of explanation ... has, under the title of
atomism or corpuscular philosophy, maintained its authority with but
slight modification; and has continued to exercise its influence upon
the principles of natural science. Its essential teaching consists in
the assumption of the _absolute impenetrability_ of primitive matter, in
the _absolute homogeneity_ of its constitution (difference of shape
being the sole remaining difference), and in the _absolutely
indestructible coherence_ of matter in its fundamental corpuscles”
(_Metaphysical First Principles_, _W._ vol. iv. p. 533; ii. Allgemeine
Anmerkung, 4).

[1159] This is additional to its other correlative assumption of the
absolute void. “The absolute void and the absolutely full are in the
doctrine of nature very much what blind chance and blind fate are in
metaphysical cosmology, namely, a barrier to the enquiring reason, which
either causes its place to be taken by arbitrary fictions, or lays it to
rest on the pillow of obscure qualities” (_Metaphysical First
Principles_, _W._ vol. iv. p. 532 (I read _forschende_ for
_herrschende_)). “There are only two methods of procedure ...: the
mechanistic, through combination of the absolutely full with the
absolute void, or an opposite dynamical method, that of explaining all
material differences through mere differences in the combination of the
original forces of repulsion and attraction” (_loc. cit._).

[1160] In the first edition Kant formulates this principle in the light
of his extremely misleading distinction between mathematical and
dynamical principles (cf. above, pp. 345-7): “All appearances, _as
regards their existence_, are subject _a priori_ to rules determining
their relation to one another in one time.”

[1161] Cf. below, p. 358.

[1162] In A 182 = B 225 the stronger term change (_Wechsel_) is
employed.

[1163] A 178-80 = B 221-3 (on the distinction between mathematical and
dynamical principles) has been commented upon above, pp. 345-7.

[1164] _Philos. Krit._ 2nd ed. i. p. 545. Caird adopts a similar view,
i. pp. 540, 580.

[1165] A 181 = B 224.

[1166] Cf. below, pp. 373-4.

[1167] That is to say, in the first edition.

[1168] Cf. above, pp. 332-3, 343-4.

[1169] Cf. above, p. 348; below, pp. 367-8, 371-2, 381-2.

[1170] Cf. above, pp. 94, 135-8, 309 ff., 347-8.

[1171] That is to say, in the first edition.

[1172] The new proof added in the second edition calls for no special
comment. In all essentials it agrees with this second proof of the first
edition. It differs only in such ways as are called for by the mode of
formulating the principle in the second edition.

[1173] This statement, as Caird has pointed out (i. p. 541), is
extremely questionable. “It may be objected that to say that ‘time
itself does not change’ is like saying that passing away does not itself
pass away. So far the endurance of time and the permanence of the
changing might even seem to mean only that the moments of time never
cease to pass away, and the changing never ceases to change. A perpetual
flux would therefore sufficiently ‘represent’ all the permanence that is
in time.” This is not, however, in itself a vital objection to Kant’s
argument. For he is here stating more than his argument really requires.
Events are dated in a _single_ time, not in an unchanging time. Kant’s
statement betrays the extent to which, as Bergson has very justly
pointed out, Kant spatialises time, _i.e._ interprets it on the analogy
of space. It is based on “the mixed idea of a measurable time, which is
space in so far as it is homogeneity, and duration in so far as it is
succession; that is to say, at bottom, the contradictory idea of
succession in simultaneity” (_Les Données immédiates_, p. 173, Eng.
trans. p. 228).

[1174] Cf. A 184 = B 227: “the proposition, that substance is permanent,
is tautological.”

[1175] Cf. A 188 = B 231.

[1176] Above, p. 341.

[1177] Cf. above, p. 309 ff.

[1178] B. Erdmann’s edition of the _Nachträge_, lxxx. p. 32. Cited by
Caird, i. pp. 541-2.

[1179] _Op. cit._ pp. 33-4.

[1180] That Kant does not mean to imply that the category of substance
has no application to the contents of inner sense is made clear by a
curious argument in the _Metaphysical First Principles of Natural
Science_ (1786), _W._ iv. p. 542: “What in this proof essentially
characterises substance, which is possible only in space and under
spatial conditions, and therefore only as object of the outer senses, is
that its quantity cannot be increased or diminished without substance
coming into being or ceasing to be. For the quantity of an object which
is possible only in space must consist of parts which are external to
one another, and these, therefore, if they are real (something movable),
must necessarily be substances. On the other hand, that which is viewed
as object of inner sense can, _as substance_, have a quantity which does
not consist of parts external to one another. Its parts are therefore
not substances, and their coming into being and ceasing to be must not
be regarded as creation or annihilation of a substance. Their increase
or diminution is therefore possible without prejudice to the principle
of the permanence of substance.” (Italics not in Kant.) Cf. also
_Prolegomena_, § 49, and below, pp. 367, 377 _n._ 3.

[1181] A 187 = B 230.

[1182] _K._ p. 211 _n._

[1183] C. A 205-7 = B 252.

[1184] _Werke_ (Frauenstädt, 1873), i. p. 85 ff.

[1185] As evidence of this failure I may cite Schopenhauer’s comment
upon A 371 and 372: “From these passages it is quite clear that for Kant
the perception of outer things in space is antecedent to all application
of the causal law, and that this law does not therefore enter into it as
its element and condition: mere sensation amounts in Kant’s view to
perception” (_Werke_, i. p. 81). Even when, as in the passages referred
to, Kant is speaking in his most subjectivist vein, he gives no
justification for any such assertion. Schopenhauer, notwithstanding his
sincere admiration for Kant--“I owe what is best in my own system to the
impression made upon me by the works of Kant, by the sacred writings of
the Hindoos, and by Plato” (_World as Will and Idea, Werke_, ii. p. 493,
Eng. trans. ii. p. 5)--is one of the most unreliable of Kant’s critics.
His comments are extremely misleading, and largely for the reason that
he was interested in Kant only as he could obtain from him confirmation
of his own philosophical tenets. Several of these tenets he certainly
derived directly from the _Critique_; but they are placed by him in so
entirely different a setting that their essential meaning is greatly
altered. We have already noted (above, p. 41) Schopenhauer’s exaggerated
statement of Kant’s intuitive theory of mathematics. Kant’s subjectivism
is similarly expounded in a one-sided and quite unrepresentative manner
(cf. below, p. 407 _n._). Hutchison Stirling’s criticisms of Kant in his
_Text Book to Kant_ are vitiated by a similar failure to recognise the
completely un-Critical character of the occasional passages in which
Kant admits a distinction between “judgments of perception” and
“judgments of experience” (cf. above, pp. 288-9). Stirling (cf. below,
p. 377) has amplified his criticism of Kant in _Princeton Review_ (Jan.
1879, pp. 178-210), _Fortnightly Review_ (July 1872), and in _Mind_
(ix., 1884, p. 531, and x., 1885, p. 45).

[1186] Cf. above, pp. 240-2, 365, and below, p. 377.

[1187] Cf. Stout, _Manual of Psychology_, third edition, pp. 444-6:
“Unless we assume from the outset that the primitive mind treats a
perceived change which challenges its interest and attention, not as
something self-existent in isolation, but as something conditioned by
and conditioning other changes, it seems hopeless to attempt to show how
this causal point of view could have arisen through any extension of
knowledge in accordance with ascertained psychological laws and
conditions.... There is good reason for denying that customary
repetition is even required to furnish a first occasion or opportunity
for the first emergence of the apprehension of causal relations. For, as
we have already insisted, the process of learning by experience is from
the first experimental.... Regularities are only found because they are
sought. But it is in the seeking that the category of causal unity is
primarily involved.” Cf. below, pp. 371-2.

[1188] A 193 = B 238.

[1189] A 191 = B 236.

[1190] By an “arbitrary” order Kant does not, of course, mean an order
of succession that is not determined, but only one that is determined by
subjectively conditioned direction of attention. Cf. below, p. 377.

[1191] Cf. A 199 = B 244, and above, pp. 133, 288-9; below, p. 377.

[1192] Cf. A 195-6 = B 240-1, and above, pp. 172, 176 ff., 182-3, 263
ff., 277-8.

[1193] A 736-7 = B 765. Italics of last sentence not in Kant.

[1194] A 189-94 = B 234-9: first to fourth paragraphs (first edition).

[1195] Cf. above, pp. 348, 358.

[1196] Cf. A 192-3 = B 238-9.

[1197] Cf. Riehl, _Philosophischer Kriticismus_ (second edition), i. pp.
551-2. While recognising the above main point, Riehl seems to assert
that empirical sequence determines the _application_ of the causal
concept. It would be truer, and more in accordance with the position
which Kant is endeavouring to establish, to assert that appeal to
constancy of sequence enables us to determine which antecedents of any
given event are causal conditions. The principle of causality is already
applied when the sequent experiences are apprehended as sequent events.
This ambiguity, however, would seem to be due only to Riehl’s mode of
expression. For, as he himself says (p. 551), the law of causality is a
ground of experience, and cannot therefore be derived from it. Cf.
above, pp. 267-8, 367.

[1198] Pp. 365-71, 377.

[1199] A 191 = B 236. Cf. above, pp. 216-18.

[1200] As pointed out above, this is really a secondary meaning which
Kant reads into the term analogy; it is not the true explanation of his
choice of the term.

[1201] _Critical Philosophy of Kant_, vol. i. pp. 540, 580.

[1202] _Kant_, p. 198: trans. by Creighton and Lefevre, p. 196.

[1203] Cf. above, pp. 270 ff., 313-21.

[1204] Kant, of course, recognises that we cannot make any such positive
assertion; to do so would be to transcend the limits imposed by Critical
principles. Cf. below, p. 382.

[1205] A 194-6 = B 239-41: fifth to seventh paragraphs (first edition).

[1206] A 196-9 = B 241-4: eighth to tenth paragraphs (first edition).

[1207] A 199-201 = B 244-6: eleventh to thirteenth paragraphs (first
edition).

[1208] Cf. above, pp. 224 ff., 264 ff.; below, 377.

[1209] A 201-2 = B 246-7: fourteenth paragraph (first edition).

[1210] B 233-4: second paragraph (second edition).

[1211] B 233-4.

[1212] From A 202 = B 247 to the end.

[1213] Kant’s phenomenalist substitute for the Cartesian subjectivism
(cf. above, pp. 270 ff., 312 ff.) enables him to develop this thesis in
a consistent and thoroughgoing manner. The subjective is a subspecies
within the class of what is determined by natural law; and the principle
of causality is therefore applicable to subjective change in the same
rigorous fashion as to the objectively sequent.

[1214] A 204 = B 249.

[1215] _W._ i. pp. 87-92.

[1216] _Grundsätze der reinen Erkenntniss-Theorie_, p. 151. Quoted and
translated by Caird, i. p. 572. Caird sums up the matter in a sentence
(p. 571): “Kant is showing, not that objective succession is always
causal, but that the determination of a succession of perceptions as
referring to a succession of states in an object, involves the principle
of causality.”

[1217] _Loc. cit._

[1218] The connected question how we can determine the ball and the
cushion as objectively coexistent is the problem of the third _Analogy_.

[1219] III. _Erklärung_ 1 and 2, _Lehrsatz_ 1 (especially _Anmerkung_
thereto). Cf. also II. _Erklärung_ 1 and 5, and the last pages of the
_Allgemeine Anmerkung_.

[1220] Pp. 351, 373-4. Cf. pp. 318-21.

[1221] A 170-1 = B 212-13, above, p. 353, _n._ 2.

[1222] A 208 = B 253-4.

[1223] _Metaphysical First Principles, II. Lehrsatz 4, Anmerkung 2._

[1224] A 209-10 = B 255-6.

[1225] A 210 = B 256.

[1226] _W._ ii. p. 22.

[1227] _W._ ii. p. 168.

[1228] _Loc. cit._

[1229] For lack of a more suitable English equivalent I have translated
_Gemeinschaft_ as “communion.” As Kant points out in A 213 = B 260, the
German term is itself ambiguous, signifying _commercium_ (_i.e._
dynamical interaction) as well as _communio_.

[1230] Cf. above, pp. 348, 358-9, 367-8, 371-2.

[1231] § 17 ff. Cf. _Nachträge zu Kants Kritik_, lxxxvi, with B.
Erdmann’s comment, p. 35.

[1232] A 211-12 = B 258. Cf. A 211 = B 257.

[1233] A 211 = B 257.

[1234] A 211-13 = B 258-60: first three paragraphs (first edition).

[1235] A 213-14 = B 260-1: fourth paragraph (first edition).

[1236] A 214-15 = B 261-2: fifth paragraph (first edition).

[1237] Cf. above, pp. 189-90, 208 ff.

[1238] B 257-8: first paragraph (second edition).

[1239] Cf. B 291-3, partially quoted above, pp. 310-11. In the
_Metaphysical First Principles_ (_III. Lehrsatz_, 4) the principle that
action and reaction are always equal is similarly limited to the outer
relations of material bodies in space, and Kant adds that all change in
bodies is motion. Cf. _W._ xi. p. 234; and above, p. 147.

[1240] Above pp. 311-12; below, pp. 473-7.

[1241] A 213 = B 260.

[1242] The inconsistency of Kant’s view of pure manifolds of time and
space with the argument of the _Analytic of Principles_ is too obvious
to call for detailed comment.

[1243] Cf. B 257.

[1244] A 213-14 = B 260-1.

[1245] B 257.

[1246] Third edition, p. 438.

[1247] Stout does not himself offer it as complete.

[1248] _World as Will and Idea, W._ ii. pp. 544-5: Eng. trans. ii. pp.
61-3.

[1249] Cf. above, p. 197.

[1250] A 212-13 = B 259.

[1251] B 258.

[1252] _Op. cit._ pp. 545-6: Eng. trans. p. 63.

[1253] _Op. cit._ pp. 546-7: Eng. trans. pp. 63-5.

[1254] Cf. above, p. 379.

[1255] Cf. Stadler, _Grundsätze_, p. 124.

[1256] _Op. cit._ p. 546: Eng. trans. p. 63.

[1257] Cf. above, pp. 97-8, 102 _n._, 165-6; below, pp. 429 ff., 447
ff., 547 ff.

[1258] Cf. Adickes, K. p. 233 _n._

[1259] A 222 = B 269. Cf. A 220 = B 268.

[1260] A 148 ff. = B 187 ff.

[1261] A 219 = B 266.

[1262] This, by Kant’s own account (A 232-4 = B 285-7), is what led him
to adopt the title ‘postulates.’ A geometrical postulate does not add
anything to the concept of its object but only defines the conditions of
its production.

[1263] Cf. above, pp. 38-9; below, pp. 398-9, 418 ff.

[1264] Cf. A 220-3 = B 267-71.

[1265] A 223 = B 270.

[1266] Cf. A 220 = B 268.

[1267] A 223 = B 270-1.

[1268] K. p. 223 _n._

[1269] A 224 = B 272.

[1270] Cf. above, pp. 288-9.

[1271] A 225 = B 272. Cf. above, pp. 394-6.

[1272] A 225 = B 273. Italics not in Kant.

[1273] _The Critical Philosophy of Kant_, i. p. 591.

[1274] _Op. cit._ p. 595.

[1275] A 226 = B 273-4.

[1276] A 226 ff. = B 279 ff.

[1277] A 218 = B 281.

[1278] A 232 = B 284.

[1279] A 231 = B 284.

[1280] Cf. above, p. 309 ff.

[1281] Kant’s argument in the note to B 290 is that of his early essay
on _Negative Quantity_. Cf. below, pp. 527 ff., 533 ff., 536.

[1282] A 236 = B 295.

[1283] Cf. above, pp. xxxv-vi, xxxviii, 185-6, 191, 195-6, 257-8, 290-1,
325 ff., 339.

[1284] The mathematical illustrations which Kant proceeds to give (A 239
= B 299) are peculiarly crude and off-hand in manner of statement. Cf.
_per contra_ A 140 = B 179 for Kant’s real view of the distinction
between image, schema, and concept.

[1285] Cf. above, pp. 195-6, 198, 339-42.

[1286] A 243 = B 301.

[1287] A 242 = B 302.

[1288] Cf. A 248 = B 305.

[1289] A 246-7 = B 303-4. A 247-8 = B 304-5 (beginning “Thought is the
action,” etc.) is merely a repetition of the preceding argument, and
probably represents a later intercalation.

[1290] Beginning “Appearances, so far as ...,” which was omitted in the
second edition. It probably constitutes, as Adickes maintains (_K._ p.
254 _n._), the original beginning of this chapter. The “as we have
hitherto maintained” of its second paragraph, which obviously cannot
apply to the pages which precede it in its present position, must refer
to the argument of the _Analytic_.

[1291] A 249, 251.

[1292] Above, p. 204 ff.

[1293] In large part it represents the Critical position as understood
by Schopenhauer, who never succeeded in acquiring any genuine
understanding of Kant’s more mature teaching (cf. above, p. 366 _n._).
Schopenhauer is correct in maintaining that one chief ground of Kant’s
belief in the existence of things in themselves lies in his initial
assumption that they must be postulated in order to account for the
given manifold. Schopenhauer is also justified in stating that Kant,
though starting from the dualistic Cartesian standpoint, so far modified
it as to conclude that the origin of this manifold must be “_objective,
since there is no ground for regarding it as subjective_” (_Parerga und
Paralipomena_, 1851 ed., p. 74 ff.). But for two reasons this is a very
incomplete, and therefore extremely misleading, account of Kant’s final
teaching. In the first place, Schopenhauer fails to take account of
Kant’s implied distinction between the sensations of the special senses
and the manifold of outer sense. When Kant recognises that the
sensations of the special senses are empirically conditioned, he is
constrained in consistency to distinguish between them and the manifold
which constitutes the matter of all experiences (cf. above, p. 275 ff.).
Things in themselves, in accounting for the latter, account also, but in
quite indirect fashion, for the former. Though sensations are
empirically conditioned, the _entire_ natural world is noumenally
grounded. Secondly, Kant’s subjectivism undergoes a similar
transformation on its inner or mental side. The analysis of
self-consciousness, which is given both in the _Deductions_ and in the
_Paralogisms_, indicates with sufficient clearness Kant’s recognition
that the form of experience is as little self-explanatory as its
content, and that it must not, without such proof as, owing to the
limitations of our experience, we are debarred from giving, be regarded
as more ultimate in nature. The realities which constitute and condition
our mental processes are not apprehended in any more direct manner than
the thing in itself. When, therefore, Schopenhauer asserts in the _World
as Will and Idea_ (_Werke, Frauenstädt_, ii. p. 494, Eng. trans, ii. p.
6) that Kant proves the world to be merely phenomenal by demonstrating
that it is conditioned by the intellect, he is emphasising what is least
characteristic in Kant’s teaching. Schopenhauer’s occasional
identification of the intellect with the brain--the nearest
approximation in his writings to what may be described as
phenomenalism--itself suffices to show how entirely he is lacking in any
firm grasp of Critical principles.

[1294] As we have noted (above, p. 204 ff.), the doctrine of the
transcendental object was entirely eliminated from those main sections
that were rewritten or substantially altered in the second edition,
namely, the chapters on the _Transcendental Deduction_, on _Phenomena
and Noumena_, and on the _Paralogisms_. That it remained in the section
on _Amphiboly_, in the _Second Analogy_, and in the _Antinomies_ is
sufficiently explained by Kant’s unwillingness to make the very
extensive alterations which such further rewriting would have involved.

[1295] A 251.

[1296] Not even, as Kant teaches in his doctrine of inner sense, in the
inner world of apperception, cf. above, p. 295 ff.

[1297] Kant claims in the _Dialectic_ that this process is also
unavoidable, constituting what he calls “transcendental illusion.”

[1298] A 254-7 = B 310-12.

[1299] A 255 = B 310-11.

[1300] Cf. below, p. 412 ff.

[1301] A 256 = B 312. For A 257 = B 312 on the empirical manner of
distinguishing between the sensuous and the intelligible, cf. above, pp.
143 ff., 149 ff.

[1302] Cf. above, pp. 143-4, 147, 214-15, 291 ff.

[1303] Kant here (A 286 = B 342) speaks of this concept of the noumenon
_as an object of non-sensuous intuition_ as being “merely negative.”
This is apt to confuse the reader, as he usually comes to it after
having read the passage introduced into the chapter on _Phenomena and
Noumena_ in the second edition, in which, as above noted (p. 409), Kant
describes this meaning of the term as positive, in distinction from its
more negative meaning as signifying a thing merely so far as it is not
an object of _our_ sense-intuition. Cf. below, p. 413.

[1304] Kant’s meaning here is not quite clear. He may mean either that
the categories as such are inapplicable to things in themselves, or
that, as this form of intuition is altogether different from our own, it
will not help in giving meaning to the categories. What follows would
seem to point to the former view.

[1305] A 286 = B 343.

[1306] A 287-8 = B 344.

[1307] A 288 = B 345.

[1308] A 288 = B 344. Kant allowed the section within which this passage
occurs to remain, without the least modification, in the second edition.

[1309] Benno Erdmann’s explanation (_Kriticismus_, p. 194) of Kant’s
omission of all references to the transcendental object, namely, because
of their being likely to conduce to a mistaken idealistic interpretation
of his teaching, we cannot accept. As already argued (above, p. 204
ff.), they represent a view which he had quite definitely and
consciously outgrown.

[1310] B 306. Cf. above, pp. 290-1.

[1311] B 308. This, it may be noted, is in keeping with the passages
above quoted from the section on _Amphiboly_.

[1312] A 255 = B 311.

[1313] Cf. above, p. 404 ff., especially pp. 409-10; also above, p. 331.

[1314] In order to form an adequate judgment upon Kant’s justification
for distinguishing between appearance and reality the reader must bear
in mind (1) the results obtained in the _Transcendental Deduction_
(above, p. 270 ff.); (2) the discussions developed in the _Paralogisms_
(below, p. 457 ff.); (3) the treatment of noumenal causality, that is of
freedom, in the _Third_ and _Fourth Antinomies_; (4) the many connected
issues raised in the _Ideal_ (below, pp. 534-7, 541-2), and in the
_Appendix to the Dialectic_ (below, p. 543 ff.). Professor Dawes Hicks
is justified in maintaining in his book, _die Begriffe Phänomenon und
Noumenon in ihrem Verhältniss zu einander bei Kant_ (Leipzig, 1897, p.
167)--a work which unfortunately is not accessible to the English
reader--that “the thing in itself is by no means a mere excrescence or
addendum of the Kantian system, but forms a thoroughly necessary
completion to the doctrine of appearances. At every turn in Kant’s
thought the doctrine of the noumenon, in one form or another, plays an
essential part.” Indeed it may be said that to state Kant’s reasons for
asserting the existence of things in themselves, is to expound his
philosophy as a whole. Upon this question there appears in Kant the same
alternation of view as in regard to his other main tenets. On Kant’s
discussion of the applicability of the category of existence to things
in themselves, cf. above, p. 322 ff. Also, on Kant’s extension of the
concepts possibility and actuality to noumena, cf. above, pp. 391 ff.,
401-3.

[1315] ‘Ideal’ and ‘Idealist’ are printed with capitals, to mark the
very special sense in which these terms are being used. As already noted
(above, p. 3), the same remark applies to the term ‘Reason.’

[1316] Cf. above, pp. xli-ii, xliv, liii-v, 331.

[1317] A 260 ff. = B 316 ff.

[1318] Cf. above, pp. 38-9, 119, 131-3, 338-9, 394-400.

[1319] Above, p. xxx ff., and below, p. 601 ff.

[1320] Cf. A 267 = B 323.

[1321] Cf. Adickes’ _Systematik_, pp. 60, 70, 72, and 111-12.

[1322] A 270 = B 326.

[1323] Cf. A 264 = B 319, and A 266 = B 322.

[1324] Cf. below, pp. 563-5, 589 ff., 601 ff.

[1325] I have dwelt upon this at length in my _Studies in the Cartesian
Philosophy_.

[1326] A 271 = B 327.

[1327] The un-Critical character of Kant’s doctrine of the pure concept
has already been noted (above, pp. 418-19), and need not be further
discussed.

[1328] A 272 = B 328.

[1329] A 273 = B 329.

[1330] This is Leibniz’s mode of stating the absolutist view of thought
(cf. above, p. xxx ff.) to which, as we shall find, Kant gives much more
adequate and incomparably deeper formulation in the _Dialectic_. Cf. pp.
430, 547 ff., 558 ff.

[1331] Adickes, _K._ p. 272 _n._, allows that the passage may be of
earlier origin than the passages which precede and follow it.

[1332] Pp. 214-15.

[1333] As such it is commented on above, p. 410 ff.

[1334] _Loc. cit._

[1335] A 290 = B 347.

[1336] Cf. above, p. 409 ff.

[1337] Kant’s commentators have frequently misrepresented this aspect of
his teaching. Cf. below, pp. 498, 520-1, 527-37, 541-2, 543 ff., 555,
558-61.

[1338] A 490 = B 518.

[1339] Cf. above, pp. 416-17.

[1340] Those readers who are not already well acquainted with the
argument of the _Dialectic_ may be recommended to pass at once to p.
441. What here follows presupposes acquaintance with the nature and
purposes of the main divisions of the _Dialectic_.

[1341] Introd. to _Reflexionen_, Bd. ii.

[1342] _W._ x. p. 123 ff. Cf. above, pp. 219-20.

[1343] Cf. _Dissertation_, § 27 _n._

[1344] _Op. cit._ Cf. § 24 with § 27.

[1345] _Op. cit._ § 27.

[1346] Cf. ii. 567, 571, 584, 585.

[1347] Cf. ii. 1251 and 586.

[1348] Cf. below, pp. 458, 488 ff.

[1349] In _Reflexionen_ ii. 573, 576, and 582 we find Kant in the very
act of so doing. _Compositio_, _co-ordinatio_, and _commercium_ are
treated as synonymous terms.

[1350] The problem of freedom is first met with in Kant’s _Lectures on
Metaphysics_ (Pölitz, edition of 1821, pp. 89, 330), but is not there
given as an antinomy, and is treated as falling within the field of
theology. In _Reflexion_ ii. 585, also, it is equated in terms of the
category of ground and consequence, with the concept of Divine
Existence, the “_absolute_ or _primum contingens_ (_libertas_).” Upon
elimination of theology, and therefore of the cosmological argument,
from the sphere of antinomy, Kant raised freedom to the rank of an
independent problem.

[1351] A 462 = B 490.

[1352] Cf. below, pp. 498-9, 571 ff.

[1353] Cf. below, p. 454, with references in _n._ 1.

[1354] A 507 = B 535. Cf. below, pp. 481, 545-6.

[1355] Cf. ii. 93, 94, 95, 1233, 1247.

[1356] This is the view represented in _Reflexionen_ ii. 94, 95.

[1357] Cf. _Reflexionen_ ii. 124.

[1358] Cf. _Reflexionen_ ii. 95.

[1359] Cf. below, p. 457.

[1360] Cf. ii. 86 ff.

[1361] Cf. _Reflexionen_ ii. 114-15.

[1362] B 394 _n._ Immortality is here taken as representing the Idea of
the soul as unconditioned substance.

[1363] Cf. below, p. 454, with further references in _n._ 1.

[1364] _Systematik_, pp. 115-16.

[1365] Above, p. 334.

[1366] This conclusion is supported by the evidence of the
_Reflexionen_: they contain not a single reference to schematism.

[1367] A 293 = B 349.

[1368] Pp. 173-4.

[1369] Cf. A 61 = B 85.

[1370] Adickes, _Systematik_, p. 77 ff.

[1371] Cf. Kant’s _caveat_ in A 293 = B 349 against identifying
dialectic with the doctrine of probable reasoning.

[1372] Pp. 427-8.

[1373] A 298 = B 355.

[1374] Cf. above, p. 332.

[1375] Reicke, i. p. 105.

[1376] _Op. cit._ i. pp. 109-10.

[1377] A 301-2 = B 358.

[1378] A 303 = B 359.

[1379] A 305 = B 362.

[1380] The wording of the concluding sentence of the third paragraph (A
307 = B 363-4) is so condensed as to be misleading. “It [viz. the
principle of causality] makes the unity of experience possible, and
borrows nothing from the Reason. The latter, if it were not for this
[its indirect] reference [through mediation of the understanding] to
possible experience, could never [of itself], from mere concepts, have
imposed a synthetic unity of that kind.”

[1381] A 310 = B 366.

[1382] _Schein des Schliessens_ would seem to be here used in that
sense.

[1383] Cf. above, p. 424.

[1384] Cf. also A 669 = B 697; A 680 = B 709.

[1385] Cf. Vaihinger, “Kant--ein Metaphysiker?” in _Philosophische
Abhandlungen_ (Sigwart _Gedenkschrift_), p. 144.

[1386] A 312 = B 368.

[1387] A 313 = B 370.

[1388] A 316-17 = B 373. The context of this passage is a defence of
Plato’s _Republic_ against the charge that it is Utopian, because
unrealisable.

[1389] A 317-18 = B 374-5.

[1390] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1240. Cf. Schopenhauer: _World as Will and
Idea_ (_Werke_, ii. p. 277: Eng. trans. i. p. 303): “The _Idea_ is the
unity that falls into multiplicity on account of the temporal and
spatial form of our intuitive apprehension; the _concept_, on the
contrary, is the unity reconstructed out of multiplicity by the
abstraction of our reason; the latter may be defined as _unitas post
rem_, the former as _unitas ante rem_.”

[1391] _Lectures on Metaphysics_ (Pölitz, 1821), p. 79.

[1392] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1243.

[1393] _Lectures on Metaphysics_, pp. 308-9.

[1394] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1244.

[1395] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1254.

[1396] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1258.

[1397] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1259.

[1398] _Reflexionen_ ii. 1260.

[1399] A 320 = B 376-7.

[1400] A 321 = B 377.

[1401] A 323-4 = B 380-1. Cf. below, pp. 480, 529, 559-60.

[1402] Regarding the _progressive series_ from the conditioned to its
consequences, cf. A 336-7 = B 393-4, A 410-11 = B 437-8, A 511 = B 539.

[1403] A 333 = B 390.

[1404] Cf. above, pp. 418, 436, 439-40; below, pp. 473-7, 520-1, 537,
543 ff., 575.

[1405] Cf. A 335.

[1406] Cf. A 337-8 = B 394-6 and note appended to B 394.

[1407] A 336 = B 393.

[1408] Cf. A 671 = B 699; above, pp. 426, 430, 436; below, pp. 552-4,
572 ff.

[1409] On the difference between the ascending and the descending
series, cf. A 331-2 = B 338 and A 410-11 = B 437-8.

[1410] The questions raised in the two introductory paragraphs (A 336-40
= B 396-8) as to the content of the Ideas, their problematic character,
and their possibility as concepts, are first adequately discussed in
later chapters. The three new terms here introduced, Paralogism,
Antinomy, and Ideal, can also best be commented upon in their own
special context.

[1411] A 341 = B 399.

[1412] Cf. below, pp. 466, 470.

[1413] A 347.

[1414] A 345-6 = B 403-4.

[1415] Cf. A 354-5.

[1416] Cf. above, p. 437.

[1417] A 348.

[1418] A 351.

[1419] A 363-4.

[1420] A 351.

[1421] _K._ 688 _n._

[1422] A similar criticism holds true of the conception of identity
employed in the third _Paralogism_, and arbitrarily equated with the
categories of quantity.

[1423] Cf. A 355-6.

[1424] It is very forcibly developed in Mendelssohn’s “Phädon” (1767)
(_Gesammelte Schriften_, 1843, ii. p. 151 ff.). This is a work with
which Kant was familiar. Cf. below, p. 470.

[1425] This is the argument which William James has expounded in his
characteristically picturesque style. “Take a sentence of a dozen words,
and take twelve men and tell to each one word. Then stand the men in a
row or jam them in a bunch, and let each think of his word as intently
as he will; nowhere will there be a consciousness of the whole sentence”
(_Principles of Psychology_, i. p. 160).

[1426] A 363 _n._ Cf. below, pp. 461-2.

[1427] A 356. Cf. Adickes, _K._ p. 688 _n._

[1428] The argument is here in harmony with Kant’s definition of
transcendental illusion.

[1429] A 358.

[1430] A 361.

[1431] A 364.

[1432] William James’s psychological description of self-consciousness
is simply an extension of this illustration. Cf. _Principles of
Psychology_, i. p. 339; quoted above, p. 278 _n._

[1433] A 363 _n._

[1434] A 362-3 and A 364. We must also, however, bear in mind that in
this chapter Kant occasionally argues in _ad hominem_ fashion from the
point of view of the position criticised.

[1435] Cf. A 353-4.

[1436] Cf. Adickes, _K._ p. 695 _n._

[1437] A 366.

[1438] P. 301 ff.

[1439] The note to A 344 has evidently got displaced; it must, as
Adickes points out, belong to A 404.

[1440] Cf. above, pp. 320, 455.

[1441] A 371-2.

[1442] A 380-1.

[1443] Cf. A 383.

[1444] A 383.

[1445] A 383.

[1446] A 381.

[1447] The first four paragraphs are probably a later intercalation
(Adickes, _K._ p. 708 _n._), since they connect both with the
introductory sections of the _Dialectic_ and with the _Introduction_ to
the _Critique_. Also, the opening words of the fifth paragraph seem to
refer us not to anything antecedent in this section, but directly to the
concluding passages of the fourth _Paralogism_.

[1448] A 385.

[1449] A 393.

[1450] A 387.

[1451] Cf. above, pp. 215-16.

[1452] A 393-4.

[1453] A 394.

[1454] Pp. 326-7.

[1455] Pp. 327-8.

[1456] A 402. Cf. B 407.

[1457] _K._ p. 717 _n._

[1458] Cf. below, p. 470.

[1459] B 406 ff.

[1460] _Kriticismus_, p. 227, cf. p. 106 ff.

[1461] A. H. Ulrichs, _Institutiones logicae et metaphysicae_ (1785).

[1462] In his review of Kant’s _Prolegomena_ in the _Allgemeine Deutsche
Bibliothek_ (1784).

[1463] Obviously by categories Kant here really means schemata. Cf. A
348, where Kant states that “pure categories ... have in themselves no
objective meaning.... Apart from intuition they are merely functions of
a judgment, without content.”

[1464] Above, pp. 404 ff., 413 ff.

[1465] B 408.

[1466] _Critical Philosophy_, ii. p. 34. So also in Watson’s _Kant
Explained_, p. 244.

[1467] Caird (_op. cit._ p. 35) takes account of Kant’s conception of a
possible intuitive understanding, but illegitimately assumes that by it
he must mean a _creative_ understanding.

[1468] Cf. above, p. 295 ff.

[1469] Cf. B 415 _n._ In B xxxix. _n._ (at the end), quoted above pp.
309-10, Kant is careful to point out that the representation of
something permanent is by no means identical with permanent
representation.

[1470] P. 463.

[1471] Namely, as _Refutation of Idealism_, B 274 ff. Cf. above, p. 308
ff.

[1472] Cf. above, pp. 457, 462-3.

[1473] A 402.

[1474] Cf. above, p. 466.

[1475] B 413-15.

[1476] _Gesammelte Schriften_, ii. p. 151 ff.

[1477] _Op. cit._ p. 121 ff.

[1478] _Op. cit._ pp. 128 ff., 168.

[1479] _Op. cit._ p. 125 ff.

[1480] Regarding the value of the hypotheses propounded by Kant in his
note to B 415, cf. below, p. 543 ff.

[1481] P. 321 ff.

[1482] Cf. above, p. 467.

[1483] Pp. 473-7.

[1484] _Kriticismus_, p. 226.

[1485] B 424.

[1486] B 421.

[1487] B 424-5.

[1488] B 425-6. Cf. above, pp. lvi-lxi; below, p. 570 ff.

[1489] The only approach to such a reference is in B 426-7, noted above,
p. 471.

[1490] A 672 = B 700. Cf. below, p. 554.

[1491] A 649 = B 677-8. Tetens in his _Philosophische Versuche_ (1777)
had devoted an entire chapter to this question. His term _Grundkraft_ is
that which Kant here employs. Cf. _Philosophische Versuche_, Bd. i.,
_Elfter Versuch_: “Concerning the fundamental power of the human soul.”
Incidentally Tetens discusses Rousseau’s suggestion that this
fundamental power consists in man’s capacity for perfecting himself. Cf.
Kant’s _Lectures on Metaphysics_ (Pölitz, 1821, p. 192 ff.).

[1492] A 682-4 = B 710-12. A 771-2 = B 799 in the _Methodology_ is
similarly ambiguous, though tending to the spiritualist mode of
formulation.

[1493] Cf. above, pp. 275-6, 279 ff., 312 ff., 384-5, 464-5.

[1494] Cf. end of B xxxix. _n._, quoted above, pp. 309-10.

[1495] A 405 = B 432.

[1496] A 408 = B 435.

[1497] Cf. A 414 = B 441, where it is stated that there is no
transcendental Idea of the substantial.

[1498] Cf. above, p. 434 ff.

[1499] A 419 = B 447.

[1500] A 420 = B 447.

[1501] A very curious sentence in Kant’s letter to Schulze (_W._ x. pp.
344-5, quoted above, p. 199) seems to be traceable to this source.

[1502] Cf. below, pp. 529, 559-60, and above, pp. 199-200, 433-4, 451.
For A 410-11 = B 439-40 on the difference between the ascending and
descending series, cf. A 331-2 = B 387-8 and A 336-7 = B 393-4.

[1503] A 420 = B 448.

[1504] Cf. _per contra_ A 486 = B 514.

[1505] The limitation of Kant’s discussion to space, time, and causality
is, of course, due to his acceptance of the current view that the
concepts of infinity and continuity are derived from our intuitions of
space and time. As we have already noted in discussing his intuitional
theory of mathematical reasoning (above, pp. 40-1, 117 ff., 128 ff.), he
fails to extend to mathematical concepts his own “transcendental” view
of the categories, namely, as _conditioning_ the possibility of
intuitional experience. Such concepts as order, plurality, whole and
part, continuity, infinity, are prior to time and space in the logical
order of thought; and to be adequately treated must be considered in
their widest application.

[1506] Cf. A 507 = B 535, and above, p. 431 ff.; below, pp. 501, 545-6.

[1507] Cf. Kant’s posthumously published _Transition from the
Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science to Physics_
(_Altpreussische Monatsschrift_, 1882), pp. 279-80: “If we take in
regard to space, not its definition, but only an _a priori_ proposition,
_e.g._ that space is a whole which must be thought only as part of a
still greater whole, it is clear ... that it is an irrational magnitude,
measurable indeed, but in its comparison with unity transcending all
number.” “If space is something objectively existent, it is a magnitude
which can exist only as part of another given magnitude.”

[1508] Cf. Schopenhauer, _World as Will and Idea_ (_Werke, Frauenstädt_,
ii. pp. 585-6; Eng. trans, ii. pp. 107-8). “I find and assert that the
whole antinomy is a mere delusion, a sham fight. Only the assertions of
the antitheses really rest upon the forms of our faculty of knowledge,
_i.e._ if we express it objectively, on the necessary, _a priori_
certain, most universal laws of nature. Their proofs alone are t
herefore drawn from objective grounds. On the other
hand, the assertions and proofs of the theses have no other than a
subjective ground, rest solely on the weakness of the reasoning
individual; for his imagination becomes tired with an endless
regression, and therefore he puts an end to it by arbitrary assumptions,
which he tries to smooth over as well as he can; and his judgment,
moreover, is in this case paralysed by early and deeply imprinted
prejudices. On this account the proof of the thesis in all the four
conflicts is throughout a mere sophism, while that of the antithesis is
a necessary inference of the reason from the laws of the world as idea
known to us _a priori_. It is, moreover, only with great pains and skill
that Kant is able to sustain the thesis, and make it appear to attack
its opponent, which is endowed with native power.... I shall show that
the proofs which Kant adduces of the individual theses are sophisms,
while those of the antitheses are quite fairly and correctly drawn from
objective grounds.”]

[1509] Cf. F. Erhardt’s _Kritik der Kantischen Antinomienlehre_ (1888),
a brief but excellent analysis of this section of the _Critique_.

[1510] § 1 _n._

[1511] Cf. A 431-2 = B 460-1: “...the concept [of the infinite] is not
the concept of a maximum; by it we think only its relation to any
assignable unit, in respect to which it is greater than all number.”

[1512] Cf. Kant’s statement in the _Observation_ to this antithesis, A
431-3 = B 459-61.

[1513] Kant regarded the point as a limit, _i.e._ as a boundary
(_Dissertation_, § 14, 4; § 15, C: “The simple in space is not a part
but a limit”; A 169-70 = B 211); whereas certain modern mathematicians
take the point as one of the undefined elements. When the point is
regarded in this latter manner, space may perhaps be satisfactorily
defined as a set of points. In arguing for the antithesis, and in the
passages just cited, Kant also assumes that, in the case of space, the
properties of the class are determined by the properties of its
elements. This questionable assumption is involved in his assertion that
space can consist only of spaces.

[1514] A 438 = B 466.

[1515] A 439-41 = B 467-9.

[1516] A 441 = B 469.

[1517] Developed in the _Dissertation_ (1770).

[1518] Zweites Hauptstück, Lehrsatz 4, Anmerkung 1. Cf. also Anmerkung
2.

[1519] _Principles of Mathematics_, i. p. 460.

[1520] Cf. above, p. 481 _n._ 2.

[1521] P. 489 _n._

[1522] Cf. Schopenhauer, _World as Will and Idea_ (_Werke_,
_Frauenstädt_, ii. p. 590; Eng. trans. ii. pp. 111-12). “The argument
for the third thesis is a very fine sophism, and is really Kant’s
pretended principle of pure reason itself entirely unadulterated and
unchanged. It tries to prove the finiteness of the series of causes by
saying that, in order to be _sufficient_, a cause must contain the
complete sum of the conditions from which the succeeding state, the
effect, proceeds. For the completeness of the determinations present
_together_ in the state which is the cause, the argument now substitutes
the completeness of the series of causes by which that state itself was
brought to actuality; and because completeness presupposes the condition
of being rounded off or closed in, and this again presupposes
finiteness, the argument infers from this a first cause, closing the
series and therefore unconditioned. But the juggling is obvious. In
order to conceive the state A as the sufficient cause of the state B, I
assume that it contains the sum of the necessary determinations from the
coexistence of which the state B inevitably follows. Now by this my
demand upon it as a _sufficient_ cause is entirely satisfied, and has no
direct connection with the question how the state A itself came to be;
this rather belongs to an entirely different consideration, in which I
regard the said state A no more as cause, but as itself an effect; in
which case another state again must be related to it, just as it was
related to B. The assumption of the finiteness of the series of causes
and effects, and accordingly of a first beginning, appears nowhere in
this as necessary, any more than the presentness of the present moment
requires us to assume a beginning of time itself.”

[1523] _Op. cit._ p. 24.

[1524] For comment upon Kant’s defence of his procedure cf. below, p.
496.

[1525] Cf. Kant’s _Observation_ on the thesis.

[1526] A 451 = B 479.

[1527] Cf. also A 451 = B 479.

[1528] Cf. Schopenhauer, _op. cit._ p. 591; Eng. trans. p. 113. “The
fourth conflict is ... really tautological with the third; and the proof
of the thesis is also essentially the same as that of the preceding one.
Kant’s assertion that every conditioned presupposes a complete series of
conditions, and therefore a series which ends with an unconditioned, is
a _petitio principii_ which must simply be denied. Everything
conditioned presupposes nothing but its condition; that this is again
conditioned raises a new consideration which is not directly contained
in the first.”

[1529] Above, p. 494.

[1530] A 459 = B 487.

[1531] Jean Jacques Dortous de Mairan (1678-1771), physicist and
mathematician. In 1740 he succeeded Fontenelle as perpetual Secretary of
the French Academy of Sciences.

[1532] Cf. above, pp. 435, 495 _n._ 4.

[1533] A 448-50 = B 476-8.

[1534] Cf. above, p. 427 ff.; below, pp. 520-1, 527-37, 541 ff.

[1535] A 462 = B 490.

[1536] Cf. above, pp. 434 ff., 479.

[1537] A 476 = B 504.

[1538] A 484 = B 512.

[1539] _Ibid._

[1540] A 483 = B 511.

[1541] A 485 = B 513.

[1542] Cf. above, p. 481; below, pp. 545-6.

[1543] Kant is here playing on the double meaning of the German
“sinnleeres”--“empty of sense” and “non-sense.”

[1544] A 489 = B 517.

[1545] A 490 = B 518.

[1546] Above, p. 426 ff.

[1547] A 490 = B 518.

[1548] Cf. above p. 204 ff.

[1549] A 494 = B 522-3.

[1550] A 495 = B 523.

[1551] Cf. A 494 = B 522-3: “...we can say of the transcendental object
that it is given in itself prior to all experience.”

[1552] A 496 = B 524.

[1553] A 491 = B 519.

[1554] Pp. 306-7.

[1555] A 497 = B 525.

[1556] A 501-2 = B 529-30.

[1557] A 506 = B 534.

[1558] Cf. end of passage: “There can be no lack of conditions that are
given through this regress.”

[1559] Cf. below, pp. 507-8.

[1560] Cf. below, pp. 507-9.

[1561] _K._ p. 414 _n._ The two last paragraphs of Section VII., which
correct its argument, that of the Transcendental Aesthetic, are probably
later additions.

[1562] A 508 = B 536.

[1563] _Loc. cit._

[1564] As to the distinction between the ascending and the descending
series, cf. above, pp. 453 _n._, 484.

[1565] Cf. A 522 = B 549-50.

[1566] A 514 = B 542.

[1567] Above, p. 506.

[1568] Cf. A 522 = B 550.

[1569] A 515 = B 543.

[1570] A 519-20 = B 547-8.

[1571] When Kant adds (A 521 = B 549), “and therefore absolutely also,”
he inconsistently reverts to the position ambiguously suggested in A 499
= B 527. Cf. above, p. 506.

[1572] A 523-6 = B 551-4.

[1573] The assertion of infinite divisibility is not applicable, Kant
states (A 526-7 = B 554-5), to bodies as organised, but only to bodies
as mere occupants of space. Organisation involves distinction of parts,
and therefore discreteness. How far organisation can go in organised
bodies, experience alone can show us.

[1574] P. 508.

[1575] A 528 = B 556.

[1576] Cf. above, pp. 345-7.

[1577] A 535-6 = B 563-4.

[1578] Cf. A 537 = B 564-5; also A 546 = B 574-5, in which Kant asserts
that man knows himself not only through the senses but “also through
pure apperception, and indeed in actions and inner determinations which
cannot be reckoned as impressions of the senses.” Such statements would
seem to show that, at the time of writing, Kant had not yet developed
his doctrine of inner sense.

[1579] A 532 = B 560.

[1580] A 536-7 = B 564-5.

[1581] A 533 = B 561.

[1582] A 536 = B 564.

[1583] A 538 = B 566.

[1584] Cf. Kant’s _Uebergang von der metaph. Anfangsgründe der
Naturwissenschaft zur Physik (Altpreussische Monatsschrift_ (1882), pp.
272-3).

[1585] A 549 = B 577. Italics not in Kant.

[1586] In A 540 = B 568 a different and less satisfactory view finds
expression.

[1587] A 542 = B 570.

[1588] A 544 = B 572.

[1589] A 546-7 = B 574-5.

[1590] A 548 = B 576.

[1591] A 552 = B 580.

[1592] A 553 = B 581.

[1593] A 557 = B 585.

[1594] A 553-4 = B 581-2.

[1595] Cf. A 537-41 = B 565-9 and A 544 = B 572.

[1596] Cf. A 566 = B 594.

[1597] Cf. above, p. 204 ff.

[1598] A 559 = B 587.

[1599] A 561 = B 589.

[1600] A 565 = B 593.

[1601] A 567 = B 593.

[1602] For Kant’s comparison of his Ideas with those of Plato, cf.
above, pp. 447-9.

[1603] §§ 803 ff. in 5th edition (Halle, 1763).

[1604] A 578 = B 606.

[1605] A 580 = B 608.

[1606] Cf. above, p. 418 ff.

[1607] A 272-4 = B 328-30.

[1608] Cf. Kant’s distinction between distributive and collective unity
in A 582-3 = B 610 with A 644 = B 672.

[1609] A 583 = B 611.

[1610] A 603 = B 631.

[1611] A 603-4 = B 631-2.

[1612] Cf. below, pp. 533, 536.

[1613] A 592 = B 620.

[1614] A 593 = B 621.

[1615] Cf. A 4-5 = B 8-9; A 735-8 = B 763-6.

[1616] Cf. above, pp. 427-8, and references there given.

[1617] Cf. above, p. 424.

[1618] Cf. above, p. 392 ff.

[1619] _K._ p. 475 _n._

[1620] A 603 = B 631.

[1621] Cf. above, p. 527. The concluding paragraphs A 613-14 = B 641-2
can best be treated later in another connection. Cf. below, p. 536.

[1622] A 614 = B 642.

[1623] A 613 = B 641.

[1624] A 616 = B 644.

[1625] A 619-20 = B 647-8.

[1626] Cf. below, pp. 541-2, 552 ff.

[1627] A 620 = B 648.

[1628] A 624 = B 652.

[1629] _Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens_ (1755).

[1630] _Critique of Judgment_, §§ 64, 65.

[1631] Hamann completed his translation of Hume’s _Dialogues on Natural
Religion_ on August 7, 1780 (cf. Hamann’s _Werke_, vi. 154 ff.): and
Kant, notwithstanding his being occupied in finishing the _Critique_,
read through the manuscript. It is highly likely that this first perusal
of Hume’s _Dialogues_ not only confirmed Kant in his negative attitude
towards natural theology, but also enabled him to define more clearly
than he otherwise would have done, the negative consequences of his own
Critical principles. The chapter on the _Ideal_, as we have already
observed (above, pp. 434-5, 527-9, 531), was probably one of the last
parts of the _Critique_ to be brought into final form. It does not seem
possible, however, to establish in any specific manner the exact
influence which Hume’s _Dialogues_ may thus have exercised upon the
argument of this portion of the _Critique_. When Schreiter’s translation
of the _Dialogues_ appeared in 1781, Hamann, not unwilling to escape the
notoriety of seeming to father so sceptical a work, withdrew his own
translation.

[1632] This is the main point of Hume’s argument in Section XI. of his
_Enquiry concerning the Human Understanding_.

[1633] A 631 = B 659.

[1634] A 641 = B 669.

[1635] Cf. above, p. 407 ff., and below, p. 552 ff.

[1636] Cf. above, p. 454, with further references in _n._ 1.

[1637] Cf. above, pp. 536-7.

[1638] A 642 = B 670.

[1639] A 769-82 = B 797-810.

[1640] A xiv, B xxiii-iv, and _Reflexionen_ ii. 1451: “In metaphysics
there can be no such thing as uncertainty.” Cf. above, pp. 10, 35.

[1641] A 770-1 = B 798-9.

[1642] A 772 = B 800.

[1643] A 775 = B 803.

[1644] Cf. A 781-2 = B 809-10.

[1645] Cf. above, pp. 481, 501.

[1646] A 777-8 = B 805-6.

[1647] A 782 = B 810.

[1648] Cf. above, pp. 97-8, 102, 390-1, 426 ff., 447 ff.

[1649] A 651 = B 679.

[1650] _Loc. cit._

[1651] A 653 = B 681.

[1652] _Dissertation_, § 30.

[1653] The extremely un-Critical reason which Kant here (A 647 = B 675)
gives for its necessarily remaining hypothetical is the “impossibility
of knowing all possible consequences.” This use of the term hypothetical
is also confusing in view of Kant’s criticism of the hypothetical
employment of Reason in A 769 ff. = B 797 ff.

[1654] A 647 = B 675.

[1655] _Loc. cit._ and A 649 = B 677.

[1656] A 648 = B 676.

[1657] A 652 = B 680.

[1658] A 660-1 = B 688-9.

[1659] A 656 = B 684.

[1660] A 656 = B 684.

[1661] A 658 = B 686.

[1662] A 660 = B 688.

[1663] The opening paragraphs of the section, A 642-5 = B 670-3, may be
of the same date as the concluding paragraphs.

[1664] Cf. _per contra_ A 669-70 = B 697-8.

[1665] A 666 = B 694.

[1666] A 669 = B 697.

[1667] Cf. above, pp. 446-7.

[1668] Cf. A 681 = B 709.

[1669] Cf. _per contra_ A 663-4 = B 691-2.

[1670] A 670 = B 698.

[1671] I may here guard against misunderstanding. Though the Ideas of
Reason condition the experience which they regulate, this must not be
taken as nullifying Kant’s fundamental distinction between the
regulative and the constitutive. Even when he is developing his less
sceptical view, he adopts, in metaphysics as in ethics, a position which
is radically distinct from that of Hegel. Though the moral ideal
represents reality of the highest order, it transcends all possible
realisation of itself in human life. Though it conditions all our
morality, it at the same time condemns it. The Christian virtue of
humility defines the only attitude proper to the human soul. In an
exactly similar manner, the fact that the Ideas of Reason have to be
regarded as conditioning the possibility of sense-experience need not
prevent us from also recognising that they likewise make possible our
consciousness of its limitations.

[1672] Cf. above, pp. 473-7.

[1673] A 679 = B 707.

[1674] A 678 = B 706.

[1675] A 674 = B 702. Cf. A 678-9 = B 706-7.

[1676] A 680 = B 708.

[1677] As above noted (pp. 499 ff.), when we find Kant thus insisting
upon the completely soluble character of all problems of pure Reason,
the sceptical, subjectivist tendency is dominant.

[1678] A 669 = B 697.

[1679] Cf. above, pp. 536-7, 541-2.

[1680] A 686-7 = B 714-15.

[1681] A 693 = B 721.

[1682] A 699-700 = B 727-8.

[1683] A 701 = B 729.

[1684] Nearly all the important points raised in the _Methodology_, and
several of its chief sections, I have commented upon in their connection
with the earlier parts of the _Critique_. Also, the _Methodology_ is
extremely diffuse. For these reasons I have found it advisable to give
such additional comment as seems necessary in the form of this Appendix.

[1685] On Kant’s use of the terms ‘discipline’ and ‘canon,’ cf. above,
pp. 71-2, 170, 174, 438.

[1686] Cf. above, p. 438.

[1687] A 4-5 = B 8-9.

[1688] _Untersuchung: Zweite Betrachtung, W._ ii. p. 283.

[1689] Kant here disavows the position of the _Untersuchung_ in which
(_Erste Betrachtung_, § 4) he had asserted that mathematics deals with
quantity and philosophy with qualities.

[1690] For comment upon this distinction, cf. above, pp. 131-3, 338-9.

[1691] _Untersuchung: Erste Betrachtung_, § 2.

[1692] A 728 = B 756.

[1693] _Untersuchung: Zweite Betrachtung, W._ ii. p. 283.

[1694] _Untersuchung: Erste Betrachtung_, § 1, _W._ ii. p. 276:
“Mathematics proceeds to all its definitions by a _synthetic_ procedure,
philosophy by an analytic procedure.”

[1695] In the _Untersuchung_ Kant’s statements are more cautious, and
also more adequate. Cf. _Erste Betrachtung_, § 3, _W._ ii. p. 279: “In
mathematics there are only a few but in philosophy there are innumerable
irresolvable concepts....”

[1696] A 731 _n._ = B 759 _n._

[1697] The phrases which Kant employs (A 732-3 = B 760-1) are:
“_unmittelbargewiss_,” “_evident_,” “_augenscheinlich_.” Cf. above, pp.
xxxv-vi, 36 ff., 53.

[1698] Cf. above, pp. 118, 142, 185-6.

[1699] Cf. above, p. 117 ff.

[1700] Cf. above, pp. 38-42, 93-4, 118-20, 133.

[1701] Cf. above, pp. 111-12, 114-15.

[1702] Cf. above, p. 131 ff.

[1703] A 737 = B 765.

[1704] Cf. above, pp. 36 ff., 117 ff., 128 ff., 565-6.

[1705] A 743-4 = B 771-2.

[1706] A 753 = B 781. In A 745 = B 773 Kant’s mention of Hume can hardly
refer to Hume’s _Dialogues_ (cf. above, pp. 539-40 n.). Kant probably
has in mind Section XI. of the _Enquiry_. The important discussion of
Hume’s position in A 760 ff. = B 788 ff. has been commented upon above,
p. 61 ff. With Priestley’s teaching (A 745-6 = B 773-4) Kant probably
became acquainted through some indirect source. The first of Priestley’s
philosophical writings to appear in German was his _History of the
Corruptions of Christianity_. The translation was published in 1782. In
A 747-8 = B 775-6 Kant quite obviously has Rousseau in mind.

[1707] Section III., on _The Discipline of Pure Reason in Regard to
Hypotheses_, has been commented on above, pp. 543-6.

[1708] A 782 = B 810.

[1709] Even in mathematics the indirect method is not always available.
Cf. Russell, _Principles of Mathematics_, i. p. 15.

[1710] A 794 = B 822.

[1711] Cf. above, p. 563 _n._ 2.

[1712] A 797 = B 825.

[1713] Cf. _Critique of Judgment, W._ v. p. 473; Bernard’s trans. p.
411: “_God_, _freedom_, and _immortality_ are the problems at the
solution of which all the preparations of Metaphysics aim, as their
ultimate and unique purpose.”

[1714] A 800-1 = B 829.

[1715] The statement in A 801 = B 829 that morals is a subject foreign
to transcendental philosophy is in line with that of A 14-15 = B 28, and
conflicts with the position later adopted in the _Critique of Practical
Reason_. Cf. above, p. 77.

[1716] A 803 = B 831-2.

[1717] Cf. below, pp. 571-5.

[1718] A 804 = B 832.

[1719] Cf. above, p. lvi.

[1720] These statements are subject to modification, if the distinction
(not clearly recognised by Kant, but really essential to his position)
between immanent and transcendent metaphysics is insisted upon. Cf.
above, pp. liv-v, 22, 56, 66-70.

[1721] Cf. above, p. 541.

[1722] _W._ v. pp. 47-8; Abbott’s trans. (3rd edition) p. 136.

[1723] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason, W._ v. pp. 31-7; Abbott’s
trans. p. 120.

[1724] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason, W._ v. p. 43; Abbott’s trans.
p. 132: “The moral law, although it gives no _view_, yet gives us a fact
absolutely inexplicable from any data of the sensible world, or from the
whole compass of our theoretical use of reason, a fact which points to a
pure world of the understanding, nay, even defines it _positively_, and
enables us to know something of it, namely, a law.”

[1725] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason_, in note to Preface.

[1726] _Op. cit._, Preface, at the beginning, Abbott’s trans. pp. 87-8.
Cf. also the concluding pages of Book I., _W._ v. pp. 103-6, Abbott, pp.
197-200.

[1727] _Critique of Judgment, W._ v. p. 468; Bernard’s trans. p. 406.

[1728] _Op. cit._ p. 474; Bernard’s trans. p. 413.

[1729] A 815 = B 843.

[1730] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason, W._ v. pp. 143-4 _n._;
Abbott’s trans. p. 242: “It is a duty to realise the _Summum Bonum_ to
the utmost of our power, therefore it must be possible, consequently it
is unavoidable for every rational being in the world to assume what is
necessary for its objective possibility. The assumption is as necessary
as the moral law, in connexion with which alone it is valid.”

[1731] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason, W._ v. p. 142 ff.; Abbott’s
trans. p. 240 ff.; _Critique of Judgment, W._ v. pp. 469-70; Bernard’s
trans. pp. 406-8.

[1732] _Critique of Judgment, W._ v. pp. 369-72; Bernard’s trans. pp.
407-10. Cf. note in same section: “It is a trust in the promise of the
moral law; not, however, such as is contained in it, but such as I put
into it, and that on morally adequate grounds.”

[1733] A 819 = B 847.

[1734] A 820 = B 848.

[1735] The distinction is less harshly drawn in Kant’s _Logic,
Einleitung_, ix. (Hartenstein), viii. p. 73; Eng. trans, p. 63:
“Conviction is opposed to persuasion. Persuasion is an assent from
inadequate reasons, in respect to which we do not know whether they are
only subjective or are also objective. Persuasion often precedes
conviction.”

[1736] Cf. above, pp. 10, 543. Cf. _Fortschritte; Werke_ (Hartenstein),
viii. p. 561.

[1737] Cf. _Logic, loc. cit._ Cf. _Foundations of the Metaphysics of
Morals, W._ iv. pp. 416-17: Abbott’s trans. pp. 33-34.

[1738] Regarding Kant’s distinction in A 827 = B 855 between Ideas and
hypotheses cf. above, p. 543 ff. Cf. also _Critique of Judgment, W._ v.
pp. 392 ff., 461 ff.; Bernard’s trans. pp. 302 ff., 395 ff.

[1739] A 829 = B 857.

[1740] Cf. Kant’s Preface to the _Critique of Practical Reason, W._ v.
p. 8 _n._; Abbott’s trans. p. 93 n. “A reviewer who wanted to find some
fault with this work--[the _Foundations of the Metaphysics of
Morals_]--has hit the truth better, perhaps, than he thought, when he
says that no new principle of morality is set forth in it, but only a
_new formula_. But who would think of introducing a new principle of all
morality, and making himself as it were the first inventor of it, just
as if all the world before him were ignorant what duty was, or had been
in thorough-going error? But whoever knows of what importance to a
mathematician a formula is, which defines accurately what is to be done
to work out a problem, will not think that a formula is insignificant
and useless which does the same for all duty in general.” Cf.
_Fortschritte_, _Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. p. 563.

[1741] _Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse, Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. p. 624,
already quoted above, p. lvii. Cf. also _op. cit._ p. 630.

[1742] Cf. _Critique of Practical Reason_, Conclusion, _W._ v. pp.
161-2; Abbott’s trans. p. 260.

[1743] A 832 = B 860.

[1744] _K._ p. 633 _n._ Cf. above, p. xxii.

[1745] Cf. Adickes, _K._ p. 635 _n._, and Vaihinger, i. p. 306. In this
table _Critique_ is distinguished from the _System_ of pure Reason (cf.
above, pp. 71-2). The transcendental philosophy of pure Reason of this
table corresponds to the _Analytic_ of the _Critique_, and to “pure
natural science” in the absolute sense (cf. above, pp. 66-7). The
rational physics of this table corresponds to the _Metaphysical First
Principles of Natural Science_.

[1746] When Kant in A 840 = B 868 takes philosophy as including
empirical knowledge he contradicts the spirit, though not the letter of
his own preceding statements. In his _Introduction to Logic_
(Hartenstein, viii. p. 22, Abbott’s trans. p. 12) the empirical is
identified with the historical.

[1747] _Fortschritte, Werke_ (Hartenstein), viii. p. 554.

[1748] _Op. cit_. p. 520.

[1749] _I.e._ between the conception of philosophy as _Schulbegriff_ and
as _Weltbegriff_ (_conceptus cosmicus_). He explains in a note to A 839
= B 868 that he employs these latter terms as indicating that philosophy
in the traditional or humanistic sense is concerned with “that which
must necessarily interest every one.” I have translated _Weltbegriff_ as
‘_universal concept_.’ By _conceptus cosmicus_ Kant means ‘concept
shared by the whole world,’ or ‘common to all mankind.’

[1750] Cf. Kant’s _Logic, Introduction_, § iii.: Abbott’s trans. pp.
14-15: “In this scholastic signification of the word, philosophy aims
only _at skill_; in reference to the higher concept common to all
mankind, on the contrary, it aims at _utility_. In the former aspect,
therefore, it is a doctrine of skill; in the latter a doctrine of
wisdom; it is the lawgiver of reason; and hence the philosopher is _not_
a _master of the art of reason_, but a _lawgiver_. The master of the art
of reason, or as Socrates calls him, the _philodoxus_, strives merely
for speculative knowledge, without concerning himself how much this
knowledge contributes to the ultimate end of human reason: he gives
rules for the use of reason for all kinds of ends. The practical
philosopher, the teacher of wisdom by doctrine and example, is the true
philosopher. For philosophy is the Ideal of a perfect wisdom, which
shows us the ultimate ends of all human reason.”

[1751] A 839 = B 867.

[1752] A 851 = B 879.

[1753] A 850 = B 878.

[1754] A 848-9 = B 876-7. Cf. above, pp. 237, 311 _n._, 312 _n._, 384-5,
473-7, 554.

[1755] A 852 = B 880.

[1756] Cf. A 313 ff. = B 370 ff., above, pp. 498-9.

[1757] Cf. above, pp. xxviii-xxix.

[1758] _Einleitung_, § iv.: Abbott’s trans, pp. 17-23.

[1759] Supplementary to pp. xxv-xxxiii. Throughout I shall make use of
my _Studies in the Cartesian Philosophy_, and may refer the reader to
them for further justification of the positions adopted.

[1760] For recognition of this distinction, cf. Herbert Spencer,
_Principles of Psychology_, vol. i., 3rd ed., pp. 620-3.

[1761] Cf. _Studies in the Cartesian Philosophy_, pp. 80-2, 106-7.

[1762] This distinction is due to Galileo, though the terms “primary”
and “secondary” were first employed by Locke.

[1763] I have dealt with Avenarius’ criticism in “Avenarius’ Philosophy
of Pure Experience” (_Mind_, vol. xv. N.S., pp. 13-31, 149-160); with
Bergson’s criticism in “Subjectivism and Realism in Modern Philosophy”
(_Philosophical Review_, vol. xvii. pp. 138-148); and with the general
issue as a whole in “The Problem of Knowledge” (_Journal of Philosophy_,
vol. ix. pp. 113-128).

[1764] On Descartes’ failure to distinguish between the mathematical and
the dynamical aspects of motion, cf. above, p. 584.

[1765] _Essay concerning Human Understanding_, IV. vi. 16.

[1766] _Op. cit._ IV. xii. 7.

[1767] _Op. cit._ IV. vi. 11.

[1768] Cf. above, pp. 27-8.

[1769] Though the concept of substance is also discussed by Hume, his
treatment of it is quite perfunctory.

[1770] Cf. above, pp. xxv ff., 61 ff.

[1771] _Treatise on Human Nature_ (Green and Grose), i. p. 380.

[1772] _Op. cit._ p. 383.

[1773] _Loc. cit._

[1774] For justification of the phrase “synthetic reason,” I must refer
to my articles in _Mind_, vol. xiv. N.S. pp. 149-73, 335-47, on “The
Naturalism of Hume.”

[1775] _Treatise_ (Green and Grose), i. pp. 474-5.

[1776] _Enquiry concerning Human Understanding_ (Green and Grose), p.
40.

[1777] _Treatise_, p. 471.

[1778] _Enquiry_ (Green and Grose), pp. 25-6.

[1779] _Éclaircissement_ sur chap. iii. pt. ii. liv. vi. _de la
Recherche_: tome iv. (1712) p. 381.

[1780] _Enquiry_, p. 57.

[1781] _Enquiry_, p. 32.

[1782] This is the objection upon which Beattie chiefly insists.

[1783] _Op. cit._ pp. 33-4.

[1784] Cf. above, pp. 39 ff., 54, 222 ff., 241, 286-9.

[1785] How far Hume’s criticism of empiricism really influenced Kant in
his appreciation of this deeper problem, it seems impossible to decide.
Very probably Kant proceeded to it by independent development of his own
standpoint, after the initial impulse received on the more strictly
logical issue.

[1786] The assertion, by Kuno Fischer and Paulsen, of an empirical
period in Kant’s development, has been challenged by Adickes, B.
Erdmann, Riehl, and Vaihinger.

[1787] Cf. B. Erdmann’s _Kriticismus_, p. 147; _Critique of Judgment,
W._ v. p. 391 (Bernard’s trans, p. 301).

[1788] Above, pp. xxx-iii.

[1789] _Philosophischer Kriticismus_, 2nd ed. p. 209.

[1790] Cf. above, pp. lv-vi, lxi, 543 ff.

       *       *       *       *       *


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

The transcenedntal doctrine=> The transcendental doctrine {pg 77}

non-commital=> non-committal {pg 122}

widersinnisches=> Widersinnisches {pg 444}

Erkenntniss=> Erkenntnis {pg 449}

themelves=> themselves {pg 505}

which contain the the material=> which contain the material {pg 523}

it as valid=> it is valid {pg 575}






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of
Pure Reason', by Norman Kemp Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COMMENTARY ***

***** This file should be named 43572-0.txt or 43572-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/5/7/43572/

Produced by Meredith Bach, lizardcry, Chuck Greif and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

