CHAPTER II

THE CANON[1711] OF PURE REASON


SECTION I

THE ULTIMATE END OF THE PURE USE OF OUR REASON[1712]

The problems of the existence of God, the freedom of the will, and the
immortality of the soul have, Kant declares, little _theoretical_
interest. For, as he has already argued, even if we were justified in
postulating God, freedom, and immortality, they would not enable us to
account for the phenomena of sense-experience, the only objects of
possible knowledge. But the three problems are also connected with our
_practical_ interests, and in that reference they constitute the chief
subject of metaphysical enquiry.[1713] The practical is whatever is
possible through freedom; and the decision as to _what we ought to do_
is the supreme interest of pure Reason in its highest employment.

     “...the ultimate intention of Nature in her wise provision for us
     has indeed, in the constitution of our Reason, been directed to our
     moral interests alone.”[1714]

This is the position which Kant endeavours to establish in his
_Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals_, and in the _Critique of
Practical Reason_. The very brief outline which he here gives of his
argument is necessarily incomplete; and is in consequence somewhat
misleading. He first disposes of the problem of freedom; and does so in
a manner which shows that he had not, when this section was composed,
developed his Critical views on the nature of moral freedom. He is for
the present content to draw a quite un-Critical distinction between
transcendental and practical freedom.[1715] The latter belongs to the
will in so far as it is determined by Reason alone, independently of
sensuous impulses. Reason prescribes objective _laws of freedom_, and
the will under the influence of these laws overcomes the affections of
sense. Such practical freedom can, Kant asserts, be proved by experience
to be a natural cause. Transcendental freedom,[1716] on the other hand,
_i.e._ the power of making a new beginning in the series of phenomena,
is a problem which can never be empirically solved. It is a purely
speculative question with which Reason in its practical employment is
not in the least concerned. The canon of pure Reason has therefore to
deal only with the two remaining problems, God and immortality. Comment
upon these assertions can best be made in connection with the argument
of the next section.[1717]


SECTION II

THE IDEAL OF THE HIGHEST GOOD, AS A DETERMINING GROUND OF THE ULTIMATE
END OF PURE REASON[1718]

Reason in its speculative employment transcends experience, but solely
for the sake of experience. In other words, speculative Reason has a
purely empirical function. (This is the explanation of the somewhat
paradoxical contention, to which Kant has already committed himself,
that the problems of God and immortality, _though seemingly speculative
in character_, really originate in our practical interests.) But pure
Reason has also a practical use; and it is in this latter employment
that it first discloses the genuinely metaphysical character of its
present constitution and ultimate aims. The moral consciousness, in
revealing to us an Ideal of absolute value, places in our hands the only
available key to the mysteries of existence. As this moral consciousness
represents the deepest reality of human life, it may be expected to have
greater metaphysical significance than anything else in human
experience; and since the ends which it reveals also present themselves
as _absolute_ in value, and are indeed the only absolute values of which
we can form any conception, this conclusion would seem to be confirmed.

Happiness has natural value; morality, _i.e._ the being worthy to be
happy, has absolute value. The means of attaining the former obtain
expression in prudential or pragmatic laws that are empirically
grounded. The conditions of the latter are embodied in a categorical
imperative of an _a priori_ character. The former _advise_ us how best
to satisfy our natural desire for happiness; the latter _dictates_ to us
how we must behave in order to deserve happiness.

Kant’s further argument is too condensed to be really clear, and if
adequately discussed would carry us quite beyond the legitimate limits
of this _Commentary_. I shall therefore confine myself to a brief and
free restatement of his general position. The Critical teaching can be
described as resulting in a new interpretation of the function of
philosophy.[1719] The task of the philosopher, properly viewed, does not
consist in the solution of _speculative_ problems; such problems
transcend our human powers. All that philosophy can reasonably attempt
is to analyse and define the situations, cognitive and practical, in
which, owing to the specific conditions of human existence, we find
ourselves to be placed. Upon analysis of the cognitive situation Kant
discovers that while all possibilities are open, the theoretical data
are never such as to justify ontological assertions.[1720] When,
however, he passes to the practical situation, wider horizons,
definitely outlined, at once present themselves. The moral consciousness
is the key to the meaning of the entire universe as well as of human
life. Its values are the sole ultimate values, and enable us to
interpret in _moral_ terms (even though we cannot comprehend in any
genuinely _theoretical_ fashion) the meaning of the dispensation under
which we live. The moral consciousness, like sense-experience, discloses
upon examination a systematic unity of presupposed conditions. In the
theoretical sphere this unity cannot be proved to be more than a
postulated Ideal of _empirical_ experience; and it is an Ideal which,
even if granted to have absolute validity, is too indefinite to enable
us to assert that ultimate reality is spiritual in character, or is
teleologically ordered. The underlying conditions, on the other hand, of
practical experience have from the start a purely noumenal reference.
They have no other function than to define, in terms of the moral
consciousness, the ultimate meaning of reality as a whole. They
postulate[1721] a universe in which the values of spiritual experience
are supported and conserved.

But the main difference in Kant’s treatment of the two situations,
cognitive and practical, only emerges into view when we recognise the
differing modes in which the transcendental method of proof is applied
in the two cases. The _a priori_ forms of sensibility, understanding,
and Reason are proved by reference to possible experience, as being its
indispensable conditions. In moral matters, however, we must not appeal
to experience. The actual is no test of the Ideal; “what is” is no test
of what ought to be. And secondly, the moral law, if valid at all, must
apply not merely within the limits of experience, but with absolute
universality to all rational beings. The moral law, therefore, can
neither be given us in experience, nor be proved as one of the
conditions necessary to its possibility. Its validity, in other words,
can be established neither through experience nor through theoretical
reason.

Though such is Kant’s own method of formulating the issue, it
exaggerates the difference of his procedure in the two _Critiques_, and
is very misleading as a statement of his real position. In one passage,
in the _Critique of Practical Reason_,[1722] Kant does, indeed, assert
that the moral law requires no deduction. It is, he claims, a _fact_ of
which we are _a priori_ conscious: so far from itself requiring proof,
it enables us to prove the reality of freedom. Yet in the very same
section he argues that the deduction of freedom from the moral law is a
credential of the latter, and is a sufficient substitute for all _a
priori_ justification. According to the first statement we have an
immediate consciousness of the validity of the moral law; according to
the second statement the moral law proves itself indirectly, by serving
as a principle for the deduction of freedom. The second form of
statement alone harmonises with the argument developed in the third
section of the _Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals_, and more
correctly expresses the intention of Kant’s central argument in the
_Critique of Practical Reason_. For the difference between the two
transcendental proofs in the two _Critiques_ does not really consist in
any diversity of method, but solely in the differing character of the
premisses from which each starts. The ambiguity of Kant’s argument in
the second _Critique_ seems chiefly to be caused by his failure clearly
to recognise that the moral law, though a form of pure Reason,
exercises, in the process of its transcendental proof, a function which
exactly corresponds to that which is discharged by possible experience
in the first _Critique_. Our consciousness of the moral law is, like
sense-experience, a given fact. It is _de facto_, and cannot be deduced
from anything more ultimate than itself.[1723] But as given, it enables
us to deduce its transcendental conditions. This does not mean that our
immediate consciousness of it _as given_ guarantees its validity. The
nature of its validity is established only in the process whereby it
reveals its necessary implications. The objects of sense-experience are
assumed by ordinary consciousness to be absolutely real; in the process
of establishing the transcendental conditions of such experience they
are discovered to be merely phenomenal. The pure principles of
understanding thus gain objective validity as the conditions of a given
experience which reveals only appearances. Ordinary consciousness
similarly starts from the assumption of the absolute validity of the
moral law. But in this case the consciousness of the law is discovered
on examination to be explicable, _even as a possibility_, only on the
assumption that it is due to the autonomous activity of a noumenal
being. By its existence it proves the conditions through which alone it
is explicable. Its mere existence suffices to prove that its validity is
objective in a deeper and truer sense than the principles of
understanding. _The notion of freedom, and therefore all the connected
Ideas of pure Reason, gain noumenal reality as the conditions of a moral
consciousness which is incapable of explanation as illusory or even
phenomenal._ Since the consciousness of the moral law is thus noumenally
grounded, it has a validity with which nothing in the phenomenal world
can possibly compare. It is the one form in which noumenal reality
directly discloses itself to the human mind.[1724]

Obviously the essential crux of Kant’s argument lies in the proof that
the moral consciousness _is_ only explicable in this manner, as the
self-legislation of a noumenal being. Into the merits of his argument we
cannot, however, here enter; and I need only draw attention to the
manner in which it conflicts with the statement of the preceding
section, that the possibility of transcendental freedom is a purely
speculative question with which practical Reason is not concerned. The
reality of freedom, as a form of noumenal activity, is the cardinal fact
of Kant’s metaphysics of morals. For though our consciousness of the
moral law is the _ratio cognoscendi_ of freedom, transcendental freedom
is the _ratio essendi_ of the moral law.[1725]

     “With this faculty [of practical Reason], transcendental freedom is
     also established; freedom, namely, in that absolute sense in which
     speculative Reason required it, in its use of the concept of
     causality, in order to escape the antinomy into which it inevitably
     falls, when in the chain of cause and effect it tries to think the
     _unconditioned_.... Freedom is the only one of all the Ideas of the
     speculative Reason of which we _know_ the possibility _a priori_
     (without, however, understanding it), because it is the condition
     of the moral law which we know.”[1726] ”[Freedom] is the only one
     of all the Ideas of pure Reason whose object is a thing of fact and
     to be reckoned among the _scibilia_.”[1727] “It is thus very
     remarkable that of the three pure rational Ideas, God, freedom, and
     immortality, that of freedom is the only concept of the
     supersensible which (by means of the causality that is thought in
     it) proves its objective reality in nature by means of the effects
     it can produce there; and thus renders possible the connection of
     both the others with nature, and of all three with one another so
     as to form a Religion.... The concept of freedom (as fundamental
     concept of all unconditioned practical laws) can extend Reason
     beyond those bounds within which every natural (theoretical)
     concept must inevitably remain confined.”[1728]

Thus freedom is for Kant a demonstrated fact, and in that respect
differs from the Ideas of God and immortality, which are merely
problematic conceptions, and which can be postulated only as articles of
“practical faith.”

This brings us to the final question, upon what grounds Kant ascribes
validity to the Ideas of God and immortality. At this point in his
argument Kant introduces the conception of the _Summum Bonum_. Reason,
in prescribing the moral law, prescribes, as the final and complete end
of all our actions, the _Summum Bonum_, _i.e._ happiness proportioned to
moral worth. _Owing to the limitations of our faculties_, the complete
attainment of this supreme end is conceivable by us only on the
assumption of a future life wherein perfect worthiness may be attained,
and of an omnipotent Divine Being who will apportion happiness in
accordance with merit.

     ”[This Divine Being] must be omnipotent, in order that the whole of
     nature and its relation to morality ... may be subject to his will;
     omniscient, that he may know our innermost sentiments and their
     moral worth; omnipresent, that he may be immediately present for
     the satisfying of every need which the highest good demands;
     eternal, that this harmony of nature and freedom may never fail,
     etc.”[1729]

The moral ideal thus supplies us with a ground[1730] for regarding the
universe as systematically ordered according to moral purposes, and also
with a principle that enables us to infer the nature and properties of
its Supreme Cause. In place of a demonology, which is all that physical
theology can establish, we construct upon moral grounds a genuine
theology.

The concepts thus obtained are, however, anthropomorphic; and for that
reason alone must be denied all speculative value. This is especially
evident in regard to the Idea of God. Owing to our incapacity to
comprehend how moral merit can condition happiness, we conceive them as
_externally_ combined through the intervention of a supreme Judge and
Ruler. As Kant indicates,[1731] we must not assert that this represents
the actual situation. He himself seems to have inclined to a more
mystical interpretation of the universe, conceiving the relation of
happiness to virtue as being grounded in a supersensuous but necessary
order that may, indeed, be bodied forth in the inadequate symbols of the
deistic creed, but which in its true nature transcends our powers of
understanding. So far as the Ideas of God and immortality are necessary
to define the moral standpoint, they have genuine validity for all moral
beings; but if developed on their own account as speculative dogmas,
they acquire a definiteness of formulation which is not essential to
their moral function, and which lays them open to suspicion even in
their legitimate use.

These considerations also indicate Kant’s further reason for entitling
the _Summum Bonum_, God and immortality, Ideas of _faith_. Though they
can be established as presuppositions of the moral situation in which we
find ourselves, such demonstration itself rests upon the acceptance of
the moral consciousness as possessing a supersensuous sanction; and that
in turn is determined by features in the moral situation not deducible
from any higher order of considerations.

     “Belief in matters of faith is a belief in a pure practical point
     of view, _i.e._ a moral faith, which proves nothing for
     theoretical, pure, rational cognition, but only for that which is
     practical and directed to the fulfilment of its duties; it in no
     way extends speculation.... If the supreme principle of all moral
     laws is a postulate, the possibility of its highest Object ... is
     thereby postulated along with it.”[1732] “So far, as practical
     Reason has the right to yield us guidance, we shall not look upon
     actions as obligatory because they are the commands of God, but
     shall regard them as divine commands because we have an inward
     obligation to them.... Moral theology is thus of immanent use only.
     It enables us to fulfil our vocation in this present world by
     showing us how to adapt ourselves to the system of all ends, and by
     warning us against the fanaticism and indeed the impiety of
     abandoning the guidance of a morally legislative Reason in the
     right conduct of our lives, in order to derive guidance directly
     from the Idea of the Supreme Being. For we should then be making a
     transcendent employment of moral theology; and that, like a
     transcendent use of pure speculation, must pervert and frustrate
     the ultimate ends of Reason.”[1733]


SECTION III

OPINING, KNOWING, AND BELIEVING[1734]

Kant first distinguishes between conviction (_Ueberzeugung_) and
persuasion (_Ueberredung_). A judgment which is objectively grounded,
and which is therefore valid for all other rational beings, is affirmed
with conviction. When the affirmation is due only to the peculiar
character of the subject, the manner in which it is asserted may be
entitled persuasion. Persuasion is therefore “a mere illusion.”[1735]
Conviction exists in three degrees, opinion, belief, and knowledge. In
opinion we are conscious that the judgment is insufficiently grounded,
and that our conviction is subjectively incomplete. In belief the
subjective conviction is complete, but is recognised as lacking in
objective justification. In knowledge the objective grounds and the
subjective conviction are alike complete.

After pointing out that opinion is not permissible in judgments of pure
Reason,[1736] Kant develops the further distinction between _pragmatic
or doctrinal belief_ and _moral belief_. When a belief is contingent
(_i.e._ is affirmed with the consciousness that on fuller knowledge it
may turn out to be false), and yet nevertheless supplies a ground for
the employment of means to certain desired ends, it may be called
_pragmatic_ belief. Such belief admits of degree, and can be tested by
wager or by oath.[1737] What may be called _doctrinal_ belief is
analogous in character, and is taken by Kant, in somewhat misleading
fashion, as describing our mode of accepting such doctrines as the
existence of God and the immortality of the soul.[1738] They are adopted
as helpful towards a contingent but important end, the discovery of
order in the system of nature. This account of the nature of Ideas is in
line with Kant’s early view of them as _merely_ regulative. Taken in
connection with his repeated employment of the term ‘moral sentiments’
(_moralische Gesinnungen_), it tends to prove that this section is early
in date of writing.

In _moral belief_ the end, the _Summum Bonum_, is absolutely necessary,
and as there is only one condition under which we can conceive it as
being realised, namely, on the assumption of the existence of God and of
a future life, the belief in God and immortality possesses the same
certainty as the moral sentiments.

     “The belief in a God and another world is so interwoven with my
     moral sentiment that as there is little danger of my losing the
     latter, there is equally little cause for fear that the former can
     ever be taken from me.”[1739]

As I have just suggested, this basing of moral belief upon subjective
sentiments, which, as Kant very inconsistently proceeds to suggest, may
possibly be lacking in certain men, marks this section as being of early
origin. But in concluding the section, in reply to the objection that,
in thus tracing such articles of faith to our “natural interest” in
morality, philosophy admits its powerlessness to advance beyond the
ordinary understanding, Kant propounds one of his abiding convictions,
namely, that in matters which concern all men without distinction nature
is not guilty of any partial distribution of her gifts, and that in
regard to the essential ends of human nature the highest philosophy
cannot advance beyond what is revealed to the common
understanding.[1740] The reverence which Kant ever cherished for the
memory of his parents, and for the religion which was so natural to
them, must have predisposed him to a recognition of the widespread
sources of the spiritual life. But Kant has himself placed on record his
sense of the great debt which in this connection he also owed to the
teaching of Rousseau.

     “I am by disposition an enquirer. I feel the consuming thirst for
     knowledge, the eager unrest to advance ever further, and the
     delights of discovery. There was a time when I believed that this
     is what confers real dignity upon human life, and I despised the
     common people who know nothing. Rousseau has set me right. This
     imagined advantage vanishes. I learn to honor men, and should
     regard myself as of much less use than the common labourer, if I
     did not believe that my philosophy will restore to all men the
     common rights of humanity.”[1741]

The sublimity of the starry heavens and the imperative of the moral law
are ever present influences on the life of man; and they require for
their apprehension no previous initiation through science and
philosophy. The naked eye reveals the former; of the latter all men are
immediately aware.[1742] In their universal appeal they are of the very
substance of human existence. Philosophy may avail to counteract the
hindrances which prevent them from exercising their native influence; it
cannot be a substitute for the inspiration which they alone can yield.




