CHAPTER III

ON THE GROUND OF THE DISTINCTION OF ALL OBJECTS WHATEVER INTO PHENOMENA
AND NOUMENA


This chapter, as Kant himself states,[1282] can yield no new results. It
will serve merely to summarise those already established in the
_Analytic_, showing how they one and all converge upon a conclusion of
supreme importance for understanding the nature and scope of human
experience--the conclusion, that though the objective employment of the
categories can be justified only within the realm of sense-experiences,
they have a wider significance whereby they define a distinction between
appearances and things in themselves. This is the conclusion which Kant
now sets himself to illustrate and enforce in somewhat greater detail.
It may be observed that the title of the chapter makes mention only of
grounds for _distinguishing_ between phenomena and noumena. That things
in themselves really exist, Kant, as we shall find, never seriously
thought of questioning.

Kant begins by recalling a main point in the preceding argument. The
categories apart from the manifold of sensibility are merely logical
functions without content.[1283] Though _a priori_, they require to be
supplemented through empirical intuition.

     “Apart from this relation to possible experience they have no
     objective validity of any sort, but are a mere play of the
     imagination or the understanding with their respective
     representations.”[1284]

As evidence of the truth of this conclusion Kant now adds a further
argument, namely, the impossibility of defining the categories except in
terms that involve reference to the conditions of sensibility.[1285]
When these conditions are omitted, the categories are without relation
to any object and consequently without meaning. They are no longer
concepts of possible empirical employment, but only of “things in
general.” When, for instance, the permanence of existence in time, which
is the condition of the empirical application of the concept of
substance, is omitted, the category reduces merely to the notion of
something that is always a subject and never a predicate.

     “But not only am I ignorant of all conditions under which this
     logical pre-eminence may belong to anything, I can neither put such
     a concept to any use nor draw the least inference from it. For
     under these conditions no object is determined for its employment,
     and consequently we do not at all know whether it signifies
     anything whatsoever.”[1286]

In abstraction from sense-data, the categories still remain as concepts
or _thoughts_, logically possible; but that is not to be taken as
signifying that they still continue to possess meaning, _i.e._ reference
to an object.[1287] And in the absence of ascertainable meaning they
cannot, of course, be defined.

In A 244[1288] Kant states his position in somewhat different fashion.
In abstraction from sense the categories have meaning, but not
determinate meaning; they relate not to any specific object, but only to
things in general. In this latter reference, however, they possess no
objective validity, since in the absence of intuition there is no means
of deciding whether or not any real existence actually corresponds to
them.

But whichever mode of statement be adopted, the same conclusion follows.

     “Accordingly, the transcendental _Analytic_ has this important
     result, that the most the understanding can achieve _a priori_ is
     to anticipate the form of a possible experience in general. And
     since that which is not appearance cannot be an object of
     experience, the understanding can never transcend those limits of
     sensibility within which alone objects are given to us. Its
     principles are merely rules for the exposition of appearances; and
     the proud title of an Ontology, which presumptuously claims to
     supply, in systematic doctrinal form, synthetic _a priori_
     knowledge of things in general (_e.g._ the principle of causality),
     must therefore give place to the modest claims of a mere Analytic
     of pure understanding.”[1289]

A 248-9[1290] opens a new line of argument which starts from the results
obtained in the _Aesthetic_. The proof that space and time are
subjective forms establishes the merely phenomenal character of
everything which can be apprehended in and through them, and is
meaningless except on the assumption that things in themselves exist.
This assumption, Kant argues, is already involved in the very word
‘appearance,’ and unless it be granted, our thinking will revolve in a
perpetual circle.[1291] But, he proceeds, this conclusion may easily be
misinterpreted. It might be taken as proving the objective reality of
noumena, and as justifying us in maintaining a distinction between the
sensible and the intelligible worlds, and therefore in asserting that
whereas the former is the object of intuition, the latter is apprehended
by the understanding in pure thought. We should then be arguing that
though in experience things are known only as they appear, through pure
understanding a nobler world than that of sense, “_eine Welt im Geiste
gedacht_,” is opened to our view.

But any such interpretation, Kant insists, runs directly counter to the
teaching of the _Analytic_, and is ruled out by the conclusions to which
it has led. Categories yield only “rules for the exposition of
appearances,” and cannot be extended beyond the field of possible
experience. It is true that all our sense-representations are related by
the understanding to an object that is “transcendental.” But that
object, in its transcendental aspect, signifies only a something = _x_.
It cannot be thought apart from the sense-data which are referred to it.
When we attempt to isolate it, and so to conceive it in its independent
nature, nothing remains through which it can be thought.

     “It is not in itself an object of knowledge, but only the
     representation of appearances under the concept of an object in
     general, viewed as determinable through the manifold of those
     appearances.”

Kant is here again expounding his early doctrine of the transcendental
object.[1292] Evidently, at the time at which this passage was written,
he had not yet come to realise that such teaching is not in harmony with
his Critical principles. It is, as we have seen above, a combination of
subjectivism and of dogmatic rationalism.[1293] The very point which he
here chiefly stresses was bound, however, when consistently followed
out, to reveal the untenableness of the doctrine of the transcendental
object; and in the second edition Kant so recast this chapter on
phenomena and noumena as to eliminate all passages in which the
transcendental object is referred to.[1294]

But to return to Kant’s own argument: the reason why the mind is “not
satisfied with this substrate of sensibility,”[1295] and therefore
proceeds to duplicate the phenomenal world by a second world of noumena,
lies in the character of the agency whereby sensibility is limited.
Sensibility is limited by the understanding; and the understanding,
overestimating its powers and prerogatives, proceeds to transform the
notion of the transcendental object = _x_ into the concept of a
noumenon, viewed in a manner conformable to its etymological
significance, as something apprehended by reason or pure intuition,
_i.e._ as intuited in some non-sensuous fashion. For only by postulating
the possibility of a non-sensuous species of intuition, can the notion
of a noumenon, thus positively conceived, be saved from
self-contradiction. Otherwise we should be asserting the apprehension of
an object independently of appearances, and yet at the same time denying
the only means through which such apprehension is possible. Statement of
the postulate suffices, however, to reveal its unsupported character. We
have no such power of non-sensuous, intuitive apprehension;[1296] nor
can we in any way prove that such a power is possible even in a Divine
Being. Though, therefore, the concept of noumena is not
self-contradictory, it involves more than we have the right to assert;
the process whereby the empty notion of a transcendental object = _x_ is
transformed into the positive concept of a noumenon is easily
comprehensible,[1297] but it is none the less illegitimate. We must,
Kant insists, keep strict hold of the central doctrine of Critical
teaching, namely, that the categories are applicable only to the data of
sense. We can still employ them as pure logical functions, yielding the
notion of objects in general (of the transcendental object = _x_). But
this does not widen the sphere of _known_ existences. It only enables us
to comprehend the limited and merely phenomenal character of the world
experienced.

At this point[1298] Kant’s argument takes a strange and misleading turn.
The concept of object in general (the transcendental object = _x_) has
been proved to be involved in the apprehension of appearances as
appearances, and in this capacity to be a limiting concept
(_Grenzbegriff_), which, though negative in function, is indispensably
involved in the constitution of human experience. Now, however, Kant
proceeds to ascribe this function to _the concept of the noumenon_. That
concept is, he repeats, purely problematic. Even the mere possibility of
its object, presupposing as it does the possibility of an understanding
capable through non-sensuous intuition of apprehending it, we have no
right to assert. That the concept is not self-contradictory is the most
that we can say of it. None the less, it is to this concept that Kant
here ascribes the indispensable limiting function.

     “The concept of a noumenon is a merely limiting concept, the
     function of which is to curb the pretensions of sensibility; and it
     is therefore only of negative employment. At the same time it is
     no arbitrary invention, and it is bound up with the limitation of
     sensibility, though it cannot affirm anything positive beyond the
     field of sensibility.”[1299]

This confusion, between the concept of a noumenon and the less definite
concept of object in general, which is probably due to the combining of
manuscripts of different dates, is corrected in the second edition by
means of a new distinction which Kant introduces, evidently for this
very purpose. The term noumenon may, he there says,[1300] be used either
positively or negatively. Taken positively, it signifies “an object of a
non-sensuous intuition”; regarded negatively, it means only “a thing so
far as it is not an object of our sensuous intuition.” Only in its
negative employment, he states, is it required as a limiting concept;
and it is then, as he recognises, indistinguishable from the notion of
the unknown thing in itself.

But despite this variation in mode of expression, in the main Kant holds
consistently to his fundamental teaching.

     “...understanding is not limited through sensibility; on the
     contrary, it itself limits sensibility by applying the term noumena
     to things in themselves (things not regarded as appearances). But
     in so doing it at the same time sets limits to itself, recognising
     that it cannot know these noumena through any of the categories,
     and that it must therefore think them only under the title of an
     unknown something.”[1301]

Or as Kant adds in the concluding sentence of this chapter:

     “...the problematic thought which leaves open a place for
     [intelligible objects], serves only, like an empty space, for the
     limitation of empirical principles, without itself containing or
     revealing any other object of knowledge beyond their sphere.”

A sentence in A 258 = B 314 deserves special notice.

     “...we can never know whether such a transcendental or exceptional
     knowledge is possible under any conditions, least of all if it is
     to be regarded as of the sort that stands under our ordinary
     categories.”

This sentence clearly shows that Kant was willing to recognise that the
categories may be inapplicable, not merely owing to lack of data for
their specification, but because of their inherent character. They may
be intrinsically inapplicable, expressing only the _modi_ of our
self-consciousness. They may be merely the instruments of our human
thinking, not forms necessary to knowledge as such.


RELEVANT PASSAGES IN THE SECTION ON AMPHIBOLY

Before passing to consideration of the extensive alterations made in
this chapter in the second edition, it is advisable to take account of
the two passages dealing with this problem in the first edition section
on _Amphiboly_: namely, A 277-280 = B 333-6, and A 285-9 = B 342-6. The
first of these passages is of great interest in other connections;[1302]
its chief importance in reference to the present problem lies in its
concluding paragraph. Kant there declares that the representation of an
object “as thing in general” is not only, in the absence of specific
data, insufficient for the determination of an object, but is
self-contradictory. For we must either abstract from all reference to an
object, and so be left with a merely logical representation; or, in
assuming an object, we must postulate a special form of intuition which
we do not ourselves possess, and which therefore we cannot employ in
forming our concept of the object. _Here again Kant is substituting the
concept of a noumenon for the less definite concept of the thing in
itself._ This is still more explicitly done in the second passage. The
pure categories are, Kant there declares, incapable of yielding the
concept of an object. Apart from the data of sense they have no relation
to any object. As purely logical functions, they are altogether lacking
in content or meaning. By objects as things in themselves we must
therefore mean objects of a non-sensuous intuition.[1303] Kant still,
indeed, continues to maintain that to them the categories do not apply,
and that we cannot, therefore, have any knowledge of them, either
intuitional or conceptual.

     “Even if we assume a non-sensuous form of intuition, our functions
     of thought would still have no meaning in reference to it.”[1304]

But Kant now insists that the notion of noumena, viewed in the above
manner, differs from the notion of “objects in general” (transcendental
= _x_) in being a legitimate non-contradictory conception; and he also
insists that though more positive in content, it is for that very reason
less open to misunderstanding. Its function is not to extend our
knowledge, but merely to limit it.

     “For it merely says that our species of intuition does not extend
     to all things, but only to objects of our senses; that its
     objective validity is consequently limited; and that a place
     therefore remains open for some other species of intuition, and so
     for things as its objects.”[1305]

The concept of a noumenon, as thus employed to signify the objects of a
non-sensuous intuition, is, Kant proceeds, merely problematic. As we
have neither intuition nor (it may be) categories fitted for its
apprehension, it represents something upon the possibility or
impossibility of which we are quite unable to pronounce.

     “...as the problematic concept of an object for a quite different
     intuition and a quite different understanding than ours, it is
     itself a problem.”

We may not therefore assert the existence of noumena, but we must none
the less form to ourselves the concept of them. This concept is
indispensably involved in the constitution of our empirical knowledge,
and is demanded for its proper interpretation. Only when viewed as a
self-sufficient representation of an absolute existence does it become
dogmatic and therefore illegitimate. In its Critical aspects it stands
for a problem which human reason is constrained by its very nature to
propound.

     “The concept of the noumenon is, therefore, not the concept of an
     object, but is a problem unavoidably bound up with the limitation
     of our sensibility--the problem, namely, as to whether there may
     not be objects entirely disengaged from our sensuous species of
     intuition. This is a question which can only be answered in an
     indeterminate manner, by saying that, as sense intuition does not
     extend to all things without distinction, a place remains open for
     other different objects; and consequently that these latter must
     not be absolutely denied, though--since we are without a
     determinate concept of them (inasmuch as no category can serve that
     purpose)--neither can they be asserted as objects for our
     understanding.”[1306]

The fact that these fundamental concepts have not yet been quite
definitely and precisely formulated in Kant’s own mind, appears very
clearly from the immediately following paragraph. For he there again
introduces the concept of the transcendental object, and adds that if
“we are pleased to name it noumenon for the reason that its
representation is not sensuous, we are free so to do.”[1307] The
characterisation given in this paragraph of the transcendental object
deserves special notice, for in it Kant goes further in the sceptical
expression of his position, though not indeed in the modification of it,
than in any other passage.

     ”[The understanding in limiting sensibility] thinks for itself an
     object in itself, but only as transcendental object which is the
     cause of appearance and therefore not itself appearance, and which
     can be thought neither as quantity nor as reality nor as substance,
     etc.... We are completely ignorant whether it is to be met with in
     us or outside us, whether it would be at once removed with the
     cessation of sensibility, or whether in the absence of sensibility
     it would still remain.”[1308]

This sentence reveals Kant as at once holding unquestioningly to the
existence of things in themselves, and yet at the same time as teaching
that they must not be conceived in terms of the categories, not even of
the categories of reality and existence.


ALTERATIONS IN SECOND EDITION

In the second edition certain paragraphs of the chapter on _Phenomena
and Noumena_ are omitted, and new paragraphs are inserted to take their
place. Though these alterations do not give adequate expression to the
Critical teaching in its maturest form, there are three important
respects in which they indicate departures from the teaching of the
first edition. In the first place, those paragraphs in which the
doctrine of the transcendental object finds expression are entirely
eliminated, and the phrase ‘transcendental object’ is no longer
employed. This, as we have already noted, is in harmony with the changes
similarly made in the second edition _Transcendental Deduction and
Paralogisms_.[1309]

Secondly, Kant is even more emphatic than in the first edition, that the
categories must not be employed save in reference to sense intuitions.
In the first edition he still allows that their application to things in
themselves is logically possible, though without objective validity. In
the second edition he goes much further. Save in their empirical
employment the categories “mean nothing whatsoever.”[1310]

     ”[In the absence of sensibility] their whole employment, and indeed
     all their meaning entirely ceases; for we have then no means of
     determining whether things in harmony with the categories are even
     possible....”[1311]

In the third place, Kant, as already noted, distinguishes between a
negative and a positive meaning of the term noumenon. Noumenon in its
negative sense is defined as being merely that which is not an object of
sensuous intuition. By noumenon in the positive sense, on the other
hand, is meant an object of non-sensuous intuition. Kant now claims that
it is the concept of noumenon in the negative sense, as equivalent
therefore simply to the thing in itself, that alone is involved, as a
_Grenzbegriff_, in the “doctrine of sensibility.” For its determination
the categories cannot be employed; that would demand a faculty of
non-sensuous intuition, which we do not possess, and would amount to the
illegitimate assertion of noumena in the positive sense. The limiting
concept, indispensably presupposed in human experience, is therefore the
bare notion of things in themselves. And accordingly, in modification of
the conclusion arrived at in the first edition, viz. that “the division
of objects into phenomena and noumena ... is not in any way
admissible,”[1312] Kant now adds to the term noumena the qualifying
phrase “in the positive sense.” In this way the assumption that things
in themselves actually exist becomes quite explicit, despite Kant’s
greater insistence upon the impossibility of applying any of the
categories to them.

But beyond thus placing in still bolder contrast the two counter
assertions, on the one hand that the categories must not be taken by us
as other than merely subjective thought-functions, and on the other that
a limiting concept is indispensably necessary, Kant makes no attempt in
these new passages to meet the difficulties involved. With the assertion
that the categories as such, and therefore by implication those of
reality and existence, are inapplicable to things in themselves,[1313]
he combines, without any apparent consciousness of conflict, the
contention that things in themselves must none the less be postulated as
actually existing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The teaching of this chapter must be regarded as only semi-Critical. The
fact that it is formulated in terms of the doctrine of the
transcendental object, itself suffices to determine the date at which it
must have been composed as comparatively early; and such changes as Kant
could make in the second edition were necessarily of a minor character.
More extensive alterations would have involved complete reconstruction
of the entire chapter, and indeed anticipation of the central teaching
of the _Dialectic_.

Kant is also hampered by the unfortunate location to which he has
assigned this chapter. At this point in the development of his argument,
namely, within the limits of the _Analytic_, Kant could really do no
more than recapitulate the _negative_ consequences which follow from the
teaching of the transcendental deduction. For though these might justify
him in asserting that it is understanding that limits sensibility, he
was not in a position to explain that the term understanding, as thus
employed, has a very wide meaning, and that within this faculty he is
prepared to distinguish between understanding in the strict sense as the
source of the categories, and a higher power to which he gives the title
Reason, and which he regards as originating a unique concept, that of
the unconditioned. Yet only when these distinctions, and the
considerations in view of which they are drawn, have been duly reckoned
with, can the problem before us be discussed in its full significance.

This placing of the chapter within the _Analytic_, and therefore prior
to the discussions first broached in the _Dialectic_, has indeed the
unfortunate consequence of concealing not only from the reader, but
also, as it would seem, to some extent from Kant himself, the ultimate
grounds upon which, from the genuinely Critical standpoint, the
distinction between phenomena and noumena must be based. For neither in
this chapter, nor in any other passage in the _Critique_, has Kant
sought to indicate, in any quite explicit manner, the bearing which the
important conclusions arrived at in the _Dialectic_ may have in regard
to it. Like so many of the most important and fruitful of his tenets,
these consequences are suggested merely by implication; or rather remain
to be discovered by the reader’s own independent efforts, in proportion
as he thinks himself into the distinctions upon which, in other
connections, Kant has himself insisted. They are never actually
formulated in and by themselves.

In seeking, therefore, to decide upon what basis the distinction between
appearance and reality ought to be regarded as resting, we are
attempting to determine how the argument of this chapter would have
proceeded had it been located at the close of the _Dialectic_. The task
is by no means easy, but the difficulties are hardly as formidable as
may at first sight appear. The general outlines of the argument are
fairly definitely prescribed by Kant’s treatment of kindred questions,
and may perhaps, with reasonable correctness, be hypothetically
constructed in view of the following considerations.

Just as Kant started from the natural assumption that reference of
representations to objects must be their reference to things in
themselves, so he similarly adopted the current Cartesian view that it
is by an inference, in terms of the category of causality, that we
advance from a representation to its external ground. It was very
gradually, in the process of developing his own Critical teaching, and
especially his phenomenalist view of the empirical world in space, that
he came to realise the very different position to which he stood
committed.[1314] When the doctrine of the transcendental object is
eliminated from his teaching, and when the categories, including that of
causality, are pre-empted for the _empirical_ object, and that object is
regarded as directly apprehended, the function of mediating the
reference of phenomenal nature to a noumenal basis falls to the Ideas of
Reason. For the distinction is no longer between representations and
their noumenal causes, but between the limited and relative character of
the entire world in space and time, and the unconditioned reality which
Reason demands for its own satisfaction. To regard the world in space as
merely phenomenal, because failing to satisfy our standards of genuine
reality, is to adopt an entirely different attitude from any to be found
in Descartes or Locke. The position may be outlined in the following
manner, in anticipation of its more adequate statement in connection
with the problems of the _Dialectic_.

The concept, whereby Reason limits sensibility, is not properly
describable as being that of the thing in itself; it is the unique
concept of the unconditioned. Our awareness of the conditioned as being
conditioned presupposes, over and above the categories, an antecedent
awareness of Ideal[1315] standards; and to that latter more fundamental
form of consciousness all our criteria of truth and reality are
ultimately due. The criteria by means of which we empirically
distinguish sense-appearance from sense-illusion, when rigorously
applied, lead us to detect deficiencies in the empirical as such. We
have then no alternative save to conceive absolute reality in terms of
the rational Ideals, of which the empirical criteria are merely
specialised forms.

There are thus two distinct, but none the less interdependent, elements
involved in Kant’s more mature teaching, phenomenalism, and what may be
called the Idealist, or absolutist, interpretation of the function of
Reason. Each demands the other for its own establishment. There must be
a genuinely objective world, by reflection upon which we may come to
consciousness of the standards which are involved in our judgments upon
it; and we must possess a faculty through which our consciousness of
these standards may be accounted for. The standards of judgment cannot
be acquired by means of judgments which do not already presuppose them;
the processes by which they are brought to clear consciousness cannot be
the processes in which they originate. They must be part of the _a
priori_ conditions of experience and combine with space, time and the
categories to render experience of the kind which we
possess--self-transcending and self-limiting--actually possible.

From this point of view the distinction between appearance and reality
is not a contrast between experience and the non-experienced, but a
distinguishing of factors, which are essential to all experience, and
through which we come to consciousness of an irresolvable conflict
between the Ideals which inspire us in the acquisition of experience,
and the limiting conditions under which alone experience is attainable
by us. In the higher field of Reason, as in the lower field of
understanding, it is not through the given, but only through the given
as interpreted by conditioning forms of an Ideal nature, that a
meaningful reality can disclose itself to the mind. The ultimate meaning
of experience lies in its significance when tested by the standards
which are indispensably involved in its own possibility. That meaning is
essentially metaphysical; more is implied in experience than the
experienced can ever itself be found to be.[1316]

Such is the central thesis of the Critical philosophy, when the teaching
of the _Analytic_ is supplemented by that of the _Dialectic_. Though the
_Critique_ is, indeed, the record of the manifold ways in which Kant
diverged from this position, not a systematic exposition of its
implications and consequences, the above thesis represents the goal upon
which his various lines of thought tend to converge. It is the guiding
motive of his devious and complex argument in the three main divisions
of the _Dialectic_. On no other interpretation can the detail of his
exposition be satisfactorily explained.

There are two chief reasons why Kant failed to draw the above
conclusions in any quite explicit manner. One reason has already been
sufficiently emphasised, namely, that the thesis, which I have just
formulated, rests upon a phenomenalist view of the natural world,
whereas the _Dialectic_ is inspired by the earlier, subjectivist
doctrine of the transcendental object. Upon the other main reason I
shall have frequent occasion to insist. As we shall find, Kant was
unable to arrive at any quite definitive decision as to the nature of
the Ideals of Reason. He alternates between the sceptical and the
absolutist view of their origin and function, and in the process of
seeking a comprehensive mid-way position which would do justice to all
that is valid in the opposing arguments, the further question as to the
bearing of his conclusions upon the problem of the distinction between
appearance and reality was driven into the background. But we are
anticipating matters the discussion of which must meantime be deferred.




APPENDIX

THE AMPHIBOLY OF THE CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION[1317]


In this appendix Kant gives a criticism of the Leibnizian rationalism--a
criticism already partially stated in the section on the
_Postulates_--and he does this in a manner which very clearly reveals
the influence which that rationalism continued to exercise upon his own
thinking. Thus Kant speaks of the “mere concept,”[1318] and in doing so
evidently means to imply that it exists in its own right, with a nature
determined solely by intrinsic factors of a strictly _a priori_
character, in complete independence of the specific material of
sense-experience. He denies, it is true, the objective validity of such
concepts, and maintains that in their empirical employment they are
completely transformed through the addition of new factors. None the
less he allows to the concepts an intrinsic nature, and practically
maintains that from the point of view of the pure concept, and therefore
from the point of view of a logic based upon it, the Leibnizian
rationalism is the one true system of metaphysics. For pure thought,
Leibniz’s system is the ultimate and only possible philosophy; and were
thought capable of determining the nature of things in themselves, we
should be constrained to adopt it as metaphysically valid. This is the
standpoint which underlies much of Kant’s argument in the _Dialectic_.
It leads him to maintain that the self must necessarily, in virtue of an
unavoidable transcendental illusion, believe in its own independent
substantial reality, that the mind is constrained to conceive reality as
an unconditioned unity, and that the notions of God, freedom, and
immortality are Ideas necessarily involved in the very constitution of
human thought.

But we must not regard Kant’s doctrine of the pure concept merely as a
survival from a standpoint which the Critical teaching is destined to
displace and supersede. For Kant is not led through inconsistency, or
through any mere lack of thoroughness in the development of his Critical
principles, to retain this rationalistic doctrine. To understand the
really operative grounds of Kant’s argumentation, and so to place the
contents of this section in proper focus, we must recall the fundamental
antithesis, developed in my introduction,[1319] between the alternative
positions, which are represented for Kant by the philosophies of Hume
and Leibniz. Kant, as already observed, is profoundly convinced of the
essential truth of the Leibnizian position. He holds to the Leibnizian
view of reason. Human reason is essentially metaphysical; its ultimate
function is to emancipate us from the limiting conditions of animal
existence; it reveals its nature in those Ideas of the unconditioned,
the discussion of which Kant reserves for the _Dialectic_.

The chief defect in Kant’s criticism of Leibniz, as developed in this
section, is that the deeper issues, which determine the extent of his
agreement with Leibniz, are not raised or even indicated. Consequently,
his references to pure thought, and his assertion[1320] that from the
point of view of pure thought Leibniz is entirely justified in his
teaching, bewilder the reader, who has been made to adopt a Critical
standpoint, and therefore to believe that thought can function only in
connection with the data of sense-experience. Kant would seem, indeed,
to have lapsed into the dogmatic standpoint of the _Dissertation_,
distinguishing between a sensible and an intelligible world, and
maintaining that pure thought is capable of determining the nature of
the latter. The only difference between his teaching here and in the
_Dissertation_ consists in the admission that all knowledge is limited
to sense-experience, and that we are therefore unable to determine
whether this intelligible world which we must _think_, and _think in the
precise manner defined by Leibniz_, does or does not exist.

This section is, indeed, like the chapter on _Phenomena and Noumena_,
wrongly located. Giving, as it does, Kant’s criticism of the Leibnizian
ontology, it discusses problems of metaphysics; and ought therefore to
have found its place in the _Dialectic_, in natural connection with the
corresponding examination of the metaphysical sciences of rational
psychology, cosmology, and theology. Architectonic, that ever-present
source of so many of Kant’s idiosyncrasies, has again interposed its
despotic mandate. As there are only three forms of syllogism, only three
main divisions can be recognised in the _Dialectic_; and the criticism
of ontology, to its great detriment, must therefore be located, where
it does not in the least belong, in the concluding section of the
_Analytic_.[1321]

But we must follow Kant’s argument as here given. Leibniz views thought
as capable of prescribing, antecedently to all experience, the
fundamental conditions to which reality must conform. The possible is
prior to, and independent of, the actual; and can be adequately
determined by pure reason from its own inherent resources. Kant does not
here question this assertion of the independence and priority of pure
thought. He is content to maintain that what is valid for thought need
not hold of those appearances which are the only possible objects of
human knowledge, since in sense-experience conditions, unforeseen by
pure thought, partly limitative and partly extensive of its concepts,
intervene to modify the conclusions which from its own point of view are
logically valid. Leibniz, through failure to realise the dual character
of thought and sense, overlooked this all-important fact; and, in
asserting that what is true for pure thought is valid of the sensuously
real, fell victim to the fallacy which Kant entitles transcendental
amphiboly.

Kant’s clearest statement of the fallacy is in A 280 = B 336. It
reduces, formally stated, to the fallacy of denying the antecedent. In
accordance with the _dictum de omni et nullo_, we can validly assert
that what belongs to or contradicts a universal concept, belongs to or
contradicts the particulars which fall under that concept. Leibniz
employs the principle in a negative and invalid form. He argues that
what is _not_ contained in a universal concept is also not contained in
the particulars to which it applies. “The entire intellectualist system
of Leibniz is reared upon this latter principle.” And as Kant points
out,[1322] the reason why so acute and powerful a thinker succumbed to
this obvious fallacy is to be found in his view of sense as merely
confused thought; or, to state the same point in another way, in his
interpretation of appearances as being the confused representations of
things in themselves.[1323] All differences between appearance and
reality are, on this view, due merely to lack of clearness in our
apprehension of the given. Sense, when completely clarified, reduces
without remainder to pure thought; and in the concepts, which thought
develops from within itself, lie the whole content alike of knowledge
and of real existence. Owing to a metaphysical theory of the nature of
the real, itself due to a false interpretation of the nature and
function of pure thought, and ultimately traceable to an excessive
preoccupation with knowledge of the strictly mathematical type,[1324]
Leibniz failed to do justice to the fundamental characteristics of our
human experience, and in especial to the actual given nature of space,
time, and dynamical causality. His rationalistic metaphysics has its
roots in the Cartesian philosophy,[1325] and is, in Kant’s view, the
perfected product of philosophical thinking, when developed on dogmatic,
_i.e._ non-Critical, lines. It is the opposite counterpart of the
empirical or sceptical type of philosophy which in modern times found
its first great supporter in Locke, and which, as Kant held, obtained
its perfected expression in the philosophy of Hume. While Descartes and
Leibniz intellectualise appearances, Locke and Hume regard the _a
priori_ concepts of understanding as merely empirical products of
discursive reflection. Both commit the same fundamental error of failing
to recognise that understanding and sensibility are two distinct sources
of representations.[1326] Both consequently strive, in equally one-sided
fashion, to reduce the complexity of experience to one alone of its
constituent elements. This section of the _Critique_ ought to have
developed the Critical teaching in its opposition to both these
alternative attitudes; Kant arbitrarily limits it to criticism of the
Leibnizian rationalism.

Kant’s method of introducing and arranging his criticism is artificial,
and need be no more than mentioned. Critical reflection upon the sources
of our knowledge, which Kant, in order to distinguish it from reflection
of the ordinary type, entitles _transcendental_ reflection, is, he
states, a duty imposed upon all who would profess to pass _a priori_
judgments upon the real. It will trace the concepts employed to their
corresponding faculties, intellectual and sensuous, and will reveal the
independence and disparity of sensibility and understanding, and so will
effectually prevent that false locating of concepts to which
transcendental amphiboly is due. Such reflection, he further argues,
consists in a _comparison_ of the representations with the faculty to
which they are due, and like ordinary comparison will determine the
relations of (1) _identity and difference_, (2) _agreement and
opposition_, (3) _inner and outer_, (4) _determinable and determining_
(matter and form). In this arbitrary but ingenious fashion Kant
contrives to obtain the four main headings required for his criticism of
the Leibnizian ontology.

(1) Under the first heading he deals with the principle of the identity
of indiscernibles. It is, Kant maintains, a typical example of the
fallacy of transcendental amphiboly. Leibniz argues that if no
difference is discoverable in the concept of things, there can be none
in the things themselves; things which are identical in conception must
be identical in all respects. But this, Kant replies, is true only so
long as the concepts abstract from the sensuous conditions of existence.
Thus no two cubic feet of space are alike. They are distinguishable from
one another by their spatial location; and that is a difference which
concerns the conditions of intuition; it is not to be discovered in the
pure concept.[1327] Spaces, alike for thought, are distinguishable for
sense. To take another of Kant’s illustrations: two drops of water, if
indistinguishable in all their internal properties of quality or
quantity, are conceptually identical. Through differences of location in
space, irrelevant to their conception, they can none the less be
intuited as numerically different. The principle of indiscernibles is
not a law of nature, but only an analytic rule for the comparison of
things through mere concepts.[1328]

(2) A second principle of the Leibnizian metaphysics is that realities
can never conflict with one another. This is supposed to follow from the
fact that in pure thought the only form of opposition is logical
negation. Realities, being pure affirmations, must necessarily harmonise
with one another. This principle ignores the altogether different
conditions of sense-existence. Space, time, and the resulting
possibility of dynamical causality supply the conditions for real
opposition. Two existences, though equally real and positive, may annul
one another. Two forces acting upon a body may neutralise one another.
From the above logical principle Leibniz’s successors[1329] profess to
obtain the far-reaching metaphysical conclusions, that all realities
agree with one another, that evil is merely negative, consisting
exclusively in limitation of existence, and that God, without detriment
to the unity of his being, can be constituted of all possible realities.

(3) Viewing space and time, which condition external relation, as merely
confused forms of apprehension, Leibniz further concluded that the
reality of substance is purely internal. And ruling out position, shape,
contact and motion, all of which involve external relations, he felt
justified in endowing the monads with the sole remaining form of known
existence, namely consciousness. The assertion that the monads are
incapable of external relation leads to the further conclusion that
they are incapable of interaction, and stand in systematic relation to
one another, solely in virtue of a pre-established harmony.

(4) From the point of view of pure thought matter must precede form. The
universal must precede the particular which is a specification of
it.[1330] Unlimited reality is taken as being the matter of all
possibility, and its limitation or form as being due to negation.
Substances must antecedently exist in order that external relations may
have something upon which to ground themselves. Space and time must be
interpreted as confused apprehensions of purely intellectual orders,
space representing a certain order in the reciprocal (pre-established)
correspondence of substances, and time the dynamical sequence of their
states. On the other hand, from the standpoint of sense and its
intuitional forms the reverse holds. The world of appearance is
conditioned by the forms of space and time; the objectively possible
coincides with the actual; and the _substantia phaenomenon_ has no
independent essence, but reduces without remainder to external
relations. For pure thought this world of given appearance is an utterly
paradoxical form of existence; it is the direct opposite of everything
that genuine reality ought to be. In this strange conclusion the
problems of the _Dialectic_, in one of their most suggestive forms, at
once loom up before us. As stated above, this entire discussion is an
anticipation of questions which cannot be adequately treated within the
limits of the _Analytic_.

The text of this section is highly composite. The entire content of the
_Appendix_ is twice reintroduced and restated at full length in the
accompanying _Note_. These successive expositions of one and the same
argument were doubtless independently written, and then later pieced
together in this external fashion. A 277-8 = B 333-4, on the nature of
the _substantia phaenomenon_, would by its references to the
transcendental object seem to be of early origin.[1331] It has already
been commented upon.[1332] A 285-9 = B 342-6, on the other hand, which
supplements the chapter on _Phenomena and Noumena_,[1333] would seem to
be of late origin. It is so dated by Adickes,[1334] owing to the
reference to schemata in its opening sentence.

=A 289-91 = B 346-9. Table of the division of the conception of
nothing.=--This curious and ingenious classification of the various
meanings of the term ‘nothing’ is chiefly of interest through its first
division: “empty conception without object, _ens rationis_.” The _ens
rationis_ can best be defined in its distinction from the fourth
division: “empty object without conception, _nihil negativum_.” The
former is a _Gedankending_; the latter is an _Unding_. The former
indeed, though not contradictory, is mere fiction (_bloss Erdichtung_),
and consequently must not be taken as falling within the field of the
possible. The latter is a concept which destroys itself, and which
therefore stands in direct conflict with the possible. The _ens
rationis_ includes, Kant explicitly states,[1335] the conception of
noumena, “which must not be reckoned among the possibilities, although
they must not for that reason be declared to be also impossible.” Kant
must here be taking noumena in the positive sense.[1336] As usual Kant’s
attempt to obtain parallels for the four classes of category breaks
down. The so-called _nihil privativum_ and the _ens imaginarium_ do not
properly come within the denotation of the term ‘nothing.’ This is very
evident in the examples which Kant cites. Cold is as real as the
opposite with which it is contrasted, while pure space and pure time are
not negative even in a conventional sense.




TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC



DIVISION II

THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC


INTRODUCTORY COMMENT UPON THE COMPOSITE ORIGIN AND CONFLICTING
TENDENCIES OF THE DIALECTIC.


We have had constant occasion to observe the composite origin and
conflicting tendencies of the _Analytic_. The _Dialectic_ is hardly less
composite in character, and is certainly not more uniform in its
fundamental teaching.

The composite nature of the text, though bewildering to the
unsophisticated reader, is not, however, without its compensations. The
text, as it stands, preserves the record of the manifold influences
which presided over its first inception, and of the devious paths by
which Kant travelled to his later conclusions. It thus enables us to
determine, with considerable accuracy, the successive stages through
which it has passed in the process of settling into its present form. As
we shall find, the sections on the antinomies contain the original
argument, out of which by varied processes of supplementation and
modification the other parts have arisen.

The conflict of doctrine has also its counter-advantages. The problems
are impartially discussed from opposed standpoints; the difficulties
peculiar to each of the competing possible solutions are frankly
recognised, and indeed insisted upon; and the internal dialectic of
Kant’s own personal thinking obtains dramatic expression. We are thus
the better enabled to appreciate the open-minded pertinacity with which
Kant set himself to do justice to every significant aspect of his
many-sided problems, and are consequently in less danger of simplifying
his argument in any arbitrary manner, or of ignoring the tentative
character of the solutions at which he arrives.

I shall first define the main lines of conflict, and shall then attempt
to trace those conflicts to the considerations in which they have their
source. The two chief lines of thought traceable throughout the
_Dialectic_ are represented by its negative and by its positive
tendencies respectively. From one point of view, Reason is merely the
understanding in its self-limiting, self-regulative employment, and the
main purpose of the _Dialectic_ is to guard against the delusive power
of fictitious principles. From the other point of view, Reason is a
faculty distinct from understanding, and its problems run parallel with
those of the _Analytic_, forming no less important a subject of
philosophical reflection, and no less fruitful a source of positive
teaching. The one line of argument connects with Kant’s more sceptical
tendencies, the other with his deep-rooted belief in the ultimate
validity of the absolute claims of pure thought.

When we approach the _Dialectic_ from the standpoint of the _Analytic_,
it is the negative aspect that is naturally most prominent. In the
_Analytic_ Kant has proved that all knowledge is limited to
sense-experience, and that a metaphysical interpretation of reality is
altogether impossible. But as the human mind would seem to be possessed
by an inborn need of metaphysical construction, this conclusion cannot
obtain its due influence until the sources of the metaphysical tendency
have been detected and laid bare. The _Dialectic_ must yield _a
psychology of metaphysics_ as well as a _logic of illusion_.

But when, on the other hand, the problems of the _Dialectic_ are viewed
in their _distinction_ from those of the _Analytic_, and their
independent character is recognised, they appear in a perspective which
sets them in a very different light. Reason is a faculty co-ordinate
with understanding, and yields _a priori_ concepts distinct in function,
no less than in nature, from the categories. To mark this distinction
Kant entitles the concepts of Reason Ideas. They demand both a
metaphysical and a transcendental deduction. These requirements are
fulfilled through their derivation from the three forms of syllogism,
and by the proof that they exercise an indispensable function, at once
limiting and directing the understanding. As limiting concepts, they
condition the consciousness of those Ideal standards through which the
human mind is enabled to distinguish between appearance and things in
themselves. As regulative, they prescribe the problems which the
understanding in its search for knowledge is called upon to solve.

These two tendencies, sceptical and constructive, are never, indeed, in
complete opposition. Common to both, rendering possible the
psychological explanation of the metaphysical impulse, which even the
negative standpoint demands, is the doctrine of the regulative function
of Ideal principles. This doctrine, which already appears in the
_Dissertation_ of 1770, was later developed into the Critical theory of
transcendental illusion; and by means of that theory Kant succeeded in
bringing the two standpoints into a very real and vital connection with
one another. At first sight it may seem to achieve their complete
reconciliation, accounting for their distinction while rendering them
mutually complementary; and Kant’s teaching may perhaps be so restated
as to bear out that impression. But the harmony is never completely
attained by Kant. Here, as in the _Analytic_, there is an equipoise of
tendencies that persist in opposition.

Kant’s mediating doctrine of transcendental illusion may first be
stated. It rests upon a distinction between appearance and illusion.
Appearance (_Erscheinung_) is a transcript in phenomenal terms of some
independent reality; and of such appearances we can acquire what from
the human point of view is genuine knowledge. On the other hand, all
professed insight into the nature of the transcendent or non-empirical
is sheer illusion (_Schein_), and purely subjective. There are three
species of illusion, logical, empirical and transcendental. Logical
illusion stands apart by itself. It is due merely to inattention or
ignorance; and vanishes immediately the attention is aroused. Empirical
and transcendental illusion, on the other hand, have a twofold point of
agreement, first, in being unavoidable, and secondly, in that they
originate in our practical needs. We may know that the moon at its
rising is no larger than in mid-heavens, that the ocean is no higher in
the distance than at the shore; this makes not the least difference in
the perceptions as they continue to present themselves. That the
illusions are adapted to our practical needs, and are consequently
beneficial, is less often observed. Changes in the colour, form, and
size of objects as they recede from us, the seeing of the parallel sides
of a street as converging, enable us to achieve what would not otherwise
be possible. By their means we acquire the power of compressing a wide
extent of landscape into a single visual field, of determining distance,
and the like. Their practical usefulness is in almost exact proportion
to the freedom with which they depart from the standards of the
independently real. Kant argues that, in these respects, transcendental
illusion is analogous to the empirical. Just as the illusory
characteristics of our perceptions are to be understood only in terms of
their practical function, so the Ideas of pure Reason have always a
practical bearing, and can only be explained and justified in terms of
the needs which they satisfy. As theoretical enquirers, we accept all
that affords us orientation in the attainment of knowledge; as moral
agents, we postulate the conditions which are necessary for the
realisation of the moral imperative. And as the Ideals of natural
science are found (such is Kant’s contention) to be in general form akin
to those of the moral consciousness, they thus acquire a twofold footing
in the mental life, maintaining their place there quite independently of
theoretical proof. Though illusory, they are unavoidable; and though
theoretically false,[1337] they are from a practical point of view both
legitimate and indispensable.

Kant, in developing this thesis, might profitably have pointed to still
another respect in which the analogy holds between sense-experience and
transcendental beliefs. The illusions of sense-perception come in the
ordinary processes of experience to be detected as such by the mind.
From the theoretical standpoint of the outside observer who compares the
situation of one percipient with that of another, and so is enabled to
cancel the differences which variety of situation carries with it, the
useful illusions of ordinary experience are reduced to the level of mere
appearance. In contradicting one another they reveal their subjective
character, and also at the same time afford data for determining the
objective conditions to which their subjectively necessary existence is
causally due. In similar fashion the transcendental illusions result in
contradictions, which compel the mind to recognise that the Ideals to
which it is committed by its practical needs are of a merely subjective
character, and may never be legitimately interpreted as representing the
actual nature of the independently real.

The chief transcendental illusion, and ultimately the cause of all the
others, consists in the belief that the Ideals of explanation which
satisfy Reason must in general outline represent the nature of ultimate
reality. What the individual seeks to discover he naturally believes to
exist prior to the discovery. As practical beings, we regard the objects
of sense-experience as absolute realities--they are the realities of
practical life, and we are practical rather than theoretical beings--and
the existing empirical sciences, conceived as Ideally completed, are
therefore viewed as yielding an adequate representation of ultimate
reality. But such a belief involves us in contradictions. The world of
phenomena in space and time is endlessly relative. It can have no outer
bounds or first beginning, and no smallest parts; and in the series of
causal antecedents there can be no member that is not effect as well as
cause. Viewed as representing a pre-existent goal, the Ideas of Reason
are imaginary completions of the intrinsically and merely relative, and
are in their very notion self-contradictory. All that is definite in
their content conflicts with their absoluteness; and yet, as it would
seem, only in their empirical reference can they hope for objective
verification.

Such are the problems of the _Dialectic_, so far as they can be
formulated in terms common to the two opposed standpoints. Their deeper
significance, and the grounds of Kant’s alternating treatment of them,
only appear when he raises the further questions, what those Ideals of
explanation which Reason prescribes really are, and how, if they
conflict with the content of experience, it is possible that they should
be conceived at all. To these questions Kant propounds both a sceptical
and an Idealist answer. The former, in bare outline, may be stated as
follows. The so-called Ideas are based upon experience and are derived
from it. The understanding removes the limitations to which its pure
concepts are subject in sense-experience, and proceeds to use them in
their widest possible application, _i.e._ to things in general. As thus
employed, they are without real significance, and are indeed
self-contradictory. To form the Idea of the unconditioned, we have to
omit all those conditions through which alone anything can be
apprehended, even as possible. To construct the concept of absolute or
unconditioned necessity, we have similarly to leave aside the conditions
upon which necessity, as revealed in experience, in all cases depends;
in eliminating conditions, we eliminate necessity in the only forms in
which it is conceivable by us. Such Ideas are, indeed, simply _schematic
forms_, whereby we body forth to ourselves, in more or less metaphorical
terms, the concept of a _maximum_. They are imaginary extensions, in
Ideal form, of the unity and system which understanding has discovered
in actual experience, and which, under the inspiration of such Ideals,
it seeks to realise in ever-increasing degree. If the understanding, as
thus insisting upon Ideal satisfaction, be entitled Reason, the Ideas
must be taken as expressing a subjective interest, and as exhausting
their legitimate employment in the regulation of the understanding.
Their transcendental deduction will consist in the proof that they are
necessary to the understanding for the _perfecting_ of its experience.
They do not justify us in attempting to decide, in anticipation of
actual experience, how far the contingent collocations and the
inexhaustible complexities of brute experience are really reducible to
a completely unified system; but they quite legitimately demand that
through all discouragements we persist in the endeavour towards their
realisation. In any case, it is by experience that the degree of their
reality has to be decided. We judge of things by the standard of that
for which they exist, and not _vice versa_. As the sole legitimate
function of the Ideas is that of inspiring the understanding in its
empirical employment, they must never be interpreted as having
metaphysical significance. As the Ideas exist solely for the sake of
experience, it is they that must be condemned, if the two really
diverge. We do not say “that a man is too long for his coat, but that
the coat is too short for the man.”[1338] It is experience, not Ideas,
which forms the criterion alike of truth and of reality.

Kant’s teaching, when on Idealist lines, is of a very different
character. Reason is distinct from understanding, and yet is no less
indispensably involved in the conditioning of experience. All
consciousness is consciousness of a whole which precedes and conditions
its parts. Such consciousness cannot be accounted for by assuming that
we are first conscious of the conditioned, and then proceed through
omission of its limitations to form to ourselves, by means of the more
positive factors involved in this antecedent consciousness, an Idea of
an unconditioned whole. The Idea of the unconditioned is distinct in
nature from all other concepts, and cannot be derived from them. It must
be a pure _a priori_ product of what may be named the faculty of Reason.
Its uniqueness is what causes its apparent meaninglessness. As it is
involved in all consciousness, it conditions all other concepts; and
cannot, therefore, be defined in terms of them. Its significance must
not be looked for save in that Ideal, to which no experience, and no
concept other than itself, can ever be adequate. That in this Ideal form
it has a very real and genuine meaning is proved by our capacity to
distinguish between appearance and reality. For upon it this
distinction, in ultimate analysis, is found to rest. Consciousness of
limitation presupposes a consciousness of what is beyond the limit;
consciousness of the unconditioned is prior to, and renders possible,
our consciousness of the contingently given. The Idea of the
unconditioned must therefore be counted as being, like the categories,
though in a somewhat different manner, a condition of the possibility of
experience. With it our standards both of truth and of reality are
inextricably bound up.[1339] The Ideas in which it specifies itself, so
far from depending upon empirical verification, are the touchstone by
which we detect the unreality of the sensible world, and by which a
truer reality, such as would be adequate to the Ideal demands of pure
Reason, is prefigured to the mind.

These two standpoints are extremely divergent in their consequences.
Each leads to a very different interpretation of the content of the
Ideas, of their function in experience, and of their objective validity.
On the one view, their content is merely empirical, and sense-experience
is our sole criterion of truth and reality; on the other, they have to
be recognised as containing a pure _a priori_ concept, and are
themselves the standards by which even empirical truth can alone be
determined. In the one case, they are Ideals projected by experience for
its own empirical guidance; they are built upon contingent experience,
and depend upon it alike for the content which makes them conceivable
and for their validity. In the other, they are presuppositions of
experience, at once conditioning its possibility and revealing its
merely phenomenal character. According to the sceptical view, Reason is
concerned only with itself and its own subjective demands; on the
Idealist view, it is a metaphysical faculty, and outlines possibilities
that may perhaps be established by practical Reason.

Such, in broad outline, are the central doctrines of the _Dialectic_.
They constitute an extraordinarily stimulating and suggestive body of
Critical teaching. In no other division of the _Critique_ do the power
and originality of Kant’s thinking gain such abundant, forceful and
illuminating expression. The accumulated results of the painstaking
analyses of the earlier sections contribute a solidity and fulness of
meaning, which render the argument extremely impressive, even to those
who are out of sympathy with Kant’s ultimate purposes. Its persistent
influence, on sceptical no less than on Idealist lines, and often
conveyed by very devious channels, can frequently be detected even in
thinkers--Herbert Spencer is an instance--who would indignantly
repudiate the charge of being indebted to such a source.


THE HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF KANT’S VIEWS IN REGARD TO THE PROBLEMS OF
THE DIALECTIC[1340]

We may now proceed to consider the evidence in support of the early
origin of the central portions of the _Dialectic_--the sections on the
antinomies. As Benno Erdmann[1341] has very conclusively shown,
preoccupation with the problem of antinomy was the chief cause of the
revolution which took place in Kant’s views in 1769, and which found
expression in his _Dissertation_ of 1770. It was the existence of
antinomy which led Kant to recognise the subjectivity of space and time.
That is to say, it led him to develop that doctrine of transcendental
idealism which reappears in the concluding sections of the _Aesthetic_,
and which was recast and developed in the _Analytic_. Already in the
_Dissertation_ it supplies the key for the solution of the problems
concerning infinity. The impossibility of completing the space, time,
and causal series, and the consequent impossibility of satisfying the
demands of the mind for totality, simplicity and unconditionedness, do
not, it is there maintained, discredit reason, but only serve to
establish the subjectivity of the sensuous forms to which the element of
infinitude is in all cases due.

Kant’s thinking was, of course, diverted into an entirely new channel
(as his letter to Herz of February 21, 1772,[1342] shows), when he came
to realise that the metaphysical validity or invalidity of thought must
be decided prior to any attempt to discover a positive solution of such
problems as are presented by the antinomies. And when, owing to the
renewed influence of Hume, at some time subsequent to the date of the
letter to Herz, this new problem was recognised as being the problem of
_a priori synthesis_, all questions regarding the nature of the
absolutely real were made to take secondary rank, yielding precedence to
those of logical theory. When the antinomy problems re-emerge, their
discussion assumes Critical form.

In three fundamental respects Kant’s treatment of the antinomies in the
_Dissertation_ differs from that of the _Critique_. In the first place,
the demand for totality or absoluteness is not in the _Dissertation_
ascribed to a separate faculty. Indeed Kant’s words would seem to show
that at times he had inclined to ascribe it merely to the free-ranging
fancy or imagination.[1343] Secondly, as the various antinomies were
traced exclusively to the influence of space and time upon pure thought,
they were treated together, and no classification of them was attempted.
And lastly, though Kant’s utterances are somewhat ambiguous,[1344] the
illusory character of the antinomies was in the main viewed as being of
a more or less _logical_ nature. That is to say, it was regarded as
entirely preventable and as “vanishing like smoke”[1345] upon adoption
of a true philosophical standpoint.

A number of the _Reflexionen_ reveal the various tentative schemes, by
trial of which Kant worked his way toward a more genuinely Critical
treatment of the problems of infinity. The intellectual factors receive
fuller recognition, and as a consequence a definite classification
results. At some time prior to the discovery of the table of categories,
Kant adopted a threefold division of what he names first principles or
presuppositions--principles of substance-accident, of
ground-consequence, and of whole-part. _Reflexion_ ii. 578 is typical.

     “Three _principia_: (1) in the field of the actual there is the
     relation of substance to accident (_inhaerentia_): (2) of ground to
     consequence (_dependentia_): (3) of parts and of composition
     (_compositio_). There are three presuppositions: of the subject, of
     the ground, and of the parts; of insition [Kant’s own term], of
     subordination, and of composition; therefore also three first
     _principia_: (1) subject, which is never a predicate; (2) ground,
     which is never a consequence; (3) unity, which is not itself
     composite.”

There are numerous other _Reflexionen_ to the same effect.[1346] The
resulting conceptions are defined both as limits[1347] and as absolute
totalities, and in _Reflexion_ ii. 1252 are enumerated as follows:

     “The first subject; the first ground; the first part. The subject
     which holds everything in itself; the ground which takes everything
     under itself; the whole which comprehends everything. The
     _totalitas absoluta_ of reality, of series, of co-ordination.”

The introduction of the terms ‘absolute’ and ‘totality’ indicate that
Kant has also come to recognise the presence of a unique notion
(equivalent to the “unconditioned” of the _Critique_), distinct in
content from any of the three enumerated _principia_, but common to them
all. From the very first Kant would seem to have appropriated for it the
title Idea. _Reflexionen_ ii. 1243, 1244, and 124 may be quoted:

     “The Idea is single (_individuum_), self-sufficient, and eternal.
     The divinity of our soul is its capacity to form the Idea. The
     senses give only copies or rather _apparentia_.” “Idea is the
     representation of the whole in so far as it necessarily precedes
     the determination of the parts. It can never be empirically
     represented, for the reason that in experience we proceed from the
     parts through successive syntheses to the whole. It is the
     archetype (_Urbild_) of things, for certain objects are only
     possible through an Idea. Transcendental Ideas are those in which
     the absolute whole determines the parts in an aggregate or as
     series.” “Metaphysics proper is the application of transcendental
     philosophy to concepts supplied by Reason and necessary to it, to
     which, however, no corresponding objects can be given in
     experience. The concepts must therefore refer to the supersensible.
     That, however, can be nothing but the unconditioned, _for that is
     the sole theoretical Idea of reason_. [Not italicised in the
     original.] Metaphysics thus relates: (1) to that of which only the
     whole can be represented as absolutely unconditioned: (2) to things
     so far as they are in themselves sensuously unconditioned. The
     first part is cosmology, the second rational doctrine of the soul,
     pneumatology and theology.”

At this stage, therefore, Kant would seem to have held that there is but
one Idea strictly so called, and that the above three _principia_ are
merely specifications of it in terms of the concepts of
substance-accident, ground-consequence, and whole-part. The
classification thus obtained is in certain respects more satisfactory
than that which is adopted in the _Critique_. It locates the
cosmological argument with the causal category, and so would enable the
conceptions of freedom or _causa sui_, and of Divine Existence, to be
dealt with in their natural connection with one another. It also
supplies, in the category of whole and part, a more fitting heading for
those antinomy problems which deal with the unlimited and the limited,
the divisible and the indivisible, the complex and the simple. The
classification would, however, in separating the problem of the simple
from that of substance, remain open to the same criticism as that of the
_Critique_.[1348]

This classification must, as we have stated, be of a date prior to
Kant’s discovery of the table of categories. That is quite clear from
its ignoring the category of reciprocity, and from its combination of
the other two categories of relation with the merely quantitative
category of whole and part. For though the last is also entitled
composition and co-ordination, it is conceived in these particular
_Reflexionen_ in exclusively quantitative terms. When Kant formulated
the “metaphysical” deduction of the categories he was, of course,
compelled to recast the classification, and did so in the only possible
manner, consistent with his architectonic, by substituting the category
of reciprocity for that of whole and part,[1349] and by taking the new
heading, obtained through combination of reciprocity with the Idea of
the unconditioned, as equivalent to the Idea of Divine Existence. But
this could not be done without dislocating the entire scheme. The
category of ground and consequence is deprived of its chief application,
that expressed in the cosmological argument; and in order to provide a
new content for it, Kant is compelled to force upon it the problems
previously classified under the displaced category of whole and part.
Even so, the problem of the _causa sui_ cannot be eliminated, and
reappears, partly as the problem of freedom, and partly as the modal
problem of necessary existence.

The identification of the theological Idea with the category of
reciprocity has a further consequence. It carries the problem of Divine
Existence outside the sphere of the problems of infinity, and
necessitates a very different treatment from that which it would
naturally have received at Kant’s hands, if developed in its connection
with his own Critical teaching. He is driven to expound it in the
extreme rationalistic form in which it had been formulated by Leibniz
and Wolff, as a doctrine of the _Ens realissimum_.

Prior to the rearrangement, necessitated by recognition of the category
of reciprocity, Kant would seem to have expected to bring the entire
body of Wolffian metaphysics within the scope of a general doctrine of
antinomy. The problems of the divisible and the indivisible, of the
simple and the complex, leading as they do to discussion of the
presuppositions underlying the Leibnizian monadology, concern spiritual
as well as material substance. Similarly, the main problems of theology
would have been treated in connection with the cosmological inference to
a first cause, and with the discussion of the possibility of first
beginnings in space and time.[1350]

The sections in the _Critique_ devoted to the antinomies reveal, in many
ways, Kant’s original design. It is especially noticeable in his
discussion of the third and fourth antinomies. The problems of freedom
and of necessary existence are by no means treated in merely
cosmological fashion. Indeed Kant makes no pretence of concealing their
psychological and theological implications. Even the first and second
antinomies have obvious bearings of a similar character. But it is in
the section entitled _The Interest of Reason in this
Self-conflict_[1351] that the broader significance of the antinomies
finds its fullest expression. In its suggestive contrast of the two
possible types of philosophy, Epicurean and Platonic, the argument
entirely transcends the bounds prescribed to it by its cosmological
setting. As we follow the comprehensive sweep of its argument, we can
hardly avoid regretting that Kant failed to keep to his original plan,
as here unfolded,[1352] of expounding the self-conflict of Reason in the
form of a broad judicial statement of the grounds and claims of the two
opposing authorities which divide the allegiance of the human spirit,
namely, the intellectual and the moral, science with its cognitive
demands on the one hand, the consciousness of duty with its no less
imperious prescriptions on the other. The materialist philosophies would
then have been presented as inevitably arising when intellectual values
are made supreme; and the Idealist philosophies as equally cogent when
moral values are taken as primary and are allowed to determine
speculative tenets. Against this background of conflicting dogmatisms
the comprehensive and satisfying character of the Critical standpoint
would have stood out the more clearly; and its historical affiliations,
its debt to the sceptics and materialists, no less than to the
Idealists, would have been depicted in more adequate terms. As it is, in
the chapters on the _Paralogisms_ and the _Ideal of Pure Reason_ there
is almost entire failure to recognise the possibility of a naturalistic
solution of the problems with which they deal, and Kant so far succumbs
to the outworn influences of his day and generation--the very influences
from which the Critical philosophy, consistently developed, is a final
breaking away--as to maintain, almost in the manner of the English
Deists, of Voltaire and Rousseau, that God, Freedom, and Immortality are
conceptions which the mind must necessarily form, and in the validity of
which it must spontaneously believe. Kant is here, indeed, interpreting
“natural reason” in the light of his own personal history. The Christian
beliefs, in which he had been nurtured from childhood, and their
rationalist counterparts in the Wolffian philosophy, had become, as it
were, a second nature to him; and the resistance, which in his own
person they had offered to the development of Critical teaching, he not
unnaturally interpreted as evidence of their being imposed by the very
structure of reason. He transforms the metaphysical sciences in their
Wolffian form into inevitable illusions of the human mind.[1353]

There is evidence that the theological problems were the first to be
withdrawn from the sphere of the “sceptical method,”[1354] peculiar to
the antinomies. Thus _Reflexion_ ii. 125[1355] states that “metaphysics
proper consists of _cosmologia rationalis_ and _theologia
naturalis_”--rational psychology being, as it would seem, still included
within cosmology.[1356] What the considerations were which induced Kant
to claim similarly independent treatment for rational psychology, we can
only conjecture. For a time, while still holding to the bipartite
division, he would seem to have made the further change of also
separating psychology from cosmology, classing psychology and theology
together as subdivisions of the rational science of soul.

     ”[Metaphysics has two parts]: the first is cosmology, the second
     rational doctrine of soul, pneumatology and theology.”[1357]

A main factor deciding Kant in favour of a dogmatic, non-sceptical
treatment of rational psychology may have been the greater opportunity
which it seemed to afford him of connecting its doctrines with the
teaching of the _Analytic_, and especially with his central doctrine of
apperception. But to whatever cause the decision was due, it resulted in
the impoverishment of the second antinomy, through withdrawal of the
more important half of its natural content. This antinomy could no
longer be made to comprehend a discussion of the logical bases of
monadology, and of its professed proofs of the simplicity and
immortality of the soul. Nothing is left to it save the discussion of
the monadistic theory of matter (_somatologia pura_).[1358] This change
has also, as already noted, the unfortunate effect of precluding Kant
from recognition of the physical application of the category of
substance. By the simple he means the substantial, and yet he may not
say so; his architectonic forbids.

I may hazard the further suggestion that Kant’s interpretation of
rational psychology in terms of the Critical doctrine of apperception is
of earlier date than his doctrine of transcendental illusion. For the
chapter on the _Paralogisms_ seems in its first form to have contained
no reference to that latter doctrine.[1359] The few passages which take
account of it, all bear evidence of being later intercalations. This is
the more remarkable in that the Paralogisms can easily be shown to be
typical examples of transcendental illusion. Indeed, neither the
antinomies nor the theological Ideal conform to its definition in the
same strict fashion.

The problem as to whether the doctrine of transcendental illusion and
the deduction of the Ideas from the three species of syllogism
originated early or late, is largely bound up with the question as to
when Kant finally adopted the terms _Analytic_ and _Dialectic_ as titles
for the two main divisions of his _Transcendental Logic_. That Kant was
at first very uncertain as to what the main divisions of his system
ought to be, appears very clearly from the _Reflexionen_.[1360] To his
teaching as a whole he usually applies the title _Transcendental
Philosophy_, and in _Reflexion_ ii. 123 he enumerates the following
subdivisions within it: _Aesthetic_, _Logic_, _Critique_, and
_Architectonic_. By _Critique_ Kant must here mean what in other
_Reflexionen_ he names _Discipline_, and which he finally named
_Dialectic_. As thus identified with the _Discipline_, the _Dialectic_
is at times viewed as a division of a _Methodology_ or _Organon_, whose
other divisions are entitled _Canon_ and _Architectonic_.[1361] This
earlier scheme may therefore be represented as follows:

                                       {Aesthetic.
                 {Doctrine of Elements {Logic.
  Transcendental {
  Philosophy     {                     {Critique = Discipline [corresponding
                 {Doctrine of Methods  {to the Dialectic
                 {  (Methodology)      {of the _Critique_].
                                       {Canon.
                                       {Architectonic.

The terms _Analytic_ and _Dialectic_ do not occur in these
_Reflexionen_, and their adoption may therefore be inferred to
synchronise with Kant’s later decision to include the treatment of the
metaphysical sciences within his _Logic_; and that decision was probably
an immediate result of his having developed meantime a doctrine of
transcendental illusion. The new scheme in its final form is therefore
as follows:

                 {            {Aesthetic.
                 {Doctrine of {
                 { Elements   {      {Analytic {of Concepts.
                 {            {Logic {         {of Judgement.
  Transcendental {                   {Dialectic--of Reason.
  Philosophy     {
  or Critique of {
  Pure Reason    {              {Discipline (retained but given a new
                 {Doctrine of   {and more general content).
                 {Methods       {Canon.
                 {(Methodology) {Architectonic.
                                {History.

In thus transferring _Dialectic_ from the _Methodology_ to the _Doctrine
of Elements_, Kant stands committed to the view that it contains
positive teaching of a character analogous to that of the _Analytic_,
with which it is now co-ordinated. As we have already noted, the
fundamental opposition which runs through the entire _Dialectic_ is due
to the conflict between the older view of Reason as merely understanding
in its transcendent employment, and this later view of it as a distinct
faculty, yielding concepts with a positive and indispensable function,
different from, and yet also analogous to, that exercised by the
categories of the understanding.

Adickes, to whom students of Kant are indebted for a convincing
demonstration of the constant influence of Kant’s logical architectonic
upon the content of the Critical teaching, would seem at this point to
rely too exclusively upon that method of explanation. He contends that
Kant’s deduction of the Ideas of Reason from the three species of
syllogism is entirely traceable to this source, and is without real
philosophical significance. That is perhaps in the main true. But it
need not prevent us from appreciating the importance of the doctrines
which Kant contrives to expound under guise of this logical machinery.
We have already observed that prior to the discovery of this deduction
Kant had recognised the connection between the concept of the
unconditioned and the three Ideas through which it finds expression. As
the forms of syllogism are differentiated in terms of the three
categories of relation, the deduction does not interfere with Kant’s
retention of this classification of Ideas; while in connecting Reason as
a faculty with reasoning as a logical process, an excellent opportunity
is found for explaining the grounds and significance of the demand for
unconditionedness, i.e. for completeness of explanation. This demand, as
he has also come to recognise, lies open to question, and therefore
calls for more precise definition.

The artificial character of the metaphysical deduction lies not so much
in this derivation of the three Ideas of the
unconditioned--unconditioned substance, unconditioned causality,
unconditioned system--from the categorical, hypothetical, and
disjunctive forms of syllogism respectively, as in the further equating
of them with the Ideas of the Self, the World, and God. The Idea of
unconditioned substance has many possible applications besides the use
to which it is put in rational psychology. The Idea of an unconditioned
causality may be conceived in psychological and theological as well as
in cosmological terms; and as a matter of fact Kant himself frequently
identifies it with the concept of freedom, as in the third and fourth
antinomies, or when he enumerates the Ideas as being those of God,
Freedom, and Immortality.[1362] Similarly, the Idea of system is the
inspiring principle of materialism, and also finds in such philosophies
as that of Spinoza much more adequate expression than in the _Ens
realissimum_ of the Wolffian School. But further comment is not, at this
stage, really profitable. These are questions which can best be
discussed as they emerge in the course of the argument.[1363]

Kant carried his logical architectonic one stage further. Not satisfied
with connecting the three Ideas of Reason with the categories that
underlie the three species of syllogism, he also attempted to organise
the various particular applications of each Idea in terms of the
fourfold division of the table of categories. By the use of his usual
high-handed methods he succeeded in doing so in the case of the
psychological and cosmological Ideas. There are four paralogisms and
four antinomies. But when the attempt failed in regard to the
theological Idea, he very wisely abstained from either apology or
explanation. That the failure was not due to lack of desire or
perseverance appears from _Reflexion_ ii. 1573, which would seem to be
the record of an unavailing attempt to obtain a satisfactory
articulation of the theological Ideal. Doubtless, had he been
sufficiently bent upon it, he could have worked out some sort of
fourfold division; but there were limits even to Kant’s devotion to the
architectonic scheme. It is difficult to see how any such arrangement
could have been followed without serious perversion of the argument.

Adickes has suggested[1364] that the distinction between the faculty of
understanding and the faculty of judgment is subsequent to, and
suggested by, Kant’s successful tracing of the Ideas to a separate
faculty of Reason. Some such distinction was demanded in order that the
parallelism of transcendental and formal logic might be complete. This
conjecture of Adickes is probably correct. It would seem to be supported
by the internal evidence of the _Analytic of Principles_. As we have had
occasion to note,[1365] the doctrine of schematism, in terms of which
the distinction between understanding and judgment is formulated, is
late in date of origin.[1366] This distinction is of the same artificial
character as that between understanding and Reason; and though, like the
latter distinction, it supplies Kant with a convenient framework for the
arrangement of genuine Critical material, it also tends to conceal the
simpler and more inward bonds of true relationship.




TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC




INTRODUCTION


_I. Transcendental Illusion_

=Dialectic is a Logic of Illusion.=[1367]--The meaning which Kant attaches
to the term dialectic has already been considered. The passage above
quoted[1368] from his _Logic_ shows the meaning which he supposed the
term historically to possess, namely, as being a sophistical art of
disputation, presenting false principles in the guise of truth by means
of a seeming fulfilment of the demands of strict logical proof. The
incorrectness of this historical derivation hardly needs to be pointed
out. Kant professes[1369] to be following his contemporaries in thus
using the term as a title for the treatment of false reasoning. But even
this statement must be challenged. Adickes, after examination of a large
number of eighteenth-century text-books, reports[1370] that in the six
passages in which alone he has found it to occur it is never so
employed. In Meier it is used as a title for the theory of probable
reasoning,[1371] and in Baumgarten it occurs only in adjectival form as
equivalent to sophistical. This last is the nearest approach to Kant’s
definition. All historical considerations may therefore be swept aside.
We are concerned only with the specific meaning which Kant thought good
to attach to the term. He adapts it in the freest manner to the needs of
his system. In A 61 = B 85, as in his _Logic_, he has defined it in
merely negative fashion. He is now careful to specify the more positive
aspects of the problems with which it deals. Though definable as the
logic of illusion, the deceptive inferences with which it concerns
itself are of a quite unique and supremely significant character. They
must, as above noted,[1372] be distinguished alike from logical and from
empirical illusion. They have their roots in the fundamental needs of
the human mind, and the recognition of their illusory character does not
render unnecessary either a positive explanation of their occurrence or
a Critical valuation of their practical function as regulative ideals.

=A 293 = B 349.=--Regarding the connection between illusion and error cf.
B 69, and above, pp. 148-53.

=A 295 = B 352.=--Logical, empirical, and transcendental illusion. Cf.
above, pp. 13, 427-9, 437.

=A 296 = B 352.=--Kant here defines the terms transcendental and
transcendent in a very unusual manner. The two terms are not, he states,
synonymous. The principles of pure understanding are of merely empirical
validity, and _consequently_ are not of _transcendental_ employment
beyond the limits of experience. A principle is _transcendent_ when it
not only removes these limits, but prescribes the overstepping of them.


_II. Pure Reason as the Seat of Transcendental Illusion_[1373]

(_a_) _Reason in General_

Reason, like understanding, is employed in two ways, formal or logical
and real. The logical use of Reason consists in mediate inference, the
real in the generation of concepts and principles. Reason is thus both a
logical and a transcendental faculty, and we may therefore expect that
its logical functions will serve as a clue to those that are
transcendental. The argument which follows is extremely obscure. It is a
foreshadowing in logical terms of a distinction which, as Kant himself
indicates, cannot at this stage be adequately stated. The distinction
may be extended and paraphrased as follows. Reason, generically taken as
including both activities, is the faculty of principles, in distinction
from understanding which is the faculty of rules.[1374] Principles,
properly so-called, are absolutely _a priori_. Universals which imply
the element of intuition must not, therefore, be ranked as principles in
the strict sense. They are more properly to be entitled rules. A true
principle is one that affords knowledge of the particulars which come
under it, and which does so from its own internal resources, that is to
say, through pure concepts. In other words, it yields _a priori_
synthetic knowledge, and yet does so independently of all given
experience. Now, as the _Analytic_ has proved, knowledge obtained
through understanding, whether in mathematical or in physical science,
is never of this character. Its principles, even though originating in
pure intuition or in the pure understanding, are valid only as
conditions of possible experience, and are applicable only to such
objects as can occur in the context of a sense-perception. That is to
say, the understanding can never obtain synthetic knowledge through pure
concepts. Though, for instance, it prescribes the principle that
everything which happens must have a cause, that principle does not
establish itself by means of the concepts which it contains, but only as
being a presupposition necessary to the possibility of sense-experience.
If, then, principles in the strict sense actually exist, they must be
due to a faculty distinct from understanding, and will call for a
deduction of a different character from that of the categories.

In the last paragraph but one of the section Kant indicates the doctrine
which he is foreshadowing. The rules of understanding apply to
appearances, prescribing the conditions under which the unity necessary
to any and every experience can alone be attained. The principles of
Reason do not apply directly to appearances, but only to the
understanding, defining the standards to which its activities must
conform, if a completely unified experience is to be achieved. Whereas
the rules of understanding are the conditions of objective existence in
space and time, principles in the strict sense are criteria for the
attainment of such absoluteness and totality as will harmonise Reason
with itself. Reason, determined by principles which issue from its own
inherent nature, prescribes what the actual ought to be; understanding,
proceeding from rules which express the conditions of possible
experience, can yield knowledge only of what is found to exist in the
course of sense-experience. The unity of Reason is Ideal; the unity of
understanding is empirical. Principles are due to the
_self_-determination of reason; the rules of understanding express the
necessitated determinations of sense. The former demand a more perfect
and complete unity than is ever attainable by means of the latter. Two
passages from the _Lose Blätter_ will help to define the distinction.

     “There is a synthesis prototypon and a synthesis ectypon. The one
... _simpliciter, a termino a priori_, ... the other _secundum
     quid, a termino a posteriori_.... Reason advances from the
     universal to the particular, the understanding from the particular
     to the universal.... The first is absolute and belongs to the free
     or metaphysical, and also to the moral, employment of
     Reason.”[1375] “The principles of the synthesis of pure Reason are
     all metaphysical.... [They] are principles of the subjective unity
     of knowledge through Reason, _i.e._ of the agreement of Reason with
     itself.”[1376]

The chief interest of this section lies in its clear indication of the
dual standpoint to which Kant is committing himself by the manner in
which he formulates this distinction between rules and principles. The
indispensableness of the latter, upon which Kant is prepared to insist,
points to the Idealist interpretation of their grounds and validity;
their derivation from mere concepts, without reference to or basis in
experience, must, on the other hand, in view of the teaching of the
_Analytic_, commit Kant to a sceptical treatment of their objective
validity. In the above account, suggestions of the Idealist point of
view are not entirely absent; but, on the whole, it is the sceptical
view that is dominant. The Ideas of Reason can be justified as necessary
only for the perfecting of experience, not as conditions of experience
as such. They express a subjective interest in the attainment of unity,
not conditions of the possibility of objective existence.

     ”[Civil Laws] are only limitations imposed upon our freedom in
     order that such freedom may completely harmonise with itself; hence
     they are directed to something which is entirely our own work, and
     of which we ourselves, through these concepts, can be the cause.
     But that objects in themselves, the very nature of things, should
     stand under principles, and should be determined according to mere
     concepts, is a demand which, if not impossible, is at least quite
     contrary to common sense [_Widersinnisches_].”[1377]


(_b_) _The Logical Use of Reason_[1378]

In this subsection Kant introduces the distinction between understanding
and judgment which he has sought to justify in A 130 ff. = B 169 ff. By
showing that inference determines the _relation_ between a major premiss
(due to the understanding) and the condition defined in the minor
premiss (due to the faculty of judgment), he professes to obtain
justification for classifying the possible forms of reasoning according
to the three categories of relation. The general remark is added that
the purpose of Reason, in its logical employment as inference, is to
obtain the highest possible unity, through subsumption of all
multiplicity under the smallest possible number of universals.


(c) _The Pure Use of Reason_[1379]

Kant here states the alternatives between which the _Dialectic_ has to
decide. Is Reason merely formal, arranging given material according to
given forms of unity, or is it a source of principles which prescribe
higher forms of unity than any revealed by actual experience? Further
examination of its formal and logical procedure constrains us, Kant
asserts, to adopt the latter position; and at the same time indicates
how those principles must be interpreted, namely, as subjective laws
that apply not to objects but only to the activities of the
understanding.

In the first place, a syllogism is not directly concerned with
intuitions, but only with concepts and judgments. This may be taken as
indicating that pure Reason relates to objects only mediately _by way_
of understanding and its judgments. The unity which it seeks is higher
than that of any possible experience; it is a unity which must be
constructed and cannot be given.[1380]

Secondly, Reason in its logical use seeks the _universal_ condition of
its judgment; and when such is not found in the major premiss proceeds
to its discovery through a regressive series of prosyllogisms. In so
doing it is obviously determined by a principle expressive of the
peculiar function of Reason in its logical employment, namely, that for
the conditioned knowledge of understanding the _unconditioned_ unity in
which that knowledge may find completion must be discovered. Such a
principle is synthetic, since from analysis of the conception of the
conditioned we can discover its relation to a condition, but never its
relation to the _unconditioned_. That is a notion which falls entirely
outside the sphere of the understanding, and which therefore demands a
separate enquiry. How is the above _a priori_ synthetic principle to be
accounted for, if it cannot be traced to understanding? Has it
objective, or has it merely subjective validity? And lastly, what
further synthetic principles can be based upon it? Such are the
questions to which Critical _Dialectic_ must supply an answer. This
_Dialectic_ will be composed of two main divisions, the doctrine of “the
transcendent concepts of pure Reason” and the doctrine of “transcendent
and dialectical inferences of Reason.”




