BOOK II

THE DIALECTICAL INFERENCES OF PURE REASON[1410]




CHAPTER I

THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON[1411]


As rational psychology fails to distinguish between appearances and
things in themselves, it identifies mere apperception with inner sense;
the self in experiencing the succession of its inner states is supposed
to acquire knowledge of its own essential nature. “I, as thinking, am an
object of inner sense, and am entitled soul,” in contrast to the body
which is an object of outer sense. Empirical psychology deals with the
concrete detail of inner experience; rational psychology abstracts from
all such special experiences, indeed from everything empirical,
professing to establish its doctrine upon the single judgment, “I
think.” That judgment has already been investigated in its connection
with the problem of the possibility, within the field of experience, of
synthetic _a priori_ judgments. It has now to be considered as a
possible basis for knowledge of the self as a thinking being (_ein
denkend Wesen_) or soul (_Seele_).

Following the guiding thread of the table of categories, but placing
them in what he regards as being, in this connection, the most
convenient order, Kant obtains a “topic” or classification of the
possible rubrics for the doctrines of a rational psychology: (1) the
soul is _substance_; (2) is _simple_; (3) is _numerically identical_;
(4) stands in relation to _possible_ objects in space. Now all those
four doctrines are, Kant holds, incapable of demonstration. The proofs
propounded by rational psychology are logically imperfect, committing
the logical fallacy which is technically named paralogism.[1412] The
fallacy is not, however, of merely logical character. Had that been the
case, it could never have gained such general currency. Certainly no
metaphysical science, widely accepted by profound thinkers, could ever
have come to be based upon it. The paralogism is transcendental in
character, resting upon a transcendental ground. It represents an
illusion which from any non-Critical standpoint is altogether
unavoidable. Its dialectic is a natural dialectic, wrongly interpreted
by the Schools, but not capriciously invented by them. The key to its
proper treatment is first supplied by the results of the transcendental
deduction. We are now called upon to apply these results in explanation
of the occurrence of the paralogisms, and in judgment upon their false
claims. Little that is really new is to be found in this chapter; but
many of the established results of the _Analytic_ receive interesting
illustration, and are thereby set in a clearer light.

In rational psychology the “I think” is taken in its universal, or to
use Kant’s somewhat misleading term, problematic aspect, that is to say,
not as a judgment expressive of the self’s own existence but “in its
mere possibility,”[1413] as representing the self-consciousness of all
possible thinking beings. As we cannot gain a representation of thinking
beings through outer experience, we are constrained to think them in
terms of our own self-consciousness. The “I think” is thus taken as a
universal judgment, expressing what belongs to the conception of
thinking being in general. The judgment is so interpreted by rational
psychology, “in order to see what predicates applicable to its subject
(be that subject actually existent or not) may flow from so simple a
judgment.”

In summarising what is directly relevant in the argument of the
transcendental deduction, Kant emphasises that the I, as representation,
is altogether empty of content.[1414]

     “We cannot even say that it is a conception, but only that it is a
     bare (_blosses_) consciousness which accompanies all conceptions.
     Through this I or he or it (the thing) which thinks, nothing
     further is represented than a transcendental subject of the
     thoughts = _x_....”

It is apprehended only in its relation to the thoughts which are its
predicates; apart from them we cannot form any conception whatever of
it, but can only revolve in a perpetual circle, since any judgment upon
it has already made use of its representation.[1415]

The patchwork character of the _Critique_, the artificial nature of the
connections between its various parts, is nowhere more evident than in
this section on the _Paralogisms_. According to the definition given of
transcendental illusion, we naturally expect Kant’s argument to show
that the _Paralogisms_ rest upon a failure to distinguish between
appearance and reality. As a matter of fact, the cause of their fallacy
is traced in the first three _Paralogisms_ solely to a failure to
distinguish between the logical and the real application of the
categories. The argument can indeed be restated so as to agree with the
introductory sections of the _Dialectic_. But Kant’s manner of
expounding the _Paralogisms_ shows that this chapter must originally
have been written independently of any intention to develop such
teaching as that of the sections which in the ultimate arrangement of
the _Critique_ are made to lead up to it.[1416]

=First Paralogism: of Substantiality.=[1417]--Save for the phrase ‘subject
in itself,’ there is, in Kant’s comment upon this _Paralogism_, not a
word regarding the necessity of a distinction between appearance and
reality, but only an insistence that the “I think” yields no knowledge
of the thinking self. Consciousness of the self and knowledge of its
underlying substance are by no means identical. The self, so far as it
enters into consciousness, is a merely logical subject; the underlying
substrate is that to which this self-consciousness and all other
thoughts are due. It is in the light of this distinction that Kant
discusses the substantiality of the subject. As expressive of the “I
think,” the category of substance and attribute can be employed only to
define the relation in which consciousness stands to its thoughts; it
expresses the merely logical relation of a subject to its predicates. It
tells us nothing regarding the nature of the “I,” save only that it is
the invariable centre of reference for all thoughts. In order to know
the self as substance, and so as capable of persisting throughout all
change, and as surviving even the death of the body, we should require
to have an intuition of it, and of such intuition there is not the
slightest trace in the “I think.” It “signifies a substance only in
Idea, not in reality.”[1418] As Kant adds later,[1419] the permanence
and self-identity of the representation of the self justifies no
argument to the permanence and self-identity of its underlying
conditions. Inference from the nature of representation to the nature of
the object represented is entirely illegitimate. In the equating of the
two, and not, as the introduction to the _Dialectic_ would lead us to
expect, in a failure to distinguish appearance from reality, consists
the paralogistic fallacy of this first syllogism.

=Second Paralogism: of Simplicity.=[1420]--We may follow Adickes[1421] in
his analysis of A 351-62. (_a_) The original criticism, parallel to that
of the first _Paralogism_, would seem to be contained in paragraphs five
to nine. (_b_) The opening paragraphs, and (_c_) the concluding
paragraphs, would seem, for reasons stated below, to be independent and
later additions.

(_a_) The argument of the central paragraphs runs almost exactly
parallel with the criticism of the first _Paralogism_, applying the same
line of thought, in disproof of the assumed argument for the simplicity
of the soul. It may be noted, in passing, that Kant here departs from
his table of categories. There is no category of simplicity. The
connection which he seeks to establish between the concept of simplicity
and the categories of quality is arbitrary. It more naturally connects
with the category of unity; but the category of unity is required for
the third _Paralogism_. For explanation of the way in which he equates
the concept of simplicity with the category of reality Kant is satisfied
to refer the reader to the section on the second antinomy in which this
same identification occurs.[1422] Indeed the simplicity here dwelt upon
seems hardly distinguishable from substantiality, and therefore it is
not surprising that Kant’s criticism of the second _Paralogism_ should
be practically identical with that of the first.[1423] Since the “I,” as
logical subject of thought, signifies only a something in general, and
embodies no insight into the constitution of this something, it is for
that reason empty of all content, and consequently simple. “The
simplicity of the _representation_ of a subject is not _eo ipso_ a
knowledge of the simplicity of the subject itself....” The second
_Paralogism_ thus, in Kant’s view, falsely argues from the merely
logical unity of the subject _in representation_ to the actual
simplicity of the subject _in itself_.

(_b_) One reason for regarding the first four paragraphs as a later
addition is their opening reference to the introductory sections of the
_Dialectic_, of which this chapter otherwise takes little or no account.
This _Paralogism_ is, Kant declares, “the Achilles of all the
dialectical inferences in the pure doctrine of the soul,” meaning that
it may well seem a quite invulnerable argument.[1424]

     “It is no mere sophistical play contrived by a dogmatist in order
     to impart to his assertions a superficial plausibility (_Schein_),
     but an inference which appears to withstand even the keenest
     scrutiny and the most scrupulously exact investigation.”

The second paragraph is a very pointed restatement of a main supporting
argument of this second _Paralogism_. This argument well deserves the
eulogy with which Kant has ushered it in. It is as follows. The unity of
consciousness can not be explained as due to the co-operative action of
independent substances. Such a merely external effect as that of motion
in a material body may be the resultant of the united motions of its
parts. But it is otherwise with thought. For should that which thinks be
viewed as composite, and the different representations, as, for
instance, of the single words of a verse, be conceived as distributed
among the several parts, a multiplicity of separate consciousnesses
would result, and the single complex consciousness, that of the verse as
a whole, would be rendered impossible. Consciousness cannot
therefore--such is the argument--inhere in the composite. The soul must
be a simple substance.[1425]

As there is no reference in this argument to the “I think,” the
criticism cannot be that of the first _Paralogism_, nor that of the
central paragraphs of this second _Paralogism_. Kant’s reply--as given
in the third and fourth paragraphs--is in effect to refer the reader to
the results of the _Analytic_, and is formulated in the manner of his
_Introduction_ to the _Critique_. The principle that multiplicity of
representation presupposes absolute unity in the thinking subject can
neither be demonstrated analytically from mere concepts, nor derived
from experience. Being a synthetic _a priori_ judgment, it can be
established only by means of a transcendental deduction. But in that
form it will define only a condition required for the possibility of
consciousness; it can tell us nothing in regard to the noumenal nature
of the thinking being. And, as Kant argues in the third
_Paralogism_,[1426] there may be a possible analogy between thought and
motion, though of a different kind from that above suggested.

The entire absence of all connection between the argument of these
paragraphs and the argument of those which immediately follow upon
them, at least suffices to show that this second _Paralogism_ has not
been written as a continuous whole; and taken together with the fact
that the problem is here formulated in terms of the _Introduction_ to
the _Critique_, would seem to show that this part of the section is of
comparatively late origin.

(_c_) The concluding paragraphs, which are of considerable intrinsic
interest, also reflect an independent line of criticism. As the phrase
“the above proposition”[1427] seems to indicate, they were not
originally composed in this present connection. They give expression to
Kant’s partial agreement with the line of argument followed by the
rationalists, but also seek to show that, despite such partial validity,
the argument does not lend support to any metaphysical extension of our
empirical knowledge. In A 358 we have what may be a reference to the
argument of the introductory sections of the _Dialectic_. The argument
under criticism is praised as being “natural and popular,” “occurring
even to the least sophisticated understanding,” and as leading it to
view the soul as an altogether different existence from the body. The
argument is as follows. None of the qualities proper to material
existence, such as impenetrability or motion, are to be discovered in
our inner experience. Nor can feelings, desires, thoughts, etc., be
externally intuited. In view of these differences, we seem justified in
asserting that the soul cannot be an appearance in space, and cannot
therefore be corporeal. Kant replies by drawing attention to the
fundamental Critical distinction between appearances and things in
themselves.[1428] If material bodies, as apprehended, were things in
themselves, the argument would certainly justify us in refusing to
regard the soul and its states as of similar nature. But since, as the
_Aesthetic_ has shown, bodies, as known, are mere appearances of outer
sense, the real question at issue is not that of the distinction between
the soul and bodies in space, but of the distinction between the soul
and that something which conditions all outer appearances.

     “...this something which underlies the outer appearances and which
     so affects our sense that it obtains the representations of space,
     matter, shape, etc., this something, viewed as noumenon (or better,
     as transcendental object), might yet also at the same time serve as
     the subject of our thoughts....”[1429]

Thus the argument criticised serves only to enforce the very genuine
distinction between inner and outer appearances; it justifies no
assertion, either positive or negative, as to the nature of the soul or
as to its relation to body in its noumenal aspect. The monadistic,
spiritualist theory of material existence remains an open possibility,
though only as an hypothesis incapable either of proof or of disproof.
We cannot obtain, by way of inference from the character of our
apperceptive consciousness, any genuine addition to our speculative
insight.

=Third Paralogism: of Personality.=[1430]--Kant’s criticism again runs
parallel with that of the preceding _Paralogisms_. The fallacy involved
is traced to a confusion between the numerical identity of the self _in
representation_ and the numerical identity of the subject _in itself_.
The logical subject of knowledge must, as the transcendental deduction
has proved, think itself as self-identical throughout all its
experiences. This is indeed all that the judgment “I think” expresses.
It is mere identity, “I am I.” But from the identity of representation
we must not argue to identity of the underlying self. So far as the
unity of self-consciousness is concerned, there is nothing to prevent
the noumenal conditions of the self from undergoing transformation so
complete as to involve the loss of identity, while yet supporting the
representation of an identical self.

     “Although the dictum of certain ancient Schools, that everything in
     the world is in a flux and nothing permanent and abiding, cannot be
     reconciled with the admission of substances, it is not refuted by
     the unity of self-consciousness. For we are unable from our own
     consciousness to determine whether, as souls, we are permanent or
     not. Since we reckon as belonging to our identical self only that
     of which we are conscious, we must necessarily judge that we are
     one and the same throughout the whole time of which we are
     conscious. We cannot, however, claim that such a judgment would be
     valid from the standpoint of an outside observer. As the only
     permanent appearance which we meet with in the soul is the
     representation ‘I’ that accompanies and connects them all, we are
     unable to prove that this ‘I,’ a mere thought, may not be in the
     same state of flux as the other thoughts which are connected
     together by its means.”[1431]

And Kant adds an interesting illustration.[1432]

     “An elastic ball which impinges on another similar ball in a
     straight line communicates to the latter its whole motion, and
     therefore its whole state (_i.e._ if we take account only of the
     positions in space). If, then, in analogy with such bodies, we
     postulate substances such that the one communicates to the other
     representations together with the consciousness of them, we can
     conceive a whole series of substances of which the first transmits
     its state together with its consciousness to the second, the second
     its own state with that of the preceding substance to the third,
     and this in turn the states of all the preceding substances
     together with its own consciousness and with their consciousness to
     another. The last substance would then be conscious of all the
     states of the substances, which had undergone change before its own
     change, as being its own states, because they would have been
     transferred to it together with the consciousness of them. And yet
     it would not have been one and the same person in all these
     states.”[1433]

The perversely Hegelian character of Caird’s and Watson’s manner of
interpreting the _Critique_ is especially evident in their treatment of
the _Paralogisms_. They make not the least mention of this part of
Kant’s teaching.

Kant employs a further argument which would seem to show that at the
time when these paragraphs were written the general tendency of his
thought was predominantly subjectivist in character. There are, he
implies, as many different times as there are selves that represent
time.[1434] The argument is as follows. As the “I think” is equivalent
to “I am I,” we may say either that all time of which I am conscious is
in me, or that I am conscious of myself as numerically identical in each
and every part of it. In my individual consciousness, therefore,
identity of my person is unfailingly present. But an observer, viewing
me from the outside,[1435] represents me in the time of his own
consciousness; and as the time in which he thus sets me is not that of
my own thinking, the self-identity of my consciousness, even if he
recognises its existence, does not justify him in inferring the
objective permanence of my self.

The two concluding paragraphs seem to have been independently
composed.[1436] They contribute nothing of importance.

=Fourth Paralogism: of Ideality.=[1437]--The main argument of this
_Paralogism_, which contains the first edition refutation of idealism,
has already been considered above.[1438] We require, therefore, only to
treat of it in its connection with the other _Paralogisms_, and to note
some few minor points that remain for consideration. Its argument
differs from that of the other _Paralogisms_ in that the fallacy
involved is traced, in agreement with the requirements of the
introductory sections of the _Dialectic_, to a failure to distinguish
between appearances and things in themselves. Its connection with the
table of categories is extremely artificial. In A 344 = B 402 the
category employed is that of possibility, in A 404 and A 344 _n._ that
of existence.[1439] Kant’s attempt to combine the problem here treated
with that of the other _Paralogisms_ can only be explained as due to the
requirements of his architectonic.[1440] This _Paralogism_ does not
concern itself with the nature of the soul. It refers exclusively to the
mode of existence to be ascribed to objective appearances. None the
less, Kant contrives to bring it within the range of rational psychology
in the following manner. He argues[1441] that rational psychologists are
one and all adherents of empirical idealism. They confound appearances
in space with things in themselves, and therefore assert that our
knowledge of their existence is inferential and consequently uncertain.
The errors of empirical idealism are thus bound up with the dogmatic
assumptions of the rationalist position. They are traceable to its
failure to distinguish between appearances and things in themselves.
Such dogmatism may take the form of materialism or of ontological
dualism, as well as of spiritualism.[1442] All three, in professing to
possess knowledge of things in themselves, violate Critical principles.
If the chief function of rational psychology consists in securing the
conception of the soul against the onslaughts of materialism,[1443] that
can be much more effectively attained through transcendental idealism.

     “For, on [Critical] teaching, so completely are we freed from the
     fear that on the removal of matter all thought, and even the very
     existence of thinking beings, would be destroyed, that on the
     contrary it is clearly shown that if I remove the thinking subject
     the whole corporeal world must at once vanish, since it is nothing
     save appearance in the sensibility of our subject and a species of
     its representations.”[1444]

We do not, indeed, succeed in proving that the thinking self is in its
existence independent of the “transcendental substrate”[1445] of outer
appearances. But as both possibilities remain open, the admission of our
ignorance leaves us free to look to other than speculative sources for
proof of the independent and abiding existence of the self.

=Reflection on the Whole of Pure Psychology.=[1446]--This section affords
Kant the opportunity of discussing certain problems which he desires to
deal with, but is unable to introduce under the recognised rubrics of
his logical architectonic.[1447] There are, Kant says, three other
dialectical questions, essential to the purposes of rational psychology,
grounded upon the same transcendental illusion (confusion of appearances
with things in themselves), and soluble in similar fashion: (1) as to
the possibility of the communion of soul and body, _i.e._ of the state
of the soul during the life of the body; (2) as to the beginning of this
association, _i.e._ of the soul in and before birth; (3) as to the
termination of this association, _i.e._ of the soul in and after the
death of the body. Kant treats these three problems from the extreme
subjectivist standpoint, inner and outer sense being distinguished and
related in the manner peculiar to the first edition. The contrast
between mind and body is a difference solely between the appearances of
inner and those of outer sense. Both alike exist only in and through the
thinking subject, though the latter

     “...have this deceptive property that, representing objects in
     space, they as it were detach themselves from the soul and appear
     to hover outside it.”[1448]

The problem, therefore, of the association of soul and body, properly
understood, is not that of the interaction of the soul with other known
substances of an opposite nature, but only

     “...how in a thinking subject outer intuition, namely, that of
     space, with its filling in of figure and motion, is possible. And
     that is a question which no human being can possibly answer. The
     gap in our knowledge ... can only be indicated through the
     ascription of outer appearances to that transcendental object which
     is the cause of this species of representations, but of which we
     can have no knowledge whatsoever and of which we shall never
     acquire any conception.”[1449]

The familiar problem of the association of mind and body is thus due to
a transcendental illusion which leads the mind to hypostatise
representations, viewing them as independent existences that act upon
the senses and generate our subjective states. The motions in space,
which are merely the expression in terms of appearance of the influence
of the transcendental object upon “our senses,”[1450] are thus wrongly
regarded as the causes of our sensations. They themselves are mere
representations, and, as Kant implies, are for that reason incapable of
acting as causes. In this section, it may be noted in passing, there is
not the least trace of the phenomenalist teaching, according to which
spatial objects are viewed as acting upon the bodily sense-organs. Kant
here denies all interaction of mind and body, and recognises only the
interaction of their noumenal conditions. Appearances as such can never
have causal efficacy. The position represented is pure subjectivism, and
very significantly goes along with Kant’s earlier doctrine of the
transcendental object.[1451]

The dogmatic character of the interaction theory appears very clearly,
as Kant proceeds to point out, in the objections which have been made to
it, whether by those who substitute for it the theories of
pre-established harmony and occasionalism, or by those who adopt a
sceptical non-committal attitude. Their objections rest upon exactly the
same presupposition as the theory which they are attacking. To
demonstrate the impossibility of interaction, they must be able to show
that the transcendental object is not the cause of outer appearances;
and owing to the limitations of our knowledge that is entirely beyond
our powers. Failing, however, to draw a distinction between appearances
and things in themselves, they have not realised the actual nature of
the situation, and accordingly have directed their objections merely to
showing that mind and body, taken as independent existences, must not be
viewed as capable of interaction.

The Critical standpoint also supplies the proper formulation for the
other two problems--a formulation which in itself decides the degree and
manner of our possible insight in regard to them. The view that the
thinking subject may be capable of thought prior to all association with
the body should be stated as asserting

     “...that prior to the beginning of that species of sensibility in
     virtue of which something appears to us in space, those
     transcendental objects, which in our present state appear to us as
     bodies, could have been intuited in an entirely different
     manner.”[1452]

The view that the soul, upon the cessation of all association with the
corporeal world, may still continue to think, will similarly consist in
the contention

     “...that if that species of sensibility, in virtue of which
     transcendental objects (which in our present state are entirely
     unknown) appear to us as a material world, should cease, all
     intuition of them would not for that reason be removed; but that
     it would still be possible that those same unknown objects should
     continue to be known [sic] by the thinking subject, though no
     longer, indeed, in the quality of bodies.”[1453]

Not the least ground, Kant claims, can be discovered by means of
speculation in support of such assertions. Even their bare possibility
cannot be demonstrated. But it is equally impossible to establish any
valid objection to them. Since we cannot pretend to knowledge of things
in themselves, a modest acquiescence in the limitations of experience
alone becomes us.

The remaining paragraphs (A 396-405) contain nothing that is new. They
merely repeat points already more adequately stated. A 401-2, which
deals with the nature of apperception and its relation to the
categories, has been considered above.[1454] The argument that, as the
self must presuppose the thought of itself in knowing anything, it
cannot know itself as object, is also commented upon above.[1455]

The statement[1456] that the determining self (the thinking, _das
Denken_) is to be distinguished from the determinable self (the thinking
subject) as knowledge from its object, should be interpreted in the
light of Kant’s argument in the second and third _Paralogisms_, that the
simplicity and self-identity of the representation of an object must not
be taken as knowledge of simplicity or numerical identity in the object
represented.

The analysis given in A 402-3 of the fallacy involved in the
_Paralogisms_ is, as Adickes has pointed out,[1457] confused and
misleading. Kant here declares that in the major premiss of each
syllogism the assertion is intended in the merely logical sense, and
therefore as applicable only to the subject _in representation_, but in
the minor premiss and conclusion is asserted of the subject as bearer of
consciousness, _i.e. in itself_. But were that so, the minor premiss
would be a false assertion, and the false conclusion would not be
traceable to logical fallacy. Kant gives the correct statement of his
position in B 410-11.[1458] The attempted justification of the fourfold
arrangement of the _Paralogisms_ with which the section concludes
suffers from the artificiality of Kant’s logical architectonic.


SECOND EDITION STATEMENT OF THE PARALOGISMS[1459]

Except for the introductory paragraphs, which remain unaltered, the
chapter is completely recast in the second edition. The treatment of the
four _Paralogisms_ which in the first edition occupied thirty-three
pages is reduced to five. The problems of the mutual interaction of mind
and body, of its prenatal character and of its immortality, the
discussion of which in the first edition required some ten pages, are
now disposed of in a single paragraph (B 426-7). The remaining
twenty-two pages of the new chapter are almost entirely devoted to more
or less polemical discussion of criticisms which had been passed upon
the first edition. These had been in great part directed against Kant’s
doctrine of apperception and of inner sense, and so could fittingly be
dealt with in connection with the problems of rational psychology. As
Benno Erdmann has suggested,[1460] B 409-14 and 419-21 would seem to be
directed against Ulrichs’[1461] Leibnizian position and especially
against his metaphysical interpretation of apperception. B 428-30 treats
of the difficulties raised by Pistorius[1462] in regard to the existence
of the self. B 414-15 is similarly polemical, but in this case Kant
cites his opponent, Mendelssohn, by name. Throughout, as in the
alterations made in the chapter on _Phenomena and Noumena_, Kant insists
more strongly than in the first edition upon the unknowableness of the
self, and on the difference between thought and knowledge. The pure
forms of thought are not, Kant now declares, concepts of objects, that
is, are not categories,[1463] but “merely logical functions.” Though
this involves no essential doctrinal change, it indicates the altered
standpoint from which Kant now regards his problem. Its significance has
already been dwelt upon.[1464]

In formulating the several arguments of the four _Paralogisms_, Kant
develops and places in the forefront a statement which receives only
passing mention in A 352-3, 362, 366-7, 381-2, namely, that the truths
contained in the judgments of rational psychology find expression in
merely identical (_i.e._ analytic) propositions. This enables Kant to
formulate both the _Paralogisms_ and his criticisms thereof in much
briefer and more pointed fashion. In each case the _Paralogism_, as he
shows, substitutes a synthetic _a priori_ judgment, involving an
extension of our knowledge and a reference to the noumenal self, for the
given judgment which, in so far as it is valid, is always a merely
analytic restatement of the purely formal “I think.” From the very
start also, Kant introduces the distinctions of his own Critical
teaching, especially that between thinking and intuiting, and that
between the determining and the determinable self.

=First Paralogism.=--That the I which thinks must always _in thought_ be
viewed as subject and not as mere predicate, is an identical
proposition. It must not be taken as meaning that the subject which
underlies thought is an abiding substance. This latter proposition is of
much wider scope, and would involve such data (in this case entirely
lacking) as are required for the establishment of a synthetic _a priori_
judgment.

=Second Paralogism.=--That the I of _apperception_ and so of all _thought_
is single and cannot be resolved into a multiplicity of subjects, is
involved in the very conception of thought, and is therefore an analytic
proposition. It must not be interpreted as signifying that the self is a
simple substance. For the latter assertion is again a synthetic
proposition, and presupposes for its possibility an intuition by the
self of its own essential nature. As all our intuitions are merely
sensuous, that cannot be looked for in the “I think.”

     “It would, indeed, be surprising if what in other cases requires so
     much labour to discover--namely, what it is, of all that is
     presented by intuition, that is substance, and further, whether
     this substance is simple (_e.g._ in the parts of matter)--should be
     thus directly given me, as if by revelation, in the poorest of all
     representations.”[1465]

We may here observe how the practice, adopted by Caird, of translating
_Anschauung_ by ‘perception’ has misled him into serious
misunderstanding of Kant’s teaching. It has caused him[1466] to
interpret Kant as arguing that we have no knowledge of the self because
we can have no _sensuous_ perception of it. Kant’s argument rather is
that as all human “intuition” is sensuous, we are cut off from all
possibility of determining our noumenal nature. We are thrown back upon
mere concepts which, as yielding only analytic propositions, cannot
extend our insight beyond the limits of sense-experience. The term
‘intuition’ is much broader in meaning than the term ‘perception’; it
can also be employed as equivalent to the phrase ‘_immediate_
apprehension.’[1467] The grounds for Kant’s contention that we have no
intuition or immediate knowledge of the self are embodied in, and
inspire, his doctrine of inner sense.[1468] It may also be noted that
in B 412 Kant, speaking of the necessity of intuition for knowledge of
the self, uses the unusual phrase ‘a permanent intuition’--a phrase
which, so far as I have observed, he nowhere employs in dealing with the
intuition that conditions the sense perception of material bodies.[1469]
Its employment here may perhaps be due to the fact that its implied
reference is not to a given sensuous manifold but to some form of
immediate apprehension, capable of revealing the permanent nature of the
noumenal self.

=Third Paralogism.=--That I am identical with myself throughout the
consciousness of my manifold experiences, is likewise an analytic
proposition obtainable by mere analysis of the “I think.” And since that
form of consciousness, as stated in the criticism of the preceding
_Paralogism_, is purely conceptual, containing no element of intuition,
no judgment based solely upon it can ever be taken as equivalent to the
synthetic proposition that the self, as thinking being, is an identical
substance.

=Fourth Paralogism.=--This _Paralogism_ is somewhat altered. As noted
above,[1470] the problem dealt with in the first edition concerns the
outer world, and only quite indirectly the nature of the self. In the
second edition that argument is restated,[1471] and is more properly
located within the _Analytic_. The argument which now takes its place
runs parallel with that of the three preceding _Paralogisms_. The
assertion that I distinguish my own existence as a thinking being from
other things outside me, including thereunder my own body, is an
analytic proposition, since by _other_ things is meant things which I
think as different from myself.

     “But I do not thereby learn whether this consciousness of myself
     would be at all possible apart from things outside me through which
     representations are given to me, and whether, therefore, I can
     exist merely as thinking being (_i.e._ without existing in human
     form).”

In =B 417-18= Kant points out that rational psychology, in asserting that
the self can be conscious apart from all consciousness of outer things,
commits itself to the acceptance of problematic idealism. If
consciousness of outer objects is not necessary to consciousness of
self, there can be no valid method of proving their existence. In the
fourth _Paralogism_ of the first edition, the inter-dependence of
rational psychology and empirical idealism is also dwelt upon, but is
there traced to a confusion of appearances with things in
themselves.[1472]

=B 410-11.=--The correct formulation is here given of what in the first
edition[1473] is quite incorrectly stated.[1474] A paralogism is a
syllogism which errs in logical form (as contrasted with a syllogism
erring in matter, _i.e._ the premisses of which are false). In the
paralogisms of Rational Psychology, the logical fallacy committed is
that of ambiguous middle, or as Kant names it, the _sophisma figurae
dictionis_. In the major premiss the middle term is used as referring to
real existence, in the minor only as expressive of the unity of
consciousness.

=Refutation of Mendelssohn’s Proof of the Permanence of the
Soul.=[1475]--Mendelssohn’s argument is that the soul, as it does not
consist of parts,[1476] cannot disappear _gradually_ by disintegration
into its constituent elements. If, therefore, it perishes, it must pass
out of existence _suddenly_; at one moment it will exist, at the next
moment it will be non-existent. But, Mendelssohn maintains, for three
closely connected reasons this would seem to be impossible. In the first
place, the immediate juxtaposition of directly opposed states is never
to be met with in the material world. Complete opposites, such as day
and night, waking and sleeping, never follow upon one another abruptly,
but only through a series of intermediate states.[1477] Secondly, among
the opposites which material processes thus bridge over, the opposition
of being and not-being is never to be found. Only by a miracle can a
material existence be annihilated.[1478] If, therefore, empirical
evidence is to be allowed as relevant, we must not assert of the
invisible soul what is never known to befall the material existences of
the visible world. Thirdly--the only part of Mendelssohn’s argument
which Kant mentions--the sudden cessation of the soul’s existence would
also violate the law of the continuity of time.[1479] Between any two
moments there is always an intermediate time in which the one moment
passes continuously into the other.

Kant’s reply to this third part of Mendelssohn’s argument is that though
the soul must not be conceived as perishing suddenly, it may pass out of
existence by a continuous diminution through an infinite number of
smaller degrees of intensive reality; and in support of this view he
maintains the very doubtful position that clearness and obscurity of
representation are not features of the contents apprehended, but only of
the intensity of the consciousness directed upon them.[1480]

=B 417-22.=--Kant here points out that rational psychology, as above
expounded, proceeds synthetically, starting from the assertion of the
substantiality of the soul and proceeding to the proof that its
existence is independent of outer things. But it may proceed in the
reverse fashion, analytically developing the implications supposed to be
involved in the “I think,” viewed as an existential judgment, _i.e._ as
signifying “I exist thinking.” Kant restates the argument in this
analytic form in order, as it would seem, to secure the opportunity of
replying to those criticisms of his teaching in the first edition which
concern his doctrine of apperception and his employment of the
categories, especially of the category of existence, in relation to the
self. What is new and important in these pages, and also in the
connected passages in B 428-30, has been discussed above.[1481]

=B 419-20.=--After remarking that simplicity or unity is involved in the
very possibility of apperception, Kant proceeds to argue that it can
never be explained from a strictly materialist standpoint, since nothing
that is real in space is ever simple. Points are merely limits, and are
not therefore themselves anything that can form part of space. The
passage as a whole would seem to be directed against the Leibnizian
teaching of Ulrichs.[1482]

=B 426-7.=--Kant makes a remark to which nothing in his argument yields
any real support, namely, that the dialectical illusion in rational
psychology is due to the substitution of an Idea of reason for the quite
indeterminate concept of a thinking being in general. As is argued
below,[1483] the assumption which he is here making that the concept of
the self is an _a priori_ and ultimate Idea of pure Reason, cannot be
regarded as a genuine part of his Critical teaching.

=B 427-8= touches quite briefly upon questions more fully and adequately
treated in the first edition. The scanty treatment here accorded to them
would seem to indicate, as Benno Erdmann remarks,[1484] that the problem
of the interaction of mind and body which so occupied Kant’s mind from
1747 to 1770 has meantime almost entirely lost interest for him. The
problem of immortality remains central, but it is now approached from
the ethical side.

In =B 421= and =B 423-6= Kant draws from his criticism of the _Paralogisms_
the final conclusion that the metaphysical problems as to the nature and
destiny of the self are essentially _practical_ problems. When
approached from a theoretical standpoint, as curious questions to be
settled by logical dialectic, their speculative proof

     “...so stands upon the point of a hair, that even the schools
     preserve it from falling only so long as they keep it unceasingly
     spinning round like a top; even in their own eyes it yields no
     abiding foundation upon which anything could be built.”[1485]
     “Rational psychology exists not as _doctrine_, ... but only as
     _discipline_. It sets impassable limits to speculative reason in
     this field, and thus keeps us, on the one hand, from throwing
     ourselves into the arms of soulless materialism, or, on the other
     hand, from losing ourselves in an unsubstantial spiritualism which
     can have no real meaning for us in this present life. But though it
     furnishes no positive doctrine, it reminds us that we should regard
     this refusal of Reason to give satisfying response to our
     inquisitive probings into what is beyond the limits of this present
     life as a hint from Reason to divert our self-knowledge from
     fruitless and extravagant speculation to its fruitful practical
     employment.”[1486] “The proofs which are serviceable for the world
     at large preserve their entire value undiminished, and indeed, upon
     the surrender of these dogmatic pretensions, gain in clearness and
     in natural force. For Reason is then located in its own peculiar
     sphere, namely the order of ends, which is also at the same time an
     order of nature; and since it is in itself a practical faculty
     which is not bound down to natural conditions, it is justified in
     extending the order of ends, and therewith our own existence,
     beyond the limits of experience and of life.”[1487]

Then follows brief indication of the central teaching of the
_Metaphysics of Ethics_ and of the two later _Critiques_. Through moral
values that outweigh all considerations of utility and happiness, we
become conscious of an inner vocation which inspires feelings of
sublimity similar to those which are aroused by contemplation of the
starry firmament; and to the verities thus disclosed we can add the less
certain but none the less valuable confirmation yielded by natural
beauty and design, and by the conformity of nature to our intellectual
demands.

     “Man’s natural endowments--not merely his talents and the impulses
     to employ them, but above all else the Moral Law within him--go so
     far beyond all utility and advantage which he may derive from them
     in this present life, that he learns thereby to prize the mere
     consciousness of a righteous will as being, apart from all
     advantageous consequences, apart even from the shadowy reward of
     posthumous fame, supreme over all other values; and so feels an
     inner call to fit himself, by his conduct in this world, and by the
     sacrifice of many of its advantages, for being a citizen of a
     better world upon which he lays hold in Idea. This powerful and
     incontrovertible proof is reinforced by our ever-increasing
     knowledge of purposiveness in all that we see around us, and by a
     glimpse of the immensity of creation, and therefore also by the
     consciousness of a certain illimitableness in the possible
     extension of our knowledge and of a striving commensurate
     therewith. All this still remains to us, though we must renounce
     the hope of ever comprehending, from the mere theoretical knowledge
     of ourselves, the necessary continuance of our existence.”[1488]


IS THE NOTION OF THE SELF A NECESSARY IDEA OF REASON?

One point of great importance must be dwelt upon before we pass from the
_Paralogisms_. Though the negative consequences which follow from the
teaching of the objective deduction are here developed in the most
explicit manner, Kant does not within the limits of this chapter, in
either edition, make any further reference to the doctrine expounded in
the introductory sections of the _Dialectic_,[1489] viz. that the notion
of the self as an immortal being is a necessary Idea of human Reason.
The reader is therefore left under the impression that that doctrine is
unaffected by the destructive criticism passed upon rational psychology,
and that it still survives as an essential tenet of the Critical
philosophy. And he is confirmed in this view when he finds the doctrine
reappearing in the _Appendix_ to the _Dialectic_ and in the
_Methodology_. The Idea of the self is there represented as performing a
quite indispensable, regulative function in the development of the
empirical science of psychology. Now it is one thing to maintain the
existence of Ideal demands of Reason for unity, system and
unconditionedness, and to assert that it is in virtue of these demands
that we are led, in the face of immense discouragement and seeming
contradictions, to reduce the chance collocations and bewildering
complexities of ordinary experience to something more nearly
approximating to what Reason prescribes. But it is a very different
matter when Kant claims that in any one sphere, such as that of
psychology, the unity and the unconditionedness must necessarily be of
one predetermined type. He is then injecting into the Ideals that
_specific_ guidance which only the detail of experience is really
capable of supplying. He is proving false to his own Critical
empiricism, in which no function is ascribed to Reason that need in any
way conflict with the autonomy of specialist research; and he is also
violating his fundamental principle that the _a priori_ can never be
other than purely formal. Indeed, when Kant discloses somewhat more in
detail what he means by the regulative function of the Idea of the self,
the ambiguity of his statements reveals the unconsidered character of
this part of his teaching. It is the expression only of a preconception,
and has eluded the scrutiny of his Critical method largely because of
the protective colouring which its admirable adaptation to the needs of
his architectonic confers upon it. If, for instance, we compare the
three passages in which it is expounded in the _Appendix_ to the
_Dialectic_, we find that Kant himself alternates between the
authoritative prescription to psychology of a spiritualist hypothesis
and what in ultimate analysis, when ambiguities of language are
discounted, amounts simply to the demand for the greatest possible
simplification of its complex phenomena. The passages are as follows.

     “In conformity with these Ideas as principles we shall first, in
     psychology, connect in inner experience all appearances, all
     actions and receptivity of our mind, as if (_als ob_) the mind were
     a simple substance which persists with personal identity (in this
     life at least), while its states, to which those of the body belong
     only as outer conditions, are in continual change.”[1490]

     “...in the human mind we have sensation, consciousness,
     imagination, memory, wit, power of discrimination, pleasure,
     desire, etc. Now, to begin with, a logical maxim requires that we
     should reduce, so far as may be possible, this seeming diversity,
     by comparing these with one another and detecting their hidden
     identity. We have to enquire whether imagination combined with
     consciousness may not be the same thing as memory, wit, power of
     discrimination, and perhaps even identical with understanding and
     Reason. Though logic is not capable of deciding whether a
     _fundamental power_ actually exists, the Idea of such a power is
     the problem involved in a systematic representation of the
     multiplicity of powers. The logical principle of Reason calls upon
     us to bring about such unity as completely as possible; and the
     more appearances of this or that power are found to be identical
     with one another, the more probable it becomes that they are simply
     different manifestations of one and the same power, which may be
     entitled, relatively speaking, their _fundamental power_. The same
     is done with the other powers. The relatively fundamental powers
     must in turn be compared with one another, with a view to
     discovering their harmony, and so bringing them nearer to a single
     radical, _i.e._ absolutely fundamental, power. But this unity of
     Reason is purely hypothetical. We do not assert that such a power
     must necessarily be met with, but that we must seek it in the
     interest of Reason, that is, of establishing certain principles for
     the manifold rules which experience may supply to us. We must
     endeavour, wherever possible, to bring in this way systematic unity
     into our knowledge.”[1491]

In the third of the _Appendix_ passages these two views are confusedly
combined. Kant is insisting that an Idea never asserts, even as an
hypothesis, the existence of a real thing.

     ”[An Idea] is only the schema of the regulative principle by which
     Reason, so far as lies in its power, extends systematic unity over
     the whole field of experience. The first object of such an Idea is
     the ‘I’ itself, viewed simply as thinking nature or soul. If I am
     to investigate the properties with which a thinking being exists in
     itself, I must interrogate experience. I cannot even apply any one
     of the categories to this object, except in so far as its schema is
     given in sense intuition. But I never thereby attain to a
     systematic unity of all appearances of inner sense. Instead, then,
     of the empirical concept (of that which the soul actually is),
     which cannot carry us far, Reason takes the concept of the
     empirical unity of all thought; and by thinking this unity as
     unconditioned and original, it forms from it a concept of Reason,
     _i.e._ the Idea of a simple substance, which, unchangeable in
     itself (personally identical), stands in association with other
     real things outside it; in a word, the Idea of a simple
     self-subsisting intelligence. Yet in so doing it has nothing in
     view save principles of systematic unity in the explanation of the
     appearances of the soul. It is endeavouring to represent all
     determinations as existing in a single subject, all powers, so far
     as possible, as derived from a single fundamental power, all change
     as belonging to the states of one and the same permanent being, and
     all appearances in space as completely different from the actions
     of thought. The simplicity and other properties of substance are
     intended to be only the schema of this regulative principle, and
     are not presupposed as the real ground of the properties of the
     soul. For these may rest on altogether different grounds of which
     we can know nothing. The soul in itself could not be known through
     these assumed predicates, not even if we regarded them as
     absolutely valid in regard to it. For they constitute a mere Idea
     which cannot be represented _in concreto_. Nothing but advantage
     can result from the psychological Idea thus conceived, if only we
     take heed that it is not viewed as more than a mere Idea, and that
     it is therefore taken as valid only in its bearing on the
     systematic employment of Reason in determining the appearances of
     our soul. For no empirical laws of bodily appearances, which are of
     a totally different kind, will then intervene in the explanation of
     what belongs exclusively to inner sense. No windy hypotheses of
     generation, extinction, and palingenesis of souls will be
     permitted. The consideration of this object of inner sense will
     thus be kept completely pure and unmixed, without employing
     heterogeneous properties. Also, Reason’s investigations will be
     directed to reducing the grounds of explanation in this field, so
     far as may be possible, to a single principle. All this will be
     best obtained (indeed is obtainable in no other way) through such a
     schema, viewed as if (_als ob_) it were a real being. The
     psychological Idea, moreover, can signify nothing but the schema of
     a regulative principle. For were I to enquire whether _the soul in
     itself_ is of spiritual nature, the question would have no meaning.
     In employing such a concept I not only abstract from corporeal
     nature, but from nature in general, _i.e._ from all predicates of a
     possible experience, and therefore from all conditions for thinking
     an object for such a concept: yet only as related to an object can
     it be said to have a meaning.”[1492]

The last passage would seem to indicate that Kant has still another and
only partially avowed reason for insisting upon a _special_ and
_spiritualist_ Idea, as regulative of empirical psychology. It is
necessary, he would seem to argue, in order to mark off the peculiar
nature of its subject matter, and to warn us against attempting to
explain its phenomena in the mechanistic manner of physical science. But
if that is Kant’s intention, he has failed to formulate the position in
any really tenable way. It is impossible to maintain, as he here does,
that “no empirical laws of bodily appearances [can] intervene in the
explanation of what belongs exclusively to inner sense.”[1493] Indeed,
in the immediately following sentences, he very clearly indicates how
completely such a position conflicts with his own real teaching. To
think away the corporeal is to think away all experience. Experience is
not dualistically divided into separate worlds. It is one and single,
and the principle of causality rules universally throughout, connecting
inner experiences of sense, feeling, and desire, with their outer
conditions, organic and physical.[1494] Thus Kant’s retention of the
Idea of the self is chiefly of interest as revealing the strength and
tenacity of his spiritualist leanings. We may judge of the
disinterestedness and courage of his thinking by the contrary character
of his pre-conceptions. For even when they have been shown to be
theoretically indemonstrable, they continue to retain by honorific title
the dignity from which they have been deposed. The full force of the
objections is none the less recognised.

     “The simplicity of substance ... is not presupposed as the real
     ground of the properties of the soul. For these may rest on
     altogether different grounds of which we can know nothing.”

That, however, is only Kant’s unbiassed estimate of the theoretical
evidence; it is not an expression of his own personal belief.




