CHAPTER III

THE IDEAL OF PURE REASON


SECTIONS I and II

THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAL[1601]

The statements of the first section cannot profitably be commented upon
at this stage; they are of a merely general character.[1602] I pass at
once to Section II., which, as above stated, is quite the most archaic
piece of rationalistic argument in the entire _Critique_. It is not
merely Leibnizian, but Wolffian in character. For Kant the Wolffian
logic had an old-time flavour and familiarity that rendered it by no
means distasteful; and he is here, as it were, recalling, not altogether
without sympathy, the lessons of his student years. They enable him to
render definite, by way of contrast, the outcome of his own Critical
teaching.

As Kant here restates the Wolffian notion of the _Ens realissimum_ in
such fashion as is required to make it conform to his deduction of the
theological Idea from the disjunctive syllogism, a preliminary statement
of the more orthodox formulation will help to set Wolff’s doctrine in a
clearer light. In so doing, I shall follow Baumgarten, whose
_Metaphysica_ Kant used as a class text-book. Briefly summarised
Baumgarten’s statement is as follows.[1603] The _Ens perfectissimum_ is
that Being which possesses as many predicates, _i.e._ perfections, as
can possibly exist together in a single thing, and in which every one of
its perfections is as great as is anywhere possible. This most perfect
Being must be a real Being, and its reality must be the greatest
possible. It is that in which the most and the greatest realities are.
But all realities are affirmative determinations, and no denial is a
reality. Accordingly no reality can contradict another reality, and all
realities can exist together in the same thing. The _Ens
perfectissimum_, in possessing all the realities that can exist
together, must therefore possess all realities without exception, and
every one of them in the highest degree. The notion of an individual
existence that is at once _perfectissimum_ and also _realissimum_ is
thus determinable by pure Reason from its internal resources. It is the
ground and condition of all other existences; all of them arise through
limitation of its purely positive nature.

Kant seeks to justify his metaphysical deduction of the _Ideal_ from the
disjunctive syllogism, by recasting the above argument in the following
manner. Since everything which exists is completely determined, it is
subject to the principle of complete determination, according to which
one of each of the possible pairs of contradictory predicates must be
applicable to it. To be completely determined the thing must be compared
with the sum total of all possible predicates. Although this idea of the
sum total of all possible predicates, through reference to which alone
any concept can be completely determined, seems itself indeterminate, we
find nevertheless on closer examination that it individualises itself _a
priori_, transforming itself into the concept of an individual existence
that is completely determined by the mere Idea, and which may therefore
be called an Ideal of pure Reason. That is proved as follows. No one can
definitely think a negation unless he founds it on the opposite
affirmation. A man completely blind cannot frame the smallest conception
of darkness, because he has none of light. All negations are therefore
derivative; it is the realities which contain the material by which a
complete determination of anything becomes possible. The source, from
which all possible predicates may be derived, can be nothing but the sum
total of reality. And this concept of the _omnitudo realitatis_ is the
Idea of a Being that is single and individual. As all finite beings
derive the material of their possibility from it, they presuppose it,
and cannot, therefore, constitute it. They are imperfect copies
(_ectypa_), of which it is the sole Ideal. The Idea is also individual.
Out of each possible pair of contradictory predicates, that one which
expresses reality belongs to it. By these infinitely numerous positive
predicates it is determined to absolute concreteness; and as it
therefore possesses all that has reality, not only in nature but in man,
it must be conceived as a personal and intelligent Primordial Being. The
logical Ideal, thus determining itself completely by its own concept,
appears not only as ideal but also as real, not only as logical but also
as divine.

Kant so far anticipates his criticism of the ontological argument as to
give, in the remaining paragraphs of this second section, a preliminary
criticism of this procedure. For the purpose for which the Ideal is
postulated, namely, the determination of all finite and therefore
limited existences, Reason does not require to presuppose an existence
corresponding to it. Its mere Idea will suffice.

     “All manifoldness of things is only a correspondingly varied mode
     of limiting the concept of the highest reality which forms their
     common substratum, just as all figures are only possible as so many
     different modes of limiting infinite space.”[1604]

This relation is not, however, that of a real existence to other things
but of an Idea to concepts. The Idea is a mere fiction, necessary for
comprehending the limited, not a reality that can be asserted, even
hypothetically,[1605] as given along with the limited. None the less,
owing to a natural transcendental illusion, the mind inevitably tends to
hypostatise it, and so generates the object of rational theology.

=Comment.=--The explanation of this illusion, which Kant proceeds to give
in the two concluding paragraphs, is peculiarly confusing. Though the
concept of an all-comprehensive reality may, he argues, be required for
the definition of sensible objects, such a concept must not for that
reason be taken as representing a real existence. The teaching of the
section on _Amphiboly_ is here entirely ignored; and the reader is
bewildered by the assumption, which Kant apparently makes, that
something analogous to the Leibnizian Ideal is a prerequisite of
possible experience.

These last remarks indicate the kind of criticism to which the argument
of this section lays itself open. In expounding the teaching of the
Leibnizian science of rational theology, Kant strives to represent its
Ideal as being an inevitable Idea of human Reason; and in order to make
this argument at all convincing he is constrained to treat as valid the
presupposed ontology, though that has already been shown in the
discussion of _Amphiboly_ to be altogether untenable.[1606] Limitation
is not merely negative; genuine realities may negate one another. Though
the objects of sense presuppose the entire system to which they belong,
the form of this presupposition is in no respect analogous to that which
Wolff would represent as holding between finite existences and the _Ens
realissimum_. The passage in the _Analytic_[1607] in which Kant directly
controverts the above teaching is as follows:

     “The principle, that realities (as pure assertions) never logically
     contradict each other ... has not the least meaning either in
     regard to nature or in regard to any thing-in-itself.... Although
     Herr von Leibniz did not, indeed, announce this proposition with
     all the pomp of a new principle, he yet made use of it for new
     assertions, and his followers expressly incorporated it in their
     Leibnizian-Wolffian system. According to this principle all evils,
     for instance, are merely consequences of the limitations of created
     beings, _i.e._ negations, because negations alone conflict with
     reality.... Similarly his disciples consider it not only possible,
     but even natural, to combine all reality, without fear of any
     conflict, in one being, because the only conflict which they
     recognise is that of contradiction, whereby the concept of a thing
     is itself removed. They do not admit the conflict of reciprocal
     injury in which each of two real grounds destroys the effect of the
     other--a process which we can represent to ourselves only in terms
     of conditions presented to us in sensibility.”

Thus the Ideal which Kant here declares to be a necessary Idea of Reason
is denounced in the _Analytic_ as based on false principles peculiar to
the Leibnizian philosophy, and as “without the least meaning in regard
either to nature or to any thing in itself.” The teaching of the
_Analytic_ will no more combine with this scholastic rationalism than
oil with water. The reader may safely absolve himself from the thankless
task of attempting to render Kant’s argumentation in these paragraphs
consistent with itself. Fortunately, in the next section, Kant returns
to the standpoint proper to the doctrine he is expounding, and lays
bare, with remarkable subtlety and in a very convincing manner, the
concealed dialectic by which the conclusions of this metaphysical
science are really determined.[1608]


SECTION III

THE SPECULATIVE ARGUMENTS IN PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF A SUPREME
BEING[1609]

=Statement.=--Though the Ideal is not arbitrary, but is presupposed in
every attempt to define completely a finite concept, Reason would feel
hesitation in thus transforming what is merely a logical concept into a
Divine Existence, were it not that it is impelled from another
direction to derive reality from such a source. All existences known in
experience are contingent, and so lead us (owing to the constitution of
our Reason) to assume an absolutely necessary Being as their ground and
cause. Now when we examine our various concepts, to ascertain which will
cover this notion of necessary existence, we find that there is one that
possesses outstanding claims, namely, that Idea which contains a
therefore for every wherefore, which is in no respect defective, and
which does not permit us to postulate any condition. The concepts of the
Ideal and of the necessary alone represent the unconditioned; and as
they agree in this fundamental respect, they must, we therefore argue,
be identical. And to this conclusion we are the more inclined, in that,
by thus idealising reality, we are at the same time enabled to realise
our Ideal.

This line of argument, which starts from the contingent, is as little
valid as that which proceeds directly from the Ideal. But since these
arguments express certain tendencies inherent in the human mind, they
have a vitality which survives any merely forensic refutation. Though
the conclusions to which they lead are false, they are none the less
inevitably drawn. Our acceptance of them is due to a transcendental
illusion which may be detected as such, but which, like the ingrained
illusions of sense-experience, must none the less persist.

The opening paragraph of Section V[1610] is the natural completion of
the above analysis. The ontological argument, in _starting_ from the
concept of the _Ens realissimum_, inverts the natural procedure. It is
“a merely scholastic innovation,” and would never have been attempted
save for the need of finding some necessary Being, to which we may
ascend from contingent existence. It maintains that this necessary Being
must be unconditioned and _a priori_ certain, and accordingly looks for
a concept capable of fulfilling this requirement. Such a concept is
supposed to exist in the Idea of an _Ens realissimum_, and this Idea is
therefore used to gain more definite knowledge of that which has been
previously and independently recognised, namely, the necessary Being,

     “This natural procedure of Reason was concealed from view, and
     instead of ending with this concept, the attempt was made to begin
     with it, and so to deduce from it that necessity of existence which
     it was only fitted to complete. Thus arose the unfortunate
     ontological proof, which yields satisfaction neither to the natural
     and healthy understanding nor to the more academic demands of
     strict proof.”[1611]

To return to Section III.: Kant breaks the continuity of his argument,
and anticipates his discussion of the cosmological proof, by stopping to
point out the illegitimacy of the assumption which underlies the first
step in the above argument, namely, that a limited being cannot be
absolutely necessary. Though the concept of a limited being does not
contain the unconditioned, that does not prove that its existence is
conditioned. Indeed each and every limited being may, for all their
concepts show to the contrary, be unconditionally necessary.[1612] The
above argument is consequently inconclusive, and cannot be relied on to
give us any concept whatever of the qualities of a necessary Being. But
this is a merely logical defect, and, as already noted, it is not really
upon logical cogency that the persuasive force of the argument depends.

In conclusion Kant points out that there are only three possible kinds
of speculative (_i.e._ theoretical) proofs of the existence of God: (1)
from definite experience and the specific nature of the world of sense
as revealed in experience; (2) from indefinite experience, _i.e._ from
the fact that any existence at all is empirically given; (3) the
non-empirical _a priori_ proof from mere concepts. The first is the
_physico-theological_ or _teleological_ argument, the second is the
_cosmological_, and the third is the _ontological_. Kant finds it
advisable to reverse the order of the proofs, and to begin by
consideration of the ontological argument. This would seem to indicate
that the ‘scholastic innovation’ to which he traces the origin of the
ontological proof has more justification than his remarks appear to
allow.


SECTION IV

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF AN ONTOLOGICAL PROOF[1613]

=Statement.=--Hitherto Kant has employed the concept of an absolutely
necessary Being without question. He now recognises that the problem,
from which we ought to start, is not whether the existence of an
absolutely necessary Being can be demonstrated, but whether, and how,
such a Being can even be conceived. And upon analysis he discovers that
the assumed notion of an absolutely necessary, _i.e._ _unconditioned_
Being is entirely lacking in intelligible content. For in eliminating
all conditioning causes--through which alone the understanding can
conceive necessity of existence--we also remove this particular kind of
necessity. A verbal definition may, indeed, be given of the Idea, as
when we say that it represents something the non-existence of which is
impossible. But this yields no insight into the reasons which make its
non-existence inconceivable, and such insight is required if anything at
all is to be thought in the Idea.

     “The expedient of removing all those conditions which the
     understanding indispensably requires in order to regard something
     as necessary, simply through the introduction of the word
     _unconditioned_, is very far from sufficing to show whether I am
     still thinking anything, or not rather perhaps nothing at all, in
     the concept of the unconditionally necessary.”[1614]

The untenableness of the concept has been in large part concealed
through a confusion between logical and ontological necessity, that is,
between necessity of judgment and necessity of existence. The fact that
every proposition of geometry must be regarded as absolutely necessary
was supposed to justify this identification. It was not observed that
logical necessity refers only to _judgments_, not to _things_ and their
relations, and that the absolute necessity of the judgment holds only
upon the assumption that the conditioned necessity of the thing referred
to has previously been granted. If there be any such thing as a
triangle, the assertion that it has three angles will follow with
absolute necessity; but the existence of a triangle or even of space in
general is contingent. In other words, the asserted necessity is only a
form of logical sequence, not the unconditioned necessity of existence
which is supposed to be disclosed in the Idea of Reason. All judgments,
so far as they refer to existence, as distinct from mere possibility,
are hypothetical, and serve to define a reality that is only
contingently given. In adopting this position, Kant is in entire
agreement with Hume. The contradictory of a matter of fact is always
thinkable. There has, Kant claims, been no more fruitful source of
illusion throughout the whole history of philosophy than the belief in
an absolute necessity that is purely logical.[1615] In the ontological
argument we have the most striking instance of such rationalistic
exaggeration of the powers of thought.

=Comment.=--Had this criticism of the Idea of unconditioned necessity been
introduced at an earlier stage in Kant’s argument, much confusion would
have been avoided. It involves the thorough revisal of his criticism of
the third and fourth antinomies, as well as of the whole account
hitherto given of the function of Reason and of its metaphysical
dialectic. The principle, that if the conditioned be given, the whole
series of conditions up to the unconditioned is likewise given, must no
longer be accepted as a basis for argument. Indeed the very terms in
which Reason has so far been defined, as the faculty of the
unconditioned, become subject to question. In that definition the term
unconditioned has tacitly been taken as equivalent to the
unconditionally necessary, and on elimination of the element of
necessity, it will reduce merely to the concept of totality, which is a
pure form of the understanding. Those parts of the _Dialectic_, which
embody the view that Reason is simply the understanding transcendently
employed, will thus be confirmed; the alternative view of Reason as a
separate faculty will have to be eliminated. But these are questions
which Kant himself proceeds to raise and discuss.[1616] Meantime he
applies the above results in criticism of the ontological argument.

=Statement.=--In an identical judgment it is contradictory to reject the
predicate while retaining the subject. But there is no contradiction if
we reject subject and predicate alike, for nothing is then left that can
be contradicted. If we assume that there is a triangle, we are bound to
recognise that it has three angles, but there is no contradiction in
rejecting the triangle together with its three angles. The same holds
true of an absolutely necessary Being. ‘God is omnipotent’ is an
identical and therefore necessary judgment. But if we say, ‘There is no
God,’ neither the omnipotence nor any other attribute remains; and there
is therefore not the least contradiction in saying that God does not
exist. The only way of evading this conclusion is to argue that there
are subjects which cannot be removed out of existence. That, however,
would only be another way of asserting that there exist absolutely
necessary subjects, and that is the very assertion which is now in
question, and which the ontological argument undertakes to prove. Our
sole test of what cannot be removed is the contradiction which would
thereby result; and the only possible instance which can be cited is the
concept of the _Ens realissimum_. It remains, therefore, to establish
the above criticism for this specific case.

At the start Kant points out that absence of internal contradiction,
even if granted, proves only that the _Ens realissimum_ is a _logically_
possible concept (as distinguished from the _nihil negativum_[1617]); it
does not suffice to establish the possibility of the object of the
concept. But for the sake of argument Kant allows this initial
assumption to pass. The argument to be disproved is that as reality
comprehends existence, existence is contained in the concept of _Ens
realissimum_, and cannot therefore be denied of it without removing its
internal possibility. The really fundamental assumption of this argument
is that existence is capable of being included in the concept of a
_possible_ being. If that were so, the assertion of its existence would
be an analytic proposition, and the proof could not be challenged. (The
assumption is partly concealed by alternation of the terms reality and
existence: in their actual employment they are completely synonymous.)
As the above assumption thus decides the entire issue, Kant sets himself
to establish, in direct opposition to it, the thesis, that every
proposition which predicates existence is synthetic, and that in
consequence its denial can never involve a logical contradiction.
Existence can never form part of the content of a conception, and
therefore must not be regarded as a possible predicate. What logically
corresponds to it in a judgment is a purely formal factor, namely, the
copula. The proposition, ‘God is omnipotent,’ contains two concepts,
each of which has its object--God and omnipotence. The word ‘is’ adds no
new predicate, but only serves to posit the predicate in its relation to
the subject. Similarly, when we take the subject together with all its
predicates (including that of omnipotence), and say, ‘God is’ or ‘there
is a God,’ we attach no new predicate to the concept of God, but only
posit the subject in itself with all its predicates as being an object
that stands in relation to our concept. In order that the proposition be
true, the _content_ of the object and of the concept must be one and the
same. If the object contained more than the concept, the concept would
not express the object, and the proposition would assert a relation that
does not hold. Or to state the same point in another way, the real must
not contain more content than the possible. Otherwise it would not be
the possible, but something different from the possible, which would
then be taken as existing. A hundred real thalers do not contain the
least coin more than a hundred possible thalers. Though my financial
position is very differently affected by a hundred real thalers than by
the thought of them only, a conceived hundred thalers are not in the
least increased through acquiring existence outside my concept.

Kant presents his argument in still another form. If we think in a thing
every kind of reality except one, the missing reality is not supplied by
my saying that this defective thing exists. On the contrary, it exists
with the same defect with which I have thought it. When, therefore, I
think a Being as the highest reality, without any defect, the question
still remains whether it exists or not. For though, in my concept,
nothing may be lacking of the possible real _content_ of a thing in
general, something is still lacking in its relation to my whole state of
thinking, namely, knowledge of its existence; and such knowledge can
never be obtained save in an _a posteriori_ manner. That is owing to the
limitations imposed by the conditions of our sense-experience. We never
confound the existence of a sensible object with its mere concept. The
concept represents something that may or may not exist: to determine
existence we must refer to actual experience. As Kant has already
stated, the actual is always for us the accidental, and its assertion is
therefore synthetic. A possible idea and the idea of a possible thing
are quite distinct.[1618] A thing is known to be possible only when
presented in some concrete experience, or when, though not actually
experienced, it has been proved to be bound up, according to empirical
laws, with given perceptions. It is not, therefore, surprising that if
we try, as is done in the ontological argument, to think existence
through the pure category, we cannot mention a single mark
distinguishing it from a merely logical possibility. The concept of a
Supreme Being is, in many respects, a valuable Idea, but just because it
is an Idea of pure Reason, _i.e._ a mere Idea, we can no more extend our
knowledge of real existence by means of it, than a merchant can better
his position by adding a few noughts to his cash account.

There are many points of connection between this section and the first
edition _Introduction_; and in view of these points of contact Adickes
has suggested[1619] that the considerations which arose in the
examination of the ontological argument may have been what brought Kant
to realise that the various problems of the _Critique_ can all be traced
to the central problem of _a priori_ synthesis.


SECTION V

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF A COSMOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD[1620]

=Statement.=--Kant, as already noted, views the ontological proof as ‘a
mere innovation of scholastic wisdom’ which restates, in a quite
unnatural form, a line of thought much more adequately expressed in the
cosmological proof. To discover the natural dialectic of Reason we must
therefore look to this latter form of argument. It is composed of two
distinct stages. In the first stage it makes no use of specific
experience: if _anything_ is given us as existing, _e.g._ the self,
there must exist an absolutely necessary Being as its cause. Then, in
the second stage, it is argued that as such a Being must be altogether
outside experience, Reason must leave experience entirely aside, and
discover from among pure concepts what properties an absolutely
necessary Being ought to possess, _i.e._ which among all possible things
contains in itself the conditions of absolute necessity. The requisite
enlightenment is believed by Reason to be derivable only from the
concept of an _Ens realissimum_, and Reason therefore at once concludes
that this concept must represent the absolutely necessary Being.

Now in that final conclusion the truth of the ontological argument is
assumed. If the concept of a Being of the highest reality is so
completely adequate to the concept of necessary existence that they can
be regarded as identical, the latter must be capable of being derived
from the former, and that is all that is maintained in the ontological
proof. To make this point clearer, Kant states it in scholastic form. If
the proposition be true, that every absolutely necessary Being is at the
same time the most real Being (and this is the _nervus probandi_ of the
cosmological proof in so far as it is also theological), it must, like
all affirmative propositions, be capable of conversion, at least _per
accidens_. This gives us the proposition that some _Entia realissima_
are at the same time absolutely necessary Beings. One _Ens realissimum_,
however, does not differ from another, and what applies to one applies
to all. In this case, therefore, we must employ simple conversion, and
say that every _Ens realissimum_ is a necessary Being. Thus the
cosmological proof is not only as illusory as the ontological, but also
less honest. While pretending to lead us by a new road to a sound
conclusion, it brings us back, after a short circuit, into the old path.
If the ontological argument is correct, the cosmological is superfluous;
and if the ontological is false, the cosmological cannot possibly be
true.

But the first stage of the cosmological argument, that by which it is
distinguished from the ontological, is itself fallacious. A whole nest
of dialectical assumptions lies hidden in its apparently simple and
legitimate inference from the contingent to the necessary. To advance
from the contingent to the necessary, from the relative to the absolute,
from the given to the transcendent, is just as illegitimate as the
opposite process of passing from Idea to existence. The necessity of
thought, which is in both cases the sole ground of the inference, is
found on examination to be of merely subjective character. No less than
three false assumptions are involved in this inference. In the first
place, the principle that everything must have a cause, which can be
proved to be valid only within the world of sense, is here applied to
the sensible world as a whole; and is therefore employed in the wider
form which coincides with the fundamental principle of the higher
faculty of Reason. We assume, that if the conditioned be given, the
totality of its conditions _up to the unconditioned_ is given likewise.
No such principle can be granted. As it is synthetic, it could be
established only as a condition of the possibility of experience. But no
such proof is offered: the principle is based upon a purely intellectual
concept. Secondly, the inference to a first cause rests on the kindred
assumption that an infinite series of empirical causes is impossible.
That conclusion can never be drawn, even within the realm of experience.
How, then, can we rely upon it in advancing beyond experience?
Certainly, no one can prove that the empirical series is infinite, but
just as little can we establish the opposite. In discussing the third
and fourth antinomies Kant has shown that the existence of a first cause
or of an absolutely necessary Being, though possible (or rather,
possibly possible), is never demonstrable. Thirdly--as has been shown in
A 592-3 = B 620-1--in inferring to an unconditioned cause, it is blindly
assumed that the removal of all conditions does not at the same time
remove the very concept of necessity. Our only notion of necessity is
derived from experience, and therefore depends on those finite
conditions which the argument would deny to us. The concept of
unconditioned necessity is entirely null and void.

The fourth defect, which Kant enumerates, refers to the second stage of
the cosmological argument, and has already been considered. He ought
also to have mentioned a still further assumption underlying its first
stage, namely, that a concept which represents a limited being, as, for
instance, that of matter, cannot represent necessary existence. This
also is an assumption which it cannot justify. This objection Kant has
himself stated in A 586 = B 614 and A 588 = B 616.[1621]

=Comment.=--We are apt to overlook the wider sweep which Kant’s criticism
takes in this section, owing to his omission to notify the reader that
he is here calling in question a principle which he has hitherto been
taking for granted, namely, the principle in terms of which he has in
the opening sections of the _Dialectic_ defined the faculty of Reason,
that if the conditioned be given the totality of conditions up to the
unconditioned is given likewise. The first step in his rejection of this
principle occurs as merely incidental to his criticism of the
ontological argument. It is there shown that the concept of the
unconditionally necessary is without meaning. Now, in this present
section, he calls in question the principle itself. It must be rejected
not only, as stated in the third of the above objections, because the
concept of the unconditioned, which tacitly implies the factor of
absolute necessity, is without real significance, but also for two
further reasons--those above cited in the first and second objections.
How very differently the problems of the _Dialectic_ appear, and how
very differently the Ideas of Reason have to be regarded, when this
principle, and also the concept of the unconditioned of which it is the
application, are thus called in question, will be shown in the sequel.

DISCOVERY AND EXPLANATION OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL ILLUSION IN ALL
TRANSCENDENTAL PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF A NECESSARY BEING[1622]

=Statement.=--We do not properly fulfil the task prescribed by Critical
teaching in merely disproving the cosmological argument. We must also
explain its hold upon the mind. If it is, as Kant insists, more natural
to the mind than the ontological, and yet, as we have just seen, is more
fallacious; if it has not been invented by philosophers, but is the
instinctive reasoning of the natural man, it must rest, like all
dialectical illusion, upon a misunderstanding of the legitimate demands
of pure Reason. _Reason demands the unconditioned, and yet cannot think
it._

     “Unconditioned necessity, which we so indispensably require as the
     last bearer of all things, is for human Reason the veritable
     abyss.... We can neither help thinking, nor can we bear the
     thought, that a Being--even if it be the one which we represent to
     ourselves as supreme amongst all Beings--should, as it were, say to
     itself: ‘I am from eternity to eternity, and outside me there is
     nothing save what is through my will; _but whence am I_?’ All
     support here fails us; and _supreme_ perfection, no less than the
     _least_ perfection, is unsubstantial and baseless for the merely
     speculative Reason....”[1623]

We are obliged to think something as necessary for all existence, and
yet at the same time are unable to think anything as in itself
necessary--God as little as anything else.

The explanation[1624] of this strange fact must be that which follows as
a corollary from the limitation of our knowledge to sense-experience,
namely, that our concepts of necessity and contingency do not concern
things in themselves, and cannot therefore be applied to them in
accordance with either of the two possible alternatives. Each
alternative must express a subjective principle of Reason; and the two
together (that something exists by necessity, and that everything is
only contingent) must form complementary rules for the guidance of the
understanding. These rules will then be purely heuristic and regulative,
relating only to the formal interests of Reason, and may well stand side
by side. For the one tells us that we ought to philosophise as if there
were a necessary first ground for everything that exists, _i.e._ that we
ought to be always dissatisfied with relativity and contingency, and to
seek always for what is unconditionally necessary. The other warns us
against regarding any single determination in things (such, for
instance, as impenetrability or gravity) as absolutely necessary, and so
bids us keep the way always open for further derivation. In other words,
Reason guides the understanding by a twofold command. The understanding
must derive phenomena and their existence from other phenomena, just as
if there were no necessary Being at all; while at the same time it must
always strive towards the completeness of that derivation, just as if
such a necessary Being were presupposed. It is owing to a transcendental
illusion or subreption that we view the latter principle as
constitutive, and so think its unity as hypostatised in the form of an
_Ens realissimum_. The falsity of this substitution becomes evident as
soon as we consider _that unconditioned necessity, as a thing in itself,
cannot even be conceived, and that the “Idea” of it cannot, therefore,
be ascribed to Reason save as a merely formal principle, regulative of
the understanding in its interpretation of given experience_.[1625]

=Comment.=--The reader may observe that, when Kant is developing this
sceptical view of the Ideal of Reason, the explanation of dialectical
illusion in terms of transcendental idealism falls into the background.
The illusion is no longer traced to a confusion between appearances and
things in themselves, but to the false interpretation of regulative
principles as being constitutive. When it is the cosmological problem
with which we are dealing, the two illusions do, indeed, coincide. If we
view the objects of sense-experience as things in themselves, we are
bound to regard the Ideal completion of the natural sciences as an
adequate representation of ultimate reality. But in Rational Theology,
which is professedly directed towards the definition of a Being distinct
from nature and conditioning all finite existence, it is not failure to
distinguish between appearance and things in themselves, but the
mistaking of a merely formal Ideal for a representation of reality, that
is alone responsible for the conclusions drawn.

In A 617-18 = B 645-6 Kant makes statements which conflict with the
teaching of A 586 = B 614 and A 588 = B 616. In the latter passages he
has argued that the concept of a limited being may not without specific
proof be taken as contradictory of absolute necessity. He now
categorically declares that the philosophers of antiquity are in error
in regarding matter as primitive and necessary; and the reason which he
gives is that the regulative principle of Reason forbids us to view
extension and impenetrability, “which together constitute the concept of
matter,” as ultimate principles of experience. But obviously Kant is
here going further than his regulative principle will justify. It
demands only that we should always look for still higher principles of
unity, and so keep open the way for possible further derivation; it does
not enable us to assert that such will actually be found to exist.
Notwithstanding the Ideal demands of the regulative principle, matter
may be primordial and necessary, and its properties of extension and
impenetrability may not be derivable from anything more ultimate.

In this connection we may raise the more general question, how far the
Ideal demand for necessity and unity in knowledge and existence can be
concretely pictured. Kant gives a varying answer. Sometimes--when he is
emphasising the limitation of our theoretical knowledge to
sense-experience--he reduces the speculative Idea of Divine Existence to
a purely abstract maxim for the regulation of natural science. When the
Ideal occupies the mind on its own account, and so attracts our
attention away from our sense-knowledge, it is an unreality, and
perverts the understanding; it yields genuine light and leading only as
a quite general maxim within the sphere of natural science. From this
point of view necessary Being, even as an Ideal, can by no means be
identified with a personal God. It signifies only the highest possible
system and unity of the endlessly varied natural phenomena in space and
time, and can be approximately realised in the most various ways. Its
significance is entirely cosmological. It is an Ideal of positive
science, and signifies only systematic unity in the object known. In
being transformed from a scientific ideal into a subject of theological
enquiry, it has inevitably given rise to dialectical illusion. At other
times,--when he is concerned to defend the concept of Divine Existence
as at least possible, and so to prepare the way for its postulation as
implied in the moral law, or when he is seeking, as in the _Critique of
Judgment_, to render comprehensible the complete adaptation of
phenomenal nature in its material aspect to the needs of our
understanding--Kant insists that we are ultimately compelled, by the
nature of our faculties, to conceive the Ideal of Reason as a personal
God, as an Intelligence working according to purposes. Only by such a
personal God, he maintains, can the demands of Reason be genuinely
satisfied.

These two interpretations of the Ideal of Reason are in conflict with
one another; and so far as the _Critique of Pure Reason_ is concerned, a
very insufficient attempt is made to justify the frequent assertion that
the Idea of God is _the_ Ideal of Reason, and not merely one possible,
and highly problematic, interpretation of it. If the Idea of God is a
necessary Idea, it cannot be adequately expressed through any merely
regulative maxim. It demands not only system in knowledge but also
perfection in the nature of the known. It is not a merely logical Ideal
such as might be satisfied by any rational system, but an Ideal which
concerns matter as well as form, man as well as nature, our moral needs
as well as our intellectual demands. If Kant is to maintain that the
only genuine function of theoretical Reason is to guide the
understanding in its scientific application, he is debarred from
asserting that a concrete interpretation of its regulative principles is
unavoidable. And he is also precluded by his own limitation of all
knowledge to sense-experience from seeking to define by any positive
predicate the transcendent nature of the thing in itself.

Such justification as Kant can offer in support of his assertion that
the Idea of God, of Intelligent Perfection, is an indispensable Idea of
human Reason, is chiefly based upon the teleological aspect of nature
which is dealt with in the physico-theological proof. Mechanical science
implies only the cosmological Idea: teleological unity presupposes the
theological Ideal. Further enquiry, then, into the necessity of the Idea
of God as a regulative principle, and its dangers as a source of
dialectical illusion, we must defer until we have examined the one
remaining argument.[1626]


SECTION VI

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF THE PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF[1627]

=Statement.=--The teleological proof starts from our definite knowledge of
the order and constitution of the sensible world. The actual world
presents such immeasurable order, variety, fitness, and beauty, that we
are led to believe that here at least is sufficient proof of the
existence of God. Kant’s attitude towards this argument is at once
extremely critical and extremely sympathetic. Though he represents it as
the oldest, the clearest, and the most convincing, he is none the less
prepared to show that it contains every one of the fallacies involved in
the other two proofs, as well as some false assumptions peculiar to
itself. It possesses overpowering persuasive force, not because of any
inherent logical cogency, but because it so successfully appeals to
feeling as to silence the intellect. It would, Kant declares, be not
only comfortless, but utterly vain to attempt to diminish its influence.

     ”[The mind is] aroused from the indecision of all melancholy
     reflection, as from a dream, by one glance at the wonders of nature
     and the majesty of the universe....”[1628]

Meantime, however, we are concerned with its merely logical force. We
have to decide whether, as theoretical proof, it can claim assent on its
own merits, requiring no favour, and no help from any other quarter. On
the basis of empirical facts the argument makes the following
assertions. (1) There are everywhere in the world clear indications of
adaptation to a definite end. (2) As this adaptation cannot be due to
the working of blind, mechanical laws, and accordingly cannot be
explained as originating in things themselves, it must have been imposed
upon them from without; and there must therefore exist, apart from the
sensible world, an intelligent Being who has arranged it according to
ideas antecedently formed. (3) As there is unity in the reciprocal
relations of the parts of the universe as portions of a single edifice,
and as the universe is infinite in extent and inexhaustible in variety,
its intelligent cause must be single, all-powerful, all-wise, i.e. God.

Now, even granting for the sake of argument the admissibility of these
assertions, they enable us to infer only an intelligent author of the
purposive form of nature, not of its matter, only an architect who is
very much hampered by the inadaptability of the material in which he
has to work, not a Creator to whose will everything is due. To prove the
contingency of matter itself, we should have to establish the truth of
the cosmological proof.

But the assumptions implied even in the demonstration that God exists as
a _formative_ power, are by no means beyond dispute. Why may not nature
be regarded as giving form to itself by its blindly working forces? Can
it really be proved that nature is a work of art that demands an
artificer as certainly as does a house, or a ship, or a clock? Kant’s
argument is at this point extremely brief, and I shall so far digress
from the statement of it, which he here gives, as to supplement it from
his other writings. Even so-called dead matter is not merely inert. By
its inherent powers of gravity and chemical attraction it spontaneously
gives rise to the most wonderful forms. When Clarke and Voltaire, in
their first enthusiasm over Newton’s great discovery, asserted that the
planetary system must have been divinely created, each planet being
launched in the tangent of its orbit by the finger of God, just as a
wheel must be fixed into its place by the hand of the mechanician, they
under-estimated the organising power of blind inanimate nature. As Kant
argued in his early treatise,[1629] the planetary system can quite well
have arisen, and, as it would seem, actually has come into existence,
through the action of blindly working laws. The mechanical principles
which account for its present maintenance will also account for its
origin and development. But it is when we turn to animate nature, which
is the chief source from which arguments for design are derived, that
the insufficiency of the teleological argument becomes most manifest. As
Kant points out in the _Critique of Judgment_, the differentia
distinguishing the living from the lifeless, is not so much that it is
organised as that it is self-organising. When, therefore, we treat an
organism as an analogon of art we completely misrepresent its essential
nature.[1630] In regarding it as put together by an external agent we
are ignoring its internal self-developing power. As Hume had previously
maintained in his _Dialogues on Natural Religion_,[1631] the facts of
the organic world not only agree with the facts of the inorganic world
in _not_ supporting the argument of the teleological proof, but are in
direct conflict with it.

But to return to Kant’s immediate statement of the argument. Setting the
above objection aside, and granting for the present that nature may be
regarded as the outcome of an external artificer, we can argue only to a
cause adequate to its production, _i.e._ to an extraordinarily wise and
wonderfully powerful Being. Even if we ignore the existence of evil and
defect in nature, the step from great power to omnipotence, and from
great wisdom to omniscience, is one that can never be justified on
empirical grounds.[1632] Since the Ideas of Reason, and above all the
completely determined, individual Ideal of Reason, transcend experience,
experience can never justify us in inferring their reality. The
teleological argument can, indeed, only lead us to the point of admiring
the greatness, wisdom, and power of the author of the world. In
proceeding further it abandons experience altogether, and reasons, not
from particular kinds and excellencies of natural design, but from the
contingency of all such adaptation to the existence of a necessary
Being, exactly in the manner of the cosmological argument. And it ends
by assuming, in agreement with the ontological proof, that the only
possible necessary Being is the Ideal of Reason. Thus after committing a
number of fallacies on its own account, the teleological argument itself
endorses all those that are involved in the more _a priori_ proofs. The
teleological argument rests on the cosmological, and the cosmological on
the ontological, which therefore would be the only proof possible, were
the proof of a completely transcendent proposition ever possible at all.
The strange fact that the convincing force of the arguments thus varies
inversely with their validity shows, Kant maintains, that we are correct
in concluding that they do not really depend upon their logical cogency,
and merely express, in abstract terms, beliefs deep-rooted in the human
spirit.


SECTION VII

CRITICISM OF ALL THEOLOGY BASED ON SPECULATIVE PRINCIPLES OF
REASON[1633]

=A 631-3 = B 659-66.=--On the distinction between “theist” and “deist,”
cf. _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vii. p. 934:

     “The later distinction between ‘theist’ and ‘deist,’ which stamped
     the latter word as excluding the belief in providence or in the
     immanence of God, was apparently formulated in the end of the
     eighteenth century by those rationalists who were aggrieved at
     being identified with the naturalists.”

=A 633-4 = B 661-2.=--Kant here does no more than indicate that by way of
practical Reason it may be possible to postulate, though not
theoretically to comprehend, a Supreme Being. On the distinction between
postulates and hypotheses, cf. A 769 ff. = B 797 ff., and below, p. 543
ff. Cf. also p. 571 ff.

=A 634 = B 662.=--On relative necessity, cf. below, pp. 555, 571 ff.

=A 635-9 = B 663-7= only summarises points already treated.

=A 639-42 = B 667-70.=--Kant concludes by declaring that the Ideal, in
addition to its regulative function, possesses two further prerogatives.
In the first place, it supplies a standard, in the light of which any
knowledge of Divine Existence, acquired from other sources, can be
purified and rendered consistent with itself. For it is “an Ideal
without a flaw,” the true crown and culmination of the whole of human
knowledge.

     “If there should be a moral theology ... transcendental theology
... will then prove itself indispensable in determining its concept
     and in constantly testing Reason which is so often deceived by
     sensibility, and which is frequently out of harmony with its own
     Ideas.”[1634]

And secondly, though the Ideal fails to establish itself theoretically,
the arguments given in its support suffice to show the quite
insufficient foundations upon which all atheistic, deistic, and
anthropomorphic philosophies rest.

=Comment.=--These concluding remarks cannot be accepted as representing
Kant’s true teaching. The Ideal, by his own showing, is by no means
without a flaw. In so far as it involves the concept of unconditioned
necessity, it is meaningless; it is purely logical, and therefore
contains no indication of real content; it embodies a false view of the
nature of negation, and therefore of the relation of realities to one
another. In short, it is constituted in accordance with the false,
un-Critical principles of Leibnizian metaphysics, and is found on
examination to be non-existent even as a purely mental entity. Reduced
to its proper terms, it becomes a mere schema regulative of the
understanding in the extension of experience, and does not yield even a
negative criterion for the testing of our ideals of Divine Existence.
The criterion, which Kant really so employs, is not that of an _Ens
realissimum_, but the concept of an Intuitive Understanding, which, as
he has indicated in the chapter on _Phenomena and Noumena_,[1635] is our
most adequate Ideal of completed Perfection. This latter is not itself,
however, a spontaneously formed concept of natural Reason, and does not
justify the assertion that the Idea of God is a necessary Idea of the
human mind. In attempting to defend such a thesis, Kant is unduly
influenced by the almost universal acceptance of deistic beliefs in the
Europe of his time.[1636] His criticism of the Ideal of Reason and of
rational theology is much more destructive, and really allows that
theology much less value, even as natural dialectic, than he is willing
to admit.[1637] Architectonic forbids that the extreme radical
consequences of the teaching of the _Analytic_ should be allowed to show
in their full force. These shortcomings are, however, in great part
remedied in the elaborate _Appendix_ which Kant has attached to the
_Dialectic_.




APPENDIX TO THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC


THE REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS OF PURE REASON[1638]

Before we proceed to deal with this _Appendix_ it will be of advantage
to consider the section in the _Methodology_ on _the Discipline of Pure
Reason in regard to Hypotheses_.[1639] That section affords a very
illuminating introduction to the problems here discussed, and is
extremely important for understanding Kant’s view of metaphysical
science as yielding either complete certainty or else nothing at all.
This is a doctrine which he from time to time suggests, to the
considerable bewilderment of the modern reader.[1640] In discussing it
he starts from the obvious objection, that though nothing can be known
through Reason in its pure _a priori_ employment, metaphysics may yet be
possible in an empirical form, as consisting of hypotheses, constructed
in conjectural explanation of the facts of experience. Kant replies by
defining the conditions under which alone hypotheses can be entertained
as such. There must always be something completely certain, and not only
invented or merely “opined,” namely, the _possibility_ of the object to
which the hypothesis appeals. Once that is proved, it is allowable, on
the basis of experience, to form opinions regarding its reality. Then,
and only then, can such opinions be entitled hypotheses. Otherwise we
are not employing the understanding to explain; we are simply indulging
the imagination in its tendency to dream. Now since the categories of
the pure understanding do not enable us to invent _a priori_ the concept
of a dynamical connection, but only to apprehend it when presented in
experience, we cannot by means of these categories invent a single
object endowed with a new quality not empirically given; and cannot,
therefore, base an hypothesis upon any such conception.

     “Thus it is not permissible to invent any new original powers, as,
     for instance, an understanding capable of intuiting its objects
     without the aid of senses; or a force of attraction without any
     contact; or a new kind of substance existing in space and yet not
     impenetrable. Nor is it legitimate to postulate any other form of
     communion of substances than that revealed in experience, any
     presence that is not spatial, any duration that is not temporal. In
     a word our Reason can employ as conditions of the possibility of
     things only the conditions of possible experience; it can never, as
     it were, _create_ concepts of things, independently of those
     conditions. Such concepts, though not self-contradictory, would be
     without an object.”[1641]

This does not, however, mean that the concepts of pure Reason can have
no valid employment. They are, it is true, Ideas merely, with no object
corresponding to them in any experience; but then it is also true that
they are not hypotheses, referring to imagined objects, supposed to be
possibly real. They are purely problematic. They are heuristic fictions
(_heuristische Fiktionen_), the sole function of which is to serve as
principles regulative of the understanding in its systematic employment.
Used in any other manner they reduce to the level of merely mental
entities (_Gedankendinge_) whose very possibility is indemonstrable, and
which cannot therefore be employed as hypotheses for the explanation of
appearances. Given appearances can be accounted for only in terms of
laws known to hold among appearances. To explain natural phenomena by a
transcendental hypothesis--mental processes by the assumption of the
soul as a substantial, simple, spiritual being, or order and design in
nature by the assumption of a Divine Author--is never admissible.

     “...that would be to explain something, which in terms of known
     empirical principles we do not understand sufficiently, by
     something which we do not understand at all.”[1642]

And Kant adds that the wildest hypotheses, if only they are physical,
are more tolerable than a hyperphysical one. They at least conform to
the conditions under which alone hypothetical explanation as such is
allowable. “Outside this field, to form opinions, is merely to play with
thoughts....”[1643]

A further condition, required to render an hypothesis acceptable, is its
adequacy for determining _a priori_ all the consequences which are
actually given. If for that purpose supplementary hypotheses have to be
called in, the force of the main assumption is proportionately
weakened. Thus we can easily explain natural order and design, if we are
allowed to postulate a Divine Author who is absolutely perfect and
all-powerful. But that hypothesis lies open to all the objections
suggested by defects and evils in nature, and can only be preserved
through new hypotheses which modify the main assumption. Similarly the
hypothesis of the human soul as an abiding and purely spiritual being,
existing in independence of the body, has to be modified to meet the
difficulties which arise from the phenomena of growth and decay. But the
new hypotheses, then constructed, derive their whole authority from the
main hypothesis which they are themselves defending.

Such is Kant’s criticism of metaphysics when its teaching is based on
the facts of experience hypothetically interpreted. In regard to
transcendent metaphysics, there are, in Kant’s view, only two
alternatives.[1644] Either its propositions must be established
independently of all experience in purely _a priori_ fashion, and
therefore as absolutely certain; or they must consist in hypotheses
empirically grounded. The first alternative has in the _Analytic_ and
_Dialectic_ been shown to be impossible; the second alternative he
rejects for the above reasons.

But this does not close Kant’s treatment of metaphysical hypotheses. He
proceeds to develop a doctrine which, in its fearless confidence in the
truth of Critical teaching, is the worthy outcome of his abiding belief
in the value of a “sceptical method.”[1645] As Reason is by its very
nature dialectical, outside opponents are not those from whom we have
most to fear. Their objections are really derived from a source which
lies in ourselves, and until these have been traced to their origin, and
destroyed from the root upwards, we can expect no lasting peace. Our
duty, therefore, is to encourage our doubts, until by the very
luxuriance of their growth they enable us to discover the hidden roots
from which they derive their perennial vitality.

     “External tranquillity is a mere illusion. The germ of these
     objections, which lies in the nature of human Reason, must be
     rooted out. But how can we uproot it, unless we give it freedom,
     nay, nourishment, to send out shoots so that it may discover itself
     to our eyes, and that we may then destroy it together with its
     root? Therefore think out objections which have never yet occurred
     to any opponent; lend him, indeed, your weapons, or grant him the
     most favourable position which he could possibly desire. You have
     nothing to fear in all this, but much to hope for; you may gain for
     yourselves a possession which can never again be contested.”[1646]

In this campaign to eradicate doubt by following it out to its
furthermost limits, the hypotheses of pure Reason, “leaden weapons
though they be, since they are not steeled by any law of experience,”
are an indispensable part of our equipment. For though hypotheses are
useless for the establishment of metaphysical propositions, they are,
Kant teaches, both admirable and valuable for their defence. That is to
say, their true metaphysical function is not dogmatic, but polemical.
They are weapons of war to which we may legitimately resort for the
maintenance of beliefs otherwise established. If, for instance, we have
been led to postulate the immaterial, self-subsistent nature of the
soul, and are met by the difficulty that experience would seem to prove
that both the growth and the decay of our mental powers are due to the
body, we can weaken this objection by formulating the hypothesis that
the body is not the cause of our thinking, but only a restrictive
condition of it, peculiar to our present state, and that, though it
furthers our sensuous and animal faculties, it acts as an impediment to
our spiritual life. Similarly, to meet the many objections against
belief in the eternal existence of a finite being whose birth depends
upon contingencies of all kinds, such as the food supply, the whims of
government, or even vice, we can adduce the transcendental hypothesis
that life has neither beginning in birth nor ending in death, the entire
world of sense being but an image due to our present mode of knowledge,
an image which like a dream has in itself no objective reality. Such
hypotheses are not, indeed, even Ideas of Reason, but simply concepts
_invented_ to show that the objections which are raised depend upon the
false assumption that the possibilities have been exhausted, and that
the mere laws of nature comprehend the whole field of possible
existences. These hypotheses at least suffice to reveal the uncertain
character of the doubts which assail us in our practical beliefs.

     ”[Transcendental hypotheses] are nothing but private opinions.
     Nevertheless, we cannot properly dispense with them as weapons
     against the misgivings which are apt to occur; they are necessary
     even to secure our inner tranquillity. We must preserve to them
     this character, carefully guarding against the assumption of their
     independent authority or absolute validity, since otherwise they
     would drown Reason in fictions and delusions.”[1647]

We may now return to A 642-68 = B 670-96. The teaching of this section
is extremely self-contradictory, wavering between a subjective and an
objective interpretation of the Ideas of Reason. The probable
explanation is that Kant is here recasting older material, and leaves
standing more of his earlier solutions than is consistent with his final
conclusions. We can best approach the discussion by considering Kant’s
statements in A 645 = B 673 and in A 650 ff. = B 678 ff. They expound,
though unfortunately in the briefest terms, a point of view which
Idealism has since adopted as fundamental. Kant himself, very strangely,
never develops its consequences at any great length.[1648] The Idea,
which Reason follows in the exercise of its sole true function, the
systematising of the knowledge supplied by the understanding, is that of
a unity in which the thought of the whole precedes the knowledge of its
parts, and contains the conditions according to which the place of every
part and its relation to the other parts are determined _a priori_. This
Idea specialises itself in various forms, and in all of them directs the
understanding to a knowledge that will be that of no mere aggregate but
of a genuine system. Such concepts are not derived from nature; we
interrogate nature _according to them_, and consider our knowledge
defective so long as it fails to embody them. In A 650 = B 678 Kant
further points out that this Idea of Reason does not merely direct the
understanding to search for such unity, but also claims for itself
objective reality. And he adds,

     “...it is difficult to understand how there can be a logical
     principle by which Reason prescribes the unity of rules, unless we
     also presuppose a transcendental principle whereby such systematic
     unity is _a priori_ assumed to be necessarily inherent in the
     objects.”

For how could we treat diversity in nature as only disguised unity, if
we were also free to regard that unity as contrary to the actual nature
of the real?

     “Reason would then run counter to its own vocation, proposing as
     its aim an Idea quite inconsistent with the constitution of
     nature.”[1649]

Nor is our knowledge of the principle merely empirical, deduced from the
unity which we find in contingent experience. On the contrary, there is
an inherent and necessary law of Reason compelling us, antecedently to
all specific experience, to look for such unity.

     “...without it we should have no Reason at all, and without Reason
     no coherent employment of the understanding, and in the absence of
     this no sufficient criterion of empirical truth. In order,
     therefore, to secure an empirical criterion we are absolutely
     compelled to presuppose the systematic unity of nature as
     objectively valid and necessary.”[1650] “It might be supposed that
     this is merely an economical contrivance of Reason, seeking to save
     itself all possible trouble, a hypothetical attempt, which, if it
     succeeds, will, through the unity thus attained, impart probability
     to the presumed principle of explanation. But such a selfish
     purpose can very easily be distinguished from the Idea. For in the
     latter we presuppose that this unity of Reason is in conformity
     with nature itself; and that, although we are indeed unable to
     determine the limits of this unity, Reason does not here beg but
     command.”[1651]

This last alternative, that Reason is here propounding a tentative
hypothesis, in order by trial to discover how far it can be empirically
verified--an alternative which Kant in the above passage rejects as
unduly subjective, and as consequently failing to recognise the
objective claims and _a priori_ authority of the Ideas of Reason,--is
yet a view which he himself adopts and indeed develops at considerable
length in this same section. This, as already stated, affords evidence
of the composite character and varying origins of the material here
presented.

The _Dissertation_ of 1770 gives a purely subjectivist interpretation of
the regulative principles, among which, from its pre-Critical
standpoint, it classes the principle of causality and the principle of
the conservation of matter.

     ”[We adopt principles] which delude the intellect into mistaking
     them for arguments derived from the object, whereas they are
     commended to us only by the peculiar nature of the intellect, owing
     to their convenience for its free and ample employment. They
     therefore ... rest on _subjective_ grounds ... namely, on the
     conditions under which it seems easy and expeditious for the
     intellect to make use of its insight.... These rules of judging, to
     which we freely submit and to which we adhere as if they were
     axioms, solely for the reason that _were we to depart from them
     almost no judgment regarding a given object would be permissible to
     our intellect, I entitle principles of convenience_.... [One of
     these is] the popularly received canon, _principia non esse
     multiplicanda praeter summam necessitatem_, to which we yield our
     adhesion, not because we have insight into causal unity in the
     world either by reason or by experience, but because we seek it by
     an impulse of the intellect, which seems to itself to have advanced
     in the explanation of phenomena only in the degree in which it is
     granted to it to descend from a single principle to the greatest
     number of consequences.”[1652]

This, in essentials, is the view which we find developed in A 646-9 = B
674-8. Reason is the faculty of deducing the particular from the
general. When the general is admitted only as _problematical_, as a mere
idea, while the particular is certain, we determine the universality of
the rule by applying it to the particulars, and then upon confirmation
of its validity proceed to draw conclusions regarding cases not actually
given. This Kant entitles the _hypothetical_ use of Reason. Reason must
never be employed constitutively. It serves only for the introduction,
as far as may be found possible, of unity into the particulars of
knowledge. It seeks to make the rule _approximate_ to
universality.[1653] The unity which it demands

     “...is a _projected_ unity, to be regarded not as given in itself,
     but as a problem only. This unity aids us in discovering a
     principle for the manifold and special employment of the
     understanding, drawing its attention to cases which are not given,
     and thus rendering it more coherent.”[1654]

The unity is merely logical, or rather methodological.[1655] To
postulate, in consequence of its serviceableness, real unity in the
objects themselves would be to transform it into a transcendental
principle of Reason, and to render

     “...the systematic unity necessary, not only subjectively and
     logically, as method, but objectively also.”[1656]

The above paragraphs are intercalated between A 645 = B 673 and A 650-63
= B 678-91, in which, as we have already seen, the directly opposite
view is propounded, namely, that such principles are _not_ merely
hypothetical, _nor_ merely logical. In all cases they claim reality, and
rest upon transcendental principles; they condition the very possibility
of experience; and may therefore be asserted to be _a priori_ necessary
and to be objectively valid. To quote two additional passages:

     “...we can conclude from the universal to the particular, only if
     universal qualities are ascribed to things as the foundation upon
     which the particular qualities rest.”[1657] “The foundation of
     these laws [cf. below, pp. 550-1] is not due to any secret design
     of making an experiment by putting them forward as merely tentative
     suggestions.... It is easily seen that they contemplate the
     parsimony of fundamental causes, the manifoldness of effects, and
     the consequent affinity of the parts of nature, as being in
     themselves both rational and natural. Hence these principles carry
     their recommendation directly in themselves, and not merely as
     methodological devices.”[1658]

Thus, in direct opposition to the preceding view of Reason’s function as
hypothetical, Kant is now prepared to maintain that the maxims of Reason
are without meaning and without application save in so far as they can
be grounded in a transcendental principle.[1659]

Let us follow Kant’s detailed exposition of this last thesis. The
logical maxim, to seek for systematic unity, rests upon the
transcendental principle that the apparently infinite variety of nature
does not exclude identity of species, that the various species are
varieties of a few genera, and these again of still higher genera. This
is the scholastic maxim: _entia praeter necessitatem non esse
multiplicanda_. Upon this principle rests the possibility of concepts,
and therefore of the understanding itself. It is balanced, however, by a
second principle, no less necessary, the transcendental law of
specification, namely, that there must be manifoldness and diversity in
things, that every genus must specify itself in divergent species, and
these again in sub-species. Or as it is expressed in its scholastic
form: _entium varietates non temere esse minuendas_. This principle is
equally transcendental. It expresses a condition no less necessary for
the possibility of the understanding, and therefore of experience. As
the understanding knows all that it knows by concepts only, however far
it may carry the division of genera, it can never know by means of pure
intuition, but always again by lower concepts. If, therefore, there were
no lower concepts, there could be no higher concepts;[1660] the gap
existing between individuals and genera could never be bridged; or
rather, since neither individuals nor universals could then be
apprehended, neither would exist for the mind. As the higher concepts
acquire all their content from the lower, they presuppose them for their
own existence.

     “Every concept may be regarded as a point which, in so far as it
     represents the standpoint of a spectator, has its own horizon....
     This horizon must be capable of containing an infinite number of
     points, each of which again has its own narrower horizon; that is,
     every species contains sub-species, according to the principle of
     specification, and the logical horizon consists exclusively of
     smaller horizons (sub-species), never of points which possess no
     extent (individuals).”[1661]

Combining these two principles, that of _homogeneity_ and that of
_specification_, we obtain a third, that of _continuity_. The logical
law of the _continuum formarum logicarum_ presupposes the transcendental
law, _lex continui in natura_. It provides that homogeneity be combined
with the greatest possible diversity by prescribing a continuous
transition from every species to every other, or in other words by
requiring that between any two species or sub-species, however closely
related, intermediate species be always regarded as possible. (The
paragraph at the end of A 661 = B 689, with its proviso that we cannot
make any definite empirical use of this law, is probably of later
origin; it connects with the concluding parts of the section.) That this
third law is also _a priori_ and transcendental, is shown by the fact
that it is not derived from the prior discovery of system in nature, but
has itself given rise to the systematised character of our
knowledge.[1662]

The psychological, chemical, and astronomical examples which Kant
employs to illustrate these laws call for no special comment. They were
taken from contemporary science, and in the advance of our knowledge
have become more confusing than helpful. The citation in A 646 = B 674
of the concepts of “pure earth, pure water, pure air” as being “concepts
of Reason” is especially bewildering. They are, even in the use which
Kant himself ascribes to them, simply empirical hypotheses, formulated
for the purposes of purely physical explanation; they are in no genuine
sense universal, regulative principles.

In passing to A 663-8 = B 691-6 we find still another variation in the
substance of Kant’s teaching. He returns, though with a greater maturity
of statement, and with a very different and much more satisfactory
terminology, to the more sceptical view of A 646-9 = B 674-7.[1663] The
interest of the above principles, Kant continues to maintain, lies in
their transcendentality. Despite the fact that they are mere Ideas for
the guidance of understanding, and can only be approached
asymptotically, they are synthetic _a priori_ judgments, and would seem
to have an objective, though indeterminate, validity. So far his
statements are in line with the preceding paragraphs. But he proceeds to
add that this objective validity consists exclusively in their
heuristic function. They differ fundamentally from the dynamical, no
less than from the mathematical, principles of understanding, in that no
schema of sensibility can be assigned to them. In other words, their
object can never be exhibited _in concreto_; it transcends all possible
experience. For this reason they are incapable of a transcendental
deduction.[1664] They are among the conditions indispensably necessary
to the possibility, not of each and every experience, but only of
experience as systematised _in the interest of Reason_. In place of a
schema they can possess only what may be called the _analogon_ of a
schema, that is, they represent the Idea of a _maximum_, which the
understanding in the subjective interest of Reason--or, otherwise
expressed,[1665] in the interest of a certain possible perfection of our
knowledge of objects--is called upon to realise _as much as possible_.
Thus they are at once _subjective_ in the source from which they arise,
and also _indeterminate_ as to the conditions under which, and the
extent to which, they can obtain empirical embodiment. The fact that in
this capacity they represent a _maximum_, does not justify any assertion
either as to the degree of unity which experience on detailed
investigation will ultimately be found to verify, or as to the noumenal
reality by which experience is conditioned.

In A 644-5 = B 672-3 Kant employs certain optical analogies to
illustrate the illusion which the Ideas, in the absence of Critical
teaching, inevitably generate. When the understanding is regulated by
the Idea of a _maximum_, and seeks to view all the lines of experience
as converging upon and pointing to it, it necessarily regards it, _focus
imaginarius_ though it be, as actually existing. The illusion, by which
objects are seen behind the surface of a mirror, is indispensably
necessary if we are to be able to see what lies behind our backs. The
transcendental illusion, which confers reality upon the Ideas of Reason,
is similarly incidental to the attempt to view experience in its
greatest possible extension.


ON THE FINAL PURPOSE OF THE NATURAL DIALECTIC OF HUMAN REASON[1666]

This section is thoroughly unified and consistent in its teaching. Its
repetitious character is doubtless due to Kant’s personal difficulty
either in definitively accepting or in altogether rejecting the
constructive, Idealist interpretation of the function of Reason. He at
least succeeds in formulating a view which, while not asserting anything
more than is required in the scientific extension of experience,
indicates the many possibilities which such experience fails to exclude.
As the Ideas of Reason are not merely empty thought-entities (_entia
rationis ratiocinantis_[1667]), but have a certain kind of objective
validity (_i.e._ are _entia rationis ratiocinatae_[1668]), they demand a
transcendental deduction.[1669] What this deduction is, and how it
differs from that of the categories, we must now determine. Its
discovery will, Kant claims, crown and complete our Critical labours.

Kant begins by drawing a distinction between representing _an object
absolutely_, and representing _an object in the Idea_.

     “In the former case our concepts are employed to determine the
     object, in the latter case there is in truth only a schema for
     which no object, not even a hypothetical one, is directly given,
     and which only enables us to represent to ourselves indirectly
     other objects in their systematic unity, by means of their relation
     to this Idea.”[1670]

An Idea is only a schema (Kant in terms of A 655 = B 693 ought rather to
have said _analogon_ of a schema) whereby we represent to ourselves, as
for instance in the concept of a Highest Intelligence, not an objective
reality but only such perfection of Reason as will tend to the greatest
possible unity in the empirical employment of understanding.

With this introduction, Kant ushers in his famous “_als ob_” doctrine.
We must view the things of the world _as if_ they derived their
existence from a Highest Intelligence. That Idea is heuristic only, not
expository. Its purpose is not to enable us to comprehend such a Being,
or even to think its existence, but only to show us how we should seek
to determine the constitution and connection of the objects of
experience. The three transcendental Ideas do not determine an object
corresponding to them, but, _under the presupposition of such an object
in the Idea_, lead us to systematic unity of _empirical_ knowledge. When
they are thus strictly interpreted as merely regulative of empirical
enquiry, they will always endorse experience and never run counter to
it. Reason, which seeks completeness of explanation, must therefore
always act in accordance with them. Only thereby can experience acquire
its fullest possible extension. This is the transcendental deduction of
which we are in search. It establishes the indispensableness of the
Ideas of Reason for the completion of experience, and their legitimacy
as regulative principles.

We may here interrupt Kant’s exposition so far as to point out that
this argument does not do justice to the full force of his position. The
true Critical contention--and only if we interpret the passage in the
light of this contention can the proof be regarded as transcendental in
the strict sense--is that the Ideas are necessary to the possibility of
each and every experience, involved together with the categories as
conditions of the very existence of consciousness. They are not merely
regulative, but are regulative of an experience which they also help to
make possible.[1671] They express the standards in whose light we
condemn all knowledge which does not fulfil them; and we have
consequently no option save to endeavour to conform to their demands. In
other words, they are not derivative concepts obtained by merely
omitting the restrictions essential to our empirical consciousness, but
represent a presupposition necessarily involved in all consciousness.
Some such restatement of the argument is demanded by the position which
Kant has himself outlined in A 645 = B 673 and in A 650 ff. = B 678 ff.
Unfortunately he does not return to it. The more sceptical view which he
has meantime been developing remains dominant. The deduction is left in
this semi-Critical form.

A 672-6 = B 700-4 give a fuller statement of the “_als ob_” doctrine. In
psychology we must proceed _as if_ the mind were a simple substance
endowed with personal identity[1672] (in this life at least), not in
order to derive explanation of its changing states from the soul so
conceived, but to derive them from each other in accordance with the
Idea. In cosmology and theology (we may observe the straits to which
Kant is reduced in his attempt to distinguish them) we ought to consider
all phenomena both in their series and in their totality _as if_ they
were due to a highest and all-sufficient unitary ground. In so doing we
shall not derive the order and system in the world from the object of
the Idea, but only extract from the Idea the rule whereby the
understanding attains the greatest possible satisfaction in the
connecting of natural causes and effects.

In A 676-7 = B 704-5 Kant resorts to still another distinction--between
_suppositio relativa_ and _suppositio absoluta_. This distinction is
suggested by the semi-objectivity of principles that are merely
regulative. Though we have to recognise them as necessary, such
necessity does not justify the assertion of their independent validity.
When we admit a supreme ground as the source of the order and system
which the principles demand, we do so only in order to think the
universality of the principles with greater definiteness. Such
supposition is relative to the needs of Reason in its _empirical_
employment: not absolute, as pointing to the existence of such a being
in itself.

     “This explains why, in relation to what is given to the senses as
     existing, we require the Idea of a primordial Being necessary in
     itself, and yet can never form the slightest concept of it or of
     its absolute necessity.”[1673]

This last statement leads to the further problem to which Kant here
gives his final solution, how if, as has been shown in the _Dialectic_,
the concepts of absolute necessity and of unconditionedness are without
meaning, the Ideas of Reason can be entertained at all, even mentally.
What is their actual content and how is it possible to conceive them?
Kant’s reply is developed in terms of the semi-Critical subjectivist
point of view which dominates this section. The Ideas are mere Ideas.
They yield not the slightest concept either of the internal possibility
or of the necessity of any object corresponding to them. They only seem
to do so, owing to a transcendental illusion. On examination we find
that the concepts which we employ in thinking them as independently
real, are one and all derived from experience. That is to say, we judge
of them after the analogy of reality, substance, causality, and
necessity in the sensible world.[1674]

     ”[They are consequently] _analoga_ only of real things, not real
     things in themselves. We remove from the object of the Idea the
     conditions which limit the concept of the understanding, but which
     at the same time alone make it possible for us to have a
     determinate concept of anything. What we then think is, therefore,
     a something of which, as it is in itself, we have no concept
     whatsoever, but which we none the less represent to ourselves as
     standing in a relation to the sum-total of appearances analogous to
     that in which appearances stand to one another.”[1675]

They do not carry our knowledge beyond the objects of possible
experience, but only extend the empirical unity of experience. They are
the schemata of regulative principles. In them Reason is concerned with
nothing but its own inherent demands; and as their unity is the unity of
a system which is to be sought only in experience,[1676] qualities
derived from the sensible world can quite legitimately be employed in
their specific determination. They are not inherently dialectical; their
demands have the rationality which we have a right to expect in the
Ideals of Reason. When Critically examined, they propound no problem
which Reason is not in itself entirely competent to solve.[1677] It is
to their misemployment that transcendental illusion is due. In the form
in which they arise from the natural disposition of our Reason they are
good and serviceable.[1678]

To the question what is the most adequate form in which the regulative
schema can be represented,[1679] Kant gives an answer which shows how
very far he is from regarding the Leibnizian _Ens realissimum_ as the
true expression of the Ideal of Reason. It is through the employment of
teleological concepts that we can best attain the highest possible form
of systematic unity.

     “The highest formal unity ... is the _purposive_ unity of things.
     The _speculative_ [_i.e._ theoretical] interest of Reason makes it
     necessary to regard all order in the world _as if_ it had
     originated in the purpose of a Supreme Reason. Such a principle
     opens out to our Reason, as applied in the field of experience,
     altogether new views as to how the things of the world may be
     connected according to teleological laws, and so enables it to
     arrive at their greatest systematic unity. The assumption of a
     Supreme Intelligence, as the one and only cause of the universe,
     though in the Idea alone, can therefore always benefit Reason and
     can never injure it.”[1680]

For so long as this assumption is employed only as a regulative
principle, even error cannot be really harmful. The worst that can
happen is that where we expected a teleological connection, a merely
mechanical or physical one is met with. If, on the other hand, we leave
the solid ground of experience, and use the assumption to explain what
we are unable to account for in empirical terms, we sacrifice all real
insight, and confound Reason by transforming a concept, which is
anthropomorphically determined for the purposes of empirical
orientation, into a means of explaining order as non-natural and as
imposed from without on the material basis of things.

This is a point of sufficient importance to call for more detailed
statement. Hume in his _Dialogues_ points out that the main defect in
the teleological proof of God’s existence is its assumption that order
and design are foreign to the inherent constitution of things, and must
be of non-natural origin. The argument is therefore weakened by every
advance in the natural sciences. It also runs directly counter to the
very phenomena, those of animal life, upon which it is chiefly based,
since the main characteristic of the organic in its distinction from the
inorganic is its inner wealth of productive and reproductive powers.
With these criticisms Kant is in entire agreement. From them, in the
passage before us, he derives an argument in support of a strictly
regulative interpretation of his “_als ob_” doctrine. The avowed
intention of the teleological argument is to prove _from nature_ the
existence of an intelligent supreme cause. If therefore its standpoint
be held to with more consistency than its own defenders have hitherto
shown, it will be found to rest upon the regulative principle, that we
must study nature as if an _inherent_ order were _native_ to it, and so
seek to approach by degrees, in proportion as such _natural unity_ is
empirically discovered, the absolute perfection which inspires our
researches. But if we transform our Ideal into an instrument of
explanation, beginning with what ought properly to be only our goal, we
delude ourselves with the belief that what can only be acquired through
the slow and tentative labours of empirical enquiry is already in our
possession.

     “If I begin with a supreme purposive Being as the ground of all
     things, the unity of nature is really surrendered, as being quite
     foreign and accidental to the nature of things, and as not to be
     known from its own general laws. There thus arises a vicious
     circle: we are assuming just that very point which is mainly in
     dispute.”[1681]

Such a method of argument is self-destructive, since if we do not find
order and perfection in the nature of things, and _therefore in their
general and necessary laws_, we are not in a position to infer such a
Being as the source of all causality.

To the question whether we may not interpret natural order, once it has
been discovered by empirical investigation, as due to the divine will,
Kant replies that such procedure is allowable only on the condition that
it is the same to us whether we say that God has wisely willed it or
that nature has wisely arranged it. We may admit the Idea of a Supreme
Being only in so far as it is required by Reason as the regulative
principle of all investigation of _nature_;

     “...and we cannot, therefore, without contradicting ourselves,
     ignore the general laws of nature in view of which the Idea was
     adopted, and look upon the purposiveness of nature as contingent
     and hyper-physical in its origin. For we were not justified in
     assuming above nature a Being of those qualities, but only in
     adopting the Idea of it in order to be able to view the
     appearances, according to the analogy of a causal determination, as
     systematically connected with one another.”[1682] “Thus pure
     Reason, which at first seemed to promise nothing less than the
     extension of knowledge beyond all limits of experience, contains,
     if properly understood, nothing but regulative
     principles....”[1683]


CONCLUDING COMMENT ON THE DIALECTIC

I may now summarise Kant’s answer to the three main questions of the
_Dialectic_: (1) Whether, or in what degree, the so-called Ideas of
Reason are concepts due to a faculty altogether distinct from the
understanding, and how far, as thus originating in pure Reason, they
allow of definition; (2) how far they are capable of a transcendental
deduction; (3) what kind of objective validity this deduction proves
them to possess.

These questions are closely interconnected; the solution of any one
determines the kind of solution to be given to all three. Kant, as we
have found, develops his final position through a series of very subtle
distinctions by which he contrives to justify and retain, though in a
highly modified form, the more crudely stated divisions between Ideas
and categories, between Reason and understanding, upon which the initial
argument of the _Dialectic_ is based.

The answer amounts in essentials to the conclusion that understanding,
in directing itself by means of Ideals, exercises a function so distinct
from that whereby it conditions concrete and specific experience, that
it may well receive a separate title; that the Ideas in terms of which
it constructs these Ideals, though schematic (_i.e._ sensuous and
empirical in content), are not themselves empirical, and so far from
being merely extended concepts of understanding, express transcendental
conditions upon which all use of the understanding rests.

Now if this position is to be justified, Kant ought to show that the
fundamental Idea of Reason, that of the unconditioned, is altogether
distinct from any concept of the understanding, and in particular that
it must not be identified with the category of totality, nor be viewed
as being merely the concept of conditioned existence with its various
empirical limitations thought away. Needless to say, Kant does not
fulfil these requirements in any consistent manner. The _Critique_
contains the material for a variety of different solutions; it does not
definitively commit itself to any one of them.

If the argument of A 650 ff. = B 678 ff. were developed we should be in
possession of what may be called the Idealist solution. It would proceed
somewhat as follows. Consciousness as such is always the awareness of a
whole which precedes and conditions its parts. Such consciousness cannot
be accounted for on the assumption that we are first conscious of the
conditioned, and then proceed to remove limitations and to form for
ourselves, by means of the more positive factors involved in this
antecedent consciousness, an Idea of the totality within which the given
falls. The Idea of the unconditioned, distinct from all concepts of
understanding, is one of the _a priori_ conditions of possible
experience, and is capable of a transcendental deduction of equal
validity with, and of the same general nature as, that of the
categories. It is presupposed in the possibility of our contingently
given experience.

As this Idea conditions all subordinate concepts, it cannot be defined
in terms of them. That does not, however, deprive it of all meaning; its
significance is of a unique kind; it finds expression in those Ideals
which, while guiding the mind in the construction of experience, also
serve as the criteria through which experience is condemned as only
phenomenal.

But this, as we have found, is not a line of argument which Kant has
developed in any detail. The passages which point to it occur chiefly in
the introductory portions of the _Dialectic_; in its later sections they
are both brief and scanty. When he sets himself, as in the chapter on
the _Ideal of Pure Reason_ and in the subsequent _Appendix_, to define
his conclusions, it is a much more empirical, and indeed sceptical, line
that he almost invariably follows. There are, he then declares, strictly
no pure, _a priori_ Ideas. The supposed Ideas of unconditionedness and
of absolute necessity are discovered on examination to be without the
least significance for the mind. The Ideas, properly defined, are merely
schemata of regulative principles, and their whole content reduces
without remainder to such categories as totality, substance, causality,
necessity, transcendently applied. As _Ideas_, they are then without
real meaning; but they can be employed by analogy to define an Ideal
which serves an indispensable function in the extension of experience.
From this point of view, the transcendental deduction of the Ideas is
radically distinct from that of the categories. The proof is not that
they are necessary for the possibility of experience, but only that they
are required for its perfect, or at least more complete, development.
And as Kant is unable to prove that such completion is really possible,
the objective validity of the Ideas is left open to question. They
should be taken only as heuristic principles; the extent of their truth,
even in the empirical realm, cannot be determined by the _a priori_
method that is alone proper to a _Critique of Pure Reason_.

The first view is inspired by the fundamental teaching of the
_Analytic_, and is the only view which will justify Kant in retaining
his distinction between appearance and things in themselves. All that is
positive in the second view can be combined with the first view; but, on
the other hand, the negative implications of the second view are at
variance with its own positive teaching. For when the Ideas are regarded
as empirical in origin no less than in function, their entire authority
is derived from experience, and cannot be regarded as being
transcendental in any valid sense of that term. In alternating between
these two interpretations of the function of Reason, Kant is wavering
between the Idealist and the merely sceptical view of the scope and
powers of pure thought. On the Idealist interpretation Reason is a
metaphysical faculty, revealing to us the phenomenal character of
experience, and outlining possibilities such as may perhaps be
established on moral grounds. From the sceptical standpoint, on the
other hand, Reason gives expression to what may be only our subjective
preference for unity and system in the ordering of experience. According
to the one, the criteria of truth and reality are bound up with the
Ideas; according to the other, sense-experience is the standard by which
the validity even of the Ideas must ultimately be judged. From the fact
that Kant should have continued sympathetically to develop two such
opposite standpoints, we would seem to be justified in concluding that
he discerned, or at least desiderated, some more complete reconciliation
of their teaching than he has himself thus far been able to achieve, and
that no solution which would either subordinate the Ideal demands of
thought, or ignore the gifts of experience, could ever have been
definitively accepted by him as satisfactorily meeting the issues at
stake. The Idealist solution is that to which his teaching as a whole
most decisively points; but he is as conscious of the difficulties which
lie in its path as he is personally convinced of its ultimate truth. His
continuing appreciation of the value of sceptical teaching is a tacit
admission that the Idealist doctrines, in the form which he has so far
been able to give to them, are not really adequate to the complexity of
the problems. As further confirmation of the tentative character of
Kant’s conclusions in the _Critique of Pure Reason_, we have his own
later writings. In the _Critique of Judgment_, published nine years
later, in teaching less sceptical and more constructive, though still
delicately balanced between the competing possibilities, and always,
therefore, leaving the final decision to moral considerations, Kant
ventures upon a restatement of the problems of the _Dialectic_. To this
restatement both of the above tendencies contribute valuable elements.




APPENDIX A[1684]

TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHODS




