CHAPTER II

SYSTEM OF ALL PRINCIPLES OF PURE UNDERSTANDING


The introductory remarks to this important chapter are again dictated by
Kant’s architectonic, and set its actual contents in an extremely false
light. Kant would seem to imply that as the _Analytic of Concepts_ has
determined all the various conceptual elements constitutive of
experience, and has proved that they serve as predicates of possible
judgments, it now remains to show in an _Analytic of Principles_ what _a
priori_ synthetic judgments, or in other words what principles, can
actually be based upon them. Though this is a quite misleading account
of the relation holding between the two books of the _Analytic_, it has
been accepted by many commentators.[1128] For several reasons it must be
rejected. The pure forms of understanding are not predicates for
possible judgments. They underlie judgment as a whole, expressing the
relation through which its total contents are organised. Thus in the
proposition “cinnabar is heavy” the category of substance and attribute
is not in any sense the predicate; it articulates the entire judgment,
interpreting the experienced contents in terms of the dual relation of
substance and attribute. Judgment, its nature and conditions, is the
real problem of the misnamed _Analytic of Concepts_. As already
indicated,[1129] the two main divisions of the _Analytic_ deal with one
and the same problem. But while doing so, they differ in two respects.
In the first place, as above noted, the _Analytic of Concepts_ supplies
no proof of the validity of particular categories, but only a quite
general demonstration that forms of unity, such as are involved in all
judgment, are demanded for the possibility of apperception. The proofs
of the indispensableness of _specific_ categories are first given in the
_Analytic of Principles_. Secondly, in the _Analytic of Concepts_ the
temporal aspect of experience falls somewhat into the background,
whereas in the _Analytic of Principles_ it is emphasised.

From these two fundamental points of difference there arises a third
distinguishing feature. When the categories, or rather schemata, are
explicitly defined, and receive individual proof, they are found to be
just those principles that are demanded for the possibility of the
positive sciences. This is, from Kant’s point of view, no mere
coincidence. Scientific knowledge is possible only in so far as
experience is grounded on _a priori_ conditions; and the conditions of
_sense_-experience are also the conditions of its conceptual
interpretation. But while the _Analytic of Concepts_ deals almost
exclusively with ordinary experience, in the _Analytic of Principles_
the physical sciences receive their due share of consideration.

=First and Second Sections. The Highest Principles of Analytic and
Synthetic Judgments.=--These two sections contain nothing not already
developed earlier in the _Critique_. Though the principle of
non-contradiction is a merely negative test of truth, it can serve as a
universal and completely adequate criterion in the case of all judgments
that are analytic of given concepts. The principle of synthetic
judgments, on the other hand, is the principle whereby we are enabled to
advance beyond a given concept so as to attach a predicate which does
not stand to it in the relation either of identity or of contradiction.
This principle is the principle of the possibility of experience. Though
_a priori_ synthetic judgments cannot be _logically_ demonstrated as
following from higher and more universal propositions,[1130] they are
capable of a _transcendental_ proof, that is, as being conditions of
sense-experience.

     “The possibility of experience is what gives objective reality to
     all our _a priori_ knowledge.”[1131] “Although we know _a priori_
     in synthetic judgments a great deal regarding space in general and
     the figures which productive imagination describes in it, and can
     obtain such judgments without actually requiring any experience;
     yet even this knowledge would be nothing but a playing with a mere
     figment of the brain, were it not that space has to be regarded as
     a condition of the appearances which constitute the material for
     outer experience....”[1132]

In the first part of the last sentence, as in the page which precedes
it, Kant would seem to be inculcating his doctrine of a pure _a priori_
manifold, but the latter part of the statement would not be affected by
the admission that space is not an independent intuition but only the
form of outer sense.

=Third Section. Systematic Representation of all the Synthetic Principles
of Understanding.=--Kant is not concerned in this section with the
fundamental propositions of mathematical science, since, on his view,
they rest upon the evidence of intuition. He claims, however, that their
objective validity depends upon two principles, which, though not
themselves mathematical in the strict sense, may conveniently be so
described from the transcendental standpoint--the principle of the
“axioms of intuition,” and the principle of the “anticipations of
experience.” The physicist, who takes the legitimacy of applied
mathematics for granted, has no occasion to formulate these principles.
That he none the less presupposes them is shown, however, by his
unquestioning assumption that nature conforms to the strict requirements
of pure mathematics. And since the principles involve pure concepts, the
one embodying the schema of number, and the other the schema of quality,
they fall outside the scope of the _Transcendental Aesthetic_, and call
for a deduction similar to that of the other categories.

As already indicated, Kant’s procedure is extremely arbitrary, and is
due to the perverting influence of his architectonic. Proof of the
validity of applied mathematics has already been given in the
_Aesthetic_[1133] of the first edition--a proof which is further
developed in the _Prolegomena_,[1134] and recast in the second edition
so as to constitute a separate “transcendental exposition.”[1135] As
Kant teaches in these passages, the objective validity of applied
mathematics rests upon proof that space and time are the _a priori_
forms of outer and inner sense. The new deductions of the schemata of
number and quality, which he now proceeds to formulate, are quite
unnecessary, and also are by no means conclusive in the manner of their
proof. This, however, is more than compensated by the extremely valuable
proofs of the schematised categories of relation which he gives in the
section on the _Analogies of Experience_. The section on the _Postulates
of Empirical Experience_, which deals with the principles of modality,
also contains matter of very real importance.

The principles with which this chapter has to deal can thus be arranged
according to the fourfold division of the table of categories: (1)
_Axioms of Intuition_, (2) _Anticipations of Perception_, (3) _Analogies
of Experience_, (4) _Postulates of Empirical Thought_. And following the
distinction already drawn in the _Analytic of Concepts_,[1136] Kant
distinguishes between the Axioms and Anticipations on the one hand, and
the Analogies and Postulates on the other. The former determine the
conditions of intuition in space and time, and may therefore be called
mathematical and constitutive. They express what is necessarily involved
in every intuition as such. The latter are dynamical. They are
principles according to which we must think the existence of an object
as determined in its relation to others. While, therefore, the first set
of principles can be intuitively verified, the second set have only an
indirect relation to the objects experienced. Whereas a relation of
causality can never be intuited as holding between two events, but only
thought into them, spatial and temporal relations are direct objects of
the mind. Similarly, the relation of substance and attribute cannot be
intuited; it can only be thought into what is intuited. The mathematical
principles thus acquire an immediate (though, be it remembered, merely
_de facto_) evidence; the _a priori_ certainty, equally complete, of the
dynamical principles can be verified only through the circuitous channel
of transcendental proof.

The composite constitution of these sections finds striking illustration
in the duplicated account of this distinction which precedes and follows
the table of principles. The two accounts can hardly have been written
in immediate succession to one another. The earlier in location[1137] is
probably the later in date. It would seem to rest upon some such
uncritical distinction as that drawn in the _Prolegomena_ between
judgments of perception and judgments of experience.[1138] The second
and briefer account[1139] is not open to this objection.

In A 178-80 = B 220-3 Kant develops a further point of difference
between the mathematical and the dynamical principles, or rather
explains what he means by his all too brief and consequently ambiguous
reference in the first of the above accounts to “existence” (_Dasein_).
The mathematical principles are _constitutive_; the dynamical are
_regulative_. That is to say, the mathematical principles lay down the
conditions for the generation or construction of appearances. The
dynamical only specify rules whereby we can define the relation in which
existences contingently given are connected. As existence can never be
constructed _a priori_, we are limited to the determination of the
interrelations between existences all of which must be given. Thus the
principle of causality enables us to predict _a priori_ that for every
event there must exist some antecedent cause; but only through empirical
investigation can we determine which of the particular given antecedents
may be so described. That is to say, the principle defines conditions to
which experience must conform, but does not enable us to construct it
in advance. This distinction is inspired by the contrast between
mathematical and physical science, and is valuable as defining the
empirically regulative function of the _a priori_ dynamical principles;
but its somewhat forced character[1140] becomes apparent when we bear in
mind Kant’s previous distinction between the principles of pure
mathematical science and the transcendental principles which justify
their application to experience. Those latter principles concern
existence as apprehended through schematised categories, and are
consequently, as regards certainty and method of proof, in exactly the
same position as the dynamical principles. This is sufficiently evident
from his own illustration of sunlight.[1141] There is as little
possibility of “constructing” its intensity as of determining _a priori_
the cause of an effect.


I. THE AXIOMS OF INTUITION

_All appearances are in their intuition extensive magnitudes._ Or as in
the second edition: _All intuitions are extensive magnitudes._

‘Extensive’ is here used in a very wide sense to include temporal as
well as spatial magnitude. Kant bases this principle upon the schema of
number, and the proof which he propounds in its support is therefore
designed to show that apprehension of an object of perception, whether
spatial or temporal, is only possible in so far as we bring that schema
into play. But though this is the professed purpose of the argument,
number is itself never even mentioned; and the reason for the omission
is doubtless Kant’s consciousness of the obvious objections to any such
position. That aspect of the argument is therefore, no doubt without
explicit intention, kept in the background. But even as thus given, the
argument must have left Kant with some feeling of dissatisfaction.
Loyalty to his architectonic scheme prevents such doubt and disquietude
from finding further expression.

The argument, in its first-edition statement, starts from the
formulation of a view of space and time directly opposed to that of the
_Aesthetic_:[1142]

     “I entitle a magnitude extensive when the representation of the
     parts makes possible, and therefore necessarily precedes, the
     representation of the whole. I cannot represent to myself a line,
     however small, without drawing it in thought, _i.e._ generating
     from a point all its parts one after another, and thus for the
     first time recording this intuition.”

Similarly with even the smallest time. And as all appearances are
intuited in space or time, every appearance, so far as intuited, is an
extensive magnitude, that is to say, can be apprehended only through
successive generation of its parts. All appearances are “aggregates,
_i.e._ manifolds of antecedently given parts.”

This definition of extensive magnitude involves an assumption which Kant
also employs elsewhere in the _Critique_,[1143] but which he nowhere
attempts to establish by argument; namely, that it is impossible to
apprehend a manifold save in succession. This assumption is, of course,
entirely false (at least as applied to our empirical consciousness), as
has since been amply demonstrated by experimental investigation. Kant
adopted it in the earlier subjectivist stage of his teaching, before he
had come to recognise that consciousness of space is involved in
consciousness of time. But even after he had done so, the earlier view
still tended to gain the upper hand whenever the doctrines of inner
sense and of productive imagination were under consideration. For in
regard to the transcendental activities of productive imagination, which
are essentially synthetic, Kant continued to treat time as more
fundamental than space. But, as already noted,[1144] a directly opposite
view of the interrelations of space and time is expounded in passages
added in the second edition.

The two central paragraphs are very externally connected with the main
argument, and are probably later interpolations.[1145] In the first of
these two paragraphs Kant ascribes the synthetic activity involved in
the “generation of figures” to the productive imagination, and maintains
that geometry is rendered possible by this faculty. In the other
paragraph Kant deals with arithmetic, but makes no reference to the
productive imagination. Its argument is limited to the contention that
propositions expressive of numerical relation, though synthetic, are not
universal. They are not axioms, but numerical formulae. This distinction
has no very obvious bearing on the present argument, and serves only to
indicate Kant’s recognition that no rigid parallelism can be established
between geometry and arithmetic. There are, it would seem, no
arithmetical axioms corresponding to the axioms of Euclid.[1146]

The concluding paragraph is a restatement of the argument of the
_Aesthetic_ and of § 13, _Note_ i. of the _Prolegomena_. Appearances are
not things in themselves. They are conditioned by the pure intuitional
forms, and are therefore subject to pure mathematics “in all its
precision.” Were we compelled to regard the objects of the senses as
things in themselves, an applied science of geometry (again taken, in
Kant’s habitual manner, as typically representing the mathematical
disciplines) would not be possible. The only new element in the argument
is the reference to synthesis as presupposed in all apprehension.

The additional proof with which in the second edition Kant prefaces the
entire argument calls for no special comment. It may, however, be noted
that though in the argument of the first edition the need of synthesis
in all apprehension is clearly taught, the term synthesis is not itself
employed except in the central and final paragraphs. In the proof given
in the second edition both the term and what it stands for are allowed
due prominence.


2. THE ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION

_In all appearances sensation and the real which corresponds to it in
the object (realitas phaenomenon) has an intensive magnitude or degree._
Or as in the second edition: _In all appearances the real, which is an
object of sensation, has intensive magnitude or degree._

We may first analyse the total section. The first paragraph[1147]
explains the term anticipation. The second and third paragraphs give a
first proof of the principle. Paragraphs four to ten treat of continuity
in space, time and change, and of the impossibility of empty space, and
also afford Kant the opportunity to develop his dynamical theory of
matter, and so to indicate the contribution which transcendental
philosophy is able to make towards a more adequate understanding of the
principles of physical science. The eleventh and twelfth paragraphs,
evidently later interpolations, give a second proof of the principle
which in one important respect varies from the first proof. In the
second edition a third proof akin to this second proof, but carrying it
a stage further, is added in the form of a new first paragraph.

Kant’s reason for changing the formulation of the principle in the
second edition is evidently the unsatisfactoriness of the phrase
“sensation _and_ the real.”[1148] The principle, properly interpreted,
applies not, as the first edition title and also the second proof would
lead us to expect, to sensation itself, but to its object, _realitas
phaenomenon_. It is phenomenalist in its teaching. The emphatic term
“anticipation” is adopted by Kant to mark that in this principle we are
able in _a priori_ fashion to determine something in regard to what in
itself is purely empirical. Sensation as such, being the matter of
experience, can never be known _a priori_. Its quality, as being a
colour or a taste, depends upon factors which are for us, owing to the
limitations of our knowledge, wholly contingent. None the less in one
particular respect we can predetermine the object of all sensation, and
so can _anticipate_ experience, even in its material aspect.

The first proof is as follows. Apprehension, so far as it takes place
through a sensation, occupies only a single moment; it does not involve
any successive synthesis proceeding from parts to the complete
representation. That which is apprehended cannot, therefore, possess
extensive magnitude. But, as already stated in the chapter on
_Schematism_, reality is that in appearance which corresponds to a
sensation. It is _realitas phaenomenon_. The absence of it is negation =
0. Now every sensation is capable of diminution; between reality in the
appearance and negation there is a continuous series of many possible
intermediate sensations, the difference between any two of which is
always smaller than the difference between the given sensation and zero.
That is to say, the real in appearance has intensive magnitude or
degree. The argument is from capability of variation in the intensity of
sensation to existence of degree in its object or cause. For the most
part this reality is spoken of as that which is apprehended in
sensation, but Kant adds that if it be

     “...viewed as cause either of sensation or of other reality in
     appearance, such as change, the degree of its reality ... is then
     entitled a moment, as for instance the moment of gravity.”

The obscurity of what in itself is a very simple and direct argument
would seem to be traceable to the lack of clearness in Kant’s own mind
as to what is to be signified by reality. The implied distinction
between sensation and its object has not been clearly formulated.
Definitions have, indeed, been given of reality in the chapter on
_Schematism_;[1149] but they are extremely difficult to decipher. Kant
never varies from the assertion that reality is “that which corresponds
to sensation in general.” Our difficulty is with the additional
qualifications. This reality, he further declares, is

     “...that, the concept of which in itself points to an existence
     [_Sein_] in time.”[1150]

The words ‘in time’ would seem to show that what is referred to is
reality _in the realm of appearance_, the _realitas phaenomenon_ of the
_Anticipations_. But immediately below we find the following sentence:

     “As time is only the form of intuition, and consequently of objects
     as appearances, what corresponds in them to sensation is the
     transcendental matter of all objects _as things in themselves_,
     thinghood [_Sachheit_], reality.”[1151]

The teaching of the first sentence is phenomenalist; that of the other
is subjectivist.

Now in the section on _Anticipations of Perception_ the phenomenalist
tendencies of Kant’s thought are decidedly the more prominent. The
implied distinction is threefold, between sensation as subjective state
possessing intensive magnitude, spatial realities that possess both
intensive and extensive magnitude, and the thing in itself. Objects as
appearances are regarded as causes of sensation and as producing changes
in one another.

The explanation of the phenomenalist character of this section is not
far to seek. Kant’s chief purpose in it, as we shall find, is to develop
the dynamical theory of matter to which he had long held, and which, as
he was convinced, would ultimately be substituted for the mechanistic
view to which almost all physicists then adhered. We can easily
understand how in this endeavour the realist tendencies of his thinking
should at once come to the surface, and why he should have been
constrained to develop a position more precise and less ambiguous than
that expressed in the definitions of reality and degree given in the
chapter on _Schematism_. With these preliminary explanations we may pass
to Kant’s second proof of his principle.

A link of connection between the two proofs may be found in the reason
which Kant in the first proof gives for his assertion that sensation
cannot possess extensive magnitude--the reason, namely, that as its
apprehension takes place in a single moment, it involves no element of
synthesis. In his second proof Kant modifies this contention, and
maintains that we can abstract from the extensive magnitude of the
appearance, and yet can recognise a synthesis as being involved.

     “The real which corresponds to sensations in general, as opposed to
     negation = 0, represents only something the very conception of
     which contains an existence [_ein Sein_], and signifies nothing but
     the synthesis in an empirical consciousness in general.”[1152]

Kant adds that in a single moment we can represent to ourselves as
involved in the bare sensation

     “...a synthesis of the uniform progression from zero to the given
     empirical consciousness.”

These statements are far from clear; but it is hardly necessary to
criticise them in detail. Since Kant is endeavouring to prove that a
schema, that of reality or limitation, is involved in the apprehension
of sensation, he is bound in consistency to maintain, in accordance with
the teaching of his deduction of the categories, that the application of
the schema demands some species of synthesis.

The third proof, added in the second edition,[1153] is somewhat more
explicit, and represents a further and last stage in Kant’s vain
endeavour to harmonise the teaching of this section with his general
principles. In the empirical consciousness of sensation there is

     “...a synthesis of the different quantities involved in the
     generation of a sensation from its beginning in pure intuition = 0
     to its particular required magnitude.”

Or again, apprehension of magnitude is apprehension

     “...in which the empirical consciousness can in a certain time
     increase from zero up to its given measure.”

Here, again, what Kant asserts as occurring in our awareness of
sensation calls for much more rigorous demonstration. Like the argument
of the second proof, it is not independently established; it is a mere
corollary to the general principles of his deduction of the categories.

Thus Kant’s thesis, that the apprehension of sense qualities as
intensive magnitudes presupposes a synthesis according to an _a priori_
schema, is both obscure in statement, and unconvincing in argument; and
some of the assertions made, especially in reference to the occurrence
of synthesis, would seem to be hardly less arbitrary than the connection
which Kant professes to trace between logical “quality,” as affirmation
or negation, and the dynamical intensity of sensuous qualities. For, as
already indicated,[1154] logical “quality” and intensive magnitude have
nothing in common save the name.

Kant next proceeds to a discussion of the general problem of continuity.
The connection is somewhat forced. But if we overlook the artificial
ordering of the argument and are content to regard what is given as in
the nature of parenthetical comment, we find in the middle paragraph of
this section an excellent statement of his view of the nature of
continuity and a very clear statement of his dynamical theory of matter.

Kant develops the conception of continuity (_a_) in reference to space
and time, and (_b_) in its application to the intensity of sensations
and of their causes.

(_a_) Kant’s own words require no comment:

     “Space and time are _quanta continua_ because no part of them can
     be given, save as enclosed between limits (points or moments), and
     therefore as being itself a space or a time. Space therefore
     consists only of spaces, time only of times. Points and moments are
     only limits, i.e. mere positions that limit space and time. But
     positions always presuppose the intuitions which they limit or are
     intended to limit; and out of mere positions, viewed as
     constituents capable of being given prior to space and time,
     neither space nor time can be constructed. Such magnitudes may also
     be called _flowing_, since the synthesis of productive imagination
     involved in their production is a progression in time, and the
     continuity of time is ordinarily denoted by the expression
     _flowing_.”[1155]

(_b_) When Kant proceeds to apply the principle of continuity to
intensive magnitude, his conclusion rests upon a somewhat different
basis. He argues that appearances must be continuous owing to the fact
that they are apprehended in space and time.[1156] So far as they are
extended in space and enduring in time that may perhaps be true; but
Kant’s assertion has a wider sweep. It implies that sensations and the
physical conditions of sensation, as for instance the sensation of red
or the force of gravity, are capable of existing in every possible
degree between zero and any given intensity. This affords the key to his
method of formulating his second and third proofs of the principle of
_Anticipations of Perception_, which, in the form in which he interprets
it, contains this further implication of continuity. These proofs are
inspired by the desire to make all apprehension, even that of simple
sensation, a temporal process, and by that indirect means to establish
for sensuous intensity and its objective conditions a continuity similar
to that of space and time. The proof is, however, as we have seen,
inconclusive. This application of continuity must be regarded as more in
the nature of a mere hypothesis than Kant is willing to recognise. As
regards sensations, it would seem to have been positively disproved by
the results of experimental psychology.

From his supposed proof of the continuity of all intensive magnitudes
Kant draws two further conclusions: first, that experience can never be
made to yield proof of the void in either space or time. For if all
reality can exist in innumerable degrees, and if each sense has a
determinate degree of receptivity, the complete absence of reality can
never be itself experienced. Inference to such absence is also
impossible for a second reason, namely, that one and the same extensive
magnitude may be completely occupied by an infinite number of different
intensive degrees, indefinitely approximating to, and yet also
indefinitely differing from, zero. Kant is here referring to the
dynamical theory of matter which he had long held,[1157] and which he
expounds in opposition to the current mechanistic view.[1158] The
mechanistic theory rests, he contends, upon an assumption purely
metaphysical and therefore wholly dogmatic, that the real in space has
no internal differences, but is uniform like the empty space in which it
exists.[1159] In accordance with this assumption physicists infer that
all qualitative differences in our sensations must be due to merely
quantitative differences in their material causes, and ultimately to
differences in the number and distribution of the constituent parts of
material bodies. If two bodies of the same volume differ in weight or
in inertia, the variation must be traced to differences in the amount of
matter, or, otherwise stated, to differences in the amount of unoccupied
space, in the two bodies. To this view Kant opposes his own
hypothesis--for it is in this more modest form that it is presented in
these paragraphs--namely, that matter occupies space by intensity and
not by mere bulk, and that it may therefore be diminished indefinitely
in degree without for that reason ceasing completely to fill the same
extensive area. Thus an expanded force such as heat, filling space
without leaving the smallest part of it empty, may be indefinitely
diminished in degree, and yet may still with these lesser degrees
continue to occupy that space as completely as before. This may not,
Kant admits, be the true explanation of physical differences, but it at
least has the merit of freeing the understanding from metaphysical
preconceptions, and of demonstrating the possibility of an alternative
to the current view. If matter has intensity as well as extensity, and
so can vary in quality as well as in quantity, physical science may
perhaps be fruitfully developed on dynamical lines.


3. THE ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE

The principle of the _Analogies_ is: _Experience is possible only
through the representation of a necessary connection of
perceptions._[1160]

Kant introduces the three analogies with the statement of an underlying
principle, which corresponds to the central thesis of the transcendental
deduction. In the second edition this general principle is reformulated,
and a new proof is added. These alterations do not seem, however, to be
of any special significance. The two proofs repeat the main argument of
the transcendental deduction, but with special emphasis upon the
temporal aspect of experience. The categories of relation, as
schematised, yield the _Analogies_, which acquire objective validity in
so far as they render experience possible. The first proof (given in the
second paragraph of the first edition) maintains that they are
indispensable for apperception, and the second proof (that of the second
edition) that they are indispensable for knowledge of objects. The
references to time in the second proof are too condensed to be
intelligible save in the light of the more explicit arguments given in
support of the three _Analogies_.

The first paragraph in the first edition must be a later interpolation,
as its assertion that simultaneity is a mode of time conflicts with the
proof given of the first _Analogy_, but agrees with what must be
regarded as a later interpolated passage introductory to that
proof.[1161] This paragraph is also peculiar in another respect.
Hitherto Kant has traced the existence of the three analogies to the
three categories of relation, each of which conditions a separate
schema. But in this paragraph he bases their threefold form on the fact
that time has three modes, duration, sequence,[1162] and coexistence,
and that there is therefore a threefold problem: first, what is involved
in consciousness of duration; secondly, what is involved in
consciousness of succession; and thirdly, what is involved in
consciousness of coexistence. This is not, however, a satisfactory mode
of stating the matter, for it might seem to imply that the three aspects
of time can be separately apprehended, and that each has its own
independent conditions. What Kant really proves is that all three
involve one another. We can only be conscious of duration in contrast to
succession, and of succession in contrast to the permanent, while both
involve consciousness of coexistence. The three analogies thus treat of
three aspects of the same problem, the first connecting with the
category of substance, the second with that of causality, and the third
with that of reciprocity.

The only point that calls for further comment[1163] concerns Kant’s
adoption of the term _Analogy_ as a title for the three principles of
“relation.” The term is employed in contra-distinction to constitutive
principle or axiom; and Kant points out that this usage of the term must
be carefully distinguished from the other or mathematical. “In
philosophy analogy is not the likeness of two quantitative but of two
qualitative relations.” In mathematical analogy a fourth term can be
discovered from three given terms; but in an ‘analogy of experience’ we
possess a rule that suffices only for the determination of the
_relation_ to a term not given, never for knowledge of this term itself.
Thus if we are informed that 15 is to _x_ as 5 is to 10, the value of
_x_ can be determined as 30. But if it be stated that a given event
stands to an antecedent event as effect to cause, only the relation
holding between the events can be specified, not the actual cause
itself. The principle of causality thus serves only as a regulative
principle, directing us to search for the cause of an event among its
antecedents.

Riehl has suggested a very different explanation of the term, namely, as
signifying that the categories of relation are employed only on the
analogy of the corresponding, pure logical forms.

     “In so far as I know matter in terms of its empirical properties as
     the substance of outer experiences, I do not gain knowledge of the
     nature of matter but only of its relation to my thinking. In all
     judgments upon outer things I employ matter as the _subject_. That
     knowledge is therefore nothing but an _analogy_ to the conceptual
     relation of a subject to its predicates. Matter is related to its
     properties and effects in the realm of appearance as the subject of
     a categorical judgment is related to its predicates. In so far as
     an antecedent is entitled the cause of an event, we do not gain
     knowledge of its nature but only of the analogy of the relation of
     cause and effect with that of antecedent and consequent in a
     hypothetical proposition; the connection of the changes is
     analogous to the conceptual relation of ground and consequence; the
     principle of the sufficient ground of changes is an _analogy of
     experience_.”[1164]

This explanation may at first sight seem to be supported by Kant’s own
statement in the concluding paragraph of the section before us.

     “Through these principles we are justified in combining appearances
     only according to an analogy with the logical and general unity of
     concepts ...”[1165]

This assertion is, however, incidental to Kant’s explanation that the
analogies are not principles of “transcendental” (_i.e._ transcendent),
but only of empirical application--an explanation itself in turn
occasioned by his desire to connect his present argument with the
chapter on _Schematism_. This interpretation of the term analogy is
probably, therefore, of the nature of an afterthought. Having adopted
the term on the grounds above stated in A 179-80 = B 222, he finds in it
an opportunity to reinforce his previous assertion of the restricting
character of the time condition through which categories are transformed
into schemata. The entire paragraph is probably, as Adickes remarks, a
later interpolation. But there are further reasons why we cannot accept
this passage as representing the real origin of the term analogy. It
would involve adoption of the subjectivist standpoint from which Riehl,
despite his otherwise realistic reading of Kant, interprets Kant’s
phenomenalist doctrines. For it implies that it is only in the noumenal,
and not also in the phenomenal sphere, that substantial existences and
genuinely dynamical activities are to be found.[1166] It would also seem
to imply, what is by no means Kant’s invariable position, the absolute
validity of the logical forms. And lastly, it would involve the priority
of the logical to the real use of the categories, a violation of
Critical principles of which Kant is himself occasionally guilty, but
never, as it would seem, in this exaggerated form.

A. =First Analogy.=--_All appearances contain the permanent (substance) as
the object itself, and the changeable as its mere determination, i.e. as
a mode in which the object exists._ Or as in the second edition: _In all
change of appearances substance is permanent; its quantum in Nature
neither increases nor diminishes._

The second paragraph[1167] is of composite character. Its first part
(consisting of the first three sentences) and its second part give
separate proofs, involving assertions directly contradictory of one
another. The one asserts change and simultaneity to be modes of time;
the other denies this. They cannot, therefore, be of the same date. The
first would seem to be the later; it connects with the first paragraph
of the preceding section.

In the first edition the principle is defined as expressing the schema
of the dual category of substance and attribute. In the second edition
it is reformulated in much less satisfactory form, as being the
scientific principle of the conservation (_i.e._ indestructibility) of
matter. This second formulation emphasises the weaker side of the
argument of the first edition, and is largely due to the perverting
influence of Kant’s method of distinguishing between the _Analytic of
Concepts_ and the _Analytic of Judgments_. It reveals Kant’s growing
tendency to contrast the two divisions of the _Analytic_, as dealing,
the one with ordinary experience, and the other with its scientific
reorganisation.[1168]

The first proof in the first edition gives explicit expression to a
presupposition underlying this entire section, namely, that all
apprehension is necessarily successive, or in other words that it is
impossible to apprehend a manifold save in succession.[1169] From this
assumption it follows that if such succession is not only to occur but
is to be apprehended as occurring, and if we are to be able to
distinguish between the successive order of all our apprehensions and
the order of coexisting independent existences, a permanent must be
thought into the succession, that is to say, the successive experiences
must be interpreted into an objective order in terms of the category of
abiding substance and changing attributes. Kant neither here nor
elsewhere makes any attempt to explain how this position is to be
reconciled with his doctrine that space can be intuited as well as time;
and there is equal difficulty in reconciling it with the doctrine
developed in his second proof (in the second division of this same
paragraph) that time itself does not change but only the appearances in
it.

As above shown,[1170] there are two tendencies in Kant’s treatment of
time, each of which carries with it its own set of connected
consequences. There is the view that consciousness of time _as a whole_
preconditions consciousness of any part of it. This tends to recognition
of simultaneity as a mode of time and of the simultaneous as apprehended
in a single non-successive act of apprehension. On the other hand, there
is the counter-view that consciousness of time is only possible through
the successive combination of its parts. This leads to the assertion
that simultaneity is not a mode of time, and that time itself cannot be
apprehended save as the result of synthesis in accordance with unifying
categories. Through the categories there arises consciousness of
objectivity, and so for the first time consciousness of a distinction
between the subjective which exists invariably and exclusively in
succession, and the objective which may exist either as successive or as
permanent, and in whose existence both elements are, indeed, inseparably
involved.

To turn now to Kant’s second[1171] proof of the principle;[1172] it is
as follows. All our perceptions are in time, and in time are represented
as either coexistent or successive. Time itself cannot change,[1173] for
only as in it can change be represented. Time, however, cannot by
itself be apprehended. As such, it is the mere empty form of our
perceptions. There must be found in the objects of perception some
abiding substrate or substance which will represent the permanence of
time in consciousness, and through relation to which coexistence and
succession of events may be perceived. And since only in relation to
this substrate can time relations be apprehended, it must be altogether
unchangeable, and may therefore[1174] be called substance. And being
unchangeable it can neither increase nor diminish in quantity. Kant,
without further argument, at once identifies this substance with matter.

This proof may be restated in briefer fashion.[1175] The consciousness
of events in time involves the dating of them in time. But that is only
possible in so far as we have a representation of the time in which they
are to be dated. Time, however, not being by itself experienced, must be
represented in consciousness by an abiding substrate in which all change
takes place, and since, as the substrate of _all_ change, it will
necessarily be unchangeable, it may be called substance.

The argument, in both proofs, is needlessly abstract, and as already
remarked,[1176] the reason of this abstractness is that Kant here, as in
the chapter on _Schematism_, unduly ignores space, limiting his analysis
to inner sense. He defines the schema of substance as the permanence of
the real in time, _i.e._ as the representation of the real which
persists while all else changes. As the second edition of the _Critique_
shows,[1177] Kant himself came to recognise the inadequacy of this
definition, and therefore of the proof of the first _Analogy_.
Consciousness is only possible through the representation of objects in
_space_. Only in outer sense is a permanent given in contrast to which
change may be perceived. The proof ought therefore to have proceeded in
the following manner. Time can be conceived only as motion, and motion
is perceivable only against a permanent background in space.
Consciousness of time therefore involves consciousness of a permanent in
space. He might have added that consciousness of relative time involves
consciousness of change in relation to something relatively permanent,
and that the scientific conception of all changes as taking place in a
single absolute time involves the determining of change through relation
to something absolutely permanent, this ultimate standard being found in
the heavenly bodies. By the permanent is not meant the immovable, but
only that which is uniform and unchanging in its motions. The uniform
motions of the heavenly bodies constitute our ultimate standard of time.
The degree of their uniformity is the measure of our approximation to an
absolute standard. A marginal note upon this _Analogy_ in Kant’s private
copy of the _Critique_ reveals Kant’s late awakened recognition of the
necessity of this mode of restating the argument.

     “Here the proof must be so developed as to apply only to substances
     as phenomena of outer sense, and must therefore be drawn from
     space, which with its determinations exists at all times. In space
     all change is motion....”[1178]

That the new argument of the second edition still proceeds on the same
lines as the second argument of the first edition is probably due, as
Erdmann remarks,[1179] to Kant’s unwillingness to make the extensive
alterations which would have been called for in the chapter on
_Schematism_ as well as in the statement of this _Analogy_.

A second serious objection to Kant’s treatment of the first _Analogy_
follows at once from the above. Kant identifies the permanent which
represents time in consciousness with matter, and seeks to prove by
means of this identification the principle of the conservation of
matter.[1180] That principle is not really capable of transcendental
proof. It is not a presupposition of possible experience, but merely a
generalisation empirically grounded. Kant is here confounding a
particular theory as to the manner in which the element of permanence,
necessary to possible experience, is realised, with the much more
general conclusion which alone can be established by transcendental
methods. His argument also conflicts with his own repeated assertion
that the notion of change, in so far as it is distinct from that of
temporal succession or of motion in space, is empirical, and
consequently falls outside the scope of transcendental enquiry. By the
conservation of matter we mean the constancy of the weight of matter
throughout all changes. But the only permanent which can be postulated
as necessary to render our actual consciousness of time possible,
consists of spatial objects sufficiently constant to act as a standard
by comparison with which motions may be measured against one another.
And as this first _Analogy_, properly understood, thus deals solely with
spatial changes of bodies, the principle of the conservation of matter
has no real connection with it.

Then thirdly, and lastly, Kant takes this first _Analogy_ as showing the
indispensable function performed in experience by the category of
substance and attribute. Substance, he argues, corresponds to the time
in which events happen, and its attributes correspond to the changing
events. Just as all events are only to be conceived as happening in
time, so too all changes are only to be conceived as changes in an
abiding substance. These, he would seem to hold, are simply two ways of
making one and the same assertion. Now Kant may perhaps be right in
insisting that all change is change in, and not of, time. Unity of
consciousness would seem to demand consciousness of a single time in
which all events happen. But this relation of time to its events does
not justify the same assertion being made of substance. Substance may be
what corresponds to time in general, and may represent it in
consciousness, but we cannot for that reason say that changes are also
only in and not of it. To regard the changes in this way as attributes
inhering in substance directly contradicts the view developed in the
second _Analogy_. For the notion of substance is there treated as an
implication of the principle of causality. Substance, Kant there
insists, is not a bare static existence in which changes take place, but
a dynamic energy which from its very nature is in perpetual necessitated
change. Change is not change in, but change of, substance.

Even in the passage in which Kant identifies the notion of the permanent
in change with that of substance and attribute, he shows consciousness
of this difficulty. We must not, he says, separate the substance from
its accidents, treating it as a separate existence. The accidents are
merely the special forms of its existence. But all the same, he adds,
withdrawing the words which he has just uttered, such a separation of
the changing accidents from the abiding substance is “_unavoidable,
owing to the conditions of the logical employment of our
understanding_.”[1181] Kant is here so hard pressed to account for the
use of the category of substance and attribute in experience, and to
explain the contradictions to which it gives rise, that the only way he
sees out of the difficulty is to refer the contradictions involved in
the category to the constitution of our understanding in its _logical_
employment. Yet as such employment of understanding is, according to his
own showing, secondary to, and dependent upon, its “real” employment,
the category of substance and attribute can hardly have originated in
this way.

We must, then, conclude that Kant offers no sufficient deduction or
explanation of the category of substance and attribute, and as he does
so nowhere else, we are driven to the further conclusion that he is
unable to account for its use in experience, or at least to reconcile it
in any adequate fashion with the principle of causality.

B. =Second Analogy.=--_Everything that happens, i.e. begins to be,
presupposes something on which it follows according to a rule._ Or as in
the second edition: _All changes take place in conformity with the law
of the connection of cause and effect._

This section, as Kant very rightly felt, contains one of the most
important and fundamental arguments of the entire _Critique_; and this
would seem to be the reason why he has so multiplied the proofs which he
gives of the _Analogy_. Within the limits of the section no less than
five distinct proofs are to be found, and still another was added in the
second edition. As Adickes[1182] argues, it is extremely unlikely that
Kant should have written five very similar proofs in immediate
succession. The probability is that they are of independent origin and
were later combined to constitute this section; or, if we hold with
Adickes that Kant first composed a “brief outline,” we may conclude that
he combined the one or more proofs, which that outline contained, with
others of earlier or of later origin. The first to the fourth paragraphs
of the first edition contain a first proof; the fifth to the seventh a
second proof (a repetition of the first proof but in indirect form); the
eighth to the tenth a third proof (almost identical with the first); the
eleventh to the thirteenth a fourth proof (different in character from
all the others); the fourteenth a fifth proof (probably the latest in
time of writing; an anticipation of the argument in the second edition).
The paragraph added in the second edition (the second paragraph in the
text of the second edition) gives a sixth and last proof.

We may first state the central argument, deferring treatment of such
additional points as arise in connection with Kant’s varying
formulations of it in his successive proofs. The second _Analogy_,
though crabbedly, diffusely, and even confusedly stated, is one of the
finest and most far-reaching pieces of argument in the whole _Critique_.
It is of special historical importance as being Kant’s answer to Hume’s
denial of the validity of the causal principle. Hume had maintained that
we can never be conscious of anything but mere succession. Kant in reply
seeks to prove that consciousness of succession is only possible through
consciousness of a necessity that determines the order of the successive
events.

Kant, we must bear in mind, accepts much of Hume’s criticism of the
category of causality. The general principle that every event must have
an antecedent cause is, Kant recognises, neither intuitively certain nor
demonstrable by general reasoning from more ultimate truths. It is not
to be accounted for by analytic thought, but like all synthetic
judgments _a priori_ can only be proved by reference to the contingent
fact of actual experience. Secondly, Kant makes no attempt, either in
this _Analogy_ or elsewhere in the _Critique_, to explain the nature and
possibility of causal connection, that is, to show how one event, the
cause, is able to give rise to another and different event, the effect.
We can never by analysis of an effect discover any reason why it must
necessarily be preceded by a cause.[1183] Thirdly, the principle of
causality, as deduced by Kant and shown to be necessarily involved in
all consciousness of time, is the quite general principle that every
event must have _some_ cause in what immediately precedes it. What in
each special case the cause may be, can only be empirically discovered;
and that any selected event is really the cause can never be absolutely
certain. The particular causal laws are discovered from experience, not
by means of the general principle but only in accordance with it, and
are therefore neither purely empirical nor wholly _a priori_. As even J.
S. Mill teaches, the general principle is assumed in every inference to
a causal law, and save by thus assuming the general principle the
particular inference to causal connection cannot be proved. But at the
same time, since the proof of causal connection depends upon
satisfaction of those empirical tests which Mill formulates in his
inductive methods, such special causal laws can be gathered only from
experience.

The starting-point of Kant’s analysis is our consciousness of an
_objective_ order in time. This is for Kant a legitimate starting-point
since he has proved in the _Transcendental Deduction_ that only through
consciousness of the objective is consciousness of the subjective in any
form possible. The independent argument by which it is here supported is
merely a particular application of the general principle of that
deduction. When we apprehend any very large object, such as a house,
though we do so by successively perceiving the different parts of it, we
never think of regarding these successive perceptions as representing
anything successive in the house. On the other hand, when we apprehend
successive events in time, such as the successive positions of a ship
sailing down stream, we do regard the succession of our experiences as
representing objective succession in what is apprehended. Kant therefore
feels justified in taking as fact, that we have the power of
distinguishing between subjective and objective succession, _i.e._
between sequences which are determined by the order of our attentive
experience and sequences which are given as such. It is this fact which
affords Kant a precise method of formulating the problem of the second
_Analogy_, viz. _how consciousness of objective change, as distinguished
from subjective succession, is possible_?

Schopenhauer, owing to the prominence in his system of the principle of
sufficient reason, has commented upon this second _Analogy_ in
considerable detail;[1184] and we may here employ one of his chief
criticisms to define more precisely the general intention of Kant’s
argument. The succession in our experiences of the parts of a house and
of the positions of a ship is, Schopenhauer maintains, in both cases of
genuinely objective character. In both instances the changes are due to
the position of two bodies relatively to one another. In the first
example one of these bodies is the body of the observer, or rather one
of his bodily organs, namely the eye, and the other is the house, in
relation to the parts of which the position of the eye is successively
altered. In the second example the ship changes its position relatively
to the stream. The motion of the eye from roof to cellar is one event;
its motion from cellar to roof is a second event; and both are events of
the same nature as the sailing of the ship. Had we the same power of
dragging the ship upstream that we have of moving the eye in a direction
opposite to that of its first movement, the positions of the ship could
be reversed in a manner exactly analogous to our reversal of the
perceptions of the house.

This criticism is a typical illustration of Schopenhauer’s entire
failure to comprehend the central thesis of Kant’s Critical
idealism.[1185] The _Analytic_, so far as the main argument of its
objective deduction is concerned, was to him a closed book; and as this
second analogy is little else than a special application of the results
of the deduction, he was equally at a loss in its interpretation. Kant
was himself, of course, in large part responsible for the
misunderstanding. The distinction which would seem to be implied by
Kant’s language between sequence that is objective and sequence that is
_merely_ subjective is completely inconsistent with Critical
principles,[1186] and is as thoroughly misleading as that other
distinction which he so frequently employs between the _a priori_ and
the merely empirical. Schopenhauer, however, regarded these distinctions
as valid, and accordingly applies them in the interpretation of Kant’s
method of argument. If inner and outer experience are to be contrasted
as two kinds of experience, there is, as Schopenhauer rightly insists,
no sufficient ground for regarding changes due to movements of the eye
as being subjective and those that are due to movements of a ship as
being objective. That is not, however, Kant’s intention in the
employment of these illustrations. He uses them only to make clear the
fairly obvious fact that while in certain cases the order of our
perceptions is subjectively initiated, in other cases we apprehend the
subjective order of our experiences as corresponding to, and explicable
only through, the objective sequence of events. In holding to this
distinction Kant is not concerned to deny that even in the order which
is determined by the subject’s purposes or caprice objective factors are
likewise involved. The fact that the foundations of a house support its
roof, and will therefore determine what it is that we shall apprehend
when we turn the eye upwards, does not render the order of our
apprehensions any the less subjective in character. But that this order
is _purely_ subjective, Kant could never have asserted. His Critical
principles definitely commit him to the view that even sensations and
desires are integral parts of the unitary system of natural law. Kant,
as we shall find, is maintaining that some such distinction between
subjective and objective sequence as is illustrated in the above
contrasted instances must be present from the very start of our
experience--must, indeed, be constitutive of experience as such. Out of
a consciousness of the purely subjective the notion of the objective can
never arise.[1187] Or otherwise stated, consciousness of a time order,
even though subjective, must ultimately involve the application of some
non-subjective standard.

     “I shall be obliged ... to derive the subjective sequence of
     apprehension from the objective sequence of appearances, because
     otherwise the former is entirely undetermined, and does not
     distinguish any one appearance from any other.”[1188]

We interpret the subjective order in terms of an objective system;
consciousness of the latter is the necessary presupposition of all
awareness. It is as necessary to the interpretation of what is
apprehended through the rotating eyeballs as to the apprehension of a
moving ship. So far from refusing to recognise that the subjective order
of our experiences is objectively conditioned, Kant is prepared to
advance to the further assertion that it is only apprehensible when so
conceived.

In the third _Analogy_ Kant proceeds to the connected problem, how we
can apprehend the parts of a house as simultaneous notwithstanding the
sequent relation of our perceptions of them, and what justification we
have for thus interpreting the subjectively sequent experiences as
representing objective coexistence. Just as Kant in this second
_Analogy_ does not argue that irreversibility is by itself proof of
causal relation, but only that the consciousness of such irreversibility
demands the employment of the conception of causality, so in the third
_Analogy_ he does not attempt to reduce the consciousness of coexistence
to the consciousness of reversibility, but to prove that only through
the application of the conception of reciprocity can the reversibility
be properly interpreted. In each case the category conditions the
empirical consciousness; the latter is an apprehension of determinate
order only in so far as it presupposes the category. Though Kant’s
treatment of the third _Analogy_ has less historical importance, and
perhaps less intrinsic interest, than the proof of the second _Analogy_,
it is even more significant of the kind of position which he is
endeavouring to establish, and I may therefore forewarn the reader that
he must not spare himself the labour of mastering its difficult, and
somewhat illusive, argument. The doctrines which it expounds at once
reinforce and extend the results of the second _Analogy_, while the
further difficulties which it brings to view, but which it is not itself
capable of meeting, indicate that the problems of the _Analytic_ call
for reconsideration in the light of certain wider issues first broached
in the _Dialectic_.

We may now return to Kant’s main argument. His problem, as we have
found, is how consciousness of objective change, as distinguished from
subjective succession, is possible. The problem, being formulated in
this particular way, demands, Kant felt, careful definition of what is
meant by the term ‘objective,’ upon which so much depends. To apply the
illustration above used, the house as apprehended is not a thing in
itself but only an appearance to the mind. What, then, do we mean by the
house, as distinguished from our subjective representations of it, when
that house is nothing but a complex (_Inbegriff_) of
representations?[1189] The question and Kant’s answer to it are stated
in subjectivist fashion, in terms of his earlier doctrine of the
transcendental object. To contrast an object with the representations
through which we apprehend it, is only possible if these representations
stand under a rule which renders necessary their combination in some one
particular way, and so distinguishes this one particular mode of
representation as the only true mode from all others. The origin,
therefore, of our distinction between the subjectively successive and
the succession which is also objective must be due in the one case to
the presence of a rule compelling us to combine the events in some
particular successive order, and in the other to the absence of such a
rule. Our apprehension of the house, for instance, may proceed in any
order, from the roof downwards or _vice versa_, and as the order may
always be reversed there is no compulsion upon the mind to regard the
order of its apprehension as representing objective sequence. But since
in our apprehension of an event B in time, the apprehension of B follows
upon the apprehension of a previous event A, and we cannot reverse the
order, the mind is compelled to view the order of succession, in terms
of the category of causality, as necessitated, and therefore as
objective. The order is a necessary order not in the sense that A must
always precede B, that A is the cause of B, but that the order, if we
are to apprehend it correctly, must in this particular case be conceived
as necessary. The succession, that is, need not be conceived as a causal
one, but in order to be conceived as objective succession it must be
conceived as rendered necessary by connections that are causal.

Having, in this general fashion, shown the bearing of his previous
analysis of objective experience upon the problem in hand, Kant proceeds
to develop from it his proof of the special principle of causality. The
schema of causality is necessary succession in time, and it is through
this, its time aspect, that Kant approaches the principle. It has to do
with the special case of _change_. To be conscious of change we must be
conscious of an _event_, that is, of something as happening at a
particular point in time. The change, in other words, requires to be
dated, and as we are not conscious of time in general, it must be dated
by reference to other events, and obviously in this case in relation to
the preceding events, in contrast to which it is apprehended _as
change_. But according to the results of our analysis of what
constitutes objective experience, it can be fixed in its position in
objective time only if it be conceived as related to the preceding
events according to a necessary law; and the law of necessary connection
in time is the law of causality. In order, then, that something which
has taken place may be apprehended as having occurred, that is, as being
an objective change, it must be apprehended as necessarily following
upon that which immediately precedes it in time, _i.e._ as causally
necessary.

The principle of causality thus conditions consciousness of objective
succession, and Hume, in asserting that we are conscious of the
succession of _events_, therefore admits all that need be assumed in
order to prove the principle. The reason why Hume failed to recognise
this, is that he ignored the distinction between consciousness of the
subjective order of our apprehensions and consciousness of the objective
sequence of events. Yet that is a distinction upon which his own
position rested. For he teaches that determination of causal laws,
sufficiently certain to serve the purposes alike of practical life and
of natural science, can be obtained through observation of those
sequences which remain constant. Such is also the position of all
empiricists. They hold that causal relation is discovered by comparison
of _given_ sequences. Kant’s contention is that the apprehension of
change as change, and therefore ultimately the apprehension even of an
arbitrarily determined order of subjective succession,[1190]
presupposes, and is only possible through, an application of the
category of causality. The primary function of the understanding does
not consist in the clarification of our representation of an event, but
in making such representation possible at all.[1191] The primary field
of exercise for the understanding lies not in the realm of reflective
comparison, but in the more fundamental sphere of creative
synthesis.[1192] In determining the nature of the given it predetermines
the principles to which all reflection upon the given must conform. The
discursive activities of scientific reflection are secondary to, and
conditioned by, the transcendental processes which generate the
experience of ordinary consciousness. Only an experience which conforms
to the causal principle can serve as foundation either for the empirical
judgments of sense experience, or for that ever-increasing body of
scientific knowledge into which their content is progressively
translated. The principle of causality is applicable to everything
experienced, for the sufficient reason that experience is itself
possible only in terms of it. This conclusion finds its most emphatic
and adequate statement in the _Methodology_.

     “...through concepts of understanding pure reason establishes
     secure principles, not however directly from concepts, but always
     only indirectly through relation of these concepts to something
     altogether contingent, namely, _possible experience_. For when such
     experience (_i.e._ something as object of possible experience) is
     presupposed, the principles are apodictically certain, though by
     themselves (directly) _a priori_ they cannot even be recognised at
     all. Thus no one can acquire insight into the proposition that
     everything which happens has its cause, merely from the concepts
     involved. It is not, therefore, a dogma, although from another
     point of view, namely, from that of the sole field of its possible
     employment, _i.e._ experience, it can be proved with complete
     apodictic certainty. But though it needs proof, it should be
     entitled a _principle_, not a _theorem_, because _it has the
     peculiar character that it makes possible the very experience which
     is its own ground of proof, and in this experience must always
     itself be presupposed_.”[1193]

Before making further comment upon Kant’s central argument, it is
advisable to consider the varying statements which Kant has given of it.
We may take his successive proofs in the order in which they occur in
the first edition.

=First Proof.=[1194]--The argument is developed in terms of Kant’s early
doctrine of the transcendental object. The only points specially
characteristic of the statement here given of that doctrine consist
(_a_) in the emphasis with which it is asserted that representations can
be experienced only in succession to one another, and that they can
never stand in the relation of coexistence,[1195] and (_b_) in the
almost complete ignoring of the transcendental object as source or
ground of the rule in terms of which the successive representations are
organised. (_a_) This is a point common to the arguments of all three
_Analogies_. In the first and third the problem is how, from
representations merely successive, permanence and coexistence can be
determined. In the second _Analogy_ the problem is how from
representations invariably successive a distinction can be drawn between
the subjectively determined order of our apprehensions and the objective
sequence of events. Or in other words: how under such conditions we can
recognise an order as given, and so as prescribing the order in which it
must be apprehended. Or to state the same point in still another manner:
how we can distinguish between an arbitrary or reversible order and an
imposed or fixed order, and so come to apprehend the subjective order of
our apprehensions as in certain cases controlled by, and explicable only
through, the objective sequence of events.[1196]

(_b_) The reason why the transcendental object, as source of the
determinate and prescribed order of the given events, falls into the
background in this passage is that Kant is concerned only with the
general principle or category by means of which the order is apprehended
as necessary. That principle has a subjective origin even though the
particular sequences of concrete events have by means of that concept to
be conceived as inexorably determined by their noumenal
conditions.[1197] The principle accounts for the _comprehension_ of the
order as objective, and that is the only point with which Kant is here
immediately concerned. That the assertion of the subjective origin of
the category is not inconsistent with recognition of the imposed order
of the given has already been shown above.[1198] Kant’s own
illustration, in this section, of the ship sailing down stream shows
that he was prepared to assume without question that they are
compatible. His argument is, however, obscure, owing to his failure to
distinguish between the two senses in which the term ‘rule’ may be
employed. The term may signify either the universal and merely formal
principle that every event must have a cause, or it may be used to
denote the fixed order in which concrete events are presented to
sense-perception. The latter order need not represent a series the
members of which are causally connected _with one another_, but only one
that is due to causal necessities. Thus the successive positions of a
ship sailing down stream are not interrelated as cause and effect, and
yet in order to be apprehended as objectively successive must be
conceived as causally conditioned. The term ‘rule’ has very different
meanings in the two cases. ‘Rule’ in the first sense is of subjective
origin. It is _formal_, and can never be given. It is read into the
given. ‘Rule’ in the second sense is given merely, and being due to
noumenal conditions constitutes the _material_ element in natural
science, the empirical content of some particular causal law. Owing to
Kant’s failure explicitly to distinguish between these two very
different connotations of the term, such a sentence as the following is
ambiguous: “That in appearance which contains the condition of this
necessary rule of apprehension is the object.” Kant may mean that the
prescribed order of the concrete events is due to the transcendental
object; but in that case it is not given as _necessary_. Necessity, as
he constantly insists, is the one thing that can never be given. The
sentence is also misleading through its use of the term ‘appearance.’
That term has no legitimate place in a passage inspired by the doctrine
of the transcendental object; there can be no such middle term between
subjective representations and the thing in itself. As Kant himself
states,[1199] appearance defined in terms of that doctrine is “nothing
save a complex of representations.”

There is a very essential difference in the view which Kant takes of the
causal relation according as he is proceeding upon subjectivist or upon
phenomenalist lines. From the one point of view appearances are
representations merely, and accordingly are entirely devoid of causal
efficacy. They are not causes and effects of one another. They have not
the independence or self-persistence necessary for the exercise of
dynamical energy or even for the reception of modifications. Being
“states of the identical self,” all causal relation, dynamically
conceived, must lie solely in their noumenal conditions. Causality
reduces to the thought of necessitated (not necessitating) sequence. It
is, as Kant has suggested in A 181 = B 224, a mere ‘analogy’ in terms of
which we apply the logical relation of ground and consequence[1200] to
the interpretation of our subjective representations, and so view them
as grounded not in one another but exclusively in the thing in itself.
Causality in the strict sense, _i.e._ dynamical agency, can be looked
for only in the noumenal sphere.

Caird, while adopting this explanation of the term ‘analogy,’[1201] is,
as might be expected from his Hegelian standpoint, extremely indefinite
and non-committal as to whether or not empirical objects can be genuine
causes. Riehl, notwithstanding his professedly realistic interpretation
of Kant, adopts the above subjectivist view of natural causation. So
also do Benno Erdmann and Paulsen. The latter[1202] speaks with no
uncertain voice.

     “Causality in the phenomenal world signifies for Kant, as for Hume,
     nothing but regularity in the sequence of phenomena. Real causal
     efficiency cannot of course occur here, for phenomena are
     ideational products. As such they can no more produce an effect
     than concepts can.”

The corresponding phenomenalist view of the causal relation receives no
quite definite formulation either in this section or elsewhere in the
_Critique_, but may be gathered from the general trend of Kant’s
phenomenalist teaching.[1203] It is somewhat as follows. The term
‘analogy’ is viewed as having a meaning very different from that above
suggested. The causal relation is not a mere analogy from the logical
relation of ground and consequence; it is the representation of
genuinely dynamical activities in the objects apprehended. Those objects
are not mere states of the self, subjective representations. They are
part of an independent order which in the form known to us is a
phenomenalist transcript of a deeper reality. If the causal relation is
the analogy of anything distinguishable from itself, it is an analogon
or interpretation of dynamical powers exercised by things in
themselves,[1204] not of the merely logical relation between premisses
and conclusion. The objects of representation may exercise powers which
representations as such can never be conceived as possessing. Between
the individual’s subjective states and things in themselves stands the
phenomenal world of the natural sciences. Its function, whether as
directly experienced through sense-perception or as conceptually
reconstructed through scientific hypothesis, is to stand as the
representative in human consciousness of that noumenal realm in which
all existence is ultimately rooted. The causal interactions of material
bodies in space are as essentially constitutive of those bodies as are
any of their quantitative properties. Causal relation, even in the
phenomenal sphere, must not be identified with mere conformity to law.
The true and complete purpose of the natural sciences is not to be found
in the Berkeleian or sceptical ideal of simplification, but in the older
and sounder conception of causal explanation. That, at least, is the
view which Kant invariably defends whenever he has occasion to discuss
the principles of physical science.

=Second Proof.=[1205]--The argument of the first proof is here developed
in indirect fashion. In the _absence_ of any rule prescribing necessary
sequence, no distinction can be made between subjective and objective
succession. The justification for such a rule lies therefore, not in an
inductive inference from repeated experience, but in its necessity for
the possibility of experience. It is an expression of the synthetic
unity in which experience consists.

=Third Proof.=[1206]--This is for the most part merely a restatement of
the first proof. It differs from it in making rather more explicit that
the objective reference involved in the notion of the transcendental
object is one that carries the mind beyond all representations to the
thought of something which determines their order according to a rule.
Otherwise the ambiguities of the terms employed are identical with those
of the first proof. Its concluding paragraph, however, is a much clearer
statement of the difficult argument of A 192-3 = B 238-9.

=Fourth Proof.=[1207]--This proof differs from all the others. It argues
from the characteristics of pure time to the properties necessary to the
empirical representation of the time-series. As time cannot be
experienced in and by itself, all its essential characteristics must be
capable of being represented in terms of appearance. “Only in
appearances can we empirically recognise continuity in the connection of
times.” The primary function of the understanding is to make such
recognition possible, and it does so by “transferring the time order to
the appearances and their existence.” It is a necessary law of time that
we can only advance to the succeeding through the preceding. Each moment
of time is the indispensable condition of the existence of that which
follows it. We can pass to the year 1915 only by way of the preceding
year 1914. And since, as just noted, time is not cognisable by itself
but only as the form of our perceptions, this law must be applicable to
them. We can only be conscious of all times as successively conditioning
one another in one single time, and that means in one single _objective_
time, if we are conscious of all the phenomena perceived as conditioning
one another in their order in time.

It is somewhat difficult to understand how Kant came to formulate the
argument in this form. The explanation may perhaps be found in his
preoccupation[1208] with the doctrine of a transcendental activity of
the productive imagination and with the connected doctrine of a pure _a
priori_ manifold. For this proof would seem to rest upon the assumption
that the characteristics of time are known purely _a priori_ and
therefore with complete certainty, independently of sense experience.
The unusual and somewhat scholastic character of the proof also appears
in Kant’s substitution of the principle of sufficient reason for the
principle of causality. But despite the artificial character of the
standpoint, the argument serves to bring prominently forward Kant’s
central thesis, viz. that the principle of causality is presupposed in
all consciousness of time, even of the subjectively successive. Also,
by emphasising that time in and by itself can never be “an object of
perception,” and that the relating of appearances to “absolute time” is
possible only through the determining of them in their relations to one
another, it supplies the data for correction of its own starting-point.

=Fifth Proof.=[1209]--This proof is probably later than the preceding
proofs. Though its essential content coincides with that of the opening
proof, its formulation would seem to be a first attempt at statement of
the sixth proof, _i.e._ of the argument which Kant added in the second
edition. Adickes considers this proof to be earlier in date than the
first four proofs, but the reason which he assigns for so regarding it,
viz. that Kant here postulates a synthesis of the imagination
independent of the categories as preceding a synthesis of apprehension
in terms of the categories, seems to be based upon a much too literal
reading of Kant’s loose mode of statement. The argument rather appears
to be, as in the sixth proof, that synthesis of the imagination may be
either subjective or objective; and the term “apprehension” would seem
to be used as signifying that the manifold synthesised is _given_ to the
imagination through actual sense experience, and that as thus given it
has a determinate order of its own. The argument concludes with the
statement (more definite than any to be found in the preceding
arguments), that the proof of the principle of causality consists in its
indispensableness as a condition of all empirical judgments, and so of
experience as such. As a ground of the possibility of experience it must
be valid of all the objects of experience.

=Sixth Proof.=[1210]--The argument of the fifth proof is here more clearly
stated. All synthesis is due to “the faculty of imagination which
determines inner sense in respect of the time relation.” Such synthesis
may, however, yield the consciousness either of subjective succession or
of succession “in the object.” In the latter form it presupposes the
employment of a pure concept of the understanding, that of the relation
of cause and effect. And the conclusion reached is again that only so is
empirical knowledge possible. This mode of stating the argument is far
from satisfactory. It tends to obscure Kant’s central thesis, that only
through consciousness of an objective order is consciousness of
subjective sequence possible, and that the principle of causality is
therefore a conditioning factor of all consciousness. The misleading
distinction drawn in the _Prolegomena_ between judgments of perception
and judgments of experience also crops out in Kant’s use of the phrase
“mere perception.”[1211]

       *       *       *       *       *

We may again return to Kant’s central argument. For we have still to
consider certain objections to which it may seem to lie open, and also
to comment upon Kant’s further explanations in the remaining paragraphs
of the section.[1212] Kant’s imperfect statement of his position has
suggested to Hutchison Stirling and others a problem which is largely
artificial, namely, how the mind is enabled to recognise the proper
occasions upon which to apply the category of causality. On the one hand
sequence as such cannot be the criterion, since many sequences are not
causal, and on the other hand the absence of sequence does not appear to
debar its application, since cause and effect would frequently seem to
be co-existent. This difficulty arises from failure to appreciate the
central thesis upon which Kant’s proof of the principle of causality
ultimately rests. Kant’s diffuse and varying mode of statement may
conceal but never conflicts with that thesis, which consists in the
contention that the category of causality is a necessary and invariable
factor in all consciousness. Nothing can be apprehended save in terms of
it.[1213] It prescribes an interpretation which the mind has no option
save to apply in the consciousness of each and every event, of the
coexistent no less than of the sequent. Whether two changes are
coexistent or are successive, each must be conceived as possessing an
antecedent cause. The only difference is that in the case of sequent
events one of them (_i.e._ the antecedent change) may, upon empirical
investigation, be found to be itself the cause of the second and
subsequent event, whereas with coexistent events this can never be
possible. As the principle of causality is that every event must have an
antecedent cause, it follows that where there is no sequence there can
be no causation. But when Kant states that sequence is “the sole
empirical criterion”[1214] of the causal relation, he does less than
justice to the position he is defending. The empirical criteria are
manifold in number, and are such as John Stuart Mill has attempted to
formulate in his inductive methods.

Schopenhauer has objected[1215] that Kant’s argument proves too much,
since it would involve that all objective sequences, such as that of
night and day or of the notes in a piece of music, are themselves causal
sequences. This criticism has been replied to by Stadler[1216] in the
following terms:

     “When Schopenhauer adduces the sequence of musical notes or of day
     and night, as objective sequences which can be known without the
     causal law, we need only meet him with the question, Where in these
     cases is the substance that changes? So soon as he is forced to put
     his objection into the form required to bring it into relation to
     the question of the possibility of knowledge, his error becomes
     obvious. His instances must then be expressed thus:--The instrument
     passes from one state of sound into another; the earth changes from
     the measure of enlightenment which makes day, to that which makes
     night. Of such changes no one will say that they are not referred
     to a cause. And we may quote in this reference the appropriate
     saying of Kant himself, ‘Days are, as it were, the children of
     Time, since the following day with that which it contains is the
     product of the previous day.’”

Night and day, in so far as they are sequent events, must be conceived
in terms of causality, not in the sense that night causes day, but as
being determined by causes that account not only for each separately,
but also for the alternating sequence of the one upon the other. Such
causes are found by the astronomer to lie in the changing positions of
the earth relatively to the sun.

Schopenhauer adds a further objection of a more subtle nature, which has
again been excellently stated and answered by Stadler:

     “Schopenhauer points out that what we call chance is just a
     sequence of events which do not stand in causal connexion. ‘I come
     out of the house and a tile falls from the roof which strikes me;
     in such a case there is no causal connexion between the falling of
     the tile and my coming out of the house, yet the succession of
     these two events is objectively determined in my apprehension of
     them.’ How have we to criticise this case from the transcendental
     point of view? We know that successions become necessary, _i.e._
     objective, for our consciousness, when we regard them as changes of
     a substance which are determined by a cause. But it is shown here
     that there are successions in which the single members are changes
     of different substances. If substance S changes its state A into B
     on account of the cause X, and substance S´ changes its state A´
     into B´ on account of the cause X´, and if I call the first change
     V and the second V´, the question arises how the objectivity of the
     succession V V´ is related to the law of causality. Sequences such
     as V V´ are very frequent, and our consciousness of the objectivity
     is certain. Do we owe this consciousness to the same rule as holds
     good in other cases? Certainly. The distinction is not qualitative,
     but rests only on the greater complication of the change in
     question. The sequence V V´ can become objective only if I think it
     as a necessary connexion. It must be so determined that V can only
     follow V´ in ‘consciousness in general’; there must be a U, the
     introduction of which is the cause that V´ follows V. To be
     convinced of this, I do not need actually to know U. I know that on
     every occasion U causes the succession V V´. Of course, this
     presupposes that all data of the states considered, A and A´,
     remain identical. But whether these data are very simple or
     endlessly complex, whether they are likely to combine to the given
     result frequently or seldom, is indifferent for the objectifying of
     the event; it is not the perception of U, but the presupposition of
     it, which makes the change necessary and so objective for
     us.”[1217]

To turn now to the other difficulty which Kant himself raises in A 202-3
= B 247-8, viz. that cause and effect would frequently seem to be
coexistent, and the “sole empirical criterion” to be therefore absent.
It may from this point of view be maintained that the great majority of
causes occur simultaneously with their effects, and that such time
sequence as occurs is due solely to the fact that the cause cannot
execute itself in one single instant. Kant has little difficulty in
disposing of this objection. Causality concerns only the _order_, not
the _lapse_, of time; and the sequence relation must remain even though
there is no interval between the two events. If a leaden ball lies upon
a cushion it makes a depression in it. The ball and the depression are
coexistent. None the less, when viewed in their dynamical relation, the
latter must be regarded as sequent upon the former. If the leaden ball
is placed upon a smooth cushion a hollow is at once made, but if a
hollow exists in a cushion a ball need not appear. In other words, the
criteria for the determination of specific causal relations are neither
the presence nor the absence of sequence, but are empirical
considerations verifiable only upon special investigation.[1218] The
observer is called upon to disentangle the complicated web of given
appearances under the guidance of the quite general and formal principle
that every event is due to some antecedent cause. He must do so as best
he can through the application of his acquired insight, and, when
necessary, by means of the requisite experimental variation of
conditions.

In the two following paragraphs (A 204-5 = B 249-51) Kant raises points
which he later discussed more fully in the _Metaphysical First
Principles of Natural Science_.[1219] As adequate explanation of the
argument would be a very lengthy matter, and not of any very real
importance for the understanding of the general Critical position, we
may omit all treatment of it. In the sections of the _Metaphysical First
Principles_ just cited, the reader will find the necessary comment and
explanation. Such bearing as these two paragraphs have upon Kant’s view
of the nature of the causal relation has been noted above.[1220]

In the section on _Anticipations of Perception_[1221] Kant has stated
that the principle of the continuity of change involves empirical
factors, and therefore falls outside the limits of transcendental
philosophy. To this more correct attitude Kant, unfortunately, did not
hold. In A 207-11 = B 252-6 he professes to establish the principle in
_a priori_ transcendental fashion as a necessary consequence of the
nature of time. This proof is indeed thrice repeated with unessential
variations, thereby clearly showing that these paragraphs also are of
composite origin. The argument in all three cases consists in inferring
from the continuity of time the continuity of all changes in time. As
the parts of time are themselves times, of which no one is the smallest,
so in all generation in time, the cause must in its action pass through
all the degrees of quantity from zero to that of the final effect.

     “Every change has a cause which evinces its causality in the whole
     time in which the change takes place. This cause, therefore, does
     not engender the change suddenly (at once or in one moment), but in
     a time, so that, as the time increases from its initial moment _a_
     to its completion in _b_, the quantity of the reality (_b-a_) is in
     like manner generated through all lesser degrees which are
     contained between the first and the last.”[1222]

This argument is inconclusive. As Kant himself recognises in regard to
space,[1223] we may not without special proof assume that what is true
of time must be true of the contents of time. If time, change, and
causation can be equated, what is true of one will be true of all three.
But the assumption upon which the argument thus rests has not itself
been substantiated.

In the third proof[1224] the argument is stated in extreme subjectivist
terms which involve the further assumption that what is true of
apprehension is _ipso facto_ true of everything apprehended. The
possibility of establishing the law of dynamical continuity follows,
Kant declares, as a consequence of its being a law of our subjective
apprehension.

     “We anticipate only our own apprehension, the formal condition of
     which, inasmuch as it inheres in the mind prior to all given
     appearances, must certainly be capable of being known _a
     priori_.”[1225]

Kant’s attitude towards the physical principle of continuity underwent
considerable change. In his _New Doctrine of Motion and Rest_
(1758)[1226] he maintains that it cannot be proved, and that physicists
may rightly refuse to recognise it even as an hypothesis. It is in the
Essay on _Negative Quantity_ (1763)[1227] that Kant first adopts the
attitude of the _Critique_, and rejects the “speculative” objections
raised against the mathematical conception of the infinitely small. In
the _Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science_[1228] the
principle of continuity is defended and developed, but only in its
application to material existence, not in its relation to the causal
process.

C. =Third Analogy.=--_All substances, in so far as they are coexistent,
stand in thoroughgoing communion,[1229] i.e. in reciprocity with one
another._ Or, as in the second edition: _All substances, so far as they
can be perceived to coexist in space, are in thoroughgoing reciprocity._

This section contains four separate proofs. The first three paragraphs
in the text of the first edition contain the first proof. The fourth
paragraph supplies a second proof, and the fifth paragraph a third. In
the second edition Kant adds a fourth proof (the first paragraph of the
text of the second edition).

We may lead up to these proofs by first formulating (_a_) the
fundamental assumption upon which they proceed, and (_b_) the thesis
which they profess to establish. (_a_) The argument involves the same
initial assumption as the preceding _Analogies_, viz. that
representations exist exclusively in succession, or stated in
phenomenalist terms, that the objectively coexistent can be apprehended
only in and through representations that are sequent to one another in
time.[1230] Upon this assumption the problem of the third _Analogy_ is
to explain how from representations all of which are in succession we
can determine the objectively coexistent. (_b_) In the
_Dissertation_[1231] Kant had maintained that though the possibility of
dynamical communion of substances is not necessarily involved in their
mere existence, such interaction may be assumed as a consequence of
their common origin in, and dependence upon, a Divine Being. In the
_Critique_ no such metaphysical speculations are any longer in order,
and Kant recognises that as regards things in themselves it is not
possible to decide whether dynamical interaction is, or is not,
necessarily involved in coexistence. The problem of this third _Analogy_
concerns only appearances, which as such must be subject to the
conditions of unitary experience; and one such condition is that they be
apprehended as belonging to a single objective order of nature, and
therefore as standing in reciprocal relations of interaction. _The
apprehension of substances as reciprocally determining one another is_,
Kant contends, _an indispensable condition of their being known even as
coexistent_. Such is Kant’s thesis. The proof may first be stated in
what may be called its typical or generic form. Kant’s four successive
proofs can then be related to it as to a common standard.

Two things, A and B, can be apprehended as coexistent only in so far as
we can experience them in either order, _i.e._ when the order of our
perceptions of them is reversible. If they existed in succession, this
could never be possible. The earlier member of a time series is past
when the succeeding member is present, and what belongs to the past can
never be an object of perception. The fact that the order in which
things can be perceived is reversible would thus seem to prove that they
do not exist successively to one another in time.[1232] That, however,
is not the case. By itself such experience does not really suffice to
yield consciousness of coexistence. It can yield only consciousness of
an alternating succession.[1233] A further factor, namely,
interpretation of the reversibility of our perceptions as due to their
being conditioned by objects which stand in the relation of reciprocal
determination, must first be postulated. If these objects mutually
determine one another to be what they are, no one of them can be
antecedent to or subsequent upon the others; and by their mutual
reference each will date the others as simultaneous with itself. In
other words, the perception of the coexistence of objects involves the
conception of them as mutually determining one another. The principle of
communion or reciprocity conditions the experience of coexistence, and
is therefore valid for objects apprehended in that manner.

Kant also maintains, more by implication than by explicit statement,
that as A and B need not stand in any direct relation, the apprehension
of them as coexistent involves the conception of an all-embracing order
of nature within which they fall and which determines them to be what
they are. If any one of them, even the most minute and insignificant,
were conceived as altered, corresponding simultaneous variations would
have to be postulated for all the others. The unity of the phenomenal
world is the counterpart of the unity of apperception. Unity of
experience involves principles which prescribe a corresponding unity in
the natural realm. Dynamical _communion_ is the sufficient and necessary
fulfilment of this demand. It carries to completion the unity demanded
by the preceding _Analogies_ of _substance_ and _causality_. Kant sums
up his position in a note to A 218 = B 265.

     “The unity of the world-whole, in which all appearances have to be
     connected, is evidently a mere consequence of the tacitly assumed
     principle of the communion of all substances which are coexistent.
     For if they were isolated, they would not as parts constitute a
     whole. And if their coexistence alone did not necessitate their
     connection (the reciprocal action of the manifold) we could not
     argue from the former, which is a merely ideal relation, to the
     latter, which is a real relation. We have, however, in the proper
     context, shown that communion is really the ground of the
     possibility of an empirical knowledge of coexistence, and that
     therefore the actual inference is merely from this empirical
     knowledge to communion as its condition.”

To turn now to Kant’s successive proofs. The first[1234] calls for no
special comment. It coincides with the above. The second[1235] proof is
an incompletely stated argument, which differs from the first only in
its more concrete statement of the main thesis and in its limitation of
the argument to spatial existences. Dynamical community is the
indispensable condition of our apprehension of any merely spatial
side-by-sideness. Kant now adds that it is the dynamical continuity of
the _spatial_ world which enables us to apprehend the coexistence of its
constituents. The important bearing of this argument we shall consider
in its connection with the proof which Kant added in the second
edition.

The third[1236] proof is probably the earliest in date of writing. It
draws a misleading distinction between subjective and objective
coexistence, and seems to argue that only the latter form of coexistence
need presuppose the employment of the category of reciprocity. That runs
directly counter to the central thesis of the other proofs, that only in
terms of dynamical relation is coexistence at all apprehensible. That
the above distinction indicates an early date of writing would seem to
be confirmed by the obscure phrase “community of apperception” which is
reminiscent of the prominence given to apperception in Kant’s earlier
views, and by the concluding sentence in which Kant employs
terms--inherence, consequence, and composition--that are also
characteristic of the earlier stages of his Critical enquiries.[1237]

It is significant that in the new argument[1238] of the second edition
the space factor, emphasised in the second proof of the first edition,
is again made prominent.[1239] The principle is, indeed, reformulated in
such manner as to suggest its limitation to spatial existences. “All
substances, so far as they can be perceived to coexist _in space_, are
in thoroughgoing reciprocity.” Now it is decidedly doubtful whether Kant
means to limit the category of reciprocity to spatial existences. As we
have already noted,[1240] he would seem to hold that though the category
of causality can _acquire_ meaning only in its application to events in
space, it may in its subsequent employment be extended to the states of
inner sense. The latter are effects dynamically caused, and among their
causal conditions are mechanical processes in space. The extension of
the category of reciprocity to include sensations and desires
undoubtedly gives rise to much greater difficulties than those involved
in the universal application of the causal principle. On the other hand,
its limitation to material bodies must render the co-ordination of
mental states and mechanical processes highly doubtful, and would carry
with it all the difficulties of an epiphenomenal view of psychical
existences. The truth probably is that in this matter Kant had not
thought out his position in any quite definite manner; and that owing to
the influence, on the one hand of the dualistic teaching of the
traditional Cartesian physics, and on the other of his increasing
appreciation of the part which space must play in the definition and
proof of the principles of understanding, he limited the category of
reciprocity to spatial existences, without considering how far such
procedure is capable of being reconciled with his determinist view of
the empirical self. His procedure is also open to a second objection,
namely, that while thus reformulating the principle, he fails to remodel
his proof in a sufficiently thoroughgoing fashion. The chief stress is
still laid upon the temporal element; and in order to obtain a proof of
the principle that will harmonise with the prominence given to the
space-factor, we are thrown back upon such supplementary suggestions as
we can extract from the second argument of the first edition. It is
there stated that “without dynamical communion even spatial community
(_communio spatii_) could never be known empirically.”[1241] That is an
assertion which, if true, will yield a proof of the principle of
reciprocity analogous to that which has been given of the principle of
causality; for it will show that just as the conception of causality is
involved in, and makes possible, the awareness of time, so the
conception of reciprocity is involved in, and makes possible, the
awareness of space.

The proof will be as follows. The parts of space have to be conceived as
spatially interrelated. Space is not a collection of independent spaces;
particular spaces exist only in and through the spaces which enclose
them. In other words, the parts of space mutually condition one another.
Each part exists only in and through its relations, direct or indirect,
to all the others; the awareness of their coexistence involves the
awareness of this reciprocal determination. But space cannot, any more
than time, be known in and by itself;[1242] and what is true of space
must therefore hold of the contents, in terms of the interrelations of
which space can alone be experienced. How, then, can the reciprocal
determination of substances in space be apprehended by a consciousness
which is subject in all its experiences to the conditions of time? As
Kant has pointed out in A 211 = B 258,[1243] objective coexistence is
distinguished from objective sequence by reversibility of the
perceptions through which it is apprehended. When A and B coexist, our
perceptions can begin with A and pass to B, or start from B and proceed
to A. There is also, as Kant observes in the second proof, a further
condition, namely, that the transition is in each case made through a
_continuous_ series of changing perceptions.

     “Only the continuous influences in all parts of space can lead our
     senses from one object to another. The light, which plays between
     our eye and the celestial bodies, produces a mediate communion
     between us and them, and thereby establishes the coexistence of the
     latter. We cannot empirically change our position (perceive such a
     change), unless matter in all parts of space makes the perception
     of our position possible to us. Only by means of its reciprocal
     influence can matter establish the simultaneous existence of its
     parts, and thereby, though only mediately, their coexistence with
     even the most remote objects. Without communion, every perception
     of an appearance in space is broken off from every other, and the
     chain of empirical representations, _i.e._ experience, would have
     to begin entirely anew with every new object, without the least
     connection with preceding representations, and without standing to
     them in any relation of time.”[1244]

But even such reversibility of _continuous_ series does not by itself
establish coexistence. For in the imagination[1245] we can represent
such series, without thereby acquiring the right to assert that they
exist not as series but as simultaneous wholes. And as Kant might also
have pointed out, even in sense-perception we can experience reversible
continuous series that do not in any way justify the inference to
coexistence. We may, for instance, produce on a musical instrument a
series of continuously changing sounds, and then in immediate succession
produce the same series in reverse order. An additional factor is
therefore required, namely, the interpretation of the reversibility of
our perceptions as being grounded in objects which, because spatially
extended, and spatially continuous with one another, can yield
continuous series of perceptions, and which, because of their
thoroughgoing reciprocity, make possible the reversing of these series.
To summarise the argument in a sentence: as the objectively coexistent,
if it is to be known at all, can only be known through sequent
representations, the condition of its apprehension is the possibility of
interpreting reversible continuous series as due to the reciprocal
interaction of spatially ordered substances.

This argument has a twofold bearing. Its most obvious consequence is
that all things apprehended as coexistent must be conceived as standing
in relations of reciprocal interaction; but by implication this involves
the further consequence that the conceptual principle of reciprocity is
an integral factor in all apprehension of space. Space, though intuitive
in character, has a meaning that demands this concept for its
articulation. Just as consciousness of temporal sequence is only
possible in terms of causation, so consciousness of spatial coexistence
is only possible through application of the category of reciprocity. And
since, on Kant’s view, awareness of space conditions awareness of time,
these conclusions carry the Critical analysis of our consciousness of
time a stage further. In confirmation of the more general argument of
the objective deduction, reciprocity is added to the already large
sum-total of the indispensable conditions of our time-consciousness;
while in regard to time itself it is shown that, owing to its
space-reference, coexistence may be counted among its possible modes.

I have made occasional reference to the positions adopted by Stout in
his _Manual of Psychology_, and may here indicate their relation to the
present argument. Stout cites four “categories” or ultimate principles
of unity which “belong even to rudimentary perceptual consciousness as a
condition of its further development,”[1246] namely, spatial unity,
temporal unity, causal unity, and the unity of different attributes as
belonging to the same thing. The criticism which, from the standpoint of
the _Analogies_, has to be passed upon this list,[1247] is that it
ignores the category of reciprocity, _i.e._ of systematic
interconnection, and that it fails to recognise the close relation in
which the various principles stand to one another. The temporal unity
must not be isolated from causal unity, nor either of them from the
spatial unity, with which the category of reciprocity is inseparably
bound up. Further, Kant maintains that these principles are demanded,
not merely for the _development_ of perceptual consciousness, but for
its very existence.

But Kant’s argument suggests many difficulties which we have not yet
considered, and we may again employ Schopenhauer’s criticisms to define
the issues involved.

     “The conception of reciprocity ought to be banished from
     metaphysics. For I now intend, quite seriously, to prove that there
     is no reciprocity in the strict sense, and this conception, which
     people are so fond of using, just on account of the indefiniteness
     of the thought, is seen, if more closely considered, to be empty,
     false, and invalid.... It implies that both the states A and B are
     cause and that both are effect of each other; but this really
     amounts to saying that each of the two is the earlier and also the
     later; thus it is an absurdity.”[1248]

This criticism proceeds on the assumption that the category of
reciprocity reduces to a dual application of the category of causality.
If that were the case, there would, of course, be no separate category
of reciprocity,[1249] and further it would, as Schopenhauer maintains,
be impossible to regard A and B as being at one and the same time both
cause and effect of one another. Causality determines the order of the
states of substances in the time series; reciprocity must be distinct
from causality if it is to be capable of defining the order of their
coexistent states in space. A deduction from the dual application of the
conception of causality has, therefore, no bearing upon the question of
the possibility of this further category. Kant has laid himself open to
this criticism by a passage which occurs in the first proof, and which
shows that he was not quite clear in his own mind as to how reciprocity
ought to be conceived.

     “That alone can determine the position of anything else in time,
     which is its cause or the cause of its determinations. Every
     substance (inasmuch as only in its determinations can it be an
     effect) must therefore contain in itself the causality of certain
     determinations in the other substance, and at the same time the
     effects of the causality of that other, _i.e._ they must stand in
     dynamical communion (immediately or mediately), if their
     coexistence is to be known in any possible experience.”[1250]

It should be noted that in the new proof[1251] in the second edition
Kant is careful to employ the terms ground and influence in place of the
terms cause and causality.

Secondly, Schopenhauer argues that if the two states necessarily belong
to each other and exist at one and the same time, they will not be
simultaneous, but will constitute only _one_ state.[1252] Schopenhauer
is again refusing to recognise the conditions under which alone a
special category of reciprocity is called for. We can speak of
simultaneity only if a _multiplicity_ be given; and if it be given, its
nature as _simultaneous plurality_ cannot be comprehended through a
causal law, which, as such, applies only to sequent order.

Lastly, Schopenhauer endeavours to confirm his position by examination
of the supposed instances of reciprocity.

     ”[In the continuous burning of a fire] the combination of oxygen
     with the combustible body is the cause of heat, and heat, again, is
     the cause of the renewed occurrence of the chemical combination.
     But this is nothing more than a chain of causes and effects, the
     links of which have alternately _the same name_.... We see before
     us only an application of the single and simple law of causality
     which gives the rule to the sequence of states, but never anything
     which must be comprehended by means of a new and special function
     of the understanding.”[1253]

Schopenhauer is again misled by his equating of reciprocity with causal
action. Combustion is quite obviously a case of sequent processes.
Instead of proving that coexistence does not involve reciprocity,
Schopenhauer is only showing that cause and effect may sometimes, as
Kant himself observes,[1254] seem to be simultaneous.[1255] Action
_followed_ by reaction is not equivalent to what Kant means by
reciprocal determination. Schopenhauer also cites the instance of a pair
of scales brought to rest by equal weights.

     “Here there is no effect produced, for there is no change; it is a
     state of rest; gravity acts, equally divided, as in every body
     which is supported at its centre of gravity, but it cannot show its
     force by any effect.”[1256]

This example is more in line with what Kant would seem to have in view,
but is still defined in reference to the problem of causation, and not
in reference to that of coexistence. Kant is not enquiring whether
coexistent bodies are related as causes and effects, though, as we have
already observed, his language betrays considerable lack of clearness on
this very point. He is endeavouring to define the conditions under which
we are enabled to recognise that bodies, external to one another in
space and apprehensible only through sequent perceptions, are none the
less coexistent. And the answer which he gives is that coexistence can
only be determined by reference of each existence to the totality of
systematic relations within which it is found, its particular spatial
location being one of the factors which condition this reference. Causal
explanation in the most usual meaning of that highly ambiguous phrase,
namely, as explanation of an artificially isolated event by reference to
antecedents similarly isolated from their context, may partially account
for this event being of one kind rather than another, but will not
explain why it is to be found at this particular time in this particular
place. That is to say, it will not answer the question which is asked
when we are enquiring as to what events are coexistent with it.

But the considerations which thus enable us to dispose of Schopenhauer’s
criticisms have the effect of involving us in new, and much more
formidable, difficulties. Indeed they disclose the incomplete, and quite
inadequate, character of Kant’s proof of the third _Analogy_. For must
not spatial co-existence be independently known if it is to serve as one
of the factors determinant of reciprocity? Can the apprehension of
extended bodies wait upon a prior knowledge of the system of nature to
which they belong?

The mere propounding of these questions does not, however, suffice to
overthrow Kant’s contention. For he is prepared--that is indeed the
reason why the _Critique_ came to be written--to answer them in a manner
that had never before been suggested, save perhaps in the philosophies
of Plato and Aristotle. This answer first emerges in the _Dialectic_, in
the course of its treatment of the wider problem, of which the above
difficulties are only special instances, how if conditioned parts can
only be known in terms of an unconditioned whole, any knowledge
whatsoever can be acquired by us. But though Kant in the _Dialectic_
gives due prominence to this fundamental problem, the hard and fast
divisions of his architectonic--and doubtless other influences which
would be difficult to define--intervene to prevent him from recognising
its full implications. For the problem is viewed in the _Dialectic_ as
involving considerations altogether different from those dwelt upon in
the _Analogies_, and as being without application to the matters of
which they treat.

The situation thus created is very similar to that which is occasioned
by Kant’s unfortunate separation of the problems of space and time in
the _Aesthetic_ from the treatment of the categories in the _Analytic_.
In the _Aesthetic_ space and time are asserted to be intuitive, not
conceptual, in nature; and yet in the _Analytic_ we find Kant
demonstrating that the principles of causality and reciprocity are
indispensably involved in their apprehension. But even more misleading
is the separation of the problems of the _Aesthetic_ and _Analytic_ from
those of the _Dialectic_. Kant’s primary and prevailing interest is in
the metaphysics, not in the mere methodology, of experience; and it is
in the _Dialectic_ that the metaphysical principles which underlie and
inspire all his other tenets first find adequate statement. Since the
third _Analogy_ defines the criterion of coexistence in entire
independence of all reference to the Ideas of Reason, Kant is thereby
precluded from even so much as indicating the true grounds upon which
his position, if it is to be really tenable, must be made to rest. For
as he ultimately came to recognise, the intuition of space not only
involves the conceptual category of reciprocal determination, but
likewise demands for its possibility an Idea of Reason. In space the
wider whole is always prior in thought to the parts which go to
constitute it. But though Kant states[1257] that this characteristic of
space justifies its being entitled an Idea of Reason, he nowhere takes
notice of the obvious and very important bearing which this must have
upon the problem, how we are to formulate the criterion of coexistence.

The general character of time is analogous to that of space, and our
formulation of the criterion of causal sequence is therefore similarly
affected. The system of nature is not the outcome of natural laws which
are independently valid; natural laws are the expression of what this
system prescribes; they are the modes in which it defines and embodies
its inherent necessities.

The situation which these considerations would seem to disclose may,
therefore, be stated as follows. If the empirical criteria of truth are
independent of the Ideas of Reason, the _Analytic_ may be adequate to
their discussion, but will be unable to justify the assertion that there
is a category of reciprocal or systematic connection distinct from that
of causality. If, however, it should be found that these criteria are
merely special applications of standards _metaphysical in
character_--and that would seem to be Kant’s final conclusion,--only in
the light of the wider considerations first broached in the _Dialectic_,
can we hope to define their nature and implications with any approach to
completeness.


4. THE POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT IN GENERAL

=First Postulate.=--_That which agrees, in intuition and in concepts, with
the formal conditions of experience is possible._

=Second Postulate.=--_That which is connected with the material conditions
of experience (that is, with sensation) is actual._

=Third Postulate.=--_That which is determined, in its connection with the
actual, according to universal conditions of experience is (that is,
exists as) necessary._

In this section Kant maintains that when the Critical standpoint is
accepted, possibility, actuality and necessity can only be defined in
terms of the conditions which render sense-experience possible. In other
words, the Critical position, that all truth, even that of _a priori_
principles, is merely _de facto_, involves acceptance of the view that
the actual reduces to the experienced, and that only by reference to the
actual as thus given can possibility and necessity be defined. The
Leibnizian view that possibility is capable of being defined
independently of the actual, and antecedently to all knowledge of it,
must be rejected.

An analysis of the text can be profitably made only after a detailed
examination of Kant’s general argument; and to that task we may at once
apply ourselves. The section affords further illustration of the
perverting influence of Kant’s architectonic, as well as of the
insidious manner in which the older rationalism continued to pervert his
thinking in his less watchful moments.

=First Postulate.=--In the opening paragraphs Kant uses (as it would seem
without consciousness of so doing) the term possibility in two very
different senses.[1258] When the possible is distinguished from the
actual and the necessary, it acquires the meaning defined in this first
_Postulate_; it is “that which agrees with the _formal_ conditions of
experience.” But it is also employed in a much narrower sense to signify
that which can have “objective reality, _i.e._ transcendental
truth.”[1259] The possibility of the objectively real rests upon
fulfilment of a threefold condition: (1) that it agree with the formal
conditions of experience; (2) that it stand in connection with the
material of the sensuous conditions of experience; and (3) that it
follow with necessity upon some preceding state in accordance with the
principle of causality, and so form part of a necessitated order of
nature. In other words, it must be causally necessitated in order to be
empirically actual; and only the empirically actual is genuinely
possible. Such is also the meaning that usually attaches to the term
possible in the other sections of the _Critique_. A ‘possible
experience’ is one that can become actual when the specific conditions,
all of which must themselves be possible, are fulfilled. An experience
which is not capable of being actual has no right to be described even
as possible. As a term applicable to the objectively real, the possible
is not wider than the actual, but coextensive with it. As Kant himself
remarks, those terms refer exclusively to differences in the subjective
attitude of the apprehending mind.

This ambiguity in the term ‘possibility’ has caused a corresponding
ambiguity in Kant’s employment of the term ‘actuality.’ It leads him to
endeavour to define the actual, not in its connection with the
conditions of possibility, but in distinction from them. The possible
having been defined (in the first _Postulate_) solely in terms of the
_formal_ factors of experience, he proceeds to characterise the actual
in a similarly one-sided fashion, exclusively in terms of the
_material_ element of given sensation. Doubtless the element of
sensation must play a prominent part in enabling us to decide what is or
is not actually existent, but no definition which omits to take account
of relational factors can be an adequate expression of Critical
teaching. Indeed, we only require to substitute the words ‘sensuously
given’ for ‘actual’ in Kant’s definition of the third _Postulate_
(_i.e._ of the necessary) in order to obtain a correct statement of the
true Critical view of actual existence: it is “that which is determined
in its connection with the sensuously given according to universal
conditions of experience.” For Kant the actual and the necessary,
objectively viewed, coincide. Necessity is for the human mind always
merely _de facto_; and nothing can be objectively actual that is not
causally determined. As the empirically possible cannot, in its
objective reference, be wider than the empirically necessary, one and
the same definition adequately covers all three terms alike. While the
distinctions between them will, of course, remain, they will be
applicable, not to objects, but only to the subjective conditions of
experience in so far as these may vary from one individual to another.
Experiences capable of being actual for one individual may be merely
possible for another. And what is merely actual to one observer may by
others be comprehended in its necessitating connections. The terms will
not denote differences in the real, but only variations in the cognitive
attitude of the individual.

Thus in professing to show that the three _Postulates_ are
transcendental _principles_, Kant does less than justice to his own
teaching. For though both here and in the opening sections of the
chapter[1260] he speaks of them in this manner, _i.e._ as being
conditions alike of ordinary and of scientific experience, he has
himself admitted in so many words the inappropriateness of such a
description.

     “The principles of modality are nothing more than explanations
     [not, it may be noted, proofs] of the concepts of possibility,
     actuality and necessity, in their empirical use, and are therefore
     at the same time restrictions of all the categories to this merely
     empirical use, ruling out and forbidding their transcendental [=
     transcendent] employment.”[1261]

That is to say, these so-called principles are not really principles;
they merely embody explanatory statements designed to render the
preceding results more definite, and especially to guard against the
illegitimate meanings which the Leibnizian metaphysics had attached to
certain of the terms involved.

These considerations bring us to the real source of Kant’s perverse
argumentation, namely, the artificial (but none the less imperious)
demands of his architectonic. He is constrained to provide a set of
_principles_ corresponding to the categories of modality. The
definitions of the modal categories have therefore to be called by that
inappropriate name. But that is not the end of the matter. In order to
meet the needs of his logical framework, Kant proceeds even further than
he had ventured to do in the sections on the _Axioms of Intuition_ and
_Anticipations of Perception_. There he fell so far short as to provide
only a single principle in each case. In dealing, however, with the
categories of relation he has been able to define each of the three
categories separately, and to derive from each a separate principle.
Many of the defects in his argument are, indeed, traceable to this
source. The close interrelations of the three principles are, as we have
had occasion to note, seriously obscured. But still, in the main,
separate treatment of each has proved feasible. Kant, encouraged, as we
may believe, by this successful fulfilment of architectonic
requirements, now sets himself to develop, in similar fashion, a
separate principle for each modal category. But for any such enterprise
the conditions are less favourable than in the case of the categories of
relation. For, as just indicated, no one of the three can, on Critical
principles, possess any genuine meaning save in its relation to the
others. Before following out this line of criticism, we must however
note some further points in Kant’s argument.

In A 219 = B 266, and again in A 225 = B 272, Kant makes the statement
that a concept can be complete prior to any decision as to its
possibility, actuality, or necessity. This contention is capable of
being interpreted in two quite independent ways, and in only one of
those ways is it tenable. He may mean that the distinction between the
possible, the actual, and the necessary, does not concern the
objectively real, which as such is always both actual and necessary, but
only the subjective attitude of the individual towards the objects of
his thought and experience. From the Critical standpoint, as we have
been arguing, such a contention is entirely just. But Kant would seem in
the above statement to be chiefly concerned to maintain that a
conception may be complete and determinate, even while we remain in
doubt whether the existence for which it stands is even possible.[1262]
Such a view is merely a relic of the Leibnizian rationalism from which
he is striving to break away. All existences have their place in a
systematic order of experience, and no conception of them can be either
complete or determinate which fails to specify the causal context to
which they belong. The process of specifying the detail of a concept is
the only process whereby we can define its possibility, actuality, or
necessity.[1263] Were it capable of complete statement without
determination of its modal character, it could never form part of a
unified experience. The examples of “fictitious” concepts, which Kant
cites, are either so determinate as to be demonstrably inconsistent with
experience, and therefore empirically impossible, or so indeterminate as
to afford no sufficient means of deciding even as to their possibility.

There is a further objection to the definition given of possibility in
the first _Postulate_. After stating that the possible is what _agrees_
with the formal conditions of experience, Kant proceeds, on the one
hand, to argue that the forms of intuition and the categories of
understanding may, in accordance with this criterion, be viewed as
possible, and, on the other hand, to maintain that no other concepts can
be so regarded.[1264] That is to say, the possible, as thus interpreted,
does not consist in something additional to, and in harmony with, the
conditions of experience, but reduces without remainder to those very
forms. Now Kant is not betrayed merely by inadvertence into thus
narrowing the sphere of the possible; such limitation is an almost
inevitable consequence of the one-sided manner in which he has treated
the concept of the possible in this first _Postulate_. He professes to
be proceeding in the light of the results obtained in the transcendental
deduction, and to be defining the possible in terms of the conditions
which make sense-experience possible. But the deduction has shown that
experience is possible only in so far as the material factors co-operate
with the formal. And when this is recognised, it becomes obvious that a
definition of the possible in terms of sensation,--namely, as that which
is capable of being presented in sense-perception,--is equally
legitimate, and is indeed required in order to correct the deficiencies
of the definition which Kant has himself given. As both factors are
indispensable in all possible experience, both must be reckoned with in
defining the possible.

Kant’s argument in the fifth paragraph is somewhat obscured by its
context. He is contending that fictitious (_gedichtete_) concepts,
elaborated from the contents presented in perception, cannot be
determined as possible. As they involve sensuous contents, the formal
elements of experience do not suffice for proof of their possibility;
and since the contents are supposed to have been recombined in ways not
supported by experience, an empirical criterion is equally inapplicable.
Obviously Kant is here using the term ‘possible’ not in the meaning of
the first _Postulate_, but in its narrower connotation as signifying
that which is capable of objective reality. Such fictitious concepts may
completely fulfil all the demands prescribed by space, time, and the
categories, and yet, as he here insists, be none the less incapable of
objective existence.

The argument is still further obscured by the character of the concrete
examples which Kant cites. They involve modes of action or of intuition
which contradict the very conditions of human experience, and so for
that reason alone fall outside the realm of the empirically possible.
That would not, however, seem to be Kant’s meaning in employing them.
Assumed powers of anticipating the future or of telepathic communication
with other minds are, he says, concepts

     “...the possibility of which is altogether groundless, as they
     cannot be based on experience and its known laws, and without such
     confirmation are arbitrary combinations of thoughts, which,
     although indeed free from contradiction, can make no claim to
     objective reality and so to the possibility of an object such as we
     here profess to think.”[1265]

The mathematical examples which Kant gives in A 223 = B 271[1266] are no
less misleading. The concept of a triangle can, it is implied, be
determined as possible in terms of the first _Postulate_, since it
harmonises with a formal condition of experience, namely, space. This is
true only if it be granted that construction in space can be executed
absolutely _a priori_, in independence of all sense-experience. Such is,
of course, Kant’s most usual view; and to that extent the argument is
consistent. Mathematical concepts will from this point of view represent
the only possible exception to the general statement that the formal
conditions of experience constitute a criterion of possibility for no
concepts save themselves. Kant’s final conclusion is clearly and
explicitly stated in the following terms:

     “I leave aside everything the possibility of which can be derived
     only from its reality in experience, and have here in view only the
     possibility of things through _a priori_ concepts; and I maintain
     the thesis that the possibility of such things can never be
     established from such concepts taken in and by themselves, but
     only when they are viewed as formal and objective conditions of
     experience in general.”[1267]

We are now in a position to appreciate the reasons which have induced
Adickes to regard the text as of composite origin.[1268] Adickes argues
that Kant’s original intention was to treat the three concepts together,
showing that they can be defined only in empirical terms, and that their
significance is consequently limited to the world of appearance. Such is
the content of the first, second, fourth (excepting the first sentence),
and fifth paragraphs. No attempt is made to separate the three
_Postulates_, and the term possibility is throughout employed
exclusively as referring to objective reality. (In the third paragraph
it is used in both senses.) The other paragraphs were, according to
Adickes’ theory, added later, when Kant unfortunately resolved to fulfil
more exactly the requirements of his architectonic. That involved the
formulation of three separate _Postulates_, with all the many evil
consequences which that attempt carried in its train. He must then have
interpolated the third paragraph, added the first sentence to the fourth
paragraph, corrected the too extensive sweep of the older paragraphs
through the introduction of the sixth paragraph, further supplemented
the exposition of the first _Postulate_ by the seventh paragraph, and
added independent treatments of the postulates of actuality and
necessity. This may seem a very complicated and hazardous hypothesis;
but careful examination of the text, with due recognition of the
confused character of the argument as it stands, will probably convince
the reader that Adickes is in the right.

=Second Postulate.=[1269]--Perception is necessary to all determination of
actuality. The actual is either itself given in perception or can be
shown, in accordance with the _Analogies_, to stand within the unity of
objective experience, in connection with what is thus given. So long as
Kant expresses himself in these terms his statements are entirely valid.
Nothing which cannot be shown to be bound up with the contingent
material of sense-experience can be admitted as actual. He proceeds,
however, to give a definition of actuality which entirely omits all
reference to the _Analogies_, and which is open to the same fundamental
criticism as his characterisation of possibility in the first
_Postulate_. Though the earlier statements give due recognition both to
the material content and to the relational forms constitutive of
complete experience, Kant now contrasts the mere or bare (_blosser_)
concept and the given perception in a manner which suggests the
unfortunate distinction drawn in the _Prolegomena_, and repeated in the
second edition of the _Critique_, between judgments of perception and
judgments of experience.[1270] Kant’s reference to “the mere concept of
a thing”[1271] is on the same lines as the opening paragraph of the
section. However complete the concept may be, it yields not the least
ground for deciding as to the existence of its object.

Kant’s thinking, as I have already pointed out, is here perverted by the
continuing influence of the Leibnizian rationalism. He is forgetting
that, on Critical principles, even the categories are meaningless except
in their reference to the contingently given. If that be true of the
strictly _a priori_, it must hold with even greater force of empirical
concepts with sensuous content. As the sole legitimate function of
concepts, whether _a priori_ or empirical, is to organise and unify the
material of sense, there can be no such thing as the mere or bare
concept. Such a combination of words is without Critical significance. A
concept as such must refer to, and embody insight into, the real. Only
in proportion to its incompleteness, that is, to its indefiniteness, can
it remain without specific and quite determinate location within the
context of unified experience. It may, indeed, be found convenient to
retain the phrase “mere concept” notwithstanding its misleading
character and rationalistic origin. It must, however, be used only to
mark the indefiniteness, indeterminateness, or incompleteness which
prevents it from adequately revealing the denotation to which through
the nature of its content it necessarily refers. Meaning and existence,
connotation and denotation, are complementary the one to the other, and
though not, perhaps, coextensive (if that term has itself meaning in
this connection), are none the less inseparably conjoined. When Kant’s
utterances, as frequently happens, imply the contrary, they may be taken
as revealing the strength and insidious tenacity of the influences from
which he was sufficiently courageous, but not always sufficiently
watchful, to break away.

The doctrine of the “mere concept” finds its natural supplement in the
equally un-Critical assertion that

     “...perception [evidently employed in the less pregnant sense, as
     signifying ‘sensation accompanied by consciousness’], which
     supplies the material to the concept, is _the sole character of
     actuality_.”[1272]

This same position is expressed equally strongly by Kant in his
_Reflexionen_ (ii. 1095).

     “Possibility is thought without being given; actuality is given
     without being thought; necessity is given through being thought.”

Such statements are entirely out of harmony with Kant’s central
teaching. There is no lack of passages in the _Critique_ which inculcate
the direct contrary. Though the element of sensation is a _sine qua non_
of all experience of the actual, the formal elements are no less
indispensable. In their absence the merely given would reduce to less
than a dream; for even in dreams images are interpreted and are referred
to some connected context. The given, merely as such, cannot enter the
field of consciousness, and is therefore “for us as good as nothing.” As
Caird has pointed out, we find in Kant

     “...two apparently contradictory forms of expression--(1) that the
     understanding by means of its conceptions refers our preceptions to
     objects, and (2) that conceptions are referred to objects only
     indirectly through perceptions. The former mode of expression is
     preferred whenever Kant has to show that ‘perceptions without
     conceptions are blind’; the latter when he has to show that
     ‘conceptions without perceptions are empty.’”[1273] “We can
     understand the possibility of Kant’s looking at the subject in
     these two opposite ways, only if we remember the reciprocal
     presupposition of perception and conception in the judgment of
     knowledge, and the way in which Kant tries to explain it, now from
     the point of view of perception, and now from the point of view of
     conception. The effect of this is, no doubt, a formal contradiction
     which Kant himself never disentangles, but which _we_ must
     endeavour to disentangle, if we would do justice to him.”[1274]

The one-sidedness of Kant’s definition of actuality is certainly due to
the cause suggested by Caird. The definition, notwithstanding its
misleading character, serves to enforce against the older rationalism,
with which Kant throughout this section is almost exclusively concerned,
the central tenet through which the Critical teaching is distinguished
from that of Leibniz, namely, that neither existence, possibility, nor
necessity, can be established save by reference to the contingent nature
of the sensuously given. Proof by reference to the possibility of
experience can establish only those conditions which can be shown to be
_de facto_ necessary in order that consciousness of time may be
accounted for. The formal conditions of experience, which in and by
themselves are determinable neither as actual nor as possible, are
established as actual, and so as necessary, by reference to the merely
given; they are necessary only in this merely relative fashion, as being
indispensable to what can never itself be viewed as other than
contingent.

     “Our knowledge of the existence of things reaches, then, only so
     far as perception and its continuation according to laws of nature
     can extend. If we do not start from experience, or do not proceed
     according to laws of the empirical connection of appearances, our
     guessing or enquiring into the existence of anything will only be
     an idle pretence.”[1275]

Polemically, therefore, Kant’s formulation of the second _Postulate_ is
not without its advantages, though from the inner standpoint of Critical
teaching it is altogether inadequate.

For comment upon A 226 = B 273, and upon the general teaching of this
_Postulate_ in its important bearing upon Kant’s phenomenalism, cf.
above, pp. 318-19.

=B 274-9.=--_Refutation of Idealism_, cf. above, p. 308 ff.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Third Postulate._[1276]--In the opening sentence Kant draws the
distinction which was lacking in his treatment of the first _Postulate_
between ‘material’ and ‘formal’ modality. (No distinction, however, is
drawn between the ‘formal’ possibility of the first _Postulate_ and
logical possibility, which consists in absence of contradiction.) It is
with the former alone that we have to deal. As existence cannot be
determined completely _a priori_, necessity can never be known from
concepts, but only by reference to the actually given, in accordance
with the universal principles that condition experience. Further, since
such empirical necessity does not concern the existence of substances,
but only the existence of their states, viewed as dynamically caused,
the criterion of empirical necessity reduces to the second _Analogy_,
viz. that everything which happens is determined by an antecedent
empirical cause. This criterion does not extend beyond the field of
possible experience, and even within that field applies only to those
existences which can be viewed as effects, _i.e._ as _events_ which come
into existence in time, and of which therefore the causes are of the
same temporal and conditioned character. The necessity is a hypothetical
necessity; given an empirical event, it can always be legitimately
viewed as necessitated by an antecedent empirical cause.

Kant introduces, reinterprets, and in this altered form professes to
justify, four of the central principles of the Leibnizian metaphysics.
_In mundo non datur casus_ gives expression to the above empirical
principle. _Non datur fatum_ may be taken as meaning that natural
(_i.e._ empirical) necessity is a conditioned and therefore
comprehensible necessity, and is consequently not rightly described as
blind. The other two principles, _non datur saltus_, and _non datur
hiatus_ connect with the principle of continuity already established in
the _Anticipations of Perception_ and in the second _Analogy_.

Kant’s further remarks reveal an uneasy feeling that he is neglecting to
assign these principles to the pigeon-holes provided in his
architectonic. The reader, he states, may easily do so for himself. That
may be so, but only if the reader be permitted the same high-handed
methods of adjustment that are here illustrated in Kant’s location of
_non datur fatum_ with the principles of modality.[1277]

In the next paragraph (A 230 = B 282) Kant suddenly, without warning or
explanation, attaches to the term possibility a meaning altogether
different from any yet assigned to it. He now takes it as equivalent to
the absolutely or metaphysically possible. Combining this with the
meanings previously given to it by Kant we obtain the following table:--

             {Logical: equivalent to absence of contradiction.
             {Empirical: in the wider sense, equivalent to agreement
             {with the formal conditions of experience; in the narrower
  Possibility{or stricter sense, involving in addition the capacity
             {of being presented in sense-experience.
             {Metaphysical: equivalent to absolute possibility, a conception
             {not of understanding but of Reason.

When this last meaning is given to the term, an entirely new set of
problems arises, to the confusion of the reader who very properly
continues to employ the term possibility in the empirical sense which,
as Kant has been insisting, is alone legitimate. Kant has temporarily
changed over to the standpoint of the metaphysical view which he has
been criticising, and accordingly uses the term ‘possibility’ in the
Leibnizian sense. Is Leibniz, he asks, justified in maintaining that the
field of the possible is wider than the realm of the actual, and the
latter in turn wider in extent than the necessary? In reply Kant accepts
the metaphysical meaning assigned to the term ‘possibility,’ but
restates the problem in Critical fashion. Do all things belong as
appearances to the context of a single experience, or are other types of
experience possible? Do other forms of intuition besides space and
time, other forms of understanding besides the discursive through
concepts, come within the range of the possible? These are questions
which fall to be answered, not by the mere understanding, the sole
function of which is empirical, but by Reason, which transcends the
world of appearance.

Kant introduces these questions, as he is careful to state,[1278] only
because they are currently believed to be within the competence of the
understanding; and he now for the first time points out that
possibility, in this sense, means absolute possibility, that which is
independent of all limiting conditions, a meaning ruled out by the
preceding treatment of the modal categories. Like all other absolute
conceptions, it belongs to Reason, and must therefore await treatment in
the _Dialectic_. These admissions come, however, only after the
discussion has been completed. Had Kant reversed the order of the two
paragraphs which constitute this digression, and marked them off as
being a digression, he would have greatly assisted the reader in
following the argument.

Kant adds a refutation of the merely logical arguments by which Leibniz
had professed to establish the priority and greater scope of the
possible. From the proposition, everything actual is possible, we can
infer by immediate inference that some possible things are actual. That,
however, would seem to imply that part of the possible is not actual,
and that something must be added to the possible in order to constitute
the actual. But this, Kant replies, is obviously an untenable view. The
something additional to the possible, not being itself possible, we
should be constrained to regard as impossible. _For our
understanding_,[1279] the possible is that which connects with some
perception in agreement with the formal conditions of experience. (Kant
here gives the correct Critical definition of the possible, by combining
the two first postulates.) Whether, and how far, other existences beyond
the field of sense experience are possible, we have no means of
deciding.

=B 288-294.=--This second edition section emphasises the fact that
possibility cannot be determined through the categories alone, but only
through the categories in their relation to intuition, and indeed to
outer intuition. Possibility is throughout taken as referring to
objective reality. The section is chiefly important in connection with
the problems bearing on the relation of inner and outer sense and on the
nature of our consciousness of time.[1280]

In B 289-91 Kant criticises those rationalistic arguments which rest
upon the equating of necessity of thought with necessity of existence.
When it is sought by mere analysis of concepts to prove that all
accidental existence has a cause, the most that can be shown is that the
existence of the accidental cannot be _comprehended_ by us, unless the
existence of a cause be assumed. But we may not argue that a condition
of possible understanding is likewise a condition of possible
existence.[1281] What is or is not possible for thought is, without
special proof, no sufficient criterion of what is or is not possible in
the real. If, again, the term accidental be taken as meaning that which
can exist only as a consequence of some other existence, the general
principle becomes merely analytic, and must not be taken as establishing
the synthetic principle of causality. The latter demands transcendental
proof by reference to the possibility of contingent experience.




