CHAPTER II

DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING


=First edition Subjective and Objective Deductions.=--In dealing with the
transcendental deduction, as given in the first edition, we can make use
of the masterly and convincing analysis which Vaihinger[752] (building
upon Adickes’ previous results, but developing an independent and quite
original interpretation) has given of its inconsecutive and strangely
bewildering argumentation. Vaihinger’s analysis is an excellent example
of detective genius in the field of scholarship. From internal evidence,
circumstantially supported by the _Reflexionen_ and _Lose Blätter_, he
is able to prove that the deduction is composed of manuscripts,
externally pieced together, and representing no less than four distinct
stages in the slow and gradual development of Kant’s views. Like
geological deposits, they remain to record the processes by which the
final result has come to be. Though they do not in their present setting
represent the correct chronological order, that may be determined once
the proper clues to their disentanglement have been duly discovered.
That discovery is itself, however, no easy task; for the unexpected,
while lending colour and incident to the commentator’s enterprise,
baffles his natural expectations at every turn. The first stage is one
in which Kant _dispenses_ with the categories, and in which, when they
are referred to, they are taken as applying _to things in themselves_.
The last stage, worked out, as there is ground for believing, in the
haste and excitement of the final revision, is not represented in the
_Prolegomena_ or in the second edition of the _Critique_, the author
retracing his steps and resuming the standpoint of the stage which
preceded it. The fortunate accident of Kant’s having jotted down upon
the back of a dated paper the record of his passing thought (one of the
few _Lose Blätter_ that are thus datable) is the culminating incident in
this philosophical drama. It felicitously serves as a keystone in the
body of evidence supported by general reasoning.

Before becoming acquainted with Vaihinger’s analysis I had observed
Kant’s ascription to empirical concepts of the functions elsewhere
allotted to the categories, but had been hopelessly puzzled as to how
such teaching could be fitted into his general system. Vaihinger’s view
of it as a pre-Critical survival would seem to be the only possible
satisfactory solution. For the view which I have taken of Kant’s
doctrine of the transcendental object as also pre-Critical, and for its
employment as a clue to the dating of passages, I am myself alone
responsible.

The order of my exposition will be as follows:[753]

I. Enumeration, in chronological order, of the four stages which compose
the deduction of the first edition, and citation of the passages which
represent each separate stage.

II. Detailed analysis, again in chronological order, of each successive
stage, with exposition of the views which it embodies.

III. Examination of the evidence yielded by the _Reflexionen_ and _Lose
Blätter_ in support of the above analysis.

IV. Connected statement and discussion of the total argument of the
deduction.


=I. Enumeration of the Four Stages=

(1) FIRST STAGE: THAT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL OBJECT, WITHOUT CO-OPERATION
OF THE CATEGORIES.--This stage is represented by[754]: (_a_) II. 3 (from
beginning of the third paragraph to end of 3) = A 104-10; (_b_) I. § 13
(the entire section) = A 84-92 (retained in second edition as B 116-24).
_a_ discusses the problem of the reference of sensations to an object,
_b_ that of the objective validity of the categories. _b_ is therefore
transitional to the second stage.

(2) SECOND STAGE: THAT OF THE CATEGORIES, WITHOUT CO-OPERATION OF THE
PRODUCTIVE IMAGINATION.--This stage is represented by: (_a_) I. [§ 14]
(with the exception of its concluding paragraph) = A 92-4 (retained in
second edition as B 124-7); (_b_) II. (the first four paragraphs) = A
95-7; (_c_) II. 4 (the entire section) = A 110-14.

(3) THIRD STAGE: THAT OF THE PRODUCTIVE IMAGINATION, WITHOUT MENTION OF
THE THREEFOLD TRANSCENDENTAL SYNTHESIS.--This stage is represented by
(_a_) III. β (from beginning of seventh paragraph to end of
twelfth) = A 119-23; (_b_) III. α (from beginning of third
paragraph to end of sixth) = A 116-19; (_c_) I. § 14 (Concluding
paragraph) = A 94-5; (_d_) III. δ (from beginning of sixteenth
paragraph to end of section preceding summary) = A 126-8; (_e_)
S(ummary) (in conclusion to III.) = A 128-30; (_f_) III. γ (from
beginning of thirteenth paragraph to end of fifteenth) = A 123-6; (_g_)
I(ntroduction) (from beginning of section to end of second paragraph) =
A 115-16; (_h_) § 10 T(ransitional to the fourth stage) = A 76-9
(retained as B 102-4).

(4) FOURTH STAGE: THAT OF THE THREEFOLD TRANSCENDENTAL SYNTHESIS.--This
stage is represented by: (_a_) II. 1-3 (from opening of 1 to end of
second paragraph in 3) = A 98-104; (_b_) II. (the two paragraphs
immediately preceding _a_) = A 97-8.


=II. Detailed Analysis of the Four Stages=

=First Stage.=--A 104-10; A 84-92 (B 116-24).

=A 104-10=; II. § 3.--This is the one passage in the _Critique_ in which
Kant explicitly defines his doctrine of the “transcendental object”; and
careful examination of the text shows that by it he means the _thing in
itself_, conceived as being the object of our representations. Such
teaching is, of course, thoroughly un-Critical; and as I shall try to
show, this was very early realised by Kant himself. The passages in
which the phrase “transcendental object” occurs are, like the section
before us, in every instance of early origin. It is significant that the
transcendental object is not again referred to in the deduction of the
first edition.[755] Though it reappears in the chapter on phenomena and
noumena, it does so in a passage which Kant excised in the second
edition. The paragraphs which he then substituted make no mention of it.
The doctrine is of frequent occurrence in the _Dialectic_, and combines
with other independent evidence to show that the larger part of the
_Dialectic_ is of early origin. That the doctrine of the transcendental
object is thus a pre-Critical or semi-Critical survival has, so far as I
am aware, not hitherto been observed by any writer upon Kant. It has
invariably been interpreted in the light of the sections in which it
does not occur, and, as thus toned down and tempered to something
altogether different from what it really stands for, has been taken as
an essential and characteristic tenet of the Critical philosophy. It was
in the course of an attempt to interpret Kant’s entire argument in the
light of his doctrine of the transcendental object that I first came to
detect its absence from all his later utterances. But it is important to
recognise that the difficulties which would result from its retention
are quite insuperable, and would by themselves, even in the absence of
all external evidence of Kant’s rejection of it, compel us to regard it
as a survival of pre-Critical thinking. As Vaihinger does not seem to
have detected the un-Critical character of this doctrine, it is the more
significant that he should, on other grounds, have felt constrained to
regard the passage in which it is expounded as embodying the earliest
stage in the development of the deduction. He would seem to continue in
the orthodox view so far as to hold that though the doctrine of the
transcendental object is here stated in pre-Critical terms, it was
permanently retained by Kant in altered form.

The doctrine of the transcendental object, as here expounded, is as
follows:

     “Appearances are themselves nothing but sensuous representations
     which must not be taken as capable of existing in themselves (_an
     sich_) with exactly the same character (_in ebenderselben Art_)
     outside our power of representation.”[756]

These sense-representations are our only possible representations, and
when we speak of an object corresponding to them, we must be conceiving
an object in general, equal to _x_.

     “They have their object, but an object which can never be intuited
     by us, and which may therefore be named the non-empirical, _i.e._
     transcendental object = _x_.”[757]

This object is conceived as being that which prevents our
representations from occurring at haphazard, necessitating their order
in such manner that, manifold and varied as they may be, they can yet be
self-consistent in their several groupings, and so possess that unity
which is essential to the concept of an object.

     “The pure concept of this transcendental object, which in fact
     throughout all our knowledge is always one and the same, is that
     which can alone confer upon all our empirical concepts relation in
     general to an object, _i.e._ objective reality.”[758]

What renders this doctrine impossible of permanent retention was that it
allowed of no objective existence mediate between the merely subjective
and the thing in itself. On such teaching there is no room for the
empirical object; and immediately upon the recognition of that latter
phenomenal form of existence in space, Kant was constrained to recognise
that it is in the empirical object, not in the thing in itself, that the
contents of our representations are grounded and unified. Any other view
must involve the application of the categories, especially those of
substance and causality, to the thing in itself. The entire empirical
world has still to be conceived as grounded in the non-empirical, but
that is a very different contention from the thesis that the thing in
itself is the object and the sole object of our representations. The
doctrine of the transcendental object has thus a twofold defect: it
advocates an extreme subjectivism, and yet at the same time applies the
categories to the thing in itself.

But the latter consequence is one which could not, at the stage
represented by this section, be appreciated by Kant. For, as we shall
find, he is endeavouring to solve the problem of the reference of
sense-representation to an object without assumption of _a priori_
categories. It is in _empirical_ concepts, conditioned only by a
transcendental apperception, that he professes to discover the grounds
and conditions of this objective reference. Let us follow Kant’s
argument in detail. The section opens[759] with what may be a reference
to the _Aesthetic_, and proceeds to deal with the first of the two
problems cited in the 1772 letter to Herz[760]--how
_sense_-representations stand related to their object. The exact terms
in which this question was there formulated should be noted.

     “I propounded to myself this question: on what ground rests the
     relation of that in us which we name representation (_Vorstellung_)
     to the object. If the representation contains only the mode in
     which the subject is affected by the object, it is easily
     understood how it should accord (_gemäss sei_) with that object as
     an effect with its cause, and how [therefore] this determination of
     our mind should be able to _represent_ something, _i.e._ have an
     object. The passive or sensuous representations have thus a
     comprehensible (_begreifliche_) relation to objects, and the
     principles, which are borrowed from the nature of our soul, have a
     comprehensible validity for all things in so far as they are to be
     objects of the senses.”[761]

Thus in 1772 there was here no real problem for Kant. The assumed fact,
that our representations are generated in us by the action of
independent existences, is taken as sufficient explanation of their
being referred to objects.

The section of the _Critique_ under consideration shows that Kant had
come to realise the inadequacy of this explanation quite early, indeed
prior to his solution of the second and further question which in that
same letter is spoken of as “the key to the whole secret” of
metaphysics. On what grounds, he now asks, is a subjective idea, _even
though it be a sense impression_, capable of yielding consciousness of
an object? In the letter to Herz the use of the term representation
(_Vorstellung_) undoubtedly helped to conceal this problem. It is now
emphasised that appearances are nothing but sense representations, and
must never be regarded as objects capable of existing in themselves,
with exactly the same character, outside our power of representation.
Now also Kant employs, in place of the phrase “in accord with,” the much
more definite term “corresponding to.” He points out that when we speak
of an object _corresponding_ to our knowledge, we imply that it is
distinct from that knowledge. Consciousness of such an object must
therefore be acquired from some other source than the given impressions.
In other words, Kant is now prepared to withdraw his statement that “the
passive or sensuous representations have an [easily] comprehensible
relation to objects.” In and by themselves they are purely subjective,
and can involve no such concept. The latter is a thought (_Gedanke_), a
concept (_Begriff_), additional to, and distinct from, the given
impressions. Its possibility, as regards both origin[762] and validity,
must be “deduced.”

There then results this first and very peculiar form of the
transcendental deduction. That part of it which persists in the
successive stages rests upon an explicitly developed distinction between
empirical and transcendental apperception. Kant teaches, in agreement
with Hume, though, as we may believe, independently of his direct
influence, that there is no single empirical state of the self which is
constant throughout experience.[763]

     “The consciousness of the self, according to the determinations of
     our state in inner perception, is merely empirical, and always in
     process of change.... That which has to be represented as of
     necessity numerically identical cannot be thought as such through
     empirical data. There must be a condition which precedes all
     experience, and renders experience itself possible, if a
     transcendental pre-supposition of this kind is to be rendered
     valid.... This pure, original, unchangeable consciousness I shall
     name transcendental apperception.”[764]

Kant would seem to have first developed this view in a quite crude form.
The consciousness of the self, he seems to have held, consists in its
awareness of its own unceasing activities. As consciousness of
_activity_, it is entirely distinct in nature and in origin from all
apprehension of sense impressions.[765] This teaching is a natural
extension of the doctrine of the _Dissertation_,[766] that such pure
notions as those of possibility, existence, necessity, substance, cause,
are “acquired by attending to the actions of the mind on the occasion of
experience.” Kant would very naturally hold that consciousness of the
identity and unity of the self is obtained in a similar manner. Such,
indeed, is the teaching of the section before us.

     “No knowledge can take place in us ... without that unity of
     consciousness which precedes all data of intuitions, and in
     relation to which all representation of objects is alone
     possible.”[767] “It is precisely this transcendental apperception
     that constructs out of (_macht aus_) all possible appearances,
     which are capable of coexisting in one experience, a connection of
     all these representations according to laws. For this unity of
     consciousness would be impossible if the mind could not become
     conscious, in the knowledge of the manifold, of the identity of the
     function whereby it combines it synthetically in one knowledge.
     Thus the mind’s original and necessary consciousness of the
     identity of itself is at the same time a consciousness of an
     equally necessary unity of the synthesis of all appearances
     according to concepts, _i.e._ according to rules.... For the mind
     could not possibly think the identity of itself in the manifold of
     its representations, and indeed _a priori_, if it did not have
     before its eyes the identity of its action....”[768]

That is to say, the self is the sole source of all unity. As a pure and
original unity it precedes experience; to its synthetic activities all
conceptual unity is due; and by reflection upon the constancy of these
activities it comes to consciousness of its own identity.

     “...even the purest objective unity, namely that of the _a priori_
     concepts (space and time), is possible only through relation of
     the intuitions to [transcendental apperception]. The numerical
     unity of this apperception is therefore the _a priori_ condition of
     all concepts, just as the manifoldness of space and of time is of
     the intuitions of sensibility.”[769]

To this consciousness of the abiding unity of the self Kant also traces
the notion of the transcendental object. The latter, he would seem to
argue, is formed by analogy from the former.

     “This object is nothing else than the subjective representation (of
     the subject) itself, but made general, for I am the original of all
     objects.”[770] “The mind, through its original and underived
     thinking, is itself the pattern (_Urbild_) of such a
     synthesis.”[771] “I would not represent anything as outside me, and
     so make [subjective] appearances into objective experience if the
     representations were not related to something which is parallel to
     my ego, and so in that way referred by me to another subject.”[772]

These quotations from the _Lose Blätter_ would seem to contain the key
to Kant’s extremely enigmatic statement in A 105, that “the unity which
the object makes necessary can be nothing else than the formal unity of
consciousness in its synthesis of the manifold of its representations,”
and again in A 109, that “this relation [of representations to an
object] is nothing else than the necessary unity of consciousness.”[773]

But this does not complete the sum-total of the functions which Kant is
at this stage prepared to assign to apperception. It mediates our
consciousness of the transcendental object in still another manner,
namely, by rendering possible the formation of the _empirical_ concepts
which unify and direct its synthetic activities. This is, indeed, the
feature in which this form of the deduction diverges most radically from
all later positions. Space and time are, it would seem, regarded as
being the sole _a priori_ concepts.[774] The instruments through which
the unity of apperception acts, and through which the thought of an
object becomes possible, are _empirical_ concepts. Such general concepts
as “body” or “triangle” serve as rules constraining the synthetic
processes of apprehension and reproduction to take place in such
unitary fashion as is required for unitary consciousness. The notion of
objectivity is specified in terms of the necessities which these
empirical concepts thus impose.

     “We think a triangle as object in so far as we are conscious of the
     combination of three straight lines according to a rule by which
     such an intuition can at all times be generated. This unity of rule
     determines the whole manifold and limits it to conditions which
     make the unity of apperception possible; and the concept of this
     unity [of rule] is the representation of the object.... All
     knowledge demands a concept, ... and a concept is always, as
     regards its form, something general, something that serves as a
     rule. Thus the concept of body serves as a rule to our knowledge of
     outer appearances, in accordance with the unity of the manifold
     which is thought through it.... The concept of body necessitates
... the representation of extension, and therewith of
     impenetrability, shape, etc.”[775]

Such is the manner in which Kant accounts for our concept of the
transcendental object. It consists of two main elements: first, the
notion of an unknown _x_, to which representations may be referred; and
secondly, the consciousness of this _x_ as exercising compulsion upon
the order of our thinking. The former notion is framed on the pattern of
the transcendental subject; it is conceived as another but unknown
subject. The consciousness of it as a source of external necessity is
mediated by the empirical concepts which transcendental apperception
also makes possible. And from this explanation of the _origin_ of the
concept of the transcendental object Kant derives the proof of its
_validity_.[776] It is indispensable for the realisation by the unitary
self of a unitary consciousness.

     “This relation [of representations to an object] is nothing else
     than the necessary unity of consciousness, and therefore also of
     the synthesis of the manifold, by a common (_gemeinschaftlich_)
     functioning of the mind, which unites it in one
     representation.”[777]

Through instruments empirical in origin, and subjectively necessary, the
notion of an objective necessity is rendered possible to the mind.

It is not surprising that Kant did not permanently hold to this view of
the empirical concept. The objections are obvious. Such a view of the
function of general concepts renders unintelligible their own first
formation. For as they are empirical, they can only be acquired by
conscious processes that do not involve them. That is to say,
consciousness of objects follows upon a prior consciousness in and
through which concepts, such as that of body, are discovered and formed.
Yet, as the argument claims, general concepts are the indispensable
conditions of unitary consciousness. How through a consciousness that is
not yet unified can general concepts be formed? Also it is difficult to
see how empirical concepts can be viewed as directly conditioned by, and
as immediately due to, anything so general as pure apperception. These
objections Kant must have come very quickly to recognise. This was the
first part of his teaching to be modified. In the immediately succeeding
stage,[778] so far as the stages can be reconstructed from the survivals
in the _Critique_, the empirical concepts are displaced once and for all
by the _a priori_ categories.

The only sentences which can be regarded as possibly conflicting with
the above interpretation are those two (in the second last and in the
last paragraphs) in which the phrase “rules _a priori_” occurs. Even
granting (what is at least questionable as regards the first) that the
words are meant to be taken together, it does not follow that Kant is
here speaking of categories. For contrary to his usual teaching he
speaks of the concept of body as a source of necessity. If so, it may
well, with equal looseness, be spoken of as _a priori_. That is indeed
done, by implication, in the second and third paragraphs, where he
speaks of a rule (referring to “body and triangle”) as making the
synthesis of reproduction “_a priori_ necessary.” Such assertions are
completely inconsistent with Kant’s Critical teaching, but so is the
entire section.

The setting in which the passage before us occurs has its own special
interest.[779] When Kant, as it would seem, on the very eve of the
publication of the _Critique_, developed the doctrine of a threefold
synthesis culminating in a “synthesis of recognition in the concept,” he
must have bethought himself of this earlier position, and have completed
his subjective deduction by incorporation, probably with occasional
alterations of phrasing, of the older manuscript. This procedure has
bewildered even the most discerning among Kant’s readers; but now,
thanks to Vaihinger’s convincing analysis, it may be welcomed as of
illuminating interest in the historical study of Kant’s development.

I may here draw attention to the two important respects in which the
positions revealed in this section continued to influence Kant’s later
teaching: namely, in the emphasis laid upon the transcendental unity of
apperception, and in the view of objectivity as involving the thought of
the thing in itself.

The excessive emphasis which in this first stage is laid upon the
transcendental unity of apperception persists throughout the later forms
of the deduction, and, as I shall try to show, does so to the detriment
of the argument. Though its functions are considerably diminished, they
are still exaggerated; this is perhaps in part due to its having been in
this early stage regarded as in and by itself the sole ultimate ground
of unitary experience. There were, however, two other influences at
work. Kant continued to employ the terminology of his earlier view, and
in his less watchful moments was betrayed thereby into conflict with his
considered teaching. But even more important was the influence of his
personal convictions. He was irrevocably committed in his own private
thinking to a belief in the spiritual and abiding character of the self;
and this belief frequently colours, in illegitimate ways, the expression
of his views. This is especially evident in some of the alterations[780]
of the second edition, written as they were at a time when he was
chiefly preoccupied with moral problems.

As regards the other factor, the view adopted in regard to the nature of
objectivity, there is ample evidence that even after the empirical
concepts had been displaced by the categories Kant still continued for
some time (possibly for several years in the earlier and middle
’seventies) to hold to his doctrine of the transcendental object.
Passages which expound it in this later form occur in the _Note on
Amphiboly_ and throughout the _Dialectic_.[781] That this may not be
taken for his final teaching is equally certain. The entire first layer
of the deduction of the first edition, all the relevant passages in the
chapter on phenomena and noumena, and some of those in the _Dialectic_,
were omitted in the second edition; and nowhere, either in the other
portions of the deduction of the first edition, or in the deduction of
the second edition, or in any passages added elsewhere in the second
edition, is such teaching to be found.

A brief statement of Kant’s doctrine of the transcendental object _in
its later form_ seems advisable at this point; it is required in order
to complete and to confirm the interpretation which I have given of the
earlier exposition. At the same time I shall endeavour to show that the
sections in which the doctrine occurs, though later than the first layer
of the deduction of the first edition, are all of comparatively early
origin, and that they reveal not the least trace of Kant’s more mature,
phenomenalist view of the empirical world in space.

We may begin with the passages in the chapter on phenomena and noumena.
The meaning in which the term transcendental is employed is there made
sufficiently clear.

     “The transcendental employment of a concept in any principle
     consists in its being referred to things _in general and in
     themselves_.”[782]

That is to say, the term transcendental, as used in the phrase
transcendental object, is not employed in any sense which would oppose
it to the transcendent. In so far as the thought of the thing in itself
is a necessary ingredient in the concept of objectivity, it is a
condition of apperception, and therefore of possible experience; in
other words, _the thought of a transcendent object is one of the
transcendental conditions of our experience_. As Kant is constantly
interchanging the terms transcendent and transcendental, such an
explanation of the phrase is perhaps superfluous; but if any is called
for, the above would seem to suffice. As we shall have occasion to
observe,[783] other factors besides the _a priori_ must be reckoned
among the conditions of experience; and to both types of conditions Kant
applies the epithet transcendental.

In the chapter on phenomena and noumena Kant enquires at considerable
length whether the categories (meaning, of course, the pure forms of
understanding, not their schematised correlates) allow of transcendental
(_i.e._ transcendent) employment. The passages in which this discussion
occurs[784] would seem, however, to be highly composite; many
paragraphs, or portions of paragraphs, are of much later date than
others. We may therefore limit our attention to those in which the
phrase transcendental object is actually employed, _i.e._ to those which
appear only in the first edition.

     “All our representations are referred by the understanding to some
     object; and since appearances are merely representations, the
     understanding refers them to a _something_ as the object of
     sensuous intuition. But this something, thus conceived (_in so
     fern_), is only the transcendental object; and by that is meant a
     something = x, of which we know, and with the present constitution
     of our understanding can know, nothing whatsoever, but which, as a
     correlate of the unity of apperception, can serve only for the
     unity of the manifold in sensuous intuition. By means of this
     unity the understanding combines the manifold into the concept of
     an object. This transcendental object cannot be separated from the
     sense data, for nothing then remains over through which it might be
     thought. Consequently it is not in itself an object of knowledge,
     but only the representation of appearances under the concept of an
     object in general which is determinable through the manifold of
     those appearances. Precisely for this reason also the categories do
     not represent a special object given to the understanding alone,
     but only serve to specify the transcendental object (the concept of
     something in general) through that which is given in sensibility,
     in order thereby to know appearances empirically under concepts of
     objects.”[785] “The object to which I relate appearance in general
     is the transcendental object, _i.e._ the completely indeterminate
     thought of _something_ in general. This cannot be entitled the
     _noumenon_ [_i.e._ the thing in itself more specifically determined
     as being the object of a purely intelligible intuition];[786] for I
     know nothing of what it is in itself, and have no concept of it
     save as the object of a sensuous intuition in general, and so as
     being one and the same for all appearances.”[787]

Otherwise stated, Kant’s teaching is as follows. The thought of the
thing in itself remains altogether indeterminate; it does not _specify_
its object, and therefore yields no knowledge of it; none the less it is
a necessary ingredient in the concept of objectivity as such. The object
as specified in terms of sense is _mere representation_; the object as
genuinely objective can only be thought. The correlate of the unity of
apperception is the thought of the thing in itself. This is what Kant is
really asserting, though in a hesitating manner which would seem to
indicate that he is himself already more or less conscious of its
unsatisfactory and un-Critical character.

The phrase transcendental object occurs once in the second
_Analogy_[788] and twice in the _Note on Amphiboly_.[789] The passage in
the second _Analogy_ may very well, in view of the kind of subjectivism
which it expounds, be of early date of writing. By transcendental object
Kant there quite obviously means the thing in itself. From the first
reference in the _Note on Amphiboly_ no definite conclusions can be
drawn. The argument is too closely bound up with his criticism of
Leibniz to allow of his own independent standpoint being properly
developed. There is, however, nothing in it which compels us to regard
it as of late origin; and quite evidently Kant here means by the
transcendental object the thing in itself. The phrase _substantia
phaenomenon_ is not, as might at first sight seem, equivalent to the
empirical object of Kant’s phenomenalist teaching. It is an adaptation
of Leibnizian phraseology.[790] The second reference in the _Note on
Amphiboly_ occurs in a passage which may perhaps be of later
origin;[791] but the transcendental object is there mentioned only in
order to afford opportunity for the statements that it cannot be thought
through any of the categories, that we are completely ignorant whether
it is within or without us, and whether if sensibility were removed it
would vanish or remain, and that it can therefore serve only as a
limiting concept. We here observe it in the very process of being
eliminated. As we shall find, Kant’s teaching is ill-expressed in the
sections on _Amphiboly_; so much so that they could not be recast
without seriously disturbing the balance of his architectonic. They were
therefore allowed to remain unaltered in the second edition.

We may now pass to the _Dialectic_. The subjectivist doctrine of the
transcendental object is there expressed in a much more uncompromising
manner. Let us first consider the references to the transcendental
object in the _Paralogisms_ and in the subsequent _Reflection_. The
phrase transcendental object occurs twice in the second _Paralogism_,
once in the third, twice in the fourth, and three times in the
_Reflection_;[792] and in all these cases there is not the least
uncertainty as to its denotation. It is taken as equivalent to the thing
in itself, and is expounded as a necessary ingredient in the
consciousness of our subjective representations as noumenally grounded.

     “What matter may be as a thing in itself (transcendental object) is
     completely unknown to us, though, owing to its being represented as
     something external, its permanence as appearance can indeed be
     observed.”[793] “We can indeed admit that something, which may be
     (in the transcendental[794] sense) ‘outside us,’ is the cause of
     our outer intuitions, but this is not the object of which we are
     thinking in the representations of matter and of corporeal things,
     for these are merely appearances, _i.e._ mere kinds of
     representation which are never to be met with save in us, and whose
     actuality depends on immediate consciousness just as does the
     consciousness of my own thoughts. The transcendental object is
     equally unknown in respect to inner and to outer intuition.”[795]

Here Kant at one and the same time distinguishes between, and confounds
together, representation and its empirical object. What is alone clear
is that by the transcendental object he means simply the thing in itself
viewed as the cause of our sensations. In A 358 it is used in a wider
sense as also comprehending the noumenal conditions which underlie the
conscious subject.

     “...this something which underlies the outer appearances and which
     so affects our sense that it obtains the representations of space,
     matter, shape, etc., this something viewed as noumenon (or better
     as transcendental object) might also at the same time be the
     subject that does our thinking....”

Similarly in A 379-80:

     “Though the I, as represented through inner sense in time, and
     objects in space outside me, are specifically quite distinct
     appearances, they are not for that reason thought as being
     different things. Neither the transcendental object which underlies
     outer appearances, nor that which underlies inner intuition, is in
     itself either matter or a thinking being, but is a ground (to us
     unknown) of the appearances which supply to us the empirical
     concepts of the former as well as of the latter kind.”

The references in the _Reflection on the Paralogisms_ are of the same
general character and are equally definite.[796] A 390-1 has special
interest in that it explicitly states that to appearances, taken as Kant
invariably takes them throughout the _Paralogisms_ in the first edition
as mere subjective representations, the category of causality, and
therefore by implication the category of substance, is inapplicable.

     “No one could dream of asserting that that which he has once come
     to recognise as mere representation is an outer cause.”

We may now turn to the passages in the chapter on the _Antinomies_.

     “The non-sensuous cause of our representations is completely
     unknown to us, and therefore we cannot intuit it as object.... We
     may, however, entitle the purely intelligible cause of appearances
     in general the transcendental object.... To this transcendental
     object we can ascribe the whole extent and connection of our
     possible perceptions....”[797]

Appearances can be regarded as real only to the extent to which they are
actually experienced. Otherwise they exist only in some unknown noumenal
form of which we can acquire no definite concept, and which is
therefore really nothing to us. This, Kant declares, is true even of
that immemorial past of which we are ourselves the product.

     “...all the events which have taken place in the immense periods
     that have preceded my own existence mean really nothing but the
     possibility of extending the chain of experience from the present
     perception back to the conditions which determine it in time.”[798]

In other words, we may not claim that such events, empirically
conceived, have ever actually existed in any such empirical form. A
similar interpretation is given to the assertion of the present reality
of what has never been actually experienced.

     “Moreover, in outcome it is a matter of indifference whether I say
     that in the empirical progress in space I can meet with stars a
     hundred times farther removed than the outermost now perceptible to
     me, or whether I say that they are perhaps to be met with in
     cosmical space even though no human being has ever perceived or
     ever will perceive them. For though they might be given as things
     in themselves, without relation to possible experience, they are
     still nothing for me, and therefore are not objects, save in so far
     as they are contained in the series of the empirical regress.”[799]
     “The cause of the empirical conditions of this process, that which
     determines what members I shall meet with and how far by means of
     such members I can carry out the regress, is transcendental and is
     therefore necessarily unknown to me.”[800]

Such is the form in which Kant’s pre-Critical doctrine of the
transcendental object survives in the _Critique_.[801] It contains no
trace of the teaching of the objective deduction of the first and second
edition or of the teaching of the refutation of idealism in the second
edition. It closely resembles Mill’s doctrine of the permanent
possibilities of sensation, and is almost equally subjectivist in
character. As already noted,[802] it also lies open to the further
objection that it involves an illegitimate application of the categories
to things in themselves. As Kant started from the naïve and natural
assumption that reference of representations to objects must be their
reference to things in themselves, he also took over the current
Cartesian view that it is by an inference in terms of the category of
causality that we advance from a representation to its cause. The thing
in itself is regarded as the sole true substance and as the real cause
of everything which happens in the natural world. Appearances, being
representations merely, are wholly transitory and completely
inefficacious. _Not only, therefore, are the categories regarded as
valid of things in themselves, they are also declared to have no
possible application to phenomena._ Sense appearances do not, on this
view, constitute the mechanical world of the natural sciences; they have
a purely subjective, more or less epi-phenomenal, existence in the mind
of each separate observer. It was very gradually, in the process of
developing his own Critical teaching, that Kant came to realise the very
different position to which he was thereby committed. The categories,
including that of causality, are pre-empted for the _empirical_ object
which is now regarded as immediately apprehended; and the function of
mediating the reference of phenomena to things in themselves now falls
to the Ideas of Reason. The distinction between appearance and reality
is no longer that between representations and their noumenal causes, but
between the limited and relative character of the entire world in space
and time and the unconditioned demanded by Reason. But these are
questions whose discussion must meantime be deferred.[803]

I may now briefly summarise the evidence in favour of the view that the
doctrine of the transcendental object is a pre-Critical or semi-Critical
survival and must not be taken as forming part of Kant’s final and
considered position. (I) Of the six sections in which the phrase
transcendental object occurs, three[804] were omitted in the second
edition, and in the passages which were substituted for them it receives
no mention. There are various reasons which can be suggested in
explanation of the retention of the other three[805] in the second
edition. The _Note on Amphiboly_ was too unsatisfactory as a whole to
encourage Kant to improve upon it in detail. The other two are outside
the limit at which Kant thought good to terminate all attempts to
improve, whether in major or in minor matters, the text of the first
edition.[806] To have recast the _Antinomies_ as he had recast the
_Paralogisms_ would have involved alterations much too extensive. Also,
there were no outside polemical influences--or at least none acting
quite directly--such as undoubtedly reinforced his other reasons for
revising the _Paralogisms_. (2) Secondly, the transcendental object is
not mentioned in the later layers of the deduction of the first edition,
nor in the deduction of the second edition, nor in any passage or note
added in the second edition. That Kant should thus suddenly cease to
employ a phrase to which he had accustomed himself is the more
significant in view of his conservative preference for the adapting of
familiar terminology to new uses. It can only be explained as due to his
recognition of the completely untenable character of the teaching to
which it had given expression. As the object of knowledge is always
empirical, it can never legitimately be called transcendental. (3)
Thirdly, the general teaching of the passages in which the phrase
transcendental object occurs is by itself sufficient proof of their
early origin. They reveal not the least trace of the deepened insight of
his final standpoints. As we know, it was certain difficulties involved
in the working out of the objective deduction that delayed the
publication of the _Critique_ for so many years; and the sections which
deal with these difficulties contain Kant’s maturest teaching. In them
he seems to withdraw definitely from the positions to which he had
unwarily committed himself by his un-Critical doctrine of the
transcendental object. I now pass to the second section constitutive of
the first stage.

=A 84-92=B 116-24, I. § 13.=--Just as in II. § 3 Kant deals solely with
the first of the two questions formulated in the letter of 1772 to
Herz--the reference of _sense_-representations to an object,--so in I. §
13 he raises only the second--that of the objective validity of
_intellectual_ representations (now spoken of as pure concepts of
understanding, or pure _a priori_ concepts, and only in one sentence as
categories). And just as in the former section he carries the problem a
step further, yet without attaining to the true Critical position, so in
this latter he still assumes that it is the application of these pure
concepts to real independent objects, _i.e._ to _things in themselves_,
which calls for justification. We must again consider the exact terms in
which this problem is formulated in the letter to Herz.[807]

     “Similarly, if that in us which is called a representation, were
     active in relation to the object, that is to say, if the object
     itself were produced by the representation (as on the view that the
     ideas in the Divine Mind are the archetypes of things), the
     conformity of representations with objects might be understood. We
     can thus render comprehensible at least the possibility of two
     kinds of intelligence--of an _intellectus archetypus_, on whose
     intuition the things themselves are grounded, and of an
     _intellectus ectypus_ which derives the data of its logical
     procedure from the sensuous intuition of things. But our
     understanding (leaving moral ends out of account) is not the cause
     of the object through its representations, nor is the object the
     cause of its intellectual representations (_in sensu reali_).
     Hence, the pure concepts of the understanding cannot be abstracted
     from the data of the senses, nor do they express our capacity for
     receiving representations through the senses. But, whilst they have
     their sources in the nature of the soul, they originate there
     neither as the result of the action of the object upon it, nor as
     themselves producing the object. In the _Dissertation_ I was
     content to explain the nature of these intellectual representations
     in a merely negative manner, viz. as not being modifications of the
     soul produced by the object. But I silently passed over the further
     question, how such representations, which refer to an object and
     yet are not the result of an affection due to that object, can be
     possible. I had maintained that the sense representations represent
     things as they appear, the intellectual representations things as
     they are. But how then are these things given to us, if not by the
     manner in which they affect us? And if such intellectual
     representations are due to our own inner activity, whence comes the
     agreement which they are supposed to have with objects, which yet
     are not their products? How comes it that the axioms of pure reason
     about these objects agree with the latter, when this agreement has
     not been in any way assisted by experience? In mathematics such
     procedure is legitimate, because its objects only _are_ quantities
     for us, and can only be represented as quantities, in so far as we
     can generate their representation by repeating a unit a number of
     times. Hence the concepts of quantity can be self-producing, and
     their principles can therefore be determined _a priori_. But when
     we ask how the understanding can form to itself completely _a
     priori_ concepts of things in their _qualitative_ determination,
     with which these things must of necessity agree, or formulate in
     regard to their possibility principles which are independent of
     experience, but with which experience must exactly conform,--we
     raise a question, that of the origin of the agreement of our
     faculty of understanding with the things in themselves, over which
     obscurity still hangs.”[808]

The section before us represents the same general standpoint as that
given in the above letter. Here, too, it is the validity of the _a
priori_ concepts in reference to _things in themselves_ that is under
consideration. The implication of Kant’s argument is that the
categories, being neither determinable nor discoverable by means of
experience, will only apply to appearances if they determine, or rather
reveal, the actual non-experienced nature of things in themselves. These
pure concepts, it is implied, owing to their combined _a priori_ and
intellectual characteristics, make this inherent claim. Either they are
altogether empty and illusory, or such unlimited validity must be
granted to them. Kant, that is to say, still holds, as in the
_Dissertation_, that sense-representations reveal things as they
_appear_, intellectual representations things as they _are_.

     “We have either to surrender completely all claims to judgments of
     pure reason, in the most esteemed of all fields, that which extends
     beyond the limits of all possible experience, or we must bring this
     Critical investigation to perfection.”[809]

The pure concepts, unlike space, “apply to objects generally, apart from
the conditions of sensibility.”[810] But here also, as in the letter to
Herz, the strange and problematic character of such knowledge is clearly
recognised.

Kant’s discussion of the concept of causality in A 90 may seem to
conflict with the above contention--that it is its applicability to
things in themselves which Kant is considering. But this difficulty
vanishes if we bear in mind that here, as in the _Dissertation_, there
is no such distinction as we find in Kant’s later more genuinely
phenomenalist position, between the objects causing our sensations and
_things in themselves_.[3] The purely intelligible object, supposed to
remain after elimination of the empirical and _a priori_ sensory
factors, is the thing in itself. The objects apprehended through sense
are real, only not in their sensuous form.

There are two connected facts which together may perhaps be taken as
evidence that I. § 13 is later than II. 3 _b_. Intellectual concepts are
reinstated alongside the _a priori_ concepts of space and time. Kant has
evidently in the meantime given up the attempt to construe the former as
empirical in origin. That that attempt was earlier in time would seem to
be proved by the further fact, that the _a priori_ concepts are here
viewed as performing the same kind of function as that ascribed in II. 3
_b_ to concepts that are empirical. They are conditions of the
“synthetic unity of thought.”[811] This view of the function of concepts
is certainly fundamental and important, and Kant permanently retained it
from his previous abortive method of ‘deduction.’ But it was a long step
from the discovery of the distinction between empirical and _a priori_
concepts to its fruitful application. That involved appreciation of the
further fact that the two problems, separately stated in the letter to
Herz and separately dealt with in II. 3 _b_ and in I. § 13--the problem
of the relation of _sense_-representations, and the problem of the
relation of _intellectual_ representations, to an object,--are indeed
one and the same, soluble from one and the same standpoint, by one and
the same method of deduction, namely, by reference to the possibility of
experience. Only in and through relation to an object can
sense-representations be apprehended; and only as conditions of such
sense-experience are the categories objectively valid. Relation to an
object is constituted by the categories, and is necessary in reference
to sense-representations, because only thereby is consciousness of any
kind possible at all.

That this truly Critical position had not been attained when I. § 13 was
written,[812] is shown not only by its concentration on the single
problem of the validity of _a priori_ concepts, but also by its repeated
assertion that representations can be consciously apprehended
independently of all relation to the faculty of understanding. The
directly counter assertion appears, however, in the sections (I. § 14,
II.: first four paragraphs) which immediately follow in the text of the
_Critique_--indicating that in the period represented by these latter
the revolutionary discovery, the truly Copernican hypothesis, had at
last been achieved. They constitute the second stage, and to it we may
now proceed.


=Second Stage.=--A 92-4 = B 124-7; A 95-7; A 110-14.

=A 92-4=, I. § 14 (with the exception of the concluding classification of
mental powers).--This section makes a fresh start; it stands in no
necessary relation to any preceding section. The problem is still
formulated, in its opening sentences, in terms reminiscent of the letter
to Herz; but otherwise the standpoint is entirely new, and save for the
wording of a single sentence (A 93: “if not intuited, yet”), is
genuinely Critical. The phrase “possibility of experience” now appears,
and is at once assigned the central rôle. The words “if not intuited,
yet” in A 93 may possibly have been inserted later in order to tone down
the flagrant contradiction with the preceding paragraphs. In any case,
even this qualification is explicitly retracted in A 94.

=A 95-7.=--The same standpoint appears in the first three paragraphs of
Section II. The categories are “the _a priori_ conditions on which the
possibility of experience depends.”[813] By the categories alone “can an
object be thought.”[814] The further important point that only in their
empirical employment do the categories have use and meaning is
excellently developed.

     “An _a priori_ concept not referring to experience would be the
     logical form only of a concept, but not the concept itself by which
     something is thought.”[815]

=A 110-14, II. 4.=--In this section also the argument starts afresh,
indicating (if such evidence were required) that, like I. § 14, it must
have been written independently of its present context. But the argument
is now advanced one step further. The categories are recognised as
simultaneously conditioning both unity of consciousness and objectivity.

     “There is but one experience ... as there is but one space and one
     time....” “The _a priori_ conditions of a possible experience are
     at the same time conditions of the possibility of objects of
     experience”[816] “...the necessity of these categories rests on the
     relation which our whole sensibility, and with it also all possible
     appearances, have to the original unity of apperception....”[817]

Now also it is _emphasised_ that save in and through _a priori_ concepts
no representations can exist for consciousness.

     “They would then belong to no experience, would be without an
     object, a blind play of representations, less even than a
     dream.”[818] They “would be to us the same as nothing.”[819]

The wording is still not altogether unambiguous, but the main point is
made sufficiently clear.

These paragraphs are the earliest in which traces of a genuine
phenomenalism can be detected. The transcendental object, one and the
same for all our knowledge, is not referred to. ‘Objects’ (in the
plural) is the term which is used wherever the context permits. The
empirical object is thus made to intervene between the thing in itself
and the subjective representations. But the distinction between
empirical objects and subjective representations on the one hand, and
between empirical objects and things in themselves on the other, is not
yet drawn in any really clear and definite manner.

A similar phenomenalist tendency crops out in Kant’s distinction[820]
between objective affinity and subjective association.

     “The ground of the possibility of the association of the manifold,
     so far as it lies in the object, is named the affinity of the
     manifold.”

None the less Kant’s subjectivism finds one of its most decided
expressions in A 114.

=Third Stage.=--A 119-23 = III. β; A 116-19 = III. α; A
94-5 = I. § 14 C(oncluding paragraph); A 126-8 = III. δ; A
128-30 = S(ummary); A 123-6 = III. γ; A 115-16 = III.
I(ntroduction); A 76-9 (B 102-4) = § 10 T(ransition to fourth stage).

=A 119-23, III. β= (from the beginning of the seventh paragraph
to the end of the twelfth). The doctrine of objective affinity already
developed in the above sections is now made to rest upon a new faculty,
the productive imagination. As Vaihinger remarks, the wording of this
section would seem to indicate that it is Kant’s first attempt at
formulating that new doctrine. He has not as yet got over his own
surprise at the revolutionary nature of the conclusions to which he
feels himself driven by the exigencies of Critical teaching. He finds
that it is deepening into consequences which may lead very far from the
current psychology and from his own previous views regarding the nature
and conditions of the knowing process and of personality. As evidence
that this section was not written continuously with II. 4,[1] we have
the further fact that though the doctrine of objective affinity is dwelt
upon, it is described afresh, with no reference to the preceding
account. Also, the empirical processes of apprehension and reproduction,
already mentioned in A 104-10, are now ascribed to the empirical
imagination which is carefully distinguished from the productive.

III. α repeats “from above” the argument given in III. β “from below.”
It insists upon the close connection between the categories (first
introduced in II. 4[821]) with the productive imagination of III. β.

Vaihinger places III. δ next in order, on account of the
connection of its argument with III. α.[822] But it dwells only
upon the chief outcome of the total argument, viz. that the orderliness
of nature is due to understanding. That productive imagination is not
mentioned, is taken by Vaihinger to signify Kant’s recognition that it
can be postulated only hypothetically, and that as doctrine it is not
absolutely essential to the strict deduction.

S summarises the entire argument, and in it “pure imagination” receives
mention.

Within this third stage III. γ is subsequent to the above four
sections. For it carries the doctrine of productive imagination one step
further. In III. β, III. α, and S, productive
imagination has been treated merely as an auxiliary function of pure
understanding.

     “The unity of apperception in relation to the synthesis of
     imagination is the _understanding_; and the same unity with
     reference to the transcendental synthesis of the imagination is the
     _pure understanding_.”[823]

It is now treated as a separate and distinct faculty. So far from being
a function of understanding, its synthesis “by itself, though carried
out _a priori_, is always sensuous.”[824] It is

     “one of the fundamental faculties of the human soul.... The two
     extreme ends, sensibility and understanding, must be brought into
     connection with each other by means of this transcendental function
     of imagination.”[825]

In this section there also appears a new element which would seem to
connect it with the next following stage, namely, the addition to the
series, apprehension, association, and reproduction, of the further
process, recognition. As here introduced it is extremely ambiguous in
character. It is counted as being empirical, and yet as containing _a
priori_ concepts. This decidedly hybrid process would seem to represent
Kant’s first formulation of the even more ambiguous process, which
corresponds to it in the fourth stage.

In III. I recognition is again mentioned, but this time in a form still
more akin to its treatment in the fourth stage. It is not recognition
through categories, but, as a form in apperception, is the

     “empirical consciousness of the identity of the reproductive
     representations with the appearances by which they were
     given.”[826]

In all other respects, however, the above six sections agree (along with
I. § 14 C) in holding to a threefold division of mental powers:
sensibility, imagination, and apperception. This third stage is thereby
marked off sufficiently clearly from the second stage in which pure
imagination is wanting, and from the fourth stage in which it is
dissolved into a threefold _a priori_ synthesis.

In both I. § 14 C and in III. I the classification which underlies the
third stage is explicitly formulated. Their statements harmoniously
combine to yield the following tabular statement:

1. The _synopsis_ of the manifold--_a priori_ through sense, _i.e._ in
pure intuition.

2. The synthesis of this manifold--through pure transcendental
imagination.

3. The unity of this synthesis--through pure original transcendental
apperception.

At this point Vaihinger adds to the above section the earlier passage §
10 T.[827] It is even more definitely than III. γ and III. I
transitional to the fourth stage. It must be classed within the third
stage, as it holds to the above threefold classification. But it
modifies that classification in two respects. First, in that it does not
employ the term _synopsis_, but only speaks of pure intuition as
required to yield us a manifold. The term synopsis, as used by Kant, is,
however, decidedly misleading.[828] His invariable teaching is that all
connection is due to synthesis. By synopsis, therefore, which he
certainly does not employ as synonymous with synthesis, can be meant
only apprehension of external side-by-sideness. It never signifies
anything except apprehension of the lowest possible order. Kant’s
omission of the term, therefore, tends to clearness of statement.
Secondly, the classification is also modified by the substitution of
understanding for the unity of apperception. Apperception is, however,
so obscurely treated in all of the above sections, that this cannot be
regarded as a vital alteration. What is new in this section, and seems
to connect it in a curious and interesting manner with sections in the
fourth stage, is its doctrine of

     “a manifold of _a priori_ sensibility.” “Space and time contain a
     manifold of pure _a priori_ intuition.”[829]

That is, in this connection, an entirely new doctrine. In all the
previous sections of the deduction (previous in the assumed order of
original writing) the manifold supplied through intuition is taken as
being empirical, and as consisting of sensations. Kant here also adds
that the manifold, “whether given empirically or _a priori_,”[830] must
be synthesised before it can be known.

     “The spontaneity of our thought requires that this manifold [of
     pure _a priori_ intuition] should be run through in a certain
     manner, taken up, and connected, in order that a knowledge may be
     formed out of it. This action I call synthesis.”

=Fourth Stage.--A 98-104; A 97-8.=--As already noted, there are in Kant
two persistent but conflicting interpretations of the nature of the
synthetic processes exercised by imagination and understanding, the
subjectivist and the phenomenalist.[831] Now, on the former view,
imagination is simply understanding _at work_. In other words,
imagination is merely the active synthesising side of a faculty whose
complementary aspect appears in the logical unity of the concept. From
this point of view the transcendental and the empirical factors may be
taken as forming a single series. The transcendental and the empirical
processes will vary together, some form of transcendental activity
corresponding to every fundamental form of empirical activity and _vice
versa_. Such an inference only follows _if_ the subjectivist standpoint
be accepted to the exclusion of the phenomenalist point of view. But
since Kant constantly alternates between them, and never quite
definitely formulates them in their distinction and opposition; since,
in fact, they were rather of the nature of obscurely felt tendencies
than of formulated standpoints, it is quite intelligible that an
inference derived from the one should be drawn even at the very time
when the other is being more explicitly developed. This, it would seem,
is what actually happened. When we come to consider the evidence
derivable from the _Reflexionen_ and _Lose Blätter_, we shall find
support for the view that after January 1780, on the very eve of the
publication of the _Critique_, while the revolutionary, phenomenalist
consequences of the Critical hypothesis were becoming clearer to him, he
unguardedly allowed the above inference to lead him to recast his
previous views in a decidedly subjectivist manner. The view that
transcendental imagination has a special and unique activity altogether
different in type from any of its empirical processes, namely, the
“productive,” is now allowed to drop; and in place of it Kant develops
the view that transcendental functions run exactly parallel with the
empirical processes of apprehension, reproduction, and recognition.
Accordingly, in place of the classification presented in the third
stage, we find a new and radically different one introduced into the
text, without the least indication that Kant’s standpoint has meantime
changed. It is given in A 97:

A. =Synopsis= of the manifold through sense.

B. =Synthesis.=

    1. Synthesis of apprehension of representations in [inner] intuition.
    2. Synthesis of reproduction of representations in imagination.
    3. Synthesis of recognition of representations in the concept.

And Kant adds in explanation that “these point to three subjective
sources of knowledge which make the understanding itself possible, and
which in so doing make all experience possible, in so far as it is an
empirical product of the understanding.” What, now, are these three
subjective sources of knowledge? They certainly are not those classified
in the table of the third stage. _A_ roughly coincides with its first
member; consequently _B_ 1 is left without proper correlate. _B_ 2 is
altogether different from the previous synthesis of imagination, for in
the earlier table transcendental imagination is regarded as being solely
productive, _never_ reproductive.[832] It is now asserted to be
reproductive--a contradiction of one of his own most emphatic
contentions, which can only be accounted for by some such explanation as
we are here stating. Nothing is lacking as regards explicitness in the
statement of this new position. “...the _reproductive_ synthesis of
imagination belongs to the transcendental acts of the soul, and, in
reference to it [viz. to the reproductive synthesis], we will call this
power too the transcendental power of the imagination.”[833] Lastly,
even B 3 does not coincide with the pure apperception of the other
table. B 3 is more akin to the recognition which in the third stage is
declared to be always empirical. In any case, it is recognition _in the
concept_; and though that may ultimately involve and condition
transcendental apperception, it remains, in the manner in which it is
here developed by Kant, something very different. But this is a point to
which we shall return. There is an added complication, running through
this entire stage, which first requires to be disentangled. The
transcendental syntheses are declared to condition the pure
representations of space and time no less than those of
sense-experience.

     “This synthesis of apprehension also must be executed _a priori_,
     _i.e._ in reference to representations which are not empirical. For
     without it we could not have the _a priori_ representations either
     of space or of time, since these can be generated only through the
     synthesis of the manifold which sensibility presents in its
     original receptivity. Thus we have a pure synthesis of
     apprehension”[834] “...if I draw a line in thought or desire to
     think of the time from one noon to another, or merely represent to
     myself a certain number, I must, firstly, apprehend these manifold
     representations one after the other. But if the preceding
     representations (the first parts of the line, the antecedent parts
     of time or the units serially represented) were always to drop out
     of my thought, and were not reproduced when I advance to those that
     follow, no complete representation, and none of all the
     aforementioned thoughts, not even the purest and first basal
     representations of space and time, could ever arise.”[835]

This, as Vaihinger remarks, is a point of sufficient importance to
justify separate treatment. But it is introduced quite incidentally by
Kant, and obscures quite as much as it clarifies the main argument.

It is convenient to start with the second synthesis. Kant’s argument is
much clearer in regard to it than in regard to the other two. He
distinguishes between empirical and transcendental reproduction.
Reproduction in ordinary experience, in accordance with the laws of
association, is merely empirical. The _de facto_ conformity of
appearances to rules is what renders such empirical reproduction
possible;

     “...otherwise our faculty of empirical imagination would never find
     any opportunity of action suited to its capacities, and would
     remain hidden within the mind as a dead, and to us unknown
     power.”[836]

Kant proceeds to argue, consistently with his doctrine of objective
affinity, that empirical reproduction is itself transcendentally
conditioned. The form, however, in which this argument is developed is
peculiar to the section before us, and is entirely new.

     “If we can show that even our purest _a priori_ intuitions yield no
     knowledge, save in so far as they contain such connection of the
     manifold as will make possible a thoroughgoing synthesis of
     reproduction, this synthesis of the imagination must be grounded,
     prior to all experience, on _a priori_ principles; and since
     experience necessarily presupposes that appearances can be
     reproduced, we shall have to assume a pure transcendental synthesis
     of the imagination as conditioning even the possibility of all
     experience.”[837]

In the concluding paragraph Kant makes clear that he regards this
_transcendental_ activity as being exercised in a twofold manner: in
relation to the _empirically_ given manifold as well as in relation to
the _a priori_ given manifold. How this transcendental activity is to be
distinguished from the empirical is not further explained. I discuss
this point below.[838]

The argument of the section on the synthesis of _apprehension_, to which
we may now turn back, suffers from serious ambiguity. It is not clear
whether a distinction, analogous to that between empirical and
transcendental reproduction, is being made in reference to apprehension.
The actual wording of its two last paragraphs would lead to that
conclusion. That, however, is a view which would seem to be excluded by
the wider context. Kant is dealing with the synthesis of apprehension in
_inner_ intuition, _i.e._ in time. By the fundamental principles of his
teaching such intuition must always be transcendental. Empirical
apprehension can only concern the data of the special senses. The
process of apprehension referred to in the middle paragraph must
therefore itself be transcendental.

But it is in dealing with the synthesis of _recognition_ that the
argument is most obscure. It is idle attempting to discover any possible
distinction between an empirical and a transcendental process of
recognition. For the transcendental process here appears as being the
consciousness that what we are thinking now is the same as what we
thought a moment before; and it is illustrated not by reference to the
pure intuitions of space and time, but only by the process of counting.
It may be argued that empirical recognition is mediated by
transcendental factors--by pure concepts and by apperception. But unless
we are to take transcendental recognition as synonymous with
transcendental apperception, which Kant’s actual teaching does not seem
to justify us in doing, such considerations will not enable us to
distinguish two forms of recognition. Apart, however, from this
difficulty, there is the further one that the concepts in and through
which the recognition is executed are here described as being empirical.
The only key that will solve the mystery of this extraordinary section,
hopelessly inexplicable when viewed as a single continuous whole, is, it
would seem, the theory of Vaihinger, namely,[839] that from the third
paragraph onwards (already dealt with as forming the first stage of the
deduction) Kant is making use of manuscript which represents the
_earliest_ form in which his explanation of the consciousness of objects
was developed, with the strange result that this section is a
combination of the latest and of the earliest forms of the deduction.
While seeking to make out a parallelism between the empirical, conscious
activities of imagination and understanding on the one hand, and its
transcendental functions on the other, he must have bethought himself of
the earlier attempt to explain consciousness of objects through
empirical concepts conditioned by transcendental apperception, and so
have attempted to expound the third form of synthesis by means of it.
As thus extended it involves a distinction between transcendental and
empirical apperception, and upon that the discussion, so far as it
concerns anything akin to recognition, altogether turns. But there is
not the least further mention of recognition itself. As transcendental,
it cannot be taken as the equivalent of empirical apperception; and as a
synthesis through concepts, can hardly coincide with pure apperception.
The title of the section, “the synthesis of recognition in the concept,”
is thus no real indication of the astonishing fare prepared for the
reader. The doctrine of a threefold synthesis seems to have occurred to
Kant on the very eve of the publication of the _Critique_. The passage
expounding it may well have been hurriedly composed, and when unforeseen
difficulties accumulated, especially in regard to recognition as a
transcendental process, Kant must have resolved simply to close the
matter by inserting the older manuscript.


=III. Evidence yielded by the “Reflexionen” and “Lose Blätter” in support
of the above analysis.=

The evidence, derived by Vaihinger from the _Reflexionen_ and _Lose
Blätter_, briefly outlined, is as follows.[840] (1) In the _Reflexionen
zur Anthropologie_ relevant passages are few in number, and represent a
standpoint very close to that of the 1770 _Dissertation_. Imagination is
treated only as an empirical faculty.[841] Recognition, which is only
once mentioned,[842] is also viewed as merely empirical. The
understanding is spoken of as the faculty through which objects are
thought.[843] The categories are not mentioned, and it is stated that
the understanding yields only ideas of reflection. “All knowledge of
things is derived, as regards its matter, from sensation--the
understanding gives only ideas of reflection.”[844] So far, these
_Reflexionen_ would seem to coincide, more or less, with the first stage
of the deduction. They contain, however, no reference to
_transcendental_ apperception; and are therefore regarded by Vaihinger
as representing a still earlier standpoint.

(2) In the _Reflexionen zur Kritik der reinen Vernunft_ there is a very
large and valuable body of relevant passages. No. 925 must be of the
same date as the letter of 1772 to Herz; it formulates its problem in
practically identical terms.[845] Nos. 946-52 and 955 may belong to the
period of the first stage. For though the doctrine of the transcendental
object as the opposite counterpart of the transcendental subject is not
mentioned, the spiritualist view of the self is prominent. In No. 946 it
is asserted that the representation of an object is “made by us through
freedom.”

     “Free actions are already given _a priori_, namely our own.”[846]
     “To pass universal objective judgments, and to do so apodictically,
     reason must be free from subjective grounds of determination. For
     were it so determined the judgment would be merely accidental,
     namely in accordance with its subjective cause. Thus reason is
     conscious _a priori_ of its freedom in objectively necessary
     judgments in so far as it apprehends them as exclusively grounded
     through their relation to the object.”[847] “Transcendental freedom
     is the necessary hypothesis of all rules, and therefore of all
     employment of the understanding.”[848] “Appearances are
     representations whereby we are affected. The representation of our
     free self-activity does not involve affection, and accordingly is
     not appearance, but apperception.”[849]

It is significant that the categories receive no mention.

Almost all the other _Reflexionen_ would seem to have originated in the
period of the second stage of the deduction; but they still betray a
strong spiritualist bias.

     “Impressions are not yet representations, for they must be related
     to something else which is an action. Now the reaction of the mind
     is an action which relates to the impression, and which if taken
     alone[850] may in its special forms receive the title
     categories.”[851] “We can know the connection of things in the
     world only if we produce it through a universal action, and so out
     of a principle of inner power (_aus einem Prinzip der inneren
     Potestas_): substance, ground, combination.”[852]

These _Reflexionen_ recognise only the categories of relation,[853] and
must therefore be prior to the twelvefold classification. There is not
the least trace of the characteristic doctrines of the third and fourth
stages of the deduction, viz. of the transcendental function of the
imagination or of a threefold transcendental synthesis. The nature of
apprehension is also most obscure. It is frequently equated with
apperception.

(3) The _Lose Blätter aus Kants Nachlass_ (Heft I.) contains fragments
which also belong to the second stage of the deduction, but which would
seem to be of somewhat earlier date than the above _Reflexionen_.[854]
They have interesting points of contact with the first stage. Thus
though the phrase transcendental object does not occur in them, the
object of knowledge is equated with _x_, and is regarded in the manner
of the first stage as the opposite counterpart of the unity of the
self.[855] These fragments belong, however, to the second stage in
virtue of their recognition of the _a priori_ categories of relation.
There is also here, as is in the _Reflexionen_, great lack of clearness
regarding the nature of apprehension; and there is still no mention of
the transcendental faculty of imagination. Fragment 8 is definitely
datable. It covers the free spaces of a letter of invitation dated May
20, 1775.[856] Fragment B 12[857] belongs to a different period from the
above. This is sufficiently evident from its contents; but fortunately
the paper upon which it is written--an official document in the
handwriting of the Rector of the Philosophical Faculty of
Königsberg--enables us to decide the exact year of its origin. It is
dated January 20, 1780. The fragment must therefore be subsequent to
that date. Now in it transcendental imagination appears as a third
faculty alongside sensibility and understanding, and a distinction is
definitely drawn between its empirical and its transcendental
employment. The former conditions the synthesis of apprehension; the
latter conditions the synthetic unity of apperception. It further
distinguishes between reproductive and productive imagination, and
ascribes the former exclusively to the empirical imagination. In all
these respects it stands in complete agreement with the teaching of the
third stage of the deduction. The fact that this fragment is subsequent
to January 1780 would seem to prove that even at that late date Kant was
struggling with his deduction.[858] But the most interesting of all
Vaihinger’s conclusions has still to be mentioned. He points out that at
the time when this fragment was composed Kant had not yet developed the
doctrine characteristic of the fourth stage, namely, of a threefold
transcendental synthesis. Moreover, as he observes, the statement which
it explicitly contains, that reproductive imagination is always
empirical, is inconsistent with any such doctrine. The teaching of the
fourth stage must consequently be ascribed to an even later date.[859]

(4) The _Lose Blätter_ (Heft II.), though almost exclusively devoted to
moral and legal questions, contain in E 67[860] a relevant passage which
Reicke regards as belonging to the ‘eighties, but which Adickes and
Vaihinger agree in dating “shortly before 1781.” On Vaihinger’s view it
is a preliminary study for the passages of the fourth stage of the
deduction. But such exact dating is not essential to Vaihinger’s
argument. It is undoubtedly quite late, and contains the following
sentence:

     “All representations, whatever their origin, are yet ultimately as
     representations modifications of inner sense, and their unity must
     be viewed from this point of view. A spontaneity of synthesis
     corresponds to their receptivity: either of apprehension as
     sensations or of reproduction as images (_Einbildungen_) or of
     recognition as concepts.”

This is the doctrine from which the deduction of the first edition
_starts_; it was, it would seem, _the last to be developed_.[861] That
we find no trace of it in the _Prolegomena_, and that it is not only
eliminated from the second edition, but is expressly disavowed,[862]
would seem to indicate that it had been hastily adopted on the very eve
of publication, and that upon reflection Kant had felt constrained
definitively to discard it. The threefold synthesis can be verified on
the empirical level, but there is no evidence that there exist
corresponding transcendental activities.


=IV. Connected Statement and Discussion of Kant’s Subjective and
Objective Deductions in the First Edition=

Such are the varying and conflicting forms in which Kant has presented
his deduction of the categories. We may now apply our results to obtain
a connected statement of the essentials of his argument. The following
exposition, which endeavours to emphasise its main broad features, to
distinguish its various steps, and to disentangle its complex and
conflicting tendencies, will, I trust, yield to the reader such steady
orientation as is necessary in so bewildering a labyrinth. In the
meantime I shall take account only of the deductions of the first
edition,[863] and from them shall strive to construct the ideal
statement to which they severally approximate. Any single relatively
consistent and complete deduction that is thus to serve as a standard
exposition must, like the root-languages of philology, be typical or
archetypal, representing the argument at which Kant aimed; it cannot be
one of the alternative expositions which he himself gives. Such
reconstruction of an argument which Kant has failed to express in a
final and genuinely adequate form must, of course, lie open to all the
dangers of arbitrary and personal interpretation. It is an extremely
adventurous undertaking, and will have to be carefully guarded by
constant reference to Kant’s _ipsissima verba_. Proof of its historical
validity will consist in its capacity to render intelligible Kant’s own
departures from it, and in its power of explaining the reasons of his so
doing. Its expository value will be in proportion to the assistance
which it may afford to the reader in deciphering the actual texts.

Our first task is to make clear the nature of the distinction which Kant
draws between the “subjective” and the “objective” deductions. This is a
distinction of great importance, and raises issues of a fundamental
character. In regard to it students of Kant take widely different views.
For it brings to a definite issue many of the chief controversies
regarding Critical teaching. Kant has made some very definite statements
in regard to it; and one of the opposing schools of interpretation finds
its chief and strongest arguments in the words which he employs. But for
reasons which will appear in due course, adherence to the letter of the
_Critique_ would in this case involve the commentator in great
difficulties. We have no option except to adopt the invidious position
of maintaining that we may now, after the interval of a hundred years
and the labours of so many devoted students, profess to understand Kant
better than he understood himself. For such procedure we may indeed cite
his own authority.

     “Not infrequently, upon comparing the thoughts which an author has
     expressed in regard to his subject, whether in ordinary
     conversation or in writing, we find that we can understand him
     better than he understood himself. As he has not sufficiently
     determined his concept, he has sometimes spoken, or even thought,
     in opposition to his own intention.”[864]

Let us, then, consider first the distinction between the two types of
deduction in the form in which it is drawn by Kant. In the _Preface_ to
the first edition,[865] Kant states that his transcendental deduction of
the categories has two sides, and assigns to them the titles subjective
and objective.

     “This enquiry, which is somewhat deeply grounded, has two sides.
     The one refers to the objects of pure understanding, and is
     intended to expound and render intelligible the objective validity
     of its _a priori_ concepts. It is therefore essential to my
     purposes. The other seeks to investigate the pure understanding
     itself, its possibility and the cognitive faculties upon which it
     rests. Although this latter exposition is of great importance for
     my chief purpose, it does not form an essential part of it. For the
     chief question is always simply this,--what and how much can the
     understanding and Reason know apart from all experience? not--how
     is the faculty of thought itself possible? The latter is as it were
     a search for the cause of a given effect; and therefore is of the
     nature of an hypothesis (though, as I shall show elsewhere, this is
     not really so); and I would appear to be taking the liberty simply
     of expressing an opinion, in which case the reader would be free to
     express a different opinion.[866] For this reason I must forestall
     the reader’s criticism by pointing out that the objective
     deduction, with which I am here chiefly concerned, retains its full
     force even if my subjective deduction should fail to produce that
     complete conviction for which I hope....”

The subjective deduction seeks to determine the subjective conditions
which are required to render knowledge possible, or to use less
ambiguous terms the generative processes to whose agency human knowledge
is due. It is consequently psychological in character. The objective
deduction, on the other hand, is so named because it deals not with
psychological processes but with questions of objective validity. It
enquires how concepts which are _a priori_, and which as _a priori_ must
be taken to originate in pure reason, can yet be valid of objects. In
other words, the objective deduction is logical, or, to use a
post-Kantian term, epistemological in character.

It is indeed true, as Kant here insists, that the subjective deduction
does not concern itself in any quite direct fashion with the Critical
problem--how _a priori_ ideas can relate to objects. “Although of great
importance for my chief purpose, it does not form an essential part of
it.” This, no doubt, is one reason why Kant omitted it when he revised
the _Critique_ for the second edition.[867] None the less it is, as he
here says, important; and what exactly that importance amounts to, and
whether it is really true that it has such minor importance as to be
rightly describable as unessential, is what we have to decide.

Though empirical psychology, in so far as it investigates the temporal
development of our experience, is, as Kant very justly claims, entirely
distinct in aim and method from the Critical enquiry, the same cannot be
said of a psychology which, for convenience, and on the lines of Kant’s
own employment of terms, may be named transcendental.[868] For it will
deal, not with the temporal development of the concrete and varied
aspects of consciousness, but with the more fundamental question of the
generative conditions indispensably necessary to consciousness as such,
_i.e._ to consciousness in each and every one of its possible
embodiments. In the definition above given of the objective deduction, I
have intentionally indicated Kant’s unquestioning conviction that the _a
priori_ originates independently of the objects to which it is applied.
This independent origin is only describable in mental or psychological
terms. The _a priori_ originates from within; it is due to the specific
conditions upon which human thinking rests. Now this interpretation of
the _a priori_ renders the teaching contained in the subjective
deduction much more essential than Kant is himself willing to recognise.
The conclusions arrived at may be highly schematic in conception, and
extremely conjectural in detail; they are none the less required to
supplement the results of the more purely logical analysis. For though
in the second edition the sections devoted to the subjective deduction
are suppressed, their teaching, and the distinctions which they draw
between the different mental processes, continue to be employed in the
exposition of the objective deduction, and indeed are presupposed
throughout the _Critique_ as a whole. They are indispensably necessary
in order to render really definite many of the contentions which the
objective deduction itself contains. To eliminate the subjective
deduction is not to cut away these presuppositions, but only to leave
them in the obscure region of the undefined. They will still continue to
influence our mode of formulating and of solving the Critical problem,
but will do so as untested and vaguely outlined assumptions, acting as
unconscious influences rather than as established principles. For these
reasons the omission of the subjective deduction is to be deplored. The
explicit statement of the implied psychological conditions is preferable
to their employment without prior definition and analysis. The deduction
of the second edition rests throughout upon the initial and
indispensable assumption, that though connection or synthesis can never
be given, it is yet the generative source of all consciousness of order
and relation. Factors which are transcendental in the strict or logical
meaning of the term rest upon processes that are transcendental in a
psychological sense.

This last phrase, ‘transcendental in a psychological sense,’ calls for a
word of justification. The synthetic processes generative of experience
are not, of course, transcendental in the strict sense. For they are not
_a priori_ in the manner of the categories. None the less they are
discoverable by the same transcendental method, namely, as being, like
the categories, indispensably necessary to the possibility of
experience. They differ from the categories in that they are not
immanent in experience, constituent of it, and cannot therefore be known
in their intrinsic nature. As they fall outside the field of
consciousness, they can only be hypothetically postulated. None the
less, formal categories and generative processes, definable elements and
problematic postulates, alike agree in being conditions _sine qua non_
of experience. And further, in terms of Kant’s presupposed psychology,
the latter are the source to which the former are due. There would thus
seem to be sufficient justification for extending the term
transcendental to cover both; and in so doing we are following the path
which Kant himself willingly travelled. For such would seem to have been
his unexpressed reasons for ascribing, as he does, the synthetic
generative processes to what he himself names transcendental faculties.

This disposes of Kant’s chief reason for refusing to recognise the
subjective deduction as a genuine part of the Critical enquiry, namely,
the contention upon which he lays such emphasis in the prefaces both of
the first and of the second edition,[869] that in transcendental
philosophy nothing hypothetical, nothing in any degree dependent upon
general reasoning from contingent fact, can have any place. That
contention proves untenable even within the domain of his purely logical
analyses. The very essence of his transcendental method consists in the
establishment of _a priori_ elements through proof of their connection
with factual experience. Kant is here revealing how greatly his mind is
still biased by the Leibnizian rationalism from which he is breaking
away. His _a priori_ cannot establish itself save in virtue of
hypothetical reasoning.[870] His transcendental method, rightly
understood, does not differ in essential nature from the hypothetical
method of the natural sciences; it does so only in the nature of its
starting-point, and in the character of the analyses which that
starting-point prescribes. And if hypothetical reasoning may be allowed
in the establishment of the logical _a priori_, there is no sufficient
reason why it may not also be employed for the determination of
dynamical factors. The sole question is as to whether the hypotheses
conform to the logical requirements and so raise themselves to a
different level from mere opinion and conjecture.[871] As Kant himself
says,[872] though his conclusions in the subjective deduction may seem
to be hypothetical in the illegitimate sense, they are not really so.
From the experience in view of which they are postulated they receive at
once the proof of their actuality and the material for their
specification.

We may now return to the question of the nature of the two deductions.
The complex character of their interrelations may be outlined as
follows:

1. Though the subjective deduction is in its later stages coextensive
with its objective counterpart, in its earlier stages it moves wholly on
what may be called the empirical level. The data which it analyses and
the conditions which it postulates are both alike empirical. The
objective deduction, on the other hand, deals from start to finish with
the _a priori_.

2. The later stages of the subjective deduction are based upon the
results of the objective deduction. The existence and validity of _a
priori_ factors having been demonstrated by transcendental, _i.e._
logical, analysis, the subjective deduction can be extended from the
lower to the higher level, and can proceed to establish for the _a
priori_ elements what in its earlier stages it has determined for
empirical consciousness, namely, the nature of the generative processes
which require to be postulated as their ground and origin. When the two
deductions are properly distinguished the objective deduction has,
therefore, to be placed midway between the initial and the final stages
of the subjective deduction.

3. The two deductions concentrate upon different aspects of experience.
In the subjective deduction experience is chiefly viewed as a _temporal
process_ in which the given falls apart into successive events, which,
in and by themselves, are incapable of constituting a unified
consciousness. The fundamental characteristic of human experience, from
this point of view, is that it is _serial_ in character. Though it is an
apprehension of time, it is itself also a process in time. In the
objective deduction, on the other hand, the time element is much less
prominent. Awareness of _objects_ is the subject-matter to which
analysis is chiefly devoted. This difference very naturally follows from
the character of the two deductions. The subjective enquiry is mainly
interested in the conditions generative of experience, and finds its
natural point of departure in the problem by what processes a unified
experience is constructed out of a succession of distinct happenings.
The objective deduction presents the logical problem of validity in its
most striking form, in our awareness of objects; the objective is
contrasted with the subjective as being that which is universally and
necessarily the same for all observers. Ultimately each of the two
deductions must yield an analysis of both types of
consciousness--awareness of time and awareness of objects; _a priori_
factors are involved in the former no less than in the latter, and both
are conditioned by generative processes. Unfortunately the manner in
which this is done in the _Critique_ causes very serious
misunderstanding. The problem of the psychological conditions generative
of consciousness of objects is raised[873] before the logical analysis
of the objective deduction has established the data necessary for its
profitable discussion. The corresponding defect in the objective
deduction is of a directly opposite character, but is even more
unfortunate in its effects. The results obtained from the analysis of
our awareness of objects are not, within the limits of the objective
deduction, applied in further analysis of our consciousness of time.
That is first done, and even then by implication rather than by explicit
argument, in the _Analytic of Principles_. This has the twofold evil
consequence, that the relations holding between the two deductions are
very greatly obscured, and that the reader is not properly prepared for
the important use to which the results of the objective deduction are
put in the _Analytic of Principles_. For it is there assumed--a quite
legitimate inference from the objective deduction, but one whose
legitimacy Kant has nowhere dwelt upon and explained--that to be
conscious of time we must be conscious of it as existing in two distinct
orders, subjective and objective. To be conscious of time we must be
conscious of objects, and to be conscious of objects we must be able to
distinguish between the order of our ideas and the order of the changes
(if any) in that which is known by their means.

Thus the two deductions, properly viewed in their full scope, play into
one another’s hands. The objective deduction is necessary to complete
the analysis of time-consciousness given in the subjective deduction,
and the extension of the analysis of object-consciousness to the
explanation of time-consciousness is necessary in order to make quite
definite and clear the full significance of the conclusions to which the
objective enquiry has led.[874]

One last point remains for consideration. Experience is a highly
ambiguous term, and to fulfil the rôle assigned to it by Kant’s
transcendental method--that of establishing the reality of the
conditions of its own possibility--its actuality must lie beyond the
sphere of all possible controversy. It must be itself a datum, calling
indeed for explanation, but not itself making claims that are in any
degree subject to possible challenge. Now if we abstract from all those
particularising factors which are irrelevant in this connection, we are
left with only three forms of experience--experience of self, experience
of objects, and experience of time. The two former are open to question.
They may be illusory, as Hume has argued. And as their validity, or
rather actuality, calls for establishment, they cannot fulfil the
demands which the transcendental method exacts from the experience whose
possibility is to yield proof of its discoverable conditions.
Consciousness of time, on the other hand, is a fact whose actuality,
however problematic in its conditions, and however mysterious in its
intrinsic nature, cannot, even by the most metaphysical of subtleties,
be in any manner or degree challenged. It is an unquestioned possession
of the human mind. Whether time itself is real we are not metaphysically
certain, but that, whatever be its reality or unreality, we are
conscious of it in the form of change, is beyond all manner of doubt.
Consciousness of time is the _factual_ experience, as conditions of
whose possibility the _a priori_ factors are transcendentally proved.
In so far as they can be shown to be its indispensable conditions, its
mere existence proves their reality. And such in effect is the ultimate
character of Kant’s proof of the objective validity of the categories.
They are proved in that it is shown that only in and through them is
consciousness of time possible.

The argument gains immeasurably in clearness when this is
recognised;[875] and the deduction of the first edition of the
_Critique_, in spite of its contorted character, remains in my view
superior to that of the second edition owing to this more explicit
recognition of the temporal aspect of consciousness and to employment of
it as the initial starting-point. Analysis at once reveals that though
consciousness of time is undeniably actual, it is conditioned in complex
ways, and that among the conditions indispensably necessary to its
possibility are both consciousness of self and consciousness of an
objective order of existence. Starting from the undeniable we are thus
brought to the problematic; but owing to the factual character of the
starting-point we can substantiate what would otherwise remain open to
question.

As this method of formulating Kant’s argument gives greater prominence
to the temporal factor than Kant himself does in his statement of the
deductions, the reader may very rightly demand further evidence that I
am not, by this procedure, setting the deductions in a false or
arbitrary perspective. Any statement of Kant’s position in other than
his own _ipsissima verba_ is necessarily, in large part, a matter of
interpretation, and proof of its correctness must ultimately consist in
the success with which it can be applied in unravelling the manifold
strands that compose his tortuous and many-sided argument; but the
following special considerations may be cited in advance. Those parts of
the _Critique_, such as the chief paragraphs of the subjective deduction
and the chapter on _Schematism_, which are demonstrably late in date of
writing, agree in assigning greater prominence to the temporal aspect of
experience. This is also true of those numerous passages added in the
second edition which deal with inner sense. All of these show an
increasing appreciation of the central rôle which time must play in the
Critical enquiries. Secondly, proof of the validity of _specific_
categories is given, as we shall find,[876] not in the objective
deduction of the _Analytic of Concepts_, but only in the _Analytic of
Principles_. What Kant gives in the former is only the quite general
demonstration that forms of unity, such as are involved in all judgment,
are demanded for the possibility of experience. Now when proof of the
specific categories does come, in the _Analytic of Principles_, it is
manifestly based on the analysis of time-experience. In the three
_Analogies_, for example, Kant’s demonstration of the objective validity
of the categories of relation consists in the proof that they are
necessary conditions of the possibility of our time-consciousness. That
is to say, the transcendental method of proof, when developed in full
detail, in reference to some specific category, agrees with the
formulation which I have given of the subjective and objective
deductions. In the third place, Kant started from a spiritualist
standpoint, akin to that of Leibniz,[877] and only very gradually broke
away from the many illegitimate assumptions which it involves. But this
original starting-point reveals its persisting influence in the
excessive emphasis which Kant continued to lay upon the unity of
apperception. He frequently speaks[878] as if it were an ultimate
self-justifying principle, by reference to which the validity of all
presupposed conditions can be established. But that, as I have already
argued, is a legitimate method of procedure only if it has previously
been established that self-consciousness is involved in all
consciousness, that is, involved even in consciousness of sequence and
duration. And as just stated, the deductions of specific categories,
given in the _Analytic of Principles_, fulfil these requirements of
complete proof. They start from the time-consciousness, not from
apperception.

I shall now summarise these introductory discussions in a brief
tabulated outline of the main steps in the argument of the two
deductions, and shall add a concluding note upon their interconnection.

=Subjective Deduction.=--1. Consciousness of time is an experience whose
actuality cannot be questioned; by its actuality it will therefore
establish the reality of everything that can be proved to be its
indispensable condition.

2. Among the conditions indispensably necessary to all consciousness of
time are synthetic processes whereby the contents of consciousness,
occurring in successive moments, are combined and unified. These
processes are processes of apprehension, reproduction, and recognition.

3. Recognition, in turn, is conditioned by self-consciousness.

4. As no consciousness is possible without self-consciousness, the
synthetic processes must have completed themselves before such
self-consciousness is possible, and consequently are not verifiable by
introspection but only by hypothetical construction.

[1, 2, 3, and 4 are steps which can be stated independently of the
argument of the objective deduction.]

5. Self-consciousness presupposes consciousness of objects, and
consciousness of objects presupposes the synthetic activities of
productive imagination whereby the matter of sense is organised in
accordance with the categories. These productive activities also are
verifiable only by conjectural inference, and only upon their completion
can consciousness of any kind make its appearance.

6. Consciousness of self and consciousness of objects thus alike rest
upon a complexity of non-phenomenal conditions. For anything that
critical analysis can prove to the contrary, consciousness and
personality may not be ultimates. They may be resultants due to
realities fundamentally different from themselves.

[5 is a conclusion obtained only by means of the argument of the
objective deduction. 6 is a further conclusion, first explicitly drawn
by Kant in the _Dialectic_.]

=Objective Deduction.=--1. The starting-point coincides with that of the
subjective deduction. Consciousness of time is an experience by whose
actuality we can establish the reality of its indispensable conditions.

2. Among the conditions necessary to all consciousness of time is
self-consciousness.

3. Self-consciousness, in turn, is itself conditioned by consciousness
of objects.

4. Consciousness of objects is possible only if the categories have
validity within the sphere of sense-experience.

5. Conclusion.--The empirical validity of the categories, and
consequently the empirical validity of our consciousness alike of the
self and of objects, must be granted as a _conditio sine qua non_ of our
consciousness of time. They are the indispensable conditions of that
fundamental experience.

As above stated,[879] the preliminary stages of the subjective deduction
prepare the way for the argument of the objective deduction, while the
results obtained by the latter render possible the concluding steps of
the former. That is to say, the objective deduction has to be
intercalated midway between the opening and the concluding stages of the
subjective deduction. It may also be observed that whereas the objective
deduction embodies the main positive teaching of the _Analytic_, in that
it establishes the possibility of natural science and of a metaphysics
of experience, the subjective deduction is more directly concerned with
the subject-matter of the _Dialectic_, reinforcing, as it does, the more
negative consequences which follow from the teaching of the objective
deduction--the impossibility of transcendent speculation. It stands in
peculiarly close connection with the teaching of the section on the
_Paralogisms_. We may now proceed to a detailed statement of the
argument of the two deductions.


THE SUBJECTIVE DEDUCTION IN ITS INITIAL EMPIRICAL STAGES

In the opening of the subjective deduction Kant is careful to give due
prominence to the temporal aspect of our human experience.

     “...all the contents of our knowledge are ultimately subject to the
     formal condition of inner sense, that is, to time, as that wherein
     they must all be ordered, connected, and brought into relation to
     one another. This is a general remark which the reader must bear in
     mind as being a fundamental presupposition of my entire
     argument.”[880]

Consciousness of time is thus the starting-point of the deduction.
Analysis reveals it as highly complex; and the purpose of the deduction
is to discover, and, as far as may be possible, to define its various
conditions. The argument can best be expounded by reference to a single
concrete example--say, our experience of a series of contents, _a_, _b_,
_c_, _d_, _e_, _f_, as in succession to one another and as together
making up the total six. In order that such an experience may be
possible the successive members of the series must be held together
simultaneously before the mind. Obviously, if the earlier members
dropped out of consciousness before the mind reached _f_, _f_ could not
be apprehended as having followed upon them. There must be a synthesis
of apprehension of the successive items.

Such a synthesis of apprehension is, however, only possible through
reproduction of the earlier experiences. If when the mind has passed
from _a_ to _f_, _f_ is apprehended as having followed upon _a_, _b_,
_c_, _d_, _e_, such consciousness is only possible in so far as these
earlier contents are reproduced in image. Synthesis of apprehension is
conditioned by synthesis of reproduction in imagination.

     “But if the preceding representations (the first parts of [a] line,
     the earlier moments of time or the units represented in sequent
     order) were always to drop out of my thought, and were not
     reproduced when I advance to those that follow, no complete
     representation, and none of all the aforementioned thoughts, not
     even the purest and first basal representations of space and time,
     could ever arise.”[881]

In order, however, that the reproduced images may fulfil their function,
they must be recognised as standing for or representing contents which
the self has just experienced.

     “Without the consciousness that what we are thinking is the same as
     what we thought a moment before, all reproduction in the series of
     representations would be in vain.”[882]

Each reproduced image would in its present state be a new experience,
and would not help in the least towards gaining consciousness of order
or number in the succession of our experiences. Recognition is,
therefore, a third form of synthesis, indispensably necessary to
consciousness of time. But further, the recognition is recognition of a
succession as forming a unity or whole, and that unity is always
conceptual.

     “The word concept (_Begriff_) might of itself have suggested this
     remark. For it is this unitary consciousness which unites into a
     single representation a manifold that has been successively
     intuited and then subsequently reproduced.”[883] “If in counting I
     forgot that the units ... have been added to one another in
     succession, I should never recognise what the sum-total is that is
     being produced through the successive addition of unit to unit; and
     so would remain ignorant of the number. For the concept of this
     number is nothing but the consciousness of this unity of
     synthesis.”[884]

The synthesis of recognition is thus a synthesis which takes place in
and through empirical concepts. In the instance which we have chosen,
the empirical concept is that of the number six.

The analysis, however, is not yet complete. Just as reproduction
conditions apprehension and both rest on recognition, so in turn
recognition presupposes a still further condition, namely,
self-consciousness. For it is obvious, once the fact is pointed out,
that the recognition of reproduced images as standing for past
experiences can only be possible in so far as there is an abiding self
which is conscious of its identity throughout the succession. Such an
act of recognition is, indeed, merely one particular form or concrete
instance of self-consciousness. The unity of the empirical concept in
and through which recognition takes place finds its indispensable
correlate in the unity of an empirical self. Thus an analysis of our
consciousness, even though conducted wholly on the empirical level, that
is, without the least reference to the _a priori_, leads by simple and
cogent argument to the conclusion that it is conditioned by complex
synthetic processes, and that these syntheses in turn presuppose a unity
which finds twofold expression for itself, objectively through a concept
and subjectively in self-consciousness.

So far I have stated the argument solely in reference to serial
consciousness. Kant renders his argument needlessly complex and
diminishes its force by at once extending it so as to cover the
connected problem, how we become aware of objects. This occurs in the
section on the synthesis of reproduction. An analysis of our
consciousness of objects, as distinct from consciousness of the
immediately successive, forces us to postulate further empirical
conditions. Since the reproductive imagination, to whose agency the
apprehension of complex unitary existences is psychologically due, acts
through the machinery of association, it presupposes constancy in the
apprehended manifold.

     “If cinnabar were sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes light,
     sometimes heavy, if a man changed sometimes into this and sometimes
     into that animal form, if the country on the longest day were
     sometimes covered with fruits, sometimes with ice and snow, my
     empirical imagination would never even have occasion when
     representing red colour to bring to mind heavy cinnabar....”[885]

This passage may be compared with the one which occurs in the section on
the synthesis of recognition. Our representations, in order to
constitute knowledge, must have the unity of some concept; the manifold
cannot be apprehended save in so far as this is possible.

     “All knowledge demands a concept, though that concept may be quite
     imperfect or obscure. But a concept is always, as regards its form,
     something general which serves as a rule. The concept of body, for
     instance, as the unity of the manifold which is thought through it,
     serves as a rule to our knowledge of outer appearances.... It
     necessitates in the perception of something outside us the
     representation of extension, and therewith the representations of
     impenetrability, form, etc.”[886]

So far the deduction still moves on the empirical level. When Kant,
however, proceeds to insist[887] that this empirical postulate itself
rests upon a transcendental condition, the argument is thrown into
complete confusion, and the reader is bewildered by the sudden
anticipation of one of the most difficult and subtle conclusions of the
objective deduction. The same confusion is also caused throughout these
sections as a whole by Kant’s description of the various syntheses as
being transcendental.[888] They cannot properly be so described. The
concepts referred to as unifying the syntheses, and the
self-consciousness which is proved to condition the syntheses, are all
empirical. They present themselves in concrete form, and presuppose
characteristics due to the special contingent nature of the given
manifold; as Kant states in so many words in the second edition.

     “Whether I can become _empirically_ conscious of the manifold as
     simultaneous or as successive depends on circumstances or empirical
     conditions. The empirical unity of consciousness, through
     association of representations, therefore itself relates to an
     appearance, and is wholly contingent.”[889]

The argument in these preliminary stages of the subjective deduction, in
so far as it is employed to yield proof that all consciousness involves
the unity of concepts and the unity of self-consciousness, is
independent of any reference to the categories, and consequently to
transcendental conditions. In accordance with the plan of exposition
above stated, we may now pass to the objective deduction.


OBJECTIVE DEDUCTION AS GIVEN IN THE FIRST EDITION

The transition from the preliminary stages of the subjective deduction
to the objective deduction may be made by further analysis either of the
objective unity of empirical concepts or of the subjective unity of
empirical self-consciousness. It is the former line which the argument
of the first edition follows. Kant is asking what is meant by an object
corresponding to our representations,[890] and answers by his objective
deduction. He substitutes the empirical for the transcendental
object,[891] and in so doing propounds one of the central and most
revolutionary tenets of the Critical philosophy. Existence takes a
threefold, not a merely dual form. Besides representations and things in
themselves, there exist the objects of our representations--the extended
world of ordinary experience and of science. Such a threefold
distinction is prefigured in the Leibnizian metaphysics, and is more or
less native to every philosophy that is genuinely speculative. Kant
himself claims Plato as his philosophical progenitor. The originality is
not in the bare thesis, but in the fruitful, tenacious, and consistent
manner in which it is developed through detailed analysis of our actual
experience.

In its first stages the argument largely coincides with the argument of
the paragraphs which deal with the transcendental object. When we
examine the objective, we find that the primary characteristic
distinguishing it from the subjective is that it lays a compulsion upon
our minds, constraining us to think about it in a certain way. By an
object is meant something which will not allow us to think at haphazard.
Cinnabar is an object which constrains us to think it as heavy and red.
An object is thus the external source of a necessity to which our
thinking has to conform. The two arguments first begin to diverge when
Kant sets himself to demonstrate that our consciousness of this external
necessity is made possible by categories which originate from within.

For this conclusion Kant prepares the way by an analysis of the second
main characteristic constitutive of an object, viz. its unity. This
unity is of a twofold nature, involving either the category of substance
and attribute or the category of cause and effect. The two categories
are ultimately inseparable, but lead us to conceive the object in two
distinct modes. When we interpret an object through the _a priori_
concept of substance and attribute, we assert that all the contents of
our perceptions of it are capable of being regarded as qualities of one
and the same identical substance. No one of its qualities can be
incongruent with any other, and all of them together, in their unity,
must be expressive of its substantial nature.

The causal interpretation of the object is, however, the more important,
and is that which is chiefly emphasised by Kant. It is, indeed, simply a
further and more adequate mode of expressing the substantial unity of
the object. All the qualities must be causally bound up with one another
in such a way that the nature of each is determined by the nature of all
the others, and that if any one quality be changed all the others must
undergo corresponding alterations. Viewed in this manner, in terms of
the category of causality, an object signifies a necessitated
combination of interconnected qualities or effects. But since no such
form of _necessitation_ can be revealed in the manifold of sense, our
_consciousness_ of compulsion cannot originate from without, and must be
due to those _a priori_ forms which, though having their source within,
control and direct our interpretation of the given. Though the objective
compulsion is not itself due to the mind, our _consciousness_ of it has
this mental _a priori_ source. The concept of an object consists in the
thought of a manifold so determined in its specific order and groupings
as to be interpretable in terms of the categories of substance and
causality.

But the problem of the deduction proper is not yet raised. On the one
hand, Kant has defined what the concept of the objective must be taken
as involving, and on the other, has pointed out that since the given as
given is an unconnected manifold, any categories through which it may be
interpreted must be of independent origin; but it still remains to be
proved that the above is a valid as well as a possible mode of
construing the given appearances. The categories, as _a priori_
concepts, originate from within. By what right may we assert that they
not only relate to an object, but even constitute the very concept of
it? Are appearances legitimately interpretable in any such manner? It
was, we may believe, in the process of answering this question that Kant
came to realise that the objects of our representations must no longer
be regarded as things in themselves. For, as he finds, a solution is
possible only on the further assumption that the mind is legislating
merely for the world of sense-experience, and is making no assertion in
regard to the absolutely and independently real. Kant’s method of proof
is the transcendental, _i.e._ he seeks to demonstrate that this
interpretation of the given is indispensably necessary as being a _sine
qua non_ of its possible apprehension. This is achieved by means of the
conclusion already established through the preliminary steps of the
subjective deduction, namely, that all consciousness involves
self-consciousness. Kant’s proof of the objective validity of the
categories consists in showing that only by means of the interpretation
of appearances as _empirically_ objective is self-consciousness possible
at all.

The self-consciousness of the subjective deduction, in the preliminary
form above stated, is, however, itself empirical. Kant, developing on
more strictly Critical lines the argument which had accompanied his
earlier doctrine of the transcendental object, now proceeds to maintain
in what is at once the most fruitful and the most misleading of his
tenets, that the ultimate ground of the possibility of consciousness and
therefore also of empirical self-consciousness is the transcendental
unity of apperception. Such apperception, to use Kant’s ambiguous
phraseology, precedes experience as its _a priori_ condition. The
interpretation of given appearances through _a priori_ categories is a
necessity of consciousness because it is a condition of
self-consciousness; and it is a condition of self-consciousness because
it alone will account for the transcendental apperception upon which all
empirical self-consciousness ultimately depends.

One chief reason why Kant’s deduction is found so baffling and illusive
is that it rests upon an interpretation of the unity of apperception
which is very definitely drawn, but to which Kant himself gives only the
briefest and most condensed expression. I shall therefore take the
liberty of restating it in more explicit terms. The true or
transcendental self has no content of its own through which it can gain
knowledge of itself. It is mere identity, I am I. In other words,
self-consciousness is a mere _form_ through which contents that never
themselves constitute the self are yet apprehended as being objects to
the self. Thus though the self in being conscious of time or duration
must be conscious of itself as _identical_ throughout the succession of
its experiences, that identity can never be discovered in those
experiences; it can only be thought as a condition of them. The
continuity of memory, for instance, is not a possible substitute for
transcendental apperception. As the subjective deduction demonstrates,
self-consciousness conditions memory, and cannot therefore be reduced to
or be generated by it.[892] When, however, such considerations are
allowed their due weight, the necessity of postulating a transcendental
unity becomes only the more evident. Though it can never itself be found
among appearances, it is an interpretation which we are none the less
compelled to give to appearances.

To summarise before proceeding. We have obtained two important
conclusions: first, that all consciousness involves self-consciousness;
and secondly, that self-consciousness is a mere form, in terms of which
contents that do not constitute the self are apprehended as existing for
the self. The first leads up to the second, and the second is equivalent
to the assertion that there can be no such thing as a pure
self-consciousness, _i.e._ a consciousness in which the self is aware of
itself and of nothing but itself. Self-consciousness, to be possible at
all, must at the same time be a consciousness of something that is
not-self. Only one further step is now required for the completion of
the deduction, namely, proof that this not-self, consciousness of which
is necessary to the possibility of self-consciousness, must consist in
empirical objects apprehended in terms of the categories. For proof Kant
again appeals to the indispensableness of apperception. As no intuitions
can enter consciousness which are not capable of being related to the
self, they must be so related to one another that, notwithstanding their
variety and diversity, the self can still be conscious of itself as
identical throughout them all. In other words, no intuition can be
related to the self that is incapable of being combined together with
all the other intuitions to form a unitary consciousness. I may here
quote from the text of the second edition:[893]

     “...only in so far as I can grasp the manifold of the
     representations in one consciousness, do I call them one and all
     mine. For otherwise I should have as many-coloured and diverse a
     self as I have representations of which I am conscious to myself.”

Or as it is stated in the first edition:[894]

     “We are _a priori_ aware of the complete identity of the self in
     respect of all representations which belong to our knowledge ... as
     a necessary condition of the possibility of all representations.”

These are the considerations which lead Kant to entitle the unity of
apperception _transcendental_. He so names it for the reason that,
though it is not itself _a priori_ in the manner of the categories, we
are yet enabled by its means to demonstrate that the unity which is
necessary for possible experience can be securely counted upon in the
manifold of all possible representations, and because (as he believed)
it also enables us to prove that the forms of such unity are the
categories of the understanding.

To the argument supporting this last conclusion Kant does not give the
attention which its importance would seem to deserve. He points out that
as the given is an unconnected manifold, its unity can be obtained only
by synthesis, and that such synthesis must conform to the conditions
prescribed by the unity of apperception. That these conditions coincide
with the categories he does not, however, attempt to prove. He
apparently believes that this has been already established in the
metaphysical deduction.[895] The forms of unity demanded by
apperception, he feels justified in assuming, are the categories. They
may be regarded as expressing the minimum of unity necessary to the
possibility of self-consciousness. If sensations cannot be interpreted
as the diverse attributes of unitary substances, if events cannot be
viewed as arising out of one another, if the entire world in space
cannot be conceived as a system of existences reciprocally
interdependent, all unity must vanish from experience, and apperception
will be utterly impossible.[896]

The successive steps of the total argument of the deduction, as given in
the first edition, are therefore as follows: Consciousness of time
involves empirical self-consciousness; empirical self-consciousness is
conditioned by a transcendental self-consciousness; and such
transcendental self-consciousness is itself, in turn, conditioned by
consciousness of objects. The argument thus completed becomes the proof
of mutual interdependence. Self-consciousness and consciousness of
objects, as polar opposites, mutually condition one another. Only
through consciousness of both simultaneously can consciousness of either
be attained. Only in and through reference to an object can an idea be
related to a self, and so be accompanied by that self-consciousness
which conditions recognition, and through recognition all the varying
forms in which our consciousness can occur. From the point of view,
however, of a Critical enquiry apperception is the more important of the
two forms of consciousness. For though each is the _causa existendi_ of
the other, self-consciousness has the unique distinction of being the
_causa cognoscendi_ of the objective and _a priori_ validity of the
forms of understanding.

     “The synthetic proposition, that all the variety of empirical
     consciousness must be combined in a single self-consciousness, is
     the absolutely first and synthetic principle of our thought in
     general.”[897]

We may at this point consider Kant’s doctrine of “objective affinity.”
It excellently enforces the main thesis which he is professing to
establish, namely, that the conditions of _unitary_ consciousness are
the conditions of _all_ consciousness. The language, however, in which
the doctrine is expounded is extremely obscure and difficult; and before
commenting upon Kant’s own methods of statement, it seems advisable to
paraphrase the argument in a somewhat free manner, and also to defer
consideration of the transcendental psychology which Kant has employed
in its exposition.[898] Association can subsist only between ideas, both
of which have occurred within the same conscious field. Now the
fundamental characteristic of consciousness, the very condition of its
existing at all, is its unity; and until this has been recognised, there
can be no understanding of the associative connection which arises under
the conditions which consciousness supplies. To attempt to explain the
unity of consciousness through the mechanism of association is to
explain an agency in terms of certain of its own effects. It is to
explain the fundamental in terms of the derivative, the conditions in
terms of what they have themselves made possible. Kant’s argument is
therefore as follows. Ideas do not become associated merely by
co-existing. They must occur together in a unitary consciousness; and
among the conditions necessary to the possibility of association are
therefore the conditions of the possibility of experience. Association
is transcendentally grounded. So far from accounting for the unity of
consciousness, it presupposes the latter as determining the conditions
under which alone it can come into play.

     “...how, I ask, is association itself possible?... On my principles
     the thorough-going affinity of appearances is easily explicable.
     All possible appearances belong as representations to the totality
     of a possible self-consciousness. But as this self-consciousness is
     a transcendental representation, numerical identity is inseparable
     from it and is _a priori_ certain. For nothing can come to our
     knowledge save in terms of this original apperception. Now, since
     this identity must necessarily enter into the synthesis of all the
     manifold of appearances, so far as the synthesis is to yield
     empirical knowledge, the appearances are subject to _a priori_
     conditions, with which the synthesis of their apprehension must be
     in complete accordance.... Thus all appearances stand in a
     thorough-going connection according to necessary laws, and
     therefore in a transcendental affinity of which the empirical is a
     mere consequence.”[899]

In other words, representations must exist in consciousness before they
can become associated; and they can exist in consciousness only if they
are consciously apprehended. But in order to be consciously apprehended,
they must conform to the transcendental conditions upon which all
consciousness rests; and in being thus apprehended they are set in
thoroughgoing unity to one another and to the self. They are apprehended
as belonging to an objective order or unity which is the correlate of
the unity of self-consciousness. This is what Kant entitles their
objective affinity; it is what conditions and makes possible their
associative or empirical connection.

This main point is very definitely stated in A 101.

     “If we can show that even our purest _a priori_ intuitions yield no
     knowledge, save in so far as they contain such a connection of the
     manifold as will make possible a thoroughgoing synthesis of
     reproduction, this synthesis of the imagination” [which acts
     through the machinery of association] “must be grounded, prior to
     all experience, on _a priori_ principles, and since experience
     necessarily presupposes that appearances can be reproduced, we
     shall have to assume a pure transcendental synthesis of the
     imagination” [_i.e._ such synthesis as is involved in the unity of
     consciousness] “as conditioning even the possibility of all
     experience.”[900]

In A 121-2 Kant expresses his position in a more ambiguous manner. He
may seem to the reader merely to be arguing that a certain minimum of
regularity is necessary in order that representations may be associated,
and experience may be possible.[901] But the general tenor of the
passage as a whole, and especially its concluding sentences, enforce the
stronger, more consistent, thesis.

     ”[The] subjective and empirical ground of reproduction according to
     rules is named the association of representations. If this unity of
     association did not also have an objective ground, which makes it
     impossible that appearances should be apprehended by the
     imagination except under the condition of a possible synthetic
     unity of this apprehension, it would be entirely accidental that
     appearances should fit into a connected whole of human knowledge.
     For even though we had the power of associating perceptions, it
     would remain entirely undetermined and accidental whether they
     would themselves be associable; and should they not be associable,
     there might exist a multitude of perceptions, and indeed an entire
     sensibility, in which much empirical consciousness would arise in
     my mind, but in a state of separation, and without belonging to one
     consciousness of myself. That, however, is impossible. For only in
     so far as I ascribe all perceptions to one consciousness (original
     apperception), can I say in all perceptions that I am conscious of
     them. There must therefore be an objective ground (that is, one
     that can be recognised _a priori_, antecedently to all empirical
     laws of the imagination) upon which may rest the possibility, nay
     the necessity, of a law that extends to all appearances....”

Kant is not merely asserting that the associableness of ideas, and the
regularity of connection which that implies, must be postulated as a
condition of experience. That would be a mere begging of the issue; the
correctness of the postulate would not be independently proved. Kant is
really maintaining the much more important thesis, that the unity of
experience, _i.e._ of consciousness, is what makes association possible
at all. And since consciousness must be unitary in order to exist, there
cannot be any empirical consciousness in which the conditions of
association, and therefore of reproduction, are not to be found.

A further misunderstanding is apt to be caused by Kant’s statement that
associative affinity rests upon objective affinity. This seems to imply,
in the same manner as the passage which we have just considered, that
instead of proving that appearances are subject to law and order, he is
merely postulating that an abiding ground of such regularity must exist
in the noumenal conditions of the sense manifold. But he himself again
supplies the needful correction.

     “This [objective ground of all association of appearances] can
     nowhere be found, except in the principle of the unity of
     apperception in respect of all forms of knowledge which can belong
     to me. In accordance with this principle all appearances must so
     enter the mind, or be so apprehended, that they fit together to
     constitute the unity of apperception. This would be impossible
     without synthetic unity in their connection, and that unity is
     therefore also objectively necessary. The objective unity of all
     empirical consciousness in one consciousness, that of original
     apperception, is therefore the necessary condition of all (even of
     all _possible_) perception; and the affinity of all appearances,
     near or remote, is a necessary consequence of a synthesis in
     imagination which is grounded _a priori_ on rules.”[902]

The fundamental characteristic of consciousness is the unified form in
which alone it can exist; only when this unity is recognised as
indispensably necessary, and therefore as invariably present whenever
consciousness exists at all, can the inter-relations of the contents of
consciousness be properly defined.

If this main contention of the Critical teaching be accepted, Hume’s
associationist standpoint is no longer tenable. Association cannot be
taken to be an ultimate and inexplicable property of our mental states.
Nor is it a property which can be regarded as belonging to presentations
viewed as so many independent existences. It is conditioned by the unity
of consciousness, and therefore rests upon the “transcendental”
conditions which Critical analysis reveals. Since the unity of
consciousness conditions association, it cannot be explained as the
outcome and product of the mechanism of association.

In restating the objective deduction in the second edition, Kant has
omitted all reference to this doctrine of objective affinity. His
reasons for this omission were probably twofold. In the first place, it
has been expounded in terms of a transcendental psychology, which, as we
shall find, is conjectural in character. And secondly, the phrase
“objective affinity” is, as I have already pointed out, decidedly
misleading. It seems to imply that Kant is postulating, without
independent proof, that noumenal conditions must be such as to supply an
orderly manifold of sense data. But though the doctrine of objective
affinity is eliminated, its place is to some extent taken[903] by the
proof that all apprehension is an act of judgment and therefore involves
factors which cannot be reduced to, or explained in terms of,
association.

There are a number of points in the deduction of the first edition which
call for further explanatory and critical comment. The first of these
concerns the somewhat misleading character of the term _a priori_ as
applied to the categories. It carries with it rationalistic associations
to which the Critical standpoint, properly understood, yields no
support. The categories are for Kant of merely _de facto_ nature. They
have no intrinsic validity. They are proved only as being the
indispensable conditions of what is before the mind as brute fact,
namely, conscious experience. By the _a priori_ is meant merely those
_relational_ factors which are required to supplement the given manifold
in order to constitute our actual consciousness. And, as Kant is careful
to point out, the experience, as conditions of which their validity is
thus established, is of a highly specific character, resting upon
synthesis of a manifold given in space and time. That is to say, their
indispensableness is proved only for a consciousness which in these
fundamental respects is constituted like our own.[904] And secondly, the
validity of the _a priori_ categories, even in our human thinking, is
established only in reference to that empirical world which is
constructed out of the given manifold in terms of the intuitive forms,
space and time. Their validity is a merely phenomenal validity. They are
valid of appearances, but not of things in themselves. The _a priori_ is
thus doubly _de facto_: first as a condition of brute fact, namely, the
actuality of our human consciousness; and secondly, as conditioning a
consciousness whose knowledge is limited to appearances. It is a
relative, not an absolute _a priori_. Acceptance of it does not,
therefore, commit us to rationalism in the ordinary meaning of that
term. Its credentials are conferred upon it by what is mere fact; it
does not represent an order superior to the actual and legislative for
it. In other words, it is Critical, not Leibnizian in character. No
transcendent metaphysics can be based upon it. In formulating this
doctrine of the _a priori_ as yielding objective insight and yet as
limited in the sphere of its application, the _Critique of Pure Reason_
marks an epoch in the history of scepticism, no less than in the
development of Idealist teaching.

There is one important link in the deduction, as above given, which is
hardly calculated to support the conclusions that depend upon it. Kant,
as we have already noted,[905] asserts that the categories express the
minimum of unity necessary for the possibility of apperception. A
contention so essential to the argument calls for the most careful
scrutiny and a meticulous exactitude of proof. As a matter of fact, such
proof is not to be found in any part of the deductions, whether of the
first or of the second editions. It is attempted only in the later
sections on the _Principles of Understanding_, and even there it is
developed, in any really satisfactory fashion, only in regard to the
categories of causality and reciprocity.[906] This proof, however, as
there given, is an argument which in originality, subtlety and force
goes far to atone for all shortcomings. It completes the objective
deduction by developing in masterly fashion (in spite of the diffuse and
ill-arranged character of the text) the central contention for which the
deduction stands. But in the transcendental deduction itself, we find
only such an argument--if it may be called an argument--as follows from
the identification of apperception with understanding.

     “The unity of apperception, in relation to the synthesis of
     imagination, is the understanding.... In understanding there are
     pure _a priori_ forms of knowledge which contain the necessary
     unity of pure synthesis of imagination in respect of all possible
     appearances. But these are the categories, _i.e._ pure concepts of
     understanding.”[907]

The point is again merely assumed in A 125-6. So also in A 126:

     “Although through experience we learn many laws, these are only
     special determinations of still higher laws, of which the highest,
     under which all others stand, originate _a priori_ in the
     understanding itself....”[908]

Again in A 129 it is argued that as we prescribe _a priori_ rules to
which all experience must conform, those rules cannot be derived from
experience, but must precede and condition it, and can do so only as
originating from ourselves (_aus uns selbst_).

     ”[They] precede all knowledge of the object as [their] intellectual
     form, and constitute a formal _a priori_ knowledge of all objects
     in so far as they are thought (categories).”

But this is only to repeat that such forms of unity as are necessary to
self-consciousness must be realised in all synthesis. It is no
sufficient proof that those forms of relation coincide with the
categories. As we shall find in considering the deduction of the second
edition, Kant to some extent came to recognise the existence of this gap
in his argument and sought to supply the missing steps. But his method
of so doing still ultimately consists in an appeal to the results of the
metaphysical deduction, and therefore rests upon his untenable belief in
the adequacy of formal logic. It fails to obviate the objection in any
satisfactory manner.

As regards the negative aspect of the conclusion reached--that the
validity of the categories is established only for appearances--Kant
maintains that this is a necessary corollary of their validity being _a
priori_. That things in themselves must conform to the conditions
demanded by the nature of our self-consciousness is altogether
impossible of proof. Even granting, what is indeed quite possible, that
things in themselves embody the pure forms of understanding, we still
cannot have any ground for maintaining that they must do so of necessity
and will be found to do so universally. For even if we could directly
experience things in themselves, and apprehend them as conforming to the
categories, such conformity would still be known only as contingent. But
when it is recognised that nature consists for us of nothing but
appearances, existing only in the mode in which they are experienced,
and therefore as necessarily conforming to the conditions under which
experience is alone possible, the paradoxical aspect of the apriority
ascribed to the categories at once vanishes. Proof of their _a priori_
validity presupposes the phenomenal character of the objects to which
they apply. They can be proved to be universal and necessarily valid of
objects only in so far as it can be shown that they have antecedently
conditioned and constituted them. The sole sufficient reason for
asserting them to be universally valid throughout experience is that
they are indispensably necessary for rendering it possible.[909] The
transcendental method of proof, _i.e._ proof by reference to the very
possibility of experience, is for this reason, as Kant so justly
emphasises, the sole type of argument capable of fulfilling the demands
which have to be met. It presupposes, and itself enforces, the truth of
the fundamental Critical distinction between appearances and things in
themselves.

Kant entitles the unity of apperception _original_
(_ursprünglich_);[910] and we may now consider how far and in what sense
this title is applicable.[911] _From the point of view of method_ there
is the same justification for employing the term ‘original’ as for
entitling the unity of apperception transcendental.[912]
Self-consciousness is more fundamental or original than consciousness of
objects, in so far as[913] it is only from the subjective standpoint
which it represents that the objective deduction can demonstrate the
necessity of synthesis, and the empirical validity of the pure forms of
understanding. It is as a condition of the possibility of
self-consciousness that the objective employment of the categories is
proved to be legitimate. _In the development of the deduction_
self-consciousness is, therefore, more original than consciousness of
objects. Kant’s employment of the term is, however, extremely
misleading. For it would seem to imply that the self has been proved to
be original or ultimate in an ontological sense, as if it preceded
experience, and through its antecedent reality rendered objective
experience possible of achievement. Such a view is undoubtedly
reinforced by Kant’s transformation of apperception into a faculty--_das
Radicalvermögen aller unsrer Erkenntniss_[914]--and his consequent
identification of it with the understanding.[915] It then seems as if he
were maintaining that the transcendental ego is ultimate and is
independent of all conditions, and that to its synthetic activities the
various forms of objective consciousness are due.[916]

This unfortunate phraseology is directly traceable to the spiritualistic
or Leibnizian character of Kant’s earlier standpoint. In the
_Dissertation_ the self is viewed as an ultimate and unconditioned
existence, antecedent to experience and creatively generative of it. We
have already noted that a somewhat similar view is presented in the
_Critique_ in those paragraphs which Vaihinger identifies as embodying
the earliest stage in the development of the argument of the deduction.
The self is there described as coming to consciousness of its permanence
through reflection upon the constancy of its own synthetic activities.
Our consciousness of a transcendental object, and even the possibility
of the empirical concepts through which such consciousness is, in these
paragraphs, supposed to be mediated, are traced to this same source. To
the last this initial excess of emphasis upon the unity of apperception
remained characteristic of Kant’s Critical teaching; and though in the
later statements of his theory, its powers and prerogatives were very
greatly diminished, it still continued to play a somewhat exaggerated
rôle. The early spiritualistic views were embodied in a terminology
which he continued to employ; and unless the altered meaning of his
terms is recognised and allowed for, misunderstanding is bound to
result. The terms, having been forged under the influence of the older
views, are but ill adapted to the newer teaching which they are employed
to formulate.

There was also a second influence at work. When Kant was constrained in
the light of his new and unexpected results to recognise his older views
as lacking in theoretical justification, he still held to them in his
own personal thinking. For there is ample evidence that they continued
to represent his _Privatmeinungen_.[917]

Only, therefore, when these misleading influences, verbal, expository,
and personal, are discounted, do the results of the deduction appear in
their true proportions. Kant’s Critical philosophy does not profess to
prove that it is self-consciousness, or apperception, or a
transcendental ego, or anything describable in kindred terms, which
ultimately renders experience possible. The most that we can
legitimately postulate, as noumenally conditioning experience, are
“syntheses” (themselves, in their generative character, not
definable)[918] in accordance with the categories. For only upon the
completion of such syntheses do consciousness of self and consciousness
of objects come to exist. Consciousness of objects does, indeed,
according to the argument of the deduction, involve consciousness of
self; self-consciousness is the form of all consciousness. But, by the
same argument, it is equally true that only in and through
consciousness of objects is any self-consciousness possible at all.
Consciousness of self and consciousness of objects _mutually_ condition
one another. Only through consciousness of both simultaneously can
consciousness of either be attained. Self-consciousness is not
demonstrably in itself any more ultimate or original than is
consciousness of objects. Both alike are forms of experience which are
conditioned in complex ways. Upon the question as to whether or not
there is any such thing as abiding personality, the transcendental
deduction casts no direct light. Indeed consciousness of self, as the
more inclusive and complex form of awareness, may perhaps be regarded as
pointing to a greater variety of contributory and generative conditions.

Unfortunately Kant, for the reasons just stated, has not sufficiently
emphasised this more negative, or rather noncommittal, aspect of the
results of the deduction. But when later in the chapter on the
_Paralogisms_ he is brought face to face with the issue, and has
occasion to pronounce upon the question, he speaks with no uncertain
voice. In the theoretical sphere there is, he declares, no sufficient
proof of the spirituality, or unitary and ultimate character, of the
self. Like everything else the unity of apperception must be noumenally
conditioned, but it cannot be shown that in itself, _as
self-consciousness or apperception_, it represents any noumenal reality.
It may be a resultant, resting upon, and due to, a complexity of
generative conditions; and these conditions may be fundamentally
different in character from itself. They may, for all that we can prove
to the contrary, be of a non-conscious and non-personal nature. There is
nothing in our cognitive experience, and no result of the Critical
analysis of it, which is inconsistent with such a possibility.[919]
Those commentators, such as Cohen, Caird, and Watson, who more or less
follow Hegel in his criticism of Kant’s procedure, give an
interpretation of the transcendental deduction which makes it
inconsistent with the sceptical conclusions which the _Critique_ as a
whole is made by its author to support. Unbiassed study of the
_Analytic_, even if taken by itself in independence of the _Dialectic_,
does not favour such a view. The argument of the transcendental
deduction itself justifies no more than Kant is willing to allow in his
discussion of the nature of the self in the section on the
_Paralogisms_. It may, indeed, as Caird has so forcibly shown in his
massive work upon the Critical philosophy, be developed upon Hegelian
lines, but only through a process of essential reconstruction which
departs very far from many of Kant’s most cherished tenets, and which
does so in a spirit that radically conflicts with that which dominates
the _Critique_ as a whole.


THE LATER STAGES OF THE SUBJECTIVE DEDUCTION

The reader will have noted that several of the factors in Kant’s
exposition have so far been entirely ignored. The time has now come for
reckoning with them. They constitute, in my view, the later stages of
the subjective deduction. That is to say, they refer to the
transcendental generative powers which Kant, _on the strength of the
results obtained in the more objective enquiry_, feels justified in
postulating. Separate consideration of them tends to clearness of
statement. Kant’s constant alternation between the logical and the
dynamical standpoints is one of the many causes of the obscurity in his
argument. In this connection we shall also find opportunity to discuss
the fundamental conflict, to which I have already had occasion to refer,
between the subjectivist and the phenomenalist modes of developing the
Critical standpoint.

The conclusions arrived at in the objective deduction compelled Kant to
revise his previous psychological views. Hitherto he had held to the
Leibnizian theory that _a priori_ concepts are obtained by reflection
upon the mind’s native and fundamental modes of action. In the
_Dissertation_ he carefully distinguishes between the _logical_ and the
_real_ employment of the understanding. Through the former empirical
concepts are derived from concrete experience. Through the latter pure
concepts are creatively generated. Logical and real thinking agree,
however, Kant there argues, in being activities of the _conscious_ mind.
Both can be apprehended and adequately determined through the revealing
power of reflective consciousness. Such a standpoint is no longer
tenable for Kant. Now that he has shown that the consciousness of self
and the consciousness of objects mutually condition one another, and
that until both are attained neither is possible, he can no longer
regard the mind as even possibly conscious of the activities whereby
experience is brought about. The activities generative of consciousness
have to be recognised as themselves falling outside it. Not even in its
penumbra, through some vague form of apprehension, can they be detected.
Only the finished products of such activities, not the activities
themselves, can be presented to consciousness; and only by general
reasoning, inferential of agencies that lie outside the conscious
field, can we hope to determine them.

Now Kant appears to have been unwilling to regard the ‘understanding’ as
ever unconscious of its activities. Why he was unwilling, it does not
seem possible to explain; at most his rationalist leanings and Wolffian
training may be cited as contributing causes. To the end he continued to
speak of the understanding as the faculty whereby the _a priori_ is
brought to consciousness. In order to develop the distinctions demanded
by the new Critical attitude, he had therefore to introduce a new
faculty, capable of taking over the activities which have to be
recognised as non-conscious. For this purpose he selected the
imagination, giving to it the special title, _productive_ imagination.
The empirical reproductive processes hitherto alone recognised by
psychologists are not, he declares, exhaustive of the nature of the
imagination. It is also capable of _transcendental_ activity, and upon
this the “objective affinity” of appearances and the resulting
possibility of their empirical apprehension is made to rest. The
productive imagination is also viewed as rendering possible the
understanding, that is, the conscious apprehension of the _a priori_ as
an element embedded in objective experience. Such apprehension is
possible because in the pre-conscious elaboration of the given manifold
the productive imagination has conformed to those _a priori_ principles
which the understanding demands for the possibility of its own exercise
in conscious apprehension. Productive imagination acts in the manner
required to yield experiences which are capable of relation to the unity
of self-consciousness, _i.e._ of being found to conform to the unity of
the categories. Why it should act in this manner cannot be explained;
but it is none the less, on Critical principles, a legitimate
assumption, since only in so far as it does so can experience, which _de
facto_ exists, be possible in any form. As a condition _sine qua non_ of
actual and possible experience, the existence of such a faculty is, Kant
argues, a legitimate inference from the results of the transcendental
deduction.

Though Kant’s insistence upon the conscious character of understanding
compels him to distinguish between it and the imagination, he has also
to recognise their kinship. If imagination can never act save in
conformity with the _a priori_ forms of understanding, some reason must
exist for their harmony. This twofold necessity of at once
distinguishing and connecting them is the cause of the hesitating and
extremely variable account which in both editions of the _Critique_ is
given of their relation. In several passages the understanding is
spoken of as simply imagination which has attained to consciousness of
its activities.[920] Elsewhere he explicitly states that they are
distinct and separate. From this second point of view Kant regards
imagination as mediating between sense and understanding, and, though
reducible to neither, akin to both.

Only on one point is Kant clear and definite, namely, that it is to
productive imagination that the _generation_ of unified experience is
primarily due. In it something of the fruitful and inexhaustible
character of noumenal reality is traceable. Doubtless one chief reason
for his choice of the title imagination is the creative character which
in popular thought has always been regarded as its essential feature. As
Kant, speaking of schematism, which is a process executed by the
imagination, states in A 141: “This schematism ... is an _art_ (_Kunst_)
concealed in the depths of the human soul.”[921] This description may
perhaps be interpreted in the light of Kant’s account of the creative
character of artistic genius in the _Critique of Judgment_, for there
also imagination figures as the truly originative or creative faculty of
the human spirit. To its noumenal character we may also trace its
capacity of combining those factors of sense and understanding which in
the realm of appearance remain persistently opposed.[922] Imagination
differs from the understanding chiefly in that it is at once more
comprehensive and also more truly creative. It supplements the
functional forms with a sensuous content, and applies them dynamically
in the generation of experience.

The schemata, which the productive imagination is supposed to construct,
are those generalised forms of temporal and spatial existence in which
alone the unity of experience necessary to apperception can be realised.
They are

     “pure (without admixture of anything empirical), and yet are in one
     aspect intellectual and in another sensuous.”[923]

Or as Kant describes the process in the chapter before us:[924]

     “We name the synthesis of the manifold in imagination
     transcendental, if without distinction of intuitions it is directed
     exclusively to the _a priori_ combination of the manifold; and the
     unity of this synthesis is entitled transcendental, if it is
     represented as _a priori_ necessary in relation to the original
     unity of apperception. As this unity of apperception conditions
     the possibility of all knowledge, the transcendental unity of the
     synthesis of imagination is the pure form of all possible
     knowledge. Hence, through it all objects of possible experience
     must be represented _a priori_.”

The schemata, thus transcendentally generated, are represented by Kant
as limiting and controlling the empirical processes of apprehension,
reproduction, and recognition. As no experience is attainable save in
terms of the schemata, they enable us to determine, on _a priori_
grounds, the degree of constancy and regularity that can be securely
counted upon in all experience. This is Kant’s psychological explanation
of what he has entitled “objective affinity.”[925] The empirical ground
of reproduction is the association of ideas; its transcendental ground
is an objective affinity which is “a necessary consequence of a
synthesis in imagination, grounded _a priori_ on rules.”[926]

     ”[The] subjective and empirical ground of reproduction according to
     rules is named the association of representations. If this unity of
     association did not also have an objective ground, which makes it
     impossible that appearances should be apprehended by the
     imagination except under the condition of a possible synthetic
     unity of this apprehension, it would be entirely accidental that
     appearances should fit into a connected whole of human
     knowledge.... There might exist a multitude of perceptions, and
     indeed an entire sensibility, in which much empirical consciousness
     would arise in my mind, but in a state of separation, and without
     belonging to one consciousness of myself. That, however, is
     impossible.” [As the subjective and objective deductions have
     demonstrated, where there is no self-consciousness there is no
     consciousness of any kind.] “There must therefore be an objective
     ground (that is, one that can be determined _a priori_,
     antecedently to all empirical laws of the imagination) upon which
     may rest the possibility, nay, the necessity of a law that extends
     to all appearances--the law, namely, that all appearances must be
     regarded as data of the senses which are associable in themselves
     and subject to general rules of universal connection in their
     reproduction. This objective ground of all association of
     appearances I entitle their _affinity_.... The objective unity of
     all empirical consciousness in one consciousness, that of original
     apperception, is the necessary condition of all possible
     perception; and the affinity of all appearances, near or remote, is
     a necessary consequence of a synthesis in imagination which is
     grounded _a priori_ on rules.”[927]

This part of Kant’s teaching is apt to seem more obscure than it is. For
the reader is not unnaturally disinclined to accept it in the very
literal sense in which it is stated. That Kant means, however, exactly
what he says, appears from the further consequence which he himself not
only recognises as necessary, but insists upon as valid. The doctrine of
objective affinity culminates in the conclusion[928] that it is “we
ourselves who introduce into the appearances that order and regularity
which we name nature.” The “we ourselves” refers to the mind in the
transcendental activities of the productive imagination. The conscious
processes of apprehension, reproduction, and recognition necessarily
conform to schemata, non-consciously generated, which express the
combined _a priori_ conditions of intuition and understanding required
for unitary consciousness.

Many points in this strange doctrine call for consideration. It rests,
in the first place, upon the assumption of a hard and fast distinction,
very difficult of acceptance, between transcendental and empirical
activities of the mind. Secondly, Kant’s assertion, that the empirical
manifolds can be relied upon to supply a satisfactory content for the
schemata, calls for more adequate justification than he himself adduces.
It is upon independent reality that the fixity of empirical
co-existences and sequences depends. Is not Kant practically assuming a
pre-established harmony in asserting that as the mind creates the _form_
of nature it can legislate _a priori_ for all possible experience?

As regards the first assumption Kant would seem to have been influenced
by the ambiguities of the term transcendental. It means, as we have
already noted,[929] either the science of the _a priori_, or the _a
priori_ itself, or the conditions which render experience possible. Even
the two latter meanings by no means coincide. The conditions of the
possibility of experience are not in all cases _a priori_. The manifold
of outer sense is as indispensable a precondition of experience as are
the forms of understanding, and yet is not _a priori_ in any valid sense
of that term. It does not, therefore, follow that because the activities
of productive imagination “transcendentally” condition experience, they
must themselves be _a priori_, and must, as Kant also maintains,[930]
deal with a pure _a priori_ manifold. Further, the separation between
transcendental and empirical activities of the mind must defeat the very
purpose for which the productive imagination is postulated, namely, in
order to account for the generation of a complex consciousness in which
no one element can temporally precede any of the others. If the
productive imagination generates only schemata, it will not account for
that complex experience in which consciousness of self and consciousness
of objects are indissolubly united. The introduction of the productive
imagination seems at first sight to promise recognition of the dynamical
aspect of our temporally sequent experience, and of that aspect in which
as appearance it refers us beyond itself to non-experienced conditions.
As employed, however, in the doctrines of schematism and of objective
affinity, the imagination exhibits a formalism hardly less extreme than
that of the understanding whose shortcomings it is supposed to make
good.

In his second assumption Kant, as so often in the _Critique_, is
allowing his old-time rationalistic leanings to influence him in
underestimating the large part which the purely empirical must always
occupy in human experience, and in exaggerating the scope of the
inferences which can be drawn from the presence of the formal,
relational factors. But this is a point which we are not yet in a
position to discuss.[931]

Fortunately, if Vaihinger’s theory be accepted,[932] section A 98-104
enables us to follow the movement of Kant’s mind in the interval between
the formulating of the doctrine of productive imagination and the
publication of the _Critique_. He himself would seem to have recognised
the unsatisfactoriness of dividing up the total conditions of experience
into transcendental activities that issue in schemata, and supplementary
empirical processes which transform them into concrete, specific
consciousness. The alternative theory which he proceeds to propound is
at first sight much more satisfactory. It consists in duplicating each
of the various empirical processes with a transcendental faculty. There
are, he now declares, three transcendental powers--a transcendental
faculty of apprehension, a transcendental faculty of reproduction
(=imagination), and a transcendental faculty of recognition. Thus Kant’s
previous view that transcendental imagination has a special and unique
activity, namely, the productive, altogether different in type from any
of its empirical processes, is now allowed to drop; in place of it Kant
develops the view that the transcendental functions run exactly parallel
with the empirical processes.[933] But though such a position may at
first seem more promising than that which it displaces, it soon reveals
its unsatisfactoriness. The two types of mental activity, transcendental
and empirical, no longer, indeed, fall apart; but the difficulty now
arises of distinguishing in apprehension, reproduction, and recognition
any genuinely transcendental aspect.[934] Apprehension, reproduction,
and recognition are so essentially conscious processes that to view them
as also transcendental does not seem helpful. They contain elements that
are transcendental in the logical sense, but cannot be shown to
presuppose in any analogous fashion mental powers that are
transcendental in the dynamical sense. This is especially evident in
regard to recognition, which is described as being “the _consciousness_
that what we are thinking is the same as what we thought a moment
before.” In dealing with apprehension and reproduction the only real
difference which Kant is able to suggest, as existing between their
transcendental and their empirical activities, is that the former
synthesise the pure _a priori_ manifolds of space and time, and the
latter the contingent manifold of sense. But even this unsatisfactory
distinction he does not attempt to apply in the case of recognition. Nor
can we hold that by the transcendental synthesis of recognition Kant
means transcendental apperception. That is, of course, the suggestion
which at once occurs to the reader. But however possible it might be to
inject such a meaning into kindred passages elsewhere, it cannot be made
to fit the context of this particular section.

Vaihinger’s theory seems to be the only thread which will guide us
through this labyrinth. Kant, on the eve of the publication of the
_Critique_, recognising the unsatisfactoriness of his hard and fast
separation of transcendental from empirical processes, adopted the view
that some form of transcendental activity corresponds to every
fundamental form of empirical activity and _vice versa_. Hastily
developing this theory, he incorporated it into the _Critique_ alongside
his older doctrine. It does not, however, reappear in the _Prolegomena_,
and its teaching is explicitly withdrawn in the second edition of the
_Critique_. Its plausibility had entrapped him into its temporary
adoption, but the defects which it very soon revealed speedily led him
to reject it.

One feature of great significance calls for special notice. The
breakdown of this doctrine of a threefold transcendental synthesis did
not, as might naturally have been expected from what is stated in the
prefaces to the _Critique_ regarding the unessential and seemingly
conjectural character of the subjective deduction, lead Kant to despair
of developing a transcendental psychology. Though in the second edition
he cuts away the sections containing the earlier stages of the
subjective deduction,[935] and in recasting the other sections gives
greater prominence to the more purely logical analyses, the older
doctrine of productive imagination is reinstated in full force,[936] and
is again developed in[937] connection with the doctrine of pure _a
priori_ manifolds. Evidently, therefore, Kant was not disheartened by
the various difficulties which lie in the path of a transcendental
psychology, and it seems reasonable to conclude that there were powerful
reasons inclining him to its retention. I shall now attempt, to the best
of my powers, to explain--the task is a delicate and difficult one--what
we may believe these reasons to have been.[938]


THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN PHENOMENALISM AND SUBJECTIVISM

A wider set of considerations than we have yet taken into account must
be borne in mind if certain broader and really vital implications of
Kant’s enquiry are to be properly viewed. The self has a twofold aspect.
It is at once animal in its conditions and potentially universal in its
powers of apprehension. Though man’s natural existence is that of an
animal organism, he can have consciousness of the spatial world out of
which his organism has arisen, and of the wider periods within which his
transitory existence falls. Ultimately such consciousness would seem to
connect man cognitively with reality as a whole. Now it is to this
universal or absolutist aspect of our consciousness, to its
transcendence of the embodied and separate self, that Kant is seeking to
do justice in his transcendental deductions, especially in his doctrine
of the transcendental unity of apperception. For he views that
apperception as conditioned by, and the correlate of, the consciousness
of objectivity. It involves the consciousness of a single cosmical time
and of a single cosmical space within which all events fall and within
which they form a whole of causally interdependent existences. That is
why he names it the _objective_ unity of apperception. It is that aspect
in which the self correlates with a wider reality, and through which it
stands in fundamental contrast to the merely subjective states and to
the individual conditions of its animal existence. The transcendental
self, so far from being identical with the empirical self, would seem to
be of directly opposite nature. The one would seem to point beyond the
realm of appearance, the other to be in its existence merely natural.
The fact that they are inextricably bound up with one another, and
co-operate in rendering experience possible, only makes the more
indispensable the duty of recognising their differing characters. Even
should they prove to be inseparable aspects of sense-experience, without
metaphysical implications, that would not obviate the necessity of
clearly distinguishing them. The distinction remains, whatever
explanation may be adopted of its speculative or other significance.

Now obviously in so fundamental an enquiry, dealing as it does with the
most complicated and difficult problem in the entire field of
metaphysics, no brief and compendious answer can cover all the various
considerations which are relevant and determining. The problem of the
deduction being what it is, the section dealing with it can hardly fail
to be the most difficult portion of the whole _Critique_. The
conclusions at which it arrives rest not merely upon the argument which
it contains but also upon the results more or less independently reached
in the other sections. The doctrine of the empirical object as
appearance requires for its development the various discussions
contained in the _Aesthetic_, in the sections on _Inner Sense_ and on
the _Refutation of Idealism_, in the chapters on _Phenomena and Noumena_
and on the _Antinomies_. The metaphysical consequences and implications
of Kant’s teaching in regard to the transcendental unity of apperception
are first revealed in the chapter on the _Paralogisms_. The view taken
of productive imagination is expanded in the section on _Schematism_. In
a word, the whole antecedent teaching of the _Critique_ is focussed, and
the entire subsequent development of the Critical doctrine is
anticipated, in this brief chapter.

But there are, of course, additional causes of the difficulty and
obscurity of the argument. One such cause has already been noted,
namely, that the _Critique_ is not a unitary work, developed from a
previously thought-out standpoint, but in large part consists of
manuscripts of very various dates, artificially pieced together by the
addition of connecting links. In no part of the _Critique_ is this so
obvious as in the _Analytic of Concepts_. Until this is recognised all
attempts to interpret the text in any impersonal fashion are doomed to
failure. For this reason I have prefaced our discussion by a statement
of Vaihinger’s analysis. No one who can accept it is any longer in
danger of underestimating this particular cause of the obscurity of
Kant’s deduction.

But the chief reason is one to which I have thus far made only passing
reference, and to which we may now give the attention which its
importance demands, namely, the tentative and experimental character of
Kant’s own final solutions. The arguments of the deduction are only
intelligible if viewed as an expression of the conflicting tendencies to
which Kant’s thought remained subject. He sought to allow due weight to
each of the divergent aspects of the experience which he was analysing,
and in so doing proceeded, as it would seem, simultaneously along the
parallel lines of what appeared to be the possible, alternative methods
of explanation. And to the end these opposing tendencies continued side
by side, to the confusion of those readers who seek for a single unified
teaching, but to the great illumination of those who are looking to
Kant, not for clear-cut or final solutions, but for helpful analysis and
for partial disentanglement of the complicated issues which go to
constitute these baffling problems.

The two chief tendencies which thus conflicted in Kant’s mind may be
named the subjectivist and the phenomenalist respectively. This conflict
remained, so to speak, underground, influencing the argument at every
point, but seldom itself becoming the subject of direct discussion. As
we shall find, it caused Kant to develop a twofold view of inner sense,
of causality, of the object of knowledge, and of the unity of
apperception. One of the few sections in the _Critique_ where it seems
on the point of emerging into clear consciousness is the section, added
in the second edition, on the _Refutation of Idealism_. But this section
owes its origin to polemical causes. It represents a position peculiar
to the maturer portions of the _Analytic_; the rest of the _Critique_ is
not rewritten so as to harmonise with it, or to develop the consequences
which consistent holding to it must involve.

I shall use the term _subjectivism_ (and its equivalent _subjective
idealism_) in the wide sense[939] which makes it applicable to the
teaching of Descartes and Locke, of Leibniz and Wolff, no less than to
that of Berkeley and Hume. A common element in all these philosophies is
the belief that subjective or mental states, “ideas” in the Lockean
sense, are the objects of consciousness, and further are the sole
possible objects of which it can have any direct or immediate awareness.
Knowledge is viewed as a process entirely internal to the individual
mind, and as carrying us further only in virtue of some additional
supervening process, inferential, conjectural, or instinctive. This
subjectivism also tends to combine with a view of consciousness as an
ultimate self-revealing property of a merely individual existence.[940]
For Descartes consciousness is the very essence, both of the mind and of
the self. It is indeed asserted to be exhaustive of the nature of both.
Though the self is described as possessing a faculty of will as well as
a power of thinking, all its activities are taken as being disclosed to
the mind through the revealing power of its fundamental attribute. The
individual mind is thus viewed as an existence in which everything takes
place in the open light of an all-pervasive consciousness. Leibniz, it
is true, taught the existence of subconscious perceptions, and so far
may seem to have anticipated Kant’s recognition of non-conscious
processes; but as formulated by Leibniz that doctrine has the defect
which frequently vitiates its modern counterpart, namely that it
represents the subconscious as analogous in nature to the conscious, and
as differing from it only in the accidental features of intensity and
clearness, or through temporary lack of control over the machinery of
reproductive association. The subconscious, as thus represented, merely
enlarges the private content of the individual mind; it in no respect
transcends it.

The genuinely Critical view of the generative conditions of experience
is radically different from this Leibnizian doctrine of _petites
perceptions_. It connects rather with Leibniz’s mode of conceiving the
origin of _a priori_ concepts. But even that teaching it restates in
such fashion as to free it from subjectivist implications. Leibniz’s
contention that the mind is conscious of its fundamental activities, and
that it is by reflection upon them that it gains all ultimate _a priori_
concepts, is no longer tenable in view of the conclusions established in
the objective deduction. Mental processes, in so far as they are
generative of experience, must fall outside the field of consciousness,
and as activities dynamically creative cannot be of the nature of ideas
or contents. They are not subconscious ideas but non-conscious
processes. They are not the submerged content of experience, but its
conditioning grounds. Their most significant characteristic has still,
however, to be mentioned. They must no longer be interpreted in
subjectivist terms, as originating in the separate existence of an
individual self. In conditioning experience they generate the only self
for which experience can vouch, and consequently, in the absence of full
and independent proof, must not be conceived as individually
circumscribed. The problem of knowledge, properly conceived, is no
longer how consciousness, individually conditioned, can lead us beyond
its own bounds, but what a consciousness, which is at once consciousness
of objects and also consciousness of a self, must imply for its
possibility. Kant thus obtains what is an almost invariable concomitant
of scientific and philosophical advance, namely a more correct and
scientific formulation of the problem to be solved. The older
formulation assumes the truth of the subjectivist standpoint; the
Critical problem, when thus stated, is at least free from preconceptions
of that particular brand. Assumptions which hitherto had been quite
unconsciously held, or else, if reflected upon, had been regarded as
axiomatic and self-evident, are now brought within the field of
investigation. Kant thereby achieves a veritable revolution; and with it
many of the most far-reaching consequences of the Critical teaching are
closely bound up.

This new standpoint, in contrast to _subjective_ idealism, may be named
_Critical_, or to employ the term which Kant himself applies both to his
transcendental deduction and to the unity of apperception, _objective_
idealism. But as the distinction between appearance and reality is no
less fundamental to the Critical attitude, we shall perhaps be less
likely to be misunderstood, or to seem to be identifying Kant’s
standpoint with the very different teaching of Hegel, if by preference
we employ the title _phenomenalism_.

In the transcendental deduction Kant, as above noted, is seeking to do
justice to the universal or absolutist aspect of our consciousness, to
its transcendence of the embodied and separate self. The unity of
apperception is entitled _objective_, because it is regarded as the
counterpart of a single cosmical time and of a single cosmical space
within which all events fall. Its objects are not mental states peculiar
to itself, nor even ideal contents numerically distinct from those in
other minds. It looks out upon a common world of genuinely independent
existence. In developing this position Kant is constrained to revise and
indeed completely to recast his previous views both as to the nature of
the synthetic processes, through which experience is constructed, and of
the given manifold, upon which they are supposed to act. From the
subjectivist point of view the synthetic activities consist of the
various cognitive processes of the individual mind, and the given
manifold consists of the sensations aroused by material bodies acting
upon the special senses. From the objective or phenomenalist standpoint
the synthetic processes are of a noumenal character, and the given
manifold is similarly viewed as being due to noumenal agencies acting,
not upon the sense-organs, which as appearances are themselves
noumenally conditioned, but upon what may be called “outer sense.” These
distinctions may first be made clear.

Sensations, Kant holds, have a twofold origin, noumenal and mechanical.
They are due in the first place to the action of things in themselves
upon the noumenal conditions of the self, and also in the second place
to the action of material bodies upon the sense-organs and the brain. To
take the latter first. Light reflected from objects, and acting on the
retina, gives rise to sensations of colour. For such causal
interrelations there exists, Kant teaches, the same kind of empirical
evidence as for the causal interaction of material bodies.[941] Our
sensational experiences are as truly events in time as are mechanical
happenings in space. In this way, however, we can account only for the
existence of our sensations and for the order in which they make their
appearance in or to consciousness, not for our awareness of them. To
state the point by means of an illustration. The impinging of one
billiard ball upon another accounts causally for the motion which then
appears in the second ball. But no one would dream of asserting that by
itself it accounts for our consciousness of that second motion. We may
contend that in an exactly similar manner, to the same extent, no more
and no less, the action of an object upon the brain accounts only for
the occurrence of a visual sensation as an event in the empirical time
sequence. A sensation just as little as a motion can carry its own
consciousness with it. To regard that as ever possible is ultimately to
endow events in time with the capacity of apprehending objects in space.
In dealing with causal connections in space and time we do not require
to discuss the problem of knowledge proper, namely, how it is possible
to have or acquire knowledge, whether of a motion in space or of a
sensation in time. When we raise that further question we have to adopt
a very different standpoint, and to take into account a much greater
complexity of conditions.

Kant applies this point of view no less rigorously to feelings,
emotions, and desires than to the sensations of the special senses. All
of them, he teaches, are ‘animal’[942] in character. They are one and
all conditioned by, and explicable only in terms of, the particular
constitution of the animal organism. They one and all belong to the
realm of appearance.[943]

The term ‘sensation’ may also, however, be applied in a wider sense to
signify the material of knowledge in so far as it is noumenally
conditioned. Thus viewed, sensations are due, not to the action of
physical stimuli upon the bodily organs, but to the affection by things
in themselves of those factors in the noumenal conditions of the self
which correspond to “sensibility.” Kant is culpably careless in failing
to distinguish those two very different meanings of the phrase ‘given
manifold.’ The language which he employs is thoroughly ambiguous. Just
as he frequently speaks as if the synthetic processes were conscious
activities exerted by the self, so also he frequently uses language
which implies that the manifold upon which these processes act is
identical with the sensations of the special senses. But the sensations
of the bodily senses, even if reducible to it, can at most form only
part of it. The synthetic processes, interpreting the manifold in
accordance with the fixed forms, space, time, and the categories,
generate the spatial world within which objects are apprehended as
causally interacting and as giving rise through their action upon the
sense-organs to the various special sensations as events in time.
Sensations, as mechanically caused, are thus on the same plane as other
appearances. They depend upon the same generating conditions as the
motions which produce them. As minor incidents within a more
comprehensive totality they cannot possibly represent the material out
of which the whole has been constructed. To explain the phenomenal world
as constructed out of the sensations of the special senses is virtually
to equate it with a small selection of its constituent parts. Such
professed explanation also commits the further absurdity of attempting
to account for the origin of the phenomenal world by means of events
which can exist only under the conditions which it itself supplies. The
manifold of the special senses and the primary manifold are radically
distinct. The former is due to material bodies acting upon the material
sense-organs. The latter is the product of noumenal agencies acting upon
“outer sense,” _i.e._ upon those noumenal conditions of the self which
constitute our “sensibility”; it is much more comprehensive than the
former; it must contain the material for all modes of objective
existence, including many that are usually regarded as purely
mental.[944]

To turn, now, to the other aspect of experience. What are the factors
which condition its form? What must we postulate in order to account for
the existence of consciousness and for the unitary form in which alone
it can appear? Kant’s answer is again ambiguous. He fails sufficiently
to insist upon distinctions which yet are absolutely vital to any
genuine understanding of the new and revolutionary positions towards
which he is feeling his way. The synthetic processes which in the
subjective and objective deductions are proved to condition all
experience may be interpreted either as conscious or as non-conscious
activities, and may be ascribed either to the agency of the individual
self or to noumenal conditions which fall outside the realm of possible
definition. Now, though Kant’s own expositions remain thoroughly
ambiguous, the results of the Critical enquiry would seem--at least so
long as the fundamental distinction between matter and form is held to
and the temporally sequent aspect of experience is kept in view--to be
decisive in favour of the latter alternative in each case. The synthetic
processes must take place and complete themselves before any
consciousness can exist at all. And as they thus precondition
consciousness, they cannot themselves be known to be conscious; and not
being known to be conscious, it is not even certain that they may
legitimately be described as mental. We have, indeed, to conceive them
on the analogy of our mental processes, but that may only be because of
the limitation of our knowledge to the data of experience. Further, we
have no right to conceive them as the activities of a noumenal self. We
know the self only as conscious, and the synthetic processes, being the
generating conditions of consciousness, are also the generating
conditions of the only self for which our experience can vouch. Kant,
viewing as he does the temporal aspect of human experience as
fundamental, would seem to be justified in naming these processes
“synthetic.” For consciousness in its very nature would seem to involve
the carrying over of content from one time to other times, and the
construction of a more comprehensive total consciousness from the
elements thus combined. Kant is here analysing in its simplest and most
fundamental form that aspect of consciousness which William James has
described in the _Principles of Psychology_,[945] and which we may
entitle the telescoping of earlier mental states into the successive
experiences that include them. They telescope in a manner which can
never befall the successive events in a causal series, and which is not
explicable by any scheme of relations derivable from the physical
sphere.

Obviously, what Kant does is to apply to the interpretation of the
noumenal conditions of our conscious experience a distinction derived by
analogy from conscious experience itself--the distinction, namely,
between our mental processes and the sensuous material with which they
deal. The application of such a distinction may be inevitable in any
attempt to explain human experience; but it can very easily, unless
carefully guarded, prove a source of serious misunderstanding. Just as
the synthetic processes which generate consciousness are not known to be
themselves conscious, so also the manifold cannot be identified with the
sensations of the bodily senses. These last are events in time, and are
effects not of noumenal but of mechanical causes.

Kant’s conclusion when developed on consistent Critical lines, and
therefore in phenomenalist terms, is twofold: positive, to the effect
that consciousness, for all that our analysis can prove to the contrary,
may be merely a resultant, derivative from and dependent upon a
complexity of conditions; and negative, to the effect that though these
conditions may by analogy be described as consisting of synthetic
processes acting upon a given material, they are in their real nature
unknowable by us. Even their bare possibility we cannot profess to
comprehend. We postulate them only because given experience is
demonstrably not self-explanatory and would seem to refer us for
explanation to some such antecedent generative grounds.

Kant, as we have already emphasised, obscures his position by the way in
which he frequently speaks of the transcendental unity of apperception
as the supreme condition of our experience. At times he even speaks as
if it were the source of the synthetic processes. That cannot, however,
be regarded as his real teaching. Self-consciousness (and the unity of
apperception, in so far as it finds expression through
self-consciousness) rests upon the same complexity of conditions as does
outer experience, and therefore may be merely a product or resultant. It
is, as he insists in the _Paralogisms_, the emptiest of all our
concepts, and can afford no sufficient ground for asserting the self to
be an abiding personality. We cannot by theoretical analysis of the
facts of experience or of the nature of self-consciousness prove
anything whatsoever in regard to the ultimate nature of the self.

Now Kant is here giving a new, and quite revolutionary, interpretation
of the distinction between the subjective and the objective. The
objective is for the Cartesians the independently real;[946] the
subjective is that which has an altogether different kind of existence
in what is entitled the field of consciousness. Kant, on the other hand,
from his phenomenalist standpoint, views existences as objective when
they are determined by purely physical causes, and as subjective when
they also depend upon physiological and psychological conditions. On
this latter view the difference between the two is no longer a
difference of kind; it becomes a difference merely of degree. Objective
existences, owing to the simplicity and recurrent character of their
conditions, are uniform. Subjective existences resting upon conditions
which are too complex to be frequently recurrent, are by contrast
extremely variable. But both types of existence are objective in the
sense that they are objects, and immediate objects, for consciousness.
Subjective states do not run parallel with the objective system of
natural existences, nor are they additional to it. For they do not
constitute our consciousness of nature; they are themselves part of the
natural order which consciousness reveals. That they contrast with
physical existences in being unextended and incapable of location in
space is what Kant would seem by implication to assert, but he
challenges Descartes’ right to infer from this particular difference a
complete diversity in their whole nature. Sensations, feelings,
emotions, and desires, so far as they are experienced by us, constitute
the empirical self which is an objective existence, integrally connected
with the material environment, in terms of which alone it can be
understood. In other words, the distinction between the subjective and
the objective is now made to fall within the system of natural law. The
subjective is not opposite in nature to the objective, but is a
subspecies within it.

The revolutionary character of this reformulation of Cartesian
distinctions may perhaps be expressed by saying that what Kant is really
doing is to substitute the distinction between appearance and reality
for the Cartesian dualism of the mental and the material. The psychical
is a title for a certain class of known existences, _i.e._ of
appearances; and they form together with the physical a single system.
But underlying this entire system, conditioning both physical and
psychical phenomena, is the realm of noumenal existence; and when the
question of the possibility of knowledge, that is, of the experiencing
of such a comprehensive natural system, is raised, it is to this
noumenal sphere that we are referred. Everything experienced, even a
sensation or desire, is an event; but the experiencing of it is an act
of awareness, and calls for an explanation of an altogether different
kind.

Thus Kant completely restates the problem of knowledge. The problem is
not how, starting from the subjective, the individual can come to
knowledge of the independently real; but how, if a common world is alone
immediately apprehended, the inner private life of the self-conscious
being can be possible, and how such inner experience is to be
interpreted. How does it come about that though sensations, feelings,
etc., are events no less mechanically conditioned than motions in space,
and constitute with the latter a single system conformed to natural law,
they yet differ from all other classes of natural events in that they
can be experienced only by a single consciousness. To this question Kant
replies in terms of his fundamental distinction between appearance and
reality. Though everything of which we are conscious may legitimately be
studied in terms of the natural system to which it belongs,
consciousness itself cannot be so regarded. In attempting to define it
we are carried beyond the phenomenal to its noumenal conditions. In
other words, it constitutes a problem, the complete data of which are
not at our disposal. This is by itself a sufficient reason for our
incapacity to explain why the states of each empirical self can never be
apprehended save by a single consciousness, or otherwise stated, why
each consciousness is limited, as regards sensations and feelings,
exclusively to those which arise in connection with some one animal
organism. It at least precludes us from dogmatically asserting that this
is due to their being subjective in the dualistic and Cartesian sense of
that term--namely, as constituting, or being states of, the knowing
self.

A diagram may serve, though very crudely, to illustrate Kant’s
phenomenalist interpretation of the cognitive situation.

                                    NC^EW
                                      |
                                      \
                                   /    \
               /------------------/------\---------------------\
             / The empirical world of our human consciousness   \
           /  +------+------+       +---+      +--------------+  \
          |   |             |       | l |      |              |  |
          |   |    ES^A     |       +---+      |     ES^B     |  |
          |   |             |       +---+      |              |  |
          |   |x^1 y^1 z^1  |       | m |      |  x^2 y^2 z^2 |  |
          |   |             |       +---+      |              |  |
          |   +-------------+       +---+      +--------------+  |
          |                         | n |                        |
           \                        +---+                       /
            \--------------------------------------------------/
             \           /                       \           /
               \       /                           \       /
                 \   /                               \   /
                   V                                   V
                  NC^A                                NC^B

            ES^A = Empirical self of the conscious Being A.

            ES^B = Empirical self of the conscious Being B.

            NC^A = Noumenal conditions of the conscious Being A.

            NC^B = Noumenal conditions of the conscious Being B.

            l, m, n = Objects in space.

            x^1, y^1, z^1 = Sensations caused by objects l, m, n
            acting on the sense-organs of the empirical self A.

            x^2, y^2, z^2= Sensations caused by 1, m, n acting
            on the sense-organs of the empirical self B.

            NC^EW = Noumenal conditions of the empirical world.

Everything in this empirical world is equally open to the consciousness
of both A and B, save only certain psychical events that are conditioned
by physiological and psychological factors. x^1, y^1, z^1 can be
apprehended only by A; x^2, y^2, z^2 can be apprehended only by B.
Otherwise A and B experience one and the same world; the body of B is
perceived by A in the same manner in which he perceives his own body.
This is true _a fortiori_ of all other material existences. Further,
these material existences are known with the same immediacy as the
subjective states. As regards the relation in which NC^A, NC^B, and
NC^EW stand to one another, no assertions can be made, save, as above
indicated,[947] such conjectural statements as may precariously be
derived through argument by analogy from distinctions that fall within
our human experience.[948]

Kant’s phenomenalism thus involves an objectivist view of individual
selves and of their interrelations. They fall within the single common
world of space. Within this phenomenal world they stand in external,
mechanical relations to one another. They are apprehended as embodied,
with known contents, sensations, feelings, and desires, composing their
inner experience. There is, from this point of view, no problem of
knowledge. On this plane we have to deal only with events known, not
with any process of apprehension. Even the components of the empirical
self, the subject-matter of empirical psychology, are not processes of
apprehension, but apprehended existences. It is only when we make a
regress beyond the phenomenal as such to the conditions which render it
possible, that the problem of knowledge arises at all. And with this
regress we are brought to the real crux of the whole question--the
reconciliation of this phenomenalism with the conditions of our
self-consciousness. For we have then to take into account the
fundamental fact that each self is not only an animal existence within
the phenomenal world, but also in its powers of apprehension coequal
with it. The self known is external to the objects known; the self that
knows is conscious of itself as comprehending within the field of its
consciousness the wider universe in infinite space.

Such considerations would, at first sight, seem to force us to modify
our phenomenalist standpoint in the direction of subjectivism. For in
what other manner can we hope to unite the two aspects of the self, the
known conditions of its finite existence and the consciousness through
which it correlates with the universe as a whole? In the one aspect it
is a part of appearance; in the other it connects with that which makes
appearance possible at all.

Quite frequently it is the subjectivist solution which Kant seems to
adopt. Objects known are “mere representations,” “states of the
identical self.” Everything outside the individual mind is real;
appearances are purely individual in origin. But such a position is
inconsistent with the deeper implications of Kant’s Critical teaching,
and would involve the entire ignoring of the many suggestions which
point to a fundamentally different and much more adequate standpoint.
The individual is himself known only as appearance, and cannot,
therefore, be the medium in and through which appearances exist. Though
appearances exist only in and through consciousness, they are not due to
any causes which can legitimately be described as individual. From this
standpoint Kant would seem to distinguish between the grounds and
conditions of phenomenal existence and the special determining causes
of individual consciousness. Transcendental conditions generate
consciousness of the relatively permanent and objective world in space
and time; empirical conditions within this space and time world
determine the sensuous modes through which special portions of this
infinite and uniform world appear diversely to different minds.

This, however, is a point of view which is only suggested, and, as we
have already observed,[949] the form in which it is outlined suggests
many objections and difficulties. Consciousness of the objective world
in space and time does not exist complete with one portion of it more
specifically determined in terms of actual sense-perceptions. Rather the
consciousness of the single world in space and time is gradually
developed through and out of sense experience of limited portions of it.
We have still to consider the various sections in the _Analytic of
Principles_ (especially the section added in the second edition on the
_Refutation of Idealism_) and in the _Dialectic_, in which Kant further
develops this standpoint. But even after doing so, we shall be forced to
recognise that Kant leaves undiscussed many of the most obvious
objections to which his phenomenalism lies open. To the very last he
fails to state in any really adequate manner how from the phenomenalist
standpoint he would regard the world described in mechanical terms by
science as being related to the world of ordinary sense-experience,[950]
or how different individual consciousnesses are related to one another.
The new form, however, in which these old-time problems here emerge is
the best possible proof of the revolutionary character of Kant’s
Critical enquiries. For these problems are no longer formulated in
terms of the individualistic presuppositions which govern the thinking
of all Kant’s predecessors, even that of Hume. The concealed
presuppositions are now called in question, and are made the subject of
explicit discussion. But further comment must meantime be deferred.[951]


TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION OF THE CATEGORIES, IN THE SECOND EDITION

The argument of the second edition transcendental deduction can be
reduced to the following eight points:

(1)[952] It opens with the statement of a fundamental assumption which
Kant does not dream of questioning and of which he nowhere attempts to
offer proof. The representation of combination is the one kind of
representation which can never be given through sense. It is not so
given even in the pure forms of space and time yielded by outer and
inner sense.[953] It is due to an act of spontaneity, which as such must
be performed by the understanding. As it is one and the same for every
kind of combination, it may be called by the general name of synthesis.
And as all combination, without exception, is due to this source, its
dissolution, that is, analysis, which seems to be its opposite, always
presupposes it.

(2)[954] Besides the manifold and its synthesis a further factor is
involved in the conception of combination, namely, _the representation
of the unity_ of the manifold. The combination which is necessary to and
constitutes knowledge is _representation_ of the synthetical unity of
the manifold. This is a factor additional to synthesis and to the
manifold synthesised. For such representation cannot arise out of any
antecedent consciousness of synthesis. On the contrary, it is only
through supervention upon the unitary synthesis that the conception of
the combination becomes possible. In other words, the representation of
unity conditions _consciousness_ of synthesis, and therefore cannot be
the outcome or product of it. This is an application, or rather
generalisation, of a position which in the first edition is developed
only in reference to the empirical process of recognition. Recognition
preconditions consciousness, and therefore cannot be subsequent upon it.

(3)[955] The unity thus represented is not, however, that which is
expressed through the category of unity. The consciousness of unity
which is involved in the conception of synthesis is that of apperception
or transcendental self-consciousness. This is the highest and most
universal form of unity, for it is a presupposition of the unity of all
possible concepts, whether analytic or synthetic, in the various forms
of judgment.

(4)[956] A manifold though given is not for that reason also
represented. It must be possible for the ‘I think’ to accompany it and
all my other representations:

     “...for otherwise something would be represented in me which could
     not be thought at all; and that is equivalent to saying that the
     representation would be impossible or at least would be nothing to
     me.”[957]

But to ascribe a manifold as my representations to the identical self is
to comprehend them, as synthetically connected, in one
apperception.[958] Only what can be combined in one consciousness can be
related to the ‘I think.’ The analytic unity of self-consciousness
presupposes the synthetic unity of the manifold.

(5)[959] The unity of apperception is analytic or self-identical. It
expresses itself through the proposition, _I am I._ But being thus pure
identity without content of its own, it cannot be conscious of itself in
and by itself. Its unity and constancy can have meaning only through
contrast to the variety and changeableness of its specific experiences;
and yet, at the same time, it is also true that such manifoldness will
destroy all possibility of unity unless it be reconcileable with it. The
variety can contribute to the conditioning of apperception only in so
far as it is capable of being combined into a single consciousness.
Through synthetic unifying of the manifold the self comes to
consciousness both of itself and of the manifold.

(6)[960] The transcendental original unity of apperception is an
objective, not a merely subjective, unity. Its conditions are also the
conditions in and through which we acquire consciousness of objects. An
object is that in the conception of which the manifold of given
intuitions is combined. (This point, though central to the argument, is
more adequately developed in the first than in the second edition.) Such
combination requires unity of consciousness. Thus the same unity which
conditions apperception likewise conditions the relation of
representations to an object. The unity of pure apperception may
therefore be described as an _objective_ unity for two reasons: first,
because it can apprehend its own analytical unity only through discovery
of unity in the given, and secondly, for the reason that such
synthetical unifying of the manifold is also the process whereby
representations acquire reference to objects.

(7)[961] Kant reinforces this conclusion, and shows its further
significance, by analysis of the act of judgment. The logical definition
of judgment, as the representation of a relation between two concepts,
has many defects. These, however, are all traceable to its initial
failure to explain, or even to recognise, the nature of the assertion
which judgment as such claims to make. Judgment asserts relations of a
quite unique kind, altogether different from those which exist between
ideas connected through association. If, for instance, on seeing a body
the sensations of weight due to the attempt to raise it are suggested by
association, there is nothing but subjective sequence; but if we form
the judgment that the body is heavy, the two representations are then
connected together _in the object_. This is what is intended by the
copula ‘is.’ It is a relational term through which the objective unity
of given representations is distinguished from the subjective. It
indicates that the representations stand in objective relation under the
pure unity of apperception, and not merely in subjective relation owing
to the play of association in the individual mind. “Judgment is nothing
but the mode of bringing cognitions to the objective unity of
apperception,” _i.e._ of giving to them a validity which holds
independently of the subjective processes through which it is
apprehended. Objective relations are not, of course, all necessary or
universal; and a judgment may, therefore, assert a relation which is
empirical and contingent. None the less the fundamental distinction
between it and any mere relation of association still persists. The
empirical relation is still in the judgment asserted to be objective.
The subject and the predicate are asserted, in the particular case or
cases to which the judgment refers, to be connected in the object and
not merely in the mind of the subject. Or otherwise stated, though
subject and predicate are not themselves declared to be necessarily and
universally related to one another, their contingent relation has to be
viewed as objectively, and therefore necessarily, grounded. Judgment
always presupposes the existence of necessary relations even when it is
not concerned to assert them. Judgment is the organ of objective
knowledge, and is therefore bound up, indirectly when not directly,
with the universality and necessity which are the sole criteria of
knowledge. The judgment expressive of contingency is still judgment, and
is therefore no less necessary in its conditions, and no less objective
in its validity, than is a universal judgment of the scientific type. To
use Kant’s own terminology, judgment acquires objective validity through
participation in the necessary unity of apperception. In so doing it is
made to embody those principles of the objective determination of all
representations through which alone cognition is possible.

(8)[962] As judgment is nothing but the mode of bringing cognitions to
the objective unity of apperception, it follows that the categories,
which in the metaphysical deduction have been proved to be the possible
functions in judging, are the conditions in and through which such pure
apperception becomes possible. Apperception conditions experience, and
the unity which both demand for their possibility is that of the
categories.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before passing to the remaining sections of the deduction,[963] which
are supplementary rather than essential, I may add comment upon the
above points. Only (7) and (8) call for special consideration. They
represent a form of argument which has no counterpart in the first
edition. As we noted,[964] the first edition argument is defective owing
to its failure to demonstrate that the categories constitute the unity
which is necessary to knowledge. By introducing in the second edition
this analysis of judgment, and by showing the inseparable connection
between pure apperception, objective consciousness and judgment, this
defect is in some degree removed. As the categories correspond to the
possible functions of judgment, their objective validity is thereby
established. By this means also the connection which in Kant’s view
exists between the metaphysical and the transcendental deductions
receives for the first time proper recognition. The categories which in
the former deduction are discovered and systematised through _logical_
analysis of the _form_ of judgment, are in the latter deduction, through
_transcendental_ analysis of the _function_ of judgment, shown to be
just those forms of relation which are necessary to the possibility of
knowledge. It must, however, be noted that the transcendental argument
is brought to completion only through assumption of the adequacy of the
metaphysical deduction. No independent attempt is made to show that the
particular categories obtained in the metaphysical deduction are those
which are required, that there are no others, or that all the twelve are
indispensable.

(7) is a development of an argument which first appears in the
_Prolegomena_. The statement of it there given is, however, extremely
confused, owing to the distinction which Kant most unfortunately
introduces[965] between judgments of experience and judgments of
perception. That distinction is entirely worthless and can only serve to
mislead the reader. It cuts at the very root of Kant’s Critical
teaching. Judgments of perception involve, Kant says, no category of the
understanding, but only what he is pleased to call the “logical
connection of perceptions in a thinking subject.” What that may be he
nowhere explains, save by adding[966] that in it perceptions are
“compared and conjoined in a consciousness of my state” (also spoken of
by Kant as “empirical consciousness”), and not “in consciousness in
general.”

     “All our judgments are at first mere judgments of perception; they
     hold good merely for us (that is, for the individual subject), and
     we do not till afterwards give them a new reference, namely, to an
     object.... To illustrate the matter: that the room is warm, sugar
     sweet, and wormwood bitter--these are merely subjectively valid
     judgments. I do not at all demand that I myself should at all
     times, or that every other person should, find the facts to be what
     I now assert; they only express a reference of two sensations to
     the same subject, to myself, and that only in my present state of
     perception. Consequently they are not intended to be valid of the
     object. Such judgments I have named those of perception. Judgments
     of experience are of quite a different nature. What experience
     teaches me under certain circumstances, it must teach me always and
     teach everybody, and its validity is not limited to the subject or
     to its state at a particular time.”[967]

The illegitimacy and the thoroughly misleading character of this
distinction hardly require to be pointed out. Obviously Kant is here
confusing assertion of contingency and contingency of assertion.[968] A
judgment of contingency, in order to be valid, must itself be necessary.
Even a momentary state of the self is referable to an object in judgment
only if that object is causally, and therefore necessarily, concerned in
its production.[969]

The distinction is repeated in § 22 as follows:

     “Thinking is the combining of representations in one consciousness.
     This combination is either merely relative to the subject, and is
     contingent and subjective, or is absolute, and is necessary or
     objective. The combination of representations in one consciousness
     is judgment. Thinking, therefore, is the same as judging, or the
     relating of representations to judgments in general. Judgments,
     therefore, are either merely subjective, or they are objective.
     They are subjective when representations are related to a
     consciousness in one subject only, and are combined in it alone.
     They are objective when they are united in a consciousness in
     general, that is, necessarily.”[970]

To accept this distinction is to throw the entire argument into
confusion. This Kant seems to have himself recognised in the interval
between the _Prolegomena_ and the second edition of the _Critique_. For
in the section before us there is no trace of it. The opposition is no
longer between subjective and objective judgment, but only between
association of ideas and judgment which as such is always objective. The
distinction drawn in the _Prolegomena_ is only, indeed, a more definite
formulation of the distinction which runs through the first edition of
the _Critique_ between the indeterminate and the determinate object of
consciousness. The more definite formulation of it seems, however, to
have had the happy effect of enabling Kant to realise the illegitimacy
of any such distinction.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may now proceed to consider the remaining sections.[971] In section
21[972] Kant makes a very surprising statement. The above argument,
which he summarises in a sentence, yields, he declares, “the _beginning_
of a deduction of the pure concepts of understanding.” This can hardly
be taken as representing Kant’s real estimate of the significance of the
preceding argument, and would seem to be due to a temporary
preoccupation with the problems that centre in the doctrine of
schematism. So far, Kant adds in explanation, no account has been taken
of the particular manner in which the manifold of empirical intuition is
supplied to us.[973] The necessary supplement, consisting of a very
brief outline statement of the doctrine of schematism, is given in
section 26.[974] It differs from the teaching of the special chapter
devoted to schematism in emphasising space equally with time. The
doctrine of pure _a priori_ manifolds is incidentally asserted.[975]
Section 26 concludes by consideration of the question why appearances
must conform to the _a priori_ categories. It is no more surprising,
Kant claims, than that they should agree with the _a priori_ forms of
intuition. The categories and the intuitional forms are relative to the
same subject to which the appearances are relative; and the appearances
“as mere representations are subject to no law of connection save that
which the combining faculty prescribes.”

The summary of the deduction given in section 27 discusses the three
possible theories regarding the origin of pure concepts, viz. those of
_generatio aequivoca_ (out of experience), _epigenesis_, and
_preformation_. The first is disproved by the deduction. The second is
the doctrine of the deduction and fulfils all the requirements of
demonstration. The proof that the categories are at once independent of
experience and yet also universally valid for all experience is of the
strongest possible kind, namely, that they make experience itself
possible. The third theory, that the categories, while subjective and
self-discovered, originate in faculties which are implanted in us by our
Creator and which are so formed as to yield concepts in harmony with the
laws of nature, lies open to two main objections. In the first place,
this is an hypothesis capable of accounting equally well for any kind of
_a priori_ whatsoever; the predetermined powers of judgment can be
multiplied without limit. But a second objection is decisive, namely,
that on such a theory the categories would lack the particular kind of
necessity which is required. They would express only the necessities
imposed upon our thinking by the constitution of our minds, and would
not justify any assertion of necessary connection _in the object_. Kant
might also have added,[976] that this hypothesis is metaphysical, and
therefore offers in explanation of the _empirical_ validity of _a
priori_ concepts a theory which rests upon and involves their
_unconditioned_ employment. That is a criticism which is reinforced by
the teaching of the _Dialectic_.

To return now to the omitted sections 22 to 25. Section 22 makes no
fresh contribution to the argument of the first edition. Its teaching in
regard to pure intuition and mathematical knowledge has already been
commented upon. In section 23 Kant dwells upon an interesting
consequence of the argument of the deduction. The categories have a
wider scope than the pure forms of sense. Since the argument of the
deduction has shown that judgment is the indispensable instrument both
for reducing a manifold to the unity of apperception and also for
conferring upon representations a relation to an object, it follows that
the categories which are simply the possible functions of unity in
judgment are valid for any and every consciousness that is sensuously
conditioned and whose knowledge is therefore acquired through synthesis
of a given manifold. Though such consciousness may not intuit in terms
of space and time, it must none the less apprehend objects in terms of
the categories. The categories thus extend to _objects of sensuous
intuition in general_. They are not, however, valid of objects as such,
that is, of things in themselves. As empty relational forms they have
_meaning_ only in reference to a given matter; and as instruments for
the reduction of variety to the unity of apperception their _validity_
has been proved only for conscious and sensuous experience. Even if the
possibility of a non-sensuous intuitive understanding, capable of
apprehending things in themselves, be granted, we have no sufficient
ground for asserting that the forms which such understanding will employ
must coincide with the categories.[977] These are points which will come
up for discussion in connection with Kant’s more detailed argument in
the chapter on the distinction between phenomena and noumena.[978]

The heading to section 24 is decidedly misleading. The phrase “objects
of the senses in general” might be synonymous with “objects of intuition
in general” of the preceding section. To interpret it, however, by the
contents of the section, it means “objects of _our_ senses.” This
section ought, therefore, to form part of section 26, which in its
opening sentences supplies its proper introduction. (It may also be
noted that the opening sentences of section 24 are a needless repetition
of section 23. This would seem to show that it was not written in
immediate continuation of it.) The first three paragraphs of section 24
expound the same doctrine of schematism as that outlined in section 26,
save that time alone is referred to. The remaining paragraphs of section
24 deal with the connected doctrine of inner sense. Section 25 deals
with certain consequences which follow from that doctrine of inner
sense.[979]


THE DOCTRINE OF INNER SENSE

We have still to consider a doctrine of great importance in Kant’s
thinking, that of inner sense. The significance of this doctrine is
almost inversely proportionate to the scantiness and obscurity of the
passages in which it is expounded and developed. Much of the
indefiniteness and illusiveness of the current interpretations of Kant
would seem to be directly traceable to the commentator’s failure to
appreciate the position which it occupies in Kant’s system. Several of
Kant’s chief results are given as deductions from it, while it itself,
in turn, is largely inspired by the need for a secure basis upon which
these positions may be made to rest. The relation of the doctrine to its
consequences is thus twofold. Kant formulates it in order to safeguard
or rather to justify certain conclusions; and yet these conclusions have
themselves in part been arrived at owing to his readiness to accept such
a doctrine, and to what would seem to have been his almost instinctive
feeling of its kinship (notwithstanding the very crude form in which
alone he was able to formulate it) with Critical teaching. It was
probably one of the earliest of the many new tenets which Kant adopted
in the years immediately subsequent to the publication of the inaugural
_Dissertation_, but it first received adequate statement in the second
edition of the _Critique_. Kant took advantage of the second edition to
reply to certain criticisms to which his view of time had given rise,
and in so doing was compelled to formulate the doctrine of inner sense
in a much more explicit manner. Hitherto he had assumed its truth, but
had not, as it would seem, sufficiently reflected upon the various
connected conclusions to which he was thereby committed. This is one of
the many instances which show how what is most fundamental in Kant’s
thinking is frequently that of which he was himself least definitely
aware. Like other thinkers, he was most apt to discuss what he himself
was inclined to question and feel doubt over. The sources of his insight
as well as the causes of his failure often lay beyond the purview of his
explicitly developed tenets; and only under the stimulus of criticism
was he constrained and enabled to bring them within the circle of
reasoned conviction. We may venture the prophecy that if Kant had been
able to devote several years more to the maturing of the problems which
in the face of so many difficulties he had brought thus far, the
doctrine of inner sense, or rather the doctrines to which it gives
expression, would have been placed in the forefront of his teaching, and
their systematic interconnection, both in the way of ground and of
consequence, with all his chief tenets would have been traced and
securely established.

This would have involved, however, two very important changes. In the
first place, Kant would have had to recognise the unsatisfactory
character of the supposed analogy between inner and outer sense. As
already remarked,[980] no great thinker, except Locke, has attempted to
interpret inner consciousness on the analogy of the senses; and the
obscurities of Kant’s argument are not, therefore, to be excused on the
ground that “the difficulty, how a subject can have an internal
intuition of itself, is common to every theory.” Secondly, Kant would
have had to define the relation in which he conceived this part of his
teaching to stand to his theory of consciousness. But both these changes
could have been made without requiring that he should give up the
doctrines which are mainly responsible for his theory of inner sense,
namely, that there can be no awareness of awareness, but only of
existences which are objective, and that there is consequently no
consciousness of the generative, synthetic processes[981] which
constitute consciousness on its subjective side. It is largely in virtue
of these conclusions that Kant’s phenomenalism differs from the
subjective idealism of his predecessors. If we ignore or reject them,
merely because of the obviously unsatisfactory manner in which alone
Kant has been able to formulate them, we rule ourselves out from
understanding the intention and purpose of much that is most
characteristic of Critical teaching.

The doctrine of inner sense, as expounded by Locke, suffers from an
ambiguity which seems almost inseparable from it, namely, the confusion
between inner sense, on the one hand as a _sense_ in some degree
analogous in nature to what may be called outer sense, and on the other
as consisting in self-conscious reflection. This same confusion is
traceable throughout the _Critique_, and is, as we shall find, in large
part responsible for Kant’s failure to recognise, independently of
outside criticism, the central and indispensable part which this
doctrine is called upon to play in his system.

The doctrine is stated by Kant as follows. Just as outer sense is
affected by noumenal agencies, and so yields a manifold arranged in
terms of a form peculiar to it, namely, space, so inner sense is
affected by the mind itself and its inner state.[982] The manifold
thereby caused is arranged in terms of a form peculiar to inner sense,
namely, time. The content thus arranged falls into two main divisions.
On the one hand we have feelings, desires, volitions, that is, states of
the mind in the strict sense, subjective non-spatial existences. On the
other hand we have sensations, perceptions, images, concepts, in a word,
representations (_Vorstellungen_) of every possible type. These latter
all refer to the external world in space, and yet, according to Kant,
speaking from the limited point of view of a critique of _knowledge_,
form the proper content of inner sense. “...the representations of the
outer senses constitute the actual material with which we occupy our
minds,”[983] “the whole material of knowledge even for our inner
sense.”[984] (These statements, it may be observed, are first made in
the second edition.) As Kant explains himself in B 67-8, he would seem
to mean that the mind in the process of “setting” representations of
outer sense in space affects itself, and is therefore constrained to
arrange the given representations likewise in time. No new content,
additional to that of outer sense, is thereby generated, but what
previously as object of outer sense existed merely in space is now also
subjected to conditions of time. The representations of outer sense are
all by their very nature likewise representations of inner sense. To
outer sense is due both their content and their spatial form; to inner
sense they owe only the additional form of time; their content remains
unaffected in the process of being taken over by a second sense. This
yields such explanation as is possible of Kant’s assertion in A 33 that
“time can never be a determination of outer appearances.” He may be
taken as meaning that time is never a determination of outer sense _as
such_, but only of its contents as always likewise subject to the form
of inner sense.[985]

This is how Kant formulates his position from the extreme subjectivist
point of view which omits to draw any distinction between representation
and its object, between inner states of the self and appearances in
space. All representations, he says,[986] all appearances without
exception, are states of inner sense, modifications of the mind. Some
exist only in time, some exist both in space and in time; but all alike
are modes of the identical self, mere representations (_blosse
Vorstellungen_). Though appearances may exist outside one another in
space, space itself exists only as representation, merely “in us.”

Now without seeking to deny that this is a view which we find in the
second edition of the _Critique_ as well as in the first,[987] and that
even in passages which are obviously quite late in date of writing Kant
frequently speaks in terms which conform to it, we must be no less
insistent in maintaining that an alternative view more and more comes
to the front in proportion as Kant gains mastery over the conflicting
tendencies that go to constitute his new Critical teaching. From the
very first he uses language which implies that _some_ kind of
distinction must be drawn between representations and objects
represented, between subjective cognitive states in the proper sense of
the term and existences in space.

     “Time can never be a determination of outer appearances. It belongs
     neither to form nor position, etc. On the other hand it determines
     the relation of representations in our inner state.”[988]

Similarly in those very sentences in which he asserts all appearances to
be _blosse Vorstellungen_, a distinction is none the less implied.

     “Time is the formal _a priori_ condition of all appearances in
     general. Space, as the pure form of all outer intuition, is as _a
     priori_ condition limited exclusively (_bloss_) to outer
     appearances. On the other hand as all representations, _whether
     they have outer things as their object or not_, still in themselves
     belong, as determinations of the mind, to the inner state, and this
     inner state is subject to the formal condition of inner intuition,
     that is of time, time is an _a priori_ condition of all appearance
     whatever. It is, indeed, the immediate condition of the inner
     appearance (of our souls), and thereby mediately likewise of outer
     appearances.”[989]

As the words which I have italicised show, Kant, even in the very
sentence in which he asserts outer representations to be inner states,
none the less recognises that appearances in space are not
representations in the same meaning of that term as are subjective
states. They are the _objects_ of representation, not representation
itself. The latter alone is correctly describable as a state of the
mind. The former may be conditioned by representation, and may therefore
be describable as appearances, but are not for that reason to be equated
with representation. But before the grounds and nature of this
distinction can be formulated in the proper Critical terms, we must
consider the reasons which induced Kant to commit himself to this
obscure and difficult doctrine of inner sense. As I shall try to show,
it is no mere excrescence upon his system; on the contrary, it is
inseparably bound up with all his main tenets.

One of the chief influences which constrained Kant to develop this
doctrine is the conclusion, so essential to his position, that knowledge
must always involve an intuitional manifold in addition to _a priori_
forms and concepts. That being so, he was bound to deny to the mind all
power of gaining knowledge by mere reflection. If our mental activities
and states lay open to direct inspection, we should have to recognise in
the mind a non-sensuous intuitional power. Through self-consciousness or
reflection we should acquire knowledge independently of sense. Such
apprehension, though limited to the mind’s own operations and states,
would none the less be _knowledge_, and yet would not conform to the
conditions which, as the transcendental deduction has shown, are
involved in all knowledge. In Kant’s view the belief that we possess
self-consciousness of this type, a power of reflection thus conceived,
is wholly illusory. To assume any such faculty would be to endow the
mind with occult or mystical powers, and would throw us back upon the
Leibnizian rationalism, which traces to such reflection our
consciousness of the categories, and which rears upon this foundation
the entire body of metaphysical science.[990]

The complementary _negative_ conclusion of the transcendental deduction
is a no less fundamental and constraining influence in compelling Kant
to develop a doctrine of inner sense. If all knowledge is knowledge of
appearances, or if, as he states his position in the _Analytic of
Principles_,[991] our knowledge can extend no further than sense
experience and inference from such experience, either knowledge of our
inner states must be mediated, like our knowledge of outer objects, by
sensation, or we can have no knowledge of them whatsoever. On Critical
principles, consistently applied, there can be no middle course between
acceptance of an indirect empirical knowledge of the mind and assertion
of its unknowableness. Mental activities may perhaps be thought in terms
of the pure forms of understanding, but in that case their conception
will remain as purely problematic and as indeterminate as the conception
of the thing in itself. It is impossible for Kant to admit _immediate_
consciousness of the mind’s real activities and states, and at the same
time to deny that we can have knowledge of things in themselves. The
_Aesthetic_, in proving that everything in space and time is appearance,
implicitly assumes the impossibility of direct self-conscious
reflection; and the transcendental deduction in showing that all
knowledge involves as correlative factors both sense and thought, has
reinforced this conclusion, and calls for its more explicit
recognition, in reference to the more inward aspect of experience.

As we have already noted,[992] Kant’s doctrine of inner sense was
probably adopted in the early ’seventies, and though it is not itself
definitely formulated in the first edition, the chief consequence that
follows from it is clearly recognised. Thus in the _Aesthetic_ Kant
draws the conclusion that, as time is the form of inner sense,
everything apprehended in time, and consequently all inner states and
activities, can be known only as appearances. The mind (meaning thereby
the ultimate conditioning grounds of consciousness) is as indirectly
known as is any other mode of noumenal existence. In the _Analytic_,
whenever he is called upon to express himself upon this and kindred
points, he continues to hold to this position; and in the section on the
_Paralogisms_ all the main consequences that follow from its acceptance
are drawn in the most explicit and unambiguous manner. It is argued that
as the inner world, the feelings, volitions and representations of which
we are conscious, is a world constructed out of a given manifold yielded
by inner sense, and is therefore known only as the appearance of a
deeper reality which we have no power of apprehending, it possesses no
superiority either of certainty or of immediacy over the outer world of
objects in space. We have immediate consciousness of both alike, but in
both cases this immediate consciousness rests upon the transcendental
synthetic processes whereby such consciousness is conditioned and
generated. The transcendental activities fall outside the field of
empirical consciousness and therefore of knowledge.

Thus Kant would seem to be maintaining that the radical error committed
by the subjective idealists, and with which all the main defects of
their teaching are inseparably bound up, lies in their ascription to the
mind of a power of direct self-conscious reflection, and consequently in
their confusion of the transcendental activities which condition
consciousness with the inner states and processes which such
consciousness reveals. This has led them to ascribe priority and
independence to our inner states, and to regard outer objects as known
only by an inference from them. The Critical teaching insists on the
distinction between appearance and reality, applies it to the inner
life, and so restores to our consciousness of the outer world the
certainty and immediacy of which subjective idealism would profess to
deprive it. Such are the important conclusions at which Kant arrives in
his various “refutations of idealism”; and it will be advisable to
consider these refutations in full detail before attempting to complete
our statement of his doctrine of inner sense.


KANT’S REFUTATIONS OF IDEALISM

Kant has in a number of different passages attempted to define his
Critical standpoint in its distinction from the positions of Descartes
and Berkeley. Consideration of these will enable us to follow Kant in
his gradual recognition of the manifold consequences to which he is
committed by his substitution of inner sense for direct self-conscious
intuition or reflection, or rather of the various congenial tenets which
it gives him the right consistently to defend and maintain. In Kant’s
Critical writings we find no less than seven different statements of his
refutation of idealism: (I.) in the fourth _Paralogism_ of the first
edition of the _Critique_; (II.) in section 13 (_Anm._ ii. and iii.) of
the _Prolegomena_; (III.) in section 49 of the _Prolegomena_; (IV.) in
the second appendix to the _Prolegomena_; (V.) in sections added in the
second edition at the conclusion of the _Aesthetic_ (B 69 ff.); (VI.) in
the “refutation of idealism” (B 274-8), in the supplementary section at
the end of the section on the _Postulates_ (B 291-4), and in the note to
the new preface (B xxxix-xl); (VII.) in the “refutation of problematic
idealism” given in the _Seven Small Papers_ which originated in Kant’s
conversations with Kiesewetter. Consideration of these in the above
order will reveal Kant’s gradual and somewhat vacillating recognition of
the new and revolutionary position which alone genuinely harmonises with
Critical principles. But first we must briefly consider the various
meanings which Kant at different periods assigned to the term idealism.
Even in the _Critique_ itself it is employed in a great variety of
diverse connotations.

In the pre-Critical writings[993] the term idealism is usually employed
in what was its currently accepted meaning, namely, as signifying any
philosophy which denied the existence of an independent world
corresponding to our subjective representations. But even as thus used
the term is ambiguous.[994] It may signify either denial of a
_corporeal_ world independent of our representations or denial of an
immaterial world “corresponding to” the represented material world,
_i.e._ the denial of _Dinge an sich_. For there are traceable in
Leibniz’s writings two very different views as to the reality of the
material world. Sometimes the monads are viewed as purely intelligible
substances without materiality of any kind. The kingdom of the extended
is set into the representing subjects; only the immaterial world of
unextended purely spiritual monads remains as independently real. At
other times the monads, though in themselves immaterial, are viewed as
constituting through their coexistence an independent material world and
a materially occupied space. Every monad has a spatial sphere of
activity. The material world is an objective existence due to external
relations between the monads, not a merely subjective existence internal
to each of them. This alternation of standpoints enabled Leibniz’s
successors to deny that they were idealists; and as the more daring and
speculative aspects of Leibniz’s teaching were slurred over in the
process of its popularisation, it was the second, less consistent view,
which gained the upper hand. Wolff, especially in his later writings,
denounces idealism; and in the current manuals, sections in refutation
of idealism became part of the recognised philosophical teaching.
Idealism still, however, continued to be used ambiguously, as signifying
indifferently either denial of material bodies or denial of things in
themselves. This is the dual meaning which the term presents in Kant’s
pre-Critical writings. In his _Dilucidatio_ (1755)[995] he refutes
idealism by means of the principle that a substance cannot undergo
changes unless it is a substance independent of other substances.
Obviously this argument can at most prove the existence of an
independent world, not that it is spatial or material. And as Vaihinger
adds, it does not even rule out the possibility that changes find their
source in a Divine Being. In the _Dreams of a Visionseer_ (1766)[996]
Swedenborg is described as an idealist, but without further
specification of the exact sense in which the term is employed. In the
inaugural _Dissertation_ (1770)[997] idealism is again rejected, on the
ground that sense-affection points to the presence of an intelligible
object or _noumenon_.

In Kant’s class lectures on metaphysics,[998] which fall, in part at
least, between 1770 and 1781, the term idealism is employed in a very
different sense, which anticipates its use in the _Appendix_ to the
_Prolegomena_.[999] The teaching of the _Dissertation_, that things in
themselves are knowable, is now described as dogmatic, Platonic,
mystical (_schwärmerischer_) idealism. He still rejects the idealism of
Berkeley, and still entitles it simply idealism, without limiting or
descriptive predicates. But now also he employs the phrase “problematic
idealism” as descriptive of his own new position. This is, of course,
contrary to his invariable usage elsewhere, but is interesting as
showing that about this time his repugnance to the term idealism begins
to give way, and that he is willing to recognise that the relation of
the Critical teaching to idealism is not one of simple opposition. He
now begins to regard idealism as a factor, though a radically
transformed factor, in his own philosophy.

Study of the _Critique_ reinforces this conclusion. In the _Aesthetic_
Kant teaches the “transcendental ideality” of space and time; and in the
_Dialectic_ (in the fourth _Paralogism_) describes his position as
idealism, though with the qualifying predicate transcendental.[1000] But
though this involves an extension of the previous connotation of the
term idealism, and might therefore have been expected to increase the
existing confusion, it has the fortunate effect of constraining Kant to
recognise and discriminate the various meanings in which it may be
employed. This is done somewhat clumsily, as if it were a kind of
afterthought. In the introductory syllogism of the fourth _Paralogism_
Descartes’ position and his own are referred to simply as idealism and
dualism respectively. The various possible sub-species of idealism as
presented in the two editions of the _Critique_ and in the _Prolegomena_
may be tabulated as follows:

            {Material {Sceptical {Problematic (the position of Descartes).
            {         {          {Sceptical in the stricter and more usual
  Idealism  {         {          { sense (the position of Hume).
            {         {Dogmatic (the position of Berkeley).
            {Formal or Critical or Transcendental (Kant’s own position).

The distinction between problematic idealism and idealism of the more
strictly sceptical type is not clearly drawn by Kant.[1001] Very
strangely Kant in this connection never mentions Hume: the reference in
B xxxix _n._ is probably not to Hume but to Jacobi. Transcendental
idealism is taken as involving an empirical realism and dualism, and is
set in opposition to transcendental realism which is represented as
involving empirical idealism. In B xxxix _n._ Kant speaks of
“psychological idealism,” meaning, as it would seem, material or
non-Critical idealism.

In the second appendix to the _Prolegomena_ Kant draws a further
distinction, in line with that already noted in his lectures on
metaphysics. Tabulated it is as follows:

          {Mystical, in the sense of belief in and reliance on a supposed
          { human power of intellectual intuition. It is described as
  Idealism{idealism in the strict (_eigentlich_) sense--the position of the
          {Eleatics, of Plato and Berkeley.
          {Formal or Critical--Kant’s own position.

This latter classification can cause nothing but confusion. The
objections that have to be made against it from Kant’s own critical
standpoint are stated below.[1002]

Let us now consider, in the order of their presentation, the various
refutations of idealism which Kant has given in his Critical writings.

=I. Refutation of Idealism as given in First Edition of “Critique”= (A
366-80).--This refutation is mainly directed against Descartes, who is
mentioned by name in A 367. Kant, as Vaihinger suggests, was very
probably led to recognise Descartes’ position as a species of idealism
in the course of a re-study of Descartes before writing the section on
the _Paralogisms_. As already pointed out, this involves the use of the
term idealism in a much wider sense than that which was usually given to
it in Kant’s own day. In the development of his argument Kant also
wavers between two very different definitions of this idealism, as being
denial of _immediate_ certainty and as denial of all certainty.[1003]
The second interpretation, which would make it apply to Hume rather than
to Descartes, is strengthened in the minds of his readers by his further
distinction[1004] between dogmatic and sceptical idealism, and the
identification of the idealism under consideration with the latter. The
title problematic which Kant in the second edition[1005] applies to
Descartes’ position suffers from this same ambiguity. As a matter of
fact, Kant’s refutation applies equally well to either position. The
teaching of Berkeley, which coincides with dogmatic idealism as here
defined by Kant, namely, as consisting in the contention that the
conception of matter is inherently contradictory, is not dwelt upon, and
the appended promise of refutation is not fulfilled.

Descartes’ position is stated as follows: only our own existence and
inner states are immediately apprehended by us; all perceptions are
modifications of inner sense; and the existence of external objects can
therefore be asserted only by an inference from the inner perceptions
viewed as effects. In criticism, Kant points out that since an effect
may result from more than one cause, this inference to a quite
determinate cause, viz. objects as bodies in space, is doubtfully
legitimate. The cause of our inner states may lie within and not without
us, and even if external, need not consist in spatial objects. Further,
leaving aside the question of a possible alternative to the assumption
of independent material bodies, the assertion of the existence of such
objects would, on Descartes’ view, be merely conjectural. It could never
have certainty in any degree equivalent to that possessed by the
experiences of inner sense.

     “By an idealist, therefore, we must not understand one who denies
     the existence of outer objects of the senses, but only one who does
     not admit that their existence is known through immediate
     perception, and who therefore concludes that we can never, by way
     of any possible experience, be completely certain of their
     reality.”[1006]

No sooner is the term idealist thus clearly defined than Kant, in
keeping with the confused character of the entire section, proceeds to
the assertion (_a_) that there are idealists of another type, namely,
transcendental idealists,[1007] and (_b_) that the non-transcendental
idealists sometimes also adopt a dogmatic position, not merely
questioning the immediacy of our knowledge of matter, but asserting it
to be inherently contradictory. All this points to the composite origin
of the contents of this section.

Transcendental idealism is opposed to empirical idealism. It maintains
that phenomena are representations merely, not things in themselves.
Space and time are the sensuous forms of our intuitions. Empirical
idealism, on the other hand, goes together with transcendental realism.
It maintains that space and time are given as real in themselves, in
independence of our sensibility. (Transcendental here, as in the phrase
“transcendental ideality,”[1008] is exactly equivalent to transcendent.)
But such a contention is inconsistent with the other main tenet of
empirical idealism. For if our inner representations have to be taken as
entirely distinct from their objects, they cannot yield assurance _even
of the existence_ of these objects. To the transcendental idealist no
such difficulty is presented. His position naturally combines with
empirical realism, or, as it may also be entitled, empirical dualism.
Material bodies in space, being merely subjective representations, are
immediately apprehended. The existence of matter can be established
“without our requiring to issue out beyond our bare self-consciousness
or to assume anything more than the certainty of the representations in
us, _i.e._ of the _cogito ergo sum_.”[1009] Though the objects thus
apprehended are outside one another in space, space itself exists only
in us.

     “Outer objects (bodies) are mere appearances, and are therefore
     nothing but a species of my representations, the objects of which
     are something only through these representations. Apart from them
     they are nothing. Thus outer things exist as well as I myself, and
     both, indeed, upon the immediate witness of my
     self-consciousness....”[1010]

The only difference is that the representation of the self belongs only
to inner, while extended bodies also belong to outer sense. There is
thus a dualism, but one that falls entirely within the field of
consciousness, and which is therefore empirical, not transcendental.
There is indeed a transcendental object which “in the transcendental
sense may be outside us,”[1011] but it is unknown and is not in
question. It ought not to be confused with our representations of matter
and corporeal things.

From this point[1012] the argument becomes disjointed and repeats
itself, and there is much to be said in support of the contention of
Adickes that the remainder of the section is made up of a number of
separate interpolations.[1013] First, Kant applies the conclusion
established in the _Postulates of Empirical Thought_, viz. that reality
is revealed only in sensation. As sensation is an element in all outer
perception, perception affords immediate certainty of real existence,
Kant next enters[1014] upon a eulogy of sceptical idealism as “a
benefactor of human reason.” It brings home to us the utter
impossibility of proving the existence of matter on the assumption that
spatial objects are things in themselves, and so constrains us to
justify the assertions which we are at every moment making. And such
justification is, Kant here claims, only possible if we recognise that
outer objects as mere representations are immediately known. In the next
paragraph we find a sentence which, together with the above eulogistic
estimate of the merits of idealism, shows how very far Kant, at the
time of writing, was from feeling the need of differentiating his
position from that of subjectivism. The sentence is this:

     “We cannot be sentient of what is outside ourselves, but only of
     what is in ourselves, and the whole of our self-consciousness
     therefore yields nothing save merely our own determinations.”

It is probable, indeed, that the paragraph in which this occurs is of
very early origin, prior to the development of the main body of the
_Analytic_; for in the same paragraph we also find the assertion,
utterly at variance with the teaching of the _Analytic_ and with that of
the first and third _Paralogisms_, that “the thinking ego” is known
phenomenally as _substance_.[1015] We seem justified in concluding that
the various manuscripts which have gone to form this section on the
fourth _Paralogism_ were written at an early date within the Critical
period.

We may note, in passing, two sentences in which, as in that quoted
above, a distinction between representations and their objects is
recognised in wording if not in fact.

     “All outer perception furnishes immediate proof of something actual
     in space, or rather is the actual itself. To this extent empirical
     realism is beyond question, _i.e._ there corresponds to our outer
     perceptions something actual in space.”[1016]

Again in A 377 the assertion occurs that “our outer senses, as regards
the data from which experience can arise, have their actual
corresponding objects in space.” Certainly these statements, when taken
together with the other passages in this section, form a sufficiently
strange combination of assertion and denial. Either there is a
distinction between representation and its object or there is not; if
the former, then objects in space are not merely representations; if the
latter, then the “correspondence” is merely that of a thing with
itself.[1017]

       *       *       *       *       *

This refutation of idealism will not itself stand criticism. For two
separate reasons it entirely fails to attain its professed end. In the
first place, it refutes the position of Descartes only by virtually
accepting the still more extreme position of Berkeley. Outer objects,
Kant argues, are immediately known because they are ideas merely. There
is no need for inference, because there is no transcendence of the
domain of our inner consciousness. In other words, Kant refutes the
problematic idealism of Descartes by means of the more subjective
idealism of Berkeley. The “dogmatic” idealism of Berkeley in the form in
which Kant here defines it,[1018] namely, as consisting in the assertion
that the notion of an independent spatial object involves inherent
contradictions, is part of his own position. For that reason he was
bound to fail in his promise[1019] to refute such dogmatic idealism.
Fortunately he never even attempts to do so. In the second place, Kant
ignores the fact that he has himself adopted an “idealist” view of inner
experience. Inner experience is not for him, as it was for Descartes,
the immediate apprehension of genuine reality. As it is only appearance,
the incorporation of outer experience within it, so far from
establishing the reality of the objects of outer sense, must rather
prove the direct contrary. No more is really established than Descartes
himself invariably assumes, namely, the actual existence of mental
representations of a corporeal world in space. Descartes’ further
assertion that the world of things in themselves can be inferred to be
material and spatial, Kant, of course, refuses to accept. On this latter
point Kant is in essential agreement with Berkeley.

It is by no means surprising that Kant’s first critics,[1020] puzzled
and bewildered by the obscurer and more difficult portions of the
_Critique_, should have based their interpretation of Kant’s general
position largely upon the above passages; and that in combining the
extreme subjective idealism which Kant there advocates with his doctrine
that the inner life of ever-changing experiences is itself merely ideal,
should have come to the conclusion that Kant’s position is an extension
of that of Berkeley. Pistorius objected that in making outer appearances
relative to an inner consciousness which is itself appearance, Kant is
reducing everything to mere illusion. Hamann came to the somewhat
similar conclusion, that Kant, notwithstanding his very different
methods of argument, is “a Prussian Hume,” in substantial agreement with
his Scotch predecessor.


II. =“Prolegomena,” Section 13, Notes II and III.=--In the _Prolegomena_
Kant replies to the criticism which the first edition of the _Critique_
had called forth, that his position is an extension of the idealism of
Descartes, and even more thoroughgoing than that of Berkeley. Idealism
he redefines in a much narrower sense, which makes it applicable only to
Berkeley

     “...as consisting in the assertion that there are none but thinking
     beings, and that all other things which we suppose ourselves to
     perceive in intuition are nothing but representations in the
     thinking beings, to which no object external to them corresponds in
     fact.”[1021]

In reply Kant affirms his unwavering belief in the reality of _Dinge an
sich_

     “...which though quite unknown to us as to what they are in
     themselves, we yet know by the representations which their
     influence on our sensibility procures us.... Can this be termed
     idealism? It is the very contrary.”[1022]

Kant adds that his position is akin to that of Locke, differing only in
his assertion of the subjectivity of the primary as well as of the
secondary qualities.

     “I should be glad to know what my assertions ought to have been in
     order to avoid all idealism. I suppose I ought to have said, not
     only that the representation of space is perfectly conformable to
     the relation which our sensibility has to objects (for that I have
     said), but also that it is completely similar to them--an assertion
     in which I can find as little meaning as if I said that the
     sensation of red has a similarity to the property of cinnabar which
     excites this sensation in me.”[1023]

Kant is here very evidently using the term idealism in the narrowest
possible meaning, as representing only the position of Berkeley, and as
excluding that of Descartes and Leibniz. Such employment of the term is
at variance with his own previous usage. Though idealism here
corresponds to the “dogmatic idealism” of A 377, it is now made to
concern the assertion or denial of things in themselves, not as
previously the problem of the reality of material objects and of space.
Kant is also ignoring the fact, which he more than once points out in
the _Critique_, that his philosophy cannot prove that the cause of our
sensations is without and not within us. His use of “body”[1024] as a
name for the thing in itself is likewise without justification. This
passage is mainly polemical; it is hardly more helpful than the
criticism to which it was designed to reply.

In Section 13, Note iii., Kant meets the still more extreme criticism
(made by Pistorius), that his system turns all the things of the world
into mere illusion (_Schein_). He distinguishes transcendental idealism
from “the mystical and visionary idealism of Berkeley” on the one hand,
and on the other from the Cartesian idealism which would convert mere
representations into things in themselves. To obviate the ambiguities of
the term transcendental, he declares that his own idealism may perhaps
more fitly be entitled Critical. This distinction between mystical and
Critical idealism connects with the contents of the second part of the
Appendix, treated below.

III. =“Prolegomena,” Section 49.=--This is simply a repetition of the
argument of the fourth _Paralogism_. The Cartesian idealism, now (as in
B 274) named material idealism, is alone referred to. The Cartesian
idealism does nothing, Kant says, but distinguish external experience
from dreaming. There is here again the same confusing use of the term
“corresponds.”

     “That something actual without us not only corresponds but must
     correspond to our external perceptions can likewise be
     proved....”[1025]

IV. =“Prolegomena,” Second Part of the Appendix.=--Kant here returns to
the distinction, drawn in Section 13, Note iii., between what he now
calls “idealism proper (_eigentlicher_),”[1026] _i.e._ visionary or
mystical idealism, and his own.

     “The position of all genuine idealists from the Eleatics to Bishop
     Berkeley is contained in this formula: ‘All cognition through the
     senses and experience is nothing but mere illusion, and only in the
     ideas of pure understanding and Reason is there truth.’ The
     fundamental principle ruling all my idealism, on the contrary, is
     this: ‘All cognition of things solely from pure understanding or
     pure Reason is nothing but mere illusion and only in experience is
     there truth.’”[1027]

This mode of defining idealism can, in this connection, cause nothing
but confusion. Its inapplicability to Berkeley would seem to prove that
Kant had no first-hand knowledge of Berkeley’s writings.[1028] As Kant’s
Note to the Appendix to the _Prolegomena_[1029] shows, he also had Plato
in mind. But the definition given of “the fundamental principle” of his
own idealism is almost equally misleading. It omits the all-essential
point, that for Kant experience itself yields truth only by conforming
to _a priori_ concepts. As it is, he proceeds to criticise Berkeley for
failure to supply a sufficient criterion of distinction between truth
and illusion. Such criterion, he insists, is necessarily _a priori_. The
Critical idealism differs from that of Berkeley in maintaining that
space and time, though sensuous, are _a priori_, and that in combination
with the pure concepts of understanding they

     “...prescribe _a priori_ its law to all possible experience: the
     law which at the same time yields the sure criterion for
     distinguishing within experience truth from illusion. My so-called
     idealism--which properly speaking is Critical idealism--is thus
     quite peculiar in that it overthrows ordinary idealism, and that
     through it all _a priori_ cognition, even that of geometry, now
     attains objective reality, a thing which even the keenest realist
     could not assert till I had proved the ideality of space and
     time.”[1030]

V. =Sections added in Second Edition at the Conclusion of the Aesthetic.=
(B 69 ff.)--Kant here again replies to the criticism of Pistorius that
all existence has been reduced to the level of illusion (_Schein_). His
defence is twofold: first, that in naming objects appearances he means
to indicate that they are independently grounded, or, as he states it,
are “something actually given.” If we _mis_interpret them, the result is
indeed illusion, but the fault then lies with ourselves and not with the
appearances as presented. Secondly, he argues that the doctrine of the
ideality of space and time is the only secure safeguard against
scepticism. For otherwise the contradictions which result from regarding
space and time as independently real will likewise hold of their
contents, and everything, including even our own existence, will be
rendered illusory. “The good Berkeley [observing these contradictions]
cannot, indeed, be blamed for reducing bodies to mere illusion.” This
last sentence may perhaps be taken as supporting the view that
notwithstanding the increased popularity of Berkeley in Germany and the
appearance of new translations in these very years, Kant has not been
sufficiently interested to acquire first-hand knowledge of Berkeley’s
writings.[1031] The epithet employed is characteristic of the rather
depreciatory attitude which Kant invariably adopts in speaking of
Berkeley.

VI. =“Refutation of Idealism” in Second Edition of the “Critique.”= (B
274-9, supplemented by note to B xxxix.).--The refutation opens by
equating idealism with material idealism (so named in contradistinction
to his own “formal or rather Critical” teaching). Within material
idealism Kant distinguishes between the problematic idealism of
Descartes, and the dogmatic idealism of Berkeley. The latter has, he
says, been overthrown in the _Aesthetic_. The former alone is dealt with
in this refutation. This is the first occurrence in the _Critique_ of
the expression “problematic idealism”: it is nowhere employed in the
first edition.[1032] Problematic idealism consists in the assertion that
we are incapable of having experience of any existence save our own;
only our inner states are immediately apprehended; all other existences
are determined by inference from them. The refutation consists in the
proof that we have experience, and not mere imagination of outer
objects. This is proved by showing that inner experience, unquestioned
by Descartes, is possible only on the assumption of outer experience,
and that this latter is as immediate and direct as is the former.

=Thesis.=--The empirically determined consciousness of my own existence
proves the existence of objects in space outside me.[1033]

=Proof.=--I am conscious of my own existence as determined in time. Time
determination presupposes the perception of something permanent. But
nothing permanent is intuitable in the empirical self. On the cognitive
side (_i.e._ omitting feelings, etc., which in this connection are
irrelevant), it consists solely of representations; and these demand a
permanent, distinct from ourselves, in relation to which their changes,
and so my own existence in the time wherein they change, may be
determined.[1034] Thus perception of this permanent is only possible
through a thing outside, and not through the mere representation of a
thing outside. And the same must hold true of the determination of my
existence in time, since this also depends upon the apprehension of the
permanent. That is to say, the consciousness of my existence is at the
same time an immediate awareness of the existence of other things
outside me.

In the note to the _Preface_ to the second edition[1035] occurs the
following emphatic statement.

     “Representation of something permanent in existence is not the same
     as permanent representation. For though the representation [of the
     permanent] may be very changing and variable like all our other
     representations, not excepting those of matter, it yet refers to
     something permanent. This latter must therefore be an external
     thing distinct from all my representations, and its existence must
     be included in the determination of my own existence, constituting
     with it but a single experience such as would not take place even
     internally if it were not also at the same time, in part, external.
     How this should be possible we are as little capable of explaining
     further as we are of accounting for our being able to think the
     abiding in time, the coexistence of which with the variable
     generates the conception of change.”

The argument of this note varies from that of B 274 ff. only in its use
of an ambiguous expression which is perhaps capable of being taken as
referring to things in themselves, but which does not seem to have that
meaning. “I am just as certainly conscious that there are things outside
me which relate to my sense....”

In B 277-8 Kant refers to the empirical fact that determination of time
can be made only by relation to outer happenings in space, such as the
motion of the sun. This is a point which is further developed in another
passage which Kant added in the second edition.

     “...in order to understand the possibility of things in conformity
     with the categories, and so to demonstrate the objective reality of
     the latter, we need not merely intuitions, but intuitions that are
     in all cases outer intuitions. When, for instance, we take the pure
     concepts of relation, we find firstly that in order to obtain
     something _permanent_ in intuition corresponding to the concept of
     substance, and so to demonstrate the objective reality of this
     concept, we require an intuition in space (of matter). For space
     alone is determined as permanent, while time, and therefore
     everything that is in inner sense, is in constant flux. Secondly,
     in order to exhibit _change_ as the intuition corresponding to the
     concept of _causality_, we must take as our example motion, _i.e._
     change in space. Only in this way can we obtain the intuition of
     changes, the possibility of which can never be comprehended through
     any pure understanding. For change is combination of
     contradictorily opposed determinations in the existence of one and
     the same thing. Now how it is possible that from a given state of a
     thing an opposite state should follow, not only cannot be conceived
     by any reason without an example, but is actually incomprehensible
     to reason without intuition. The intuition required is the
     intuition of the movement of a point in space. The presence of the
     point in different spaces (as a sequence of opposite
     determinations) is what first yields to us an intuition of change.
     For in order that we may afterwards make inner changes likewise
     thinkable, we must represent time (the form of inner sense)
     figuratively as a line, and the inner change through the drawing of
     this line (motion), and so in this manner by means of outer
     intuition make comprehensible the successive existence of
     ourselves in different states. The reason of this is that all
     change, if it is indeed to be perceived as change, presupposes
     something permanent in intuition, and that in inner sense no
     permanent intuition is to be met with. Lastly, the possibility of
     the category of _community_ cannot be comprehended through mere
     reason alone. Its objective reality is not to be understood without
     intuition and indeed outer intuition in space.”[1036]

In this passage Kant is modifying the teaching of the first edition in
two very essential respects. In the first place, he is now asserting
that consciousness of both space and motion is necessary to
consciousness of time;[1037] and in the second place, he is maintaining
that the _categories_ can acquire meaning only by reference to outer
appearances. Had Kant made all the necessary alterations which these new
positions involve, he would, as we shall find,[1038] have had entirely
to recast the chapters on _Schematism_ and on the _Principles of
Understanding_. Kant was not, however, prepared to make such extensive
alterations, and these chapters are therefore left practically
unmodified. This is one of the many important points in which the reader
is compelled to reinterpret passages of earlier date in the light of
Kant’s later utterances. There is also a further difficulty. Does Kant,
in maintaining that the categories can _acquire_ significance only in
reference to outer perception, also mean to assert that their subsequent
employment is limited to the mechanical world of the material sciences?
This is a point in regard to which Kant makes no quite direct statement;
but indirectly he would seem to indicate that that was not his
intention.[1039] He frequently speaks of the states of inner sense as
mechanically conditioned. Sensations,[1040] feelings, and desires,[1041]
are, he would seem to assert, integral parts of the unitary system of
phenomenal existence. Such a view is not, indeed, easily reconcilable
with his equating of the principle of substance with the principle of
the conservation of matter.[1042] There are here two conflicting
positions which Kant has failed to reconcile: the traditional dualistic
attitude of Cartesian physics and the quite opposite implications of his
Critical phenomenalism. When the former is being held to, Kant has to
maintain that psychology can never become a science;[1043] but his
Critical teaching consistently developed seems rather to support the
view that psychology, despite special difficulties peculiar to its
subject matter, can be developed on lines strictly analogous to those of
the material sciences.

We may now return to Kant’s main argument. This new refutation of
idealism in the second edition differs from that given in the fourth
_Paralogism_ of the first edition, not only in method of argument but
also in the nature of the conclusion which it seeks to establish. Indeed
it proves the _direct opposite_ of what is asserted in the first
edition. The earlier proof sought to show that, as regards immediacy of
apprehension and subjectivity of existence, outer appearances stand on
the same level as do our inner experiences. The proof of the second
edition, on the other hand, argues that though outer appearances are
immediately apprehended they must be existences distinct from the
subjective states through which the mind represents them. The two
arguments agree, indeed, in establishing immediacy, but as that which is
taken as immediately known is in the one case a subjective state and in
the other is an independent existence, the immediacy calls in the two
cases for entirely different methods of proof. The first method
consisted in viewing outer experiences as a subdivision within our inner
experiences. The new method views their relation as not that of
including and included, but of conditioning and conditioned; and it is
now to outer experience that the primary position is assigned. So far is
outer experience from being possible only as part of inner experience,
that on the contrary inner experience, consciousness of the flux of
inner states, is only possible in and through experience of independent
material bodies in space. A sentence from each proof will show how
completely their conclusions are opposed.

     “Outer objects (bodies) are mere appearances, and are therefore
     nothing but a species of my representations, the objects of which
     are something only through these representations. Apart from them
     they are nothing.”[1044] “Perception of this permanent is possible
     only through a _thing_ outside me, and not through the mere
     _representation_ of a thing outside me.”[1045]

The one sentence asserts that outer objects are representations; the
other argues that they must be existences distinct from their
representations. The one inculcates a subjectivism of a very extreme
type; the other results in a realism, which though ultimately
phenomenalist, is none the less genuinely objective in character. This
difference is paralleled by the nature of the idealisms to which the two
proofs are opposed and which they profess to refute. The argument of the
_Paralogism_ of the first edition is itself Berkeleian, and refutes only
the problematic idealism of Descartes. The argument of the second
edition, though formally directed only against Descartes, constitutes a
no less complete refutation of the position of Berkeley. In its realism
it has kinship with the positions of Arnauld and of Reid, while, in
attempting to combine this realism with due recognition of the force and
validity of Hume’s sceptical philosophy, it breaks through all previous
classifications, formulates a profoundly original substitute for the
previously existing theories, and inaugurates a new era in the theory of
knowledge.

As already pointed out,[1046] Kant restates the distinction between the
subjective and the objective in a manner which places the problem of
knowledge in an entirely new light. The subjective is not to be regarded
as opposite in nature to the objective, but as a subspecies within it.
It does not proceed parallel with the sequence of natural existences,
but is itself part of the natural system which consciousness reveals.
Sensations, in the form in which they are consciously apprehended by us,
do not constitute our consciousness of nature, but are themselves
events which are possible only under the conditions which the natural
world itself supplies.[1047] The Cartesian dualism of the subjective and
the objective is thus subordinated to the Critical distinction between
appearance and reality. Kant’s phenomenalism is a genuine alternative to
the Berkeleian teaching, and not, as Schopenhauer and so many others
have sought to maintain, merely a variant upon it.

The striking contradiction between Kant’s various refutations of
idealism has led some of Kant’s most competent critics to give a
different interpretation of the argument of the second edition from that
given above. These critics take the independent and permanent objects
which are distinguished from our subjective representations to be things
in themselves. That is to say, they interpret this refutation as based
upon Kant’s semi-Critical doctrine of the transcendental object (in the
form in which it is employed for the solution of the _Antinomies_), and
so as agreeing with the refutation given in the _Prolegomena_.[1048]
Kant is taken as rejecting idealism because of his belief in things in
themselves. This is the view adopted by Benno Erdmann,[1049]
Sidgwick,[1050] A. J. Balfour.[1051]

As Vaihinger,[1052] Caird,[1053] and Adamson[1054] have shown, such an
interpretation is at complete variance with the actual text. This is,
indeed, so obvious upon unbiassed examination that the only point which
repays discussion is the question, why Benno Erdmann and those who
follow him should have felt constrained to place so unnatural an
interpretation upon Kant’s words. The explanation seems to lie in
Erdmann’s convinced belief, plainly shown in all his writings upon Kant,
that the _Critique_ expounds a single consistent and uniform
standpoint.[1055] If such belief be justified, there is no alternative
save to interpret Kant’s refutation of idealism in the manner which
Erdmann adopts. For as the subjectivism of much of Kant’s teaching is
beyond question, consistency can be obtained only by sacrifice of all
that conflicts with it. Thus, and thus alone, can Erdmann’s rendering of
the refutation of the second edition be sustained; the actual wording,
taken in and by itself, does not support it. Kant here departs from his
own repeated assertion, in the second hardly less than in the first
edition of the _Critique_, of the subjectivity of outer appearances.
But, as Vaihinger justly contends, Kant was never greater than in this
violation of self-consistency, “never more consistent than in this
inconsistency.” Tendencies, previously active but hitherto inarticulate,
are at last liberated. If the chrysalis stage of the intense brooding of
the twelve years of Critical thinking was completed in the writing of
the first edition of the _Critique_, the philosophy which then emerged
only attains to mature stature in those extensions of the _Critique_,
scattered through it from _Preface_ to _Paralogisms_, which embody this
realistic theory of the independent existence of material nature. For
this theory is no mere external accretion, and no mere reversal of
subordinate tenets, but a ripening of germinal ideas to which, even in
their more embryonic form, the earlier Critical teaching owed much of
its inspiration, and which, when consciously adopted and maturely
formulated, constitute such a deepening of its teaching as almost
amounts to transformation. The individual self is no longer viewed as
being the bearer of nature, but as its offspring and expression, and as
being, like nature, interpretable in its twofold aspect, as appearance
and as noumenally grounded. The bearer of appearance is not the
individual subject, but those transcendental creative agencies upon
which man and nature alike depend. Both man and nature transcend the
forms in which they are apprehended; and nothing in experience justifies
the giving of such priority to the individual mind as must be involved
in any acceptance of subjectivist theory. Though man is cognisant of
space and time, comprehending them within the limits of his
consciousness, and though in all experience unities are involved which
cannot originate within or be explained by experience, it is no less
true that man is himself subject to the conditions of space and time,
and that the synthetic unities which point beyond experience do not
carry us to a merely individual subject. If man is not a part or product
of nature, neither is nature the product of man. Kant’s
transcendentalism, in its maturest form, is genuinely phenomenalist in
character. That is the view which has already been developed above, in
the discussion of Kant’s transcendental deduction. I shall strive to
confirm it by comparison of the teaching of the two editions of the
_Critique_ in regard to the reality of outer appearances.

Schopenhauer, to whom this new development of the Critical teaching was
altogether anathema, the cloven hoof of the Hegelian heresies,
denounced it as a temporary and ill-judged distortion of the true
Critical position, maintaining that it is incapable of combination with
Kant’s central teaching, and that it finds no support in the tenets,
pure and unperverted, of the first edition. Kant, he holds, is here
untrue to himself, and temporarily, under the stress of polemical
discussion, lapses from the heights to which he had successfully made
his way, and upon which he had securely established, in agreement with
Plato and in extension of Berkeley, the doctrine of all genuine
philosophical thinking, the doctrine of the _Welt als Vorstellung_.

We may agree with Schopenhauer in regarding those sections of the first
edition of the _Critique_ which were omitted in the second edition as
being a permanently valuable expression of Kantian thought, and as
containing much that finds no equally adequate expression in the
passages which were substituted for them; and yet may challenge his
interpretation of both editions alike. If, as we have already been
arguing, we must regard Kant’s thinking as in large degree tentative,
that is, as progressing by the experimental following out of divergent
tendencies, we may justly maintain that among the most characteristic
features of his teaching are the readiness with which he makes changes
to meet deeper insight, and the persistency with which he strives to
attain a position in which there will be least sacrifice or blurring of
any helpful distinction, and fullest acknowledgment of the manifold and
diverse considerations that are really essential. Recognising these
features, we shall be prepared to question the legitimacy of
Schopenhauer’s opposition between the teaching of the two editions. We
shall rather expect to find that the two editions agree in the
alternating statement and retraction of conflicting positions, and that
the later edition, however defective in this or that aspect as compared
with the first edition, none the less expresses the maturer insight, and
represents a further stage in the development of ideas that have been
present from the start. It may perhaps for this very reason be more
contradictory in its teaching; it will at least yield clearer and more
adequate formulation of the diverse consequences and conflicting
implications of the earlier tenets. It will be richer in content, more
open-eyed in its adoption of mutually contradictory positions, freer
therefore from unconscious assumptions, and better fitted to supply the
data necessary for judgment upon its own defects. Only those critics who
are blind to the stupendous difficulties of the tasks which Kant here
sets himself, and credulous of their speedy and final completion, can
complain of the result. Philosophical thinkers of the most diverse
schools in Germany, France, and England, have throughout the nineteenth
century received from the _Critique_ much of their inspiration. The
profound influence which Kant has thus exercised upon succeeding thought
must surely be reckoned a greater achievement than any that could have
resulted from the constructing of a system so consistent and unified,
that the alternative would lie only between its acceptance and its
rejection. Ultimately the value of a philosophy consists more in the
richness of its content and the comprehensiveness of its dialectic, than
in the logical perfection of its formal structure. The latter quality is
especially unfitted to a philosophy which inaugurated a new era, and
formulated the older problems in an altogether novel manner. Under such
conditions fertility of suggestion and readiness to modify or even
recast adopted positions, openness to fuller insight acquired through
the very solutions that may at first have seemed to satisfy and close
the issues, are more to be valued than the power to remove
contradictions and attain consistency. This is the point of view which I
shall endeavour to justify in reference to the matters now before us. In
particular there are two points to be settled: first, whether and how
far the argument of the second edition is prefigured in the first
edition; and secondly, whether and to what extent it harmonises with,
and gives expression to, all that is most central and genuinely Critical
in both editions.

In the first place we must observe that the fourth _Paralogism_ occurs
in a section which bears all the signs of having been independently
written and incorporated later into the main text. It is certainly of
earlier origin than those sections which represent the third and fourth
layers of the deduction of the first edition, and very possibly was
composed in the middle ’seventies. Indeed, apart from single paragraphs
which may have been added in the process of adapting it to the main
text, it could quite well, so far as its refutation of idealism is
concerned, be of even earlier date. The question as to the consistency
of the refutation of the second edition with the teaching of the first
edition must therefore chiefly concern those parts of the _Analytic_
which connect with the later forms of the transcendental deduction, that
is to say, with the transcendental deduction itself, with the
_Analogies_ and _Postulates_, and with particular paragraphs that have
been added in other sections. We have already noted how Kant from the
very first uses terms which involve the drawing of a distinction between
representations and their objects. Passages in which this distinction
occurs can be cited from both the _Aesthetic_ and the _Analytic_, and
two such occur in the fourth _Paralogism_ itself.[1056] Objects, he
says, “correspond” to their representations. A variation in expression
is found in such passages as the following:

     “...the objects of outer perception also actually exist (_auch
     wirklich sind_) in that very form in which they are intuited in
     space....”[1057]

Such language is meaningless, and could never have been chosen, if Kant
had not, even in the earlier stages of his thinking, postulated a
difference between the existence of an object and the existence of its
representation. He must at least have distinguished between the
representations and their content. That, however, he could have done
without advancing to the further assertion of their independent
existence. Probably he was not at all clear in his own mind, and was too
preoccupied with the other complexities of his problem, to have thought
out his position to a definite decision. When, however, as in the fourth
_Paralogism_, he made any attempt so to do, he would seem to have felt
constrained to adopt the extreme subjectivist position. Expressions to
that effect are certainly very much more common than those above
mentioned. This is what affords Schopenhauer such justification,
certainly very strong, as he can cite for regarding subjectivism as the
undoubted teaching of the first edition.

When, however, we also take account of the very different teaching which
is contained in the important section on the _Postulates of Empirical
Thought_, the balance of evidence is decisively altered. The
counter-teaching, which is suggested by certain of the conflicting
factors of the transcendental deduction and of the _Analogies_, here
again receives clear and detailed expression. This is the more
significant, as it is in this section that Kant sets himself formally to
define what is to be understood by empirical reality. It thus contains
his, so to speak, official declaration as to the mode of existence
possessed by outer appearances. The passage chiefly relevant is as
follows:

     “If the existence of the thing is bound up with some perceptions
     according to the principles of their empirical connection (the
     Analogies), we can determine its existence antecedently to the
     perception of it, and consequently, to that extent, in an _a
     priori_ manner. For as the existence of the thing is bound up with
     our perceptions in a possible experience, we are able in the series
     of possible perceptions, and under the guidance of the Analogies,
     to make the transition from our actual perception to the thing in
     question. Thus we discover the existence of a magnetic matter
     pervading all bodies from the perception of the attracted iron
     filings, although the constitution of our organs cuts us off from
     all immediate perception of that matter. For in accordance with the
     laws of sensibility and the connection of our perceptions in a
     single experience, we should, were our senses more refined,
     actually experience it in an immediate empirical intuition. The
     grossness of our senses does not in any way decide the form of
     possible experience in general.”[1058]

Now it cannot, of course, be argued that the above passage is altogether
unambiguous. We can, if we feel sufficiently constrained thereto, place
upon it an interpretation which would harmonise it with Kant’s more
usual subjectivist teaching, namely as meaning that in the progressive
construction of experience, or in the ideal completion which follows
upon assumption of more refined sense-organs, possible empirical
realities are made to become, or are assumed to become, real, but that
until the possible experiences are thus realised in fact or in ideal
hypothesis, they exist outwardly only in the form of their noumenal
conditions. And as a matter of fact, this is how Kant himself interprets
the teaching of this section in the process of applying it in solution
of the antinomies.

     “Accordingly, if I represent to myself the aggregate of all objects
     of the senses existing in all time and all places, I do not set
     them, antecedently to experience, in space and time. The
     representation is nothing but the thought of a possible experience
     in its absolute completeness. Since the objects are mere
     representations, only in such a possible experience are they given.
     To say that they exist prior to all my experience, can only be
     taken as meaning that they will be met with, if, starting from
     actual perception, I advance to that part of experience to which
     they belong. The cause of the empirical conditions of this advance
     (that which determines what members I shall meet with, or how far I
     can meet with any such in my regress) is transcendental, and is
     therefore necessarily unknown to me. We are not, however, concerned
     with this transcendental cause, but only with the rule of
     progression in that experience in which objects, that is to say,
     appearances, are given. Moreover, in outcome it is a matter of
     indifference whether I say that in the empirical progress in space
     I can meet with stars a hundred times farther removed than the
     outermost now perceptible to me, or whether I say that they are
     perhaps to be met with in cosmical space even though no human being
     has ever perceived or ever will perceive them. For though they
     might be given as things in themselves, without relation to
     possible experience, they are still nothing to me, and therefore
     are not objects, save in so far as they are contained in the series
     of the empirical regress.”[1059]

But though this is a possible interpretation of the teaching of the
_Postulates_, and though further it is Kant’s own interpretation in
another portion of the _Critique_, it is not by any means thereby
decided that this is what the section itself actually teaches. Unbiassed
study of the section, in independence of the use to which it is
elsewhere put, can find within it no such limitation to its assertion of
the actual independent existence of non-perceived bodies. We have to
remember that the doctrine and solution of the _Antinomies_ was
completed prior to the writing of the central portions of the
_Critique_. The section treating of their _solution_ seems, indeed, in
certain parts to be later[1060] than the other main portions of the
chapter on the _Antinomies_, and must have been at least recast after
completion of the _Postulates_. But the subjectivist solution is so much
simpler in statement, so much more fully worked out, and indeed so much
more capable of definite formulation, and also so much more at one with
the teaching developed in the preceding chapter on the _Paralogisms_,
that even granting the doctrine expounded in the section on the
_Postulates_ to be genuinely phenomenalist, it is not surprising that
Kant should have been unwilling to recast his older and simpler solution
of the _Antinomies_. In any case we are not concerned to argue that
Kant, even after formulating the phenomenalist view, yields to it an
unwavering adherence. As I have already insisted, his attitude continues
to the very last to be one of alternation between two opposed
standpoints.

But the most significant feature of Kant’s treatment of the argument of
the _Postulates_ still remains for consideration. It was in immediate
succession to the paragraph above quoted[1061] that Kant, in the second
edition, placed his “_Refutation of Idealism_” with the emphatic
statement that this (not as in the first edition in connection with the
_Paralogisms_) was its “correct location.” It is required, he says, as a
reply to an objection which the teaching of the _Postulates_ must at
once suggest. The argument of the second edition in proof of the
independent reality of material bodies, and in disproof of subjectivism,
is thus given by Kant as a necessary extension and natural supplement of
the teaching of the first edition.

There is therefore reason for concluding that the same preconception
which has led to such radical misinterpretation of Kant’s _Refutation of
Idealism_ has been at work in inducing a false reading of Kant’s
argument in the _Postulates_, namely the belief that Kant’s teaching
proceeds on consistent lines, and that it must at all costs be
harmonised with itself. Finding subjectivism to be emphatically and
unambiguously inculcated in all the main sections of the _Critique_, and
the phenomenalist views, on the other hand, to be stated in a much less
definite and somewhat elusive manner, commentators have impoverished the
Critical teaching by suppression of many of its most subtile and
progressive doctrines. Kant’s experimental, tentative development of
divergent tendencies is surely preferable to this artificial product of
high-handed and unsympathetic emendation.


INNER SENSE AND APPERCEPTION

We are now in position to complete our treatment of inner sense. When
the inner world of feelings, volitions, and representations is placed on
the same empirical level as the outer world of objects in space, when
the two are correlated and yet also at the same time sharply
distinguished, when, further, it is maintained that objects in space
exist independently of their representations, and that in this
independence they are necessary for the possibility of the latter, the
whole aspect of the Critical teaching undergoes a genial and welcome
transformation. Instead of the forbidding doctrine that the world in
space is merely my representation, we have the very different teaching
that only through consciousness of an independent world in space is
consciousness of the inner subjective life possible at all, and that as
each is “external” to the other, neither can be reduced to, or be
absorbed within, the other. The inner representations do not produce or
generate the spatial objects, do not even condition their existence, but
are required only for the individual’s empirical consciousness of them.
Indeed the relations previously holding between them are now reversed.
It is the outer world which renders the subjective representations
possible. The former is prior to the latter; the latter exist in order
to reveal the former. The outer world in space must, indeed, be regarded
as conditioned by, and relative to, the noumenal conditions of its
possibility; but these, on Kant’s doctrine of outer and inner sense, are
distinct from all experienced contents and from all experienced mental
processes. This will at once be recognised as holding of the noumenal
conditions of the given manifold. But it is equally true, Kant
maintains, in regard to the noumenal conditions of our mental life. We
have no immediate knowledge of the transcendental syntheses that
condition all consciousness, and in our complete ignorance of their
specific nature they cannot legitimately be equated with any individual
or personal agent. As the empirical self is only what it is known as,
namely, appearance, it cannot be the bearer of appearance. This function
falls to that which underlies both inner and outer appearances equally,
and which within experience gains twofold expression for itself, in the
conception of the thing in itself = _x_ on the one hand, and in the
correlative conception of a transcendental subject, likewise = _x_, on
the other.

But with mention of the transcendental subject we are brought to a
problem which in the second edition invariably accompanies Kant’s
discussion of inner sense. The ‘I think’ of apperception can find
expression only in an empirical judgment, and yet, so far from being the
outcome of inner sense, preconditions its possibility. What then is its
relation to inner sense? Does not its recognition conflict with Kant’s
denial of the possibility of self-conscious reflection, of direct
intuitive apprehension by the self of itself? The pure apperception, ‘I
think,’ is equivalent, Kant declares, to the judgment ‘I am,’ and
therefore involves the assertion of the subject’s existence.[1062] Does
not this conflict on the one hand with the Critical doctrine that
knowledge of existence is only possible in terms of sense, and on the
other with the Critical limitation of the categories to the realm of
appearance? How are such assertions as that the ‘I think’ of pure
apperception refers to a non-empirical reality, and that it predicates
its existence, to be reconciled with the doctrine of inner sense as
above stated?

As we have already observed,[1063] Kant’s early doctrine of the
transcendental object was developed in a more or less close parallelism
with that of the transcendental unity of apperception. They were
regarded as correlative opposites, the dual centres of noumenal
reference for our merely subjective representations. Kant’s further
examination of the nature of apperception, as embodied in alterations in
the second edition, was certainly, as we shall find, inspired by the
criticisms which the first edition had called forth. His replies,
however, are merely more explicit statements of the distinction which he
had already developed in the first edition between the transcendental
and the empirical self, and that distinction in turn was doubtless
itself largely determined by his own independent recognition of the
untenability of his early view of the transcendental object. Though it
is much more difficult to differentiate between the empirical and the
transcendental self than to distinguish between the empirical object and
the thing in itself, both distinctions are from a genuinely Critical
standpoint equally imperative, and rest upon considerations that are
somewhat similar in the two cases.

One of the chief and most telling criticisms directed against the
teaching of the first edition was that Kant’s doctrine of a
transcendental consciousness of the self’s existence, _i.e._ of the
existence of a noumenal being, “this I or he or it (the thing) which
thinks,”[1064] is inconsistent with the teaching of the _Postulates of
Empirical Thought_. In that section, as also later in the section on the
theological _Ideal_, Kant had declared most emphatically that existence
is never discoverable in the content of any mere concept. It is revealed
in perception, and in perception alone, in virtue of the element of
sensation contained in the latter.

     “...to know the _actuality_ of things demands _perception_, and
     therefore sensation.... For that the concept precedes perception,
     signifies the concept’s mere possibility; the perception which
     supplies the content [_Stoff_] to the concept, is the sole
     criterion [_Charakter_] of actuality.”[1065]

Yet Kant had also maintained that the ‘I think’ is equivalent to ‘I
am,’[1066] and that in this form, as an intellectual consciousness of
the self’s existence, it precedes all experience. The teaching of the
_Postulates_ is, however, the teaching of the _Critique_ as a whole, and
such critics as Pistorius seemed therefore to be justified in
maintaining that Kant, in reducing the experiences of inner sense to
mere appearance, destroys the possibility of establishing reality in any
form. Appearance, in order to be appearance, presupposes the reality not
only of that which appears, but also of the mental process whereby it is
apprehended. But if reality is given only in sensation, and yet all
experience that involves sensation is merely appearance, there is no
self by which appearance can be conditioned; and only illusion
(_Schein_), not appearance (_Erscheinung_), is left. To quote Pistorius’
exact words:

     ”[If our inner representations are not things in themselves but
     only appearances] there will be nothing but illusion (_Schein_),
     for nothing remains to which anything can appear.”[1067]

Kant evidently felt the force of this criticism, for in the second
edition he replies to it on no less than seven different
occasions.[1068] In three of these passages[1069] the term _Schein_ is
employed, and in the note to B xxxix the term _Erdichtung_ appears. This
shows very conclusively that it is such criticism as the above that Kant
has in mind. The most explicit passage is B 428:

     “The proposition, ‘I think,’ or ‘I exist thinking,’ is an empirical
     proposition. Such a judgment, however, is conditioned by empirical
     intuition, and the object that is thought therefore underlies it as
     appearance. It would consequently seem that on our theory the soul
     is completely transformed, even in thinking [_selbst im Denken_],
     into appearance, and that in this way our consciousness itself, as
     being a mere illusion [_Schein_], must refer in fact to nothing.”

Kant, in his reply, is unyielding in the contention that the ‘I think,’
even though it involves an empirical judgment, is itself intellectual.
“This representation is a thinking, not an intuiting,”[1070] or as he
adds, “The ‘I think’ expresses the _actus_ whereby I determine my
existence.” Existence is therefore already given thereby.[1071] Kant
also still maintains that the self thus revealed is not “appearance and
still less illusion.”

     “I am conscious of myself ..., not as I appear to myself, nor as I
     am in myself, but only that I am.”[1072] “I thereby represent
     myself to myself neither as I am nor as I appear to myself. I think
     myself only as I do any object in general from whose mode of
     intuition I abstract.”[1073]

Kant’s method of meeting the criticism, while still holding to these
positions, is twofold. It consists in the first place in maintaining
that the ‘I think,’ though intellectual, can find expression only in
empirical judgments--in other words, that it is in and by itself formal
only, and presupposes as the occasion of its employment a given manifold
of inner sense; and secondly, by the statement that the ‘existence’
which is involved in the ‘I think’ is not the category of existence. Let
us take in order each of these two points.

Kant’s first method of reply itself appears in two forms, a stronger and
a milder. The milder mode of statement[1074] is to the effect that
though the representation ‘I am’ already immediately involves the
_thought_ of the existence of the subject, it yields no knowledge of it.
Knowledge would involve intuition, namely, consciousness of inner
determinations in time, which in turn would itself presuppose
consciousness of outer objects. As a merely intellectual
representation,

     “...this ‘I’ has not the least predicate of intuition which, in its
     character of permanence, could, somewhat after the manner of
     impenetrability in the empirical intuition of matter, serve as
     correlate of time determination in inner sense.”[1075]

The stronger and more definite mode of statement is that the ‘I think’
is an empirical proposition.[1076] Though it involves as one factor the
intellectual representation, ‘I think,’ it is none the less empirical.

     “Without some empirical representation supplying the material for
     thought, the _actus_, ‘I think,’ would not take place....”[1077]

The empirical is indeed “only the condition of the application or
employment of the pure intellectual faculty,” but as such is
indispensable. This is repeated in even clearer terms in B 429.

     “The proposition, ‘I think,’ in so far as it amounts to the
     assertion, ‘I exist thinking,’ is no mere logical function but
     determines the subject (which is then at the same time object) in
     respect of existence, and cannot take place without inner
     sense....”

This admission is the more significant in that it follows immediately
upon a passage in which Kant has been arguing that thinking, taken in
and by itself, is a merely logical function.

The real crux lies in the question as to the legitimacy of Kant’s
application of the predicate existence to the transcendental subject.
Its employment in reference to the empirical self in time is part of the
problem of the _Refutation of Idealism_ in the second edition; and the
answer there given is clear and definite. Consciousness of the empirical
self as existing in time involves consciousness of outer objects in
space. But as Kant recognises that a transcendental ego, not in time, is
presupposed in all consciousness of the empirical self, the question
whether the predicate of existence is also applicable to the
transcendental self cannot be altogether avoided, and is indeed referred
to in B 277. The attitude to be taken to this latter question is not,
however, defined in that section.

In the first edition Kant has insisted that the categories as pure forms
of the understanding, in isolation from space and time, are merely
logical functions “without content.” Interpreted literally, this would
signify that they are devoid of meaning, and therefore are incapable of
yielding the thought of any independent object or existence. As merely
logical forms of relation, they presuppose a material, and that is
supplied only through outer and inner sense. Such is not, however, the
way in which Kant interprets his own statement. It is qualified so as to
signify only that they are without _specific_ or _determinate_ content.
They are taken as yielding the conception of object in general. Passages
in plenty can be cited from the first edition[1078]--passages allowed to
remain in the second edition--in which Kant teaches that the pure forms
of understanding, as distinct from the schematised categories, yield the
conception of things in themselves. This view is, indeed, a survival
from his earlier doctrine of the transcendental object.[1079] In all
passages added in the second edition the consequences of his argument
are more rigorously drawn, and the doctrine of the transcendental object
is entirely eliminated. It is now unambiguously asserted that the pure
forms of understanding, the “_modes_ of self-consciousness in
thinking,”[1080] are not intellectual concepts of _objects_. They “yield
no object whatsoever.” The only object is that given through sense. And
since in thinking the transcendental subject we do, by Kant’s own
account, think an “object,” he is led to the conclusion, also explicitly
avowed, that the notion of existence involved in the ‘I think’ is not
the category of the same name.[1081] So also of the categories of
substance and causality.

     “If I represent myself as _subject_ of thoughts or as _ground_ of
     thinking, these modes of representation do not signify the
     categories of substance or of cause....”[1082]

The notion of the self, like the notion of things in themselves, is a
concept distinct from all the categories.[1083]

This conclusion is reinforced by means of an argument which is employed
in the section of the first edition on _Paralogisms_. Apperception is
the ground of the possibility of the categories, and these latter on
their side represent only the synthetic unity which that apperception
demands. Self-consciousness is therefore the representation of that
which is the condition of all unity, and which yet is itself
unconditioned.

     “...it does not represent itself through the categories, but knows
     the categories and through them all objects in the absolute unity
     of apperception, and so through itself. Now it is, indeed, very
     evident that I cannot know as an object that which I must
     presuppose in order to know any object....”[1084]

This argument recurs in B 422.

     “The subject of the categories cannot by thinking the categories
     acquire a conception of itself as an object of the categories. For,
     in order to think them, its pure self-consciousness, which is what
     was to be accounted for, must itself be presupposed.”

It is extremely difficult to estimate the value and cogency of this
argument.[1085] Many objections or rather qualifications must be made
before it can be either accepted or rejected. If it be taken only as
asserting that the unity of self-consciousness is not _adequately_
expressible through any of the categories, it is undoubtedly valid. If,
further, the categories be identified with the schemata, it is also true
that they are not applicable in any degree or manner. The schemata are
applicable only to natural existences in space and time.
Self-consciousness can never be reduced to a natural existence of that
type. On the other hand, if it is not self-consciousness as such, but
the self-conscious _subject_, which on Kant’s view is always
noumenal--“this I or he or it (the thing) which thinks”[1086]--that is
referred to, and if we distinguish between the categories strictly so
called, that is, the pure forms of understanding, and the schemata, it
is not at all evident that the self-conscious subject may not be
described as being an existence that is always a subject and never a
predicate, and as being related to experience as a ground or condition.
These indefinite assertions leave open alternative possibilities. They
do not even decide whether the self is “I or he or it.”[1087] In so far
as they advance beyond the mere assertion that the self rests upon
noumenal conditions they are, indeed, incapable of proof, but by no
Critical principle can they be shown to be inapplicable. When,
therefore, Kant may seem to extract a more definite conclusion from the
above argument,[1088] he advances beyond what it can be made to
support.

Kant is here influenced by the results of the ethical enquiries with
which in the period subsequent to 1781 he was chiefly preoccupied. He
believed himself to have proved that the self, as a self-conscious
being, is a genuinely noumenal existence. That being so, he was bound to
hold that the categories, even as pure logical forms, are inadequate to
express its real determinate nature. But he confounds this position with
the assertion that they are not only inadequate, but in and by
themselves are likewise inapplicable. That is not a legitimate
conclusion, for even if the self is more than mere subject or mere
ground, it will at least be so much. When ethical considerations are
left out of account, the only proper conclusion is that the
applicability of the categories to the self-conscious subject is capable
neither of proof nor of disproof, but that when the distinction between
appearance and reality (which as we shall find is ultimately based upon
the Ideas of Reason) has been drawn, the categories can be employed to
define the possible difference between self-conscious experience and its
unknown noumenal conditions. Any other conclusion conflicts with the
teaching of the section on the _Paralogisms_.

It is important to observe--a point ignored by such critics as Caird and
Watson--that in the sections under consideration[1089] Kant most
explicitly declares self-consciousness to be merely “the
_representation_ of that which is the condition of all unity.” He
maintains that this representation, as standing for “the determining
self (the thinking), is to be distinguished from the self which we are
seeking to determine (the subject which thinks) as knowledge from its
object,”[1090] or in other words, that, without special proof,
unattainable on theoretical grounds, “the unity of thought” may not be
taken as equivalent to the unity of the thinking subject.[1091] They may
be as diverse as unity of representation and unity of object represented
are frequently found to be. We may never argue from simplicity in a
representation to simplicity in its object.

But to return to the main thesis, it may be observed that these
arguments, with the exception of that which we have just been
considering from the nature of self-consciousness, lead to the
conclusion that the categories are as little applicable to the thing in
itself as to the transcendental subject. Even the argument from the
necessary and invariable presence of self-consciousness in each and
every act of judgment is itself valid only from a point of view which
regards self-consciousness in the manner of Kant’s early semi-Critical
view of the transcendental subject[1092] as an ultimate. But if, as is
maintained in the section in which this argument occurs, viz. that on
the _Paralogisms_, self-consciousness may be complexly conditioned, and
may indeed have conditions similar in nature to those which underlie
outer experience, the categories may be just as applicable, or as
inapplicable, to its noumenal nature as to the nature of the thing in
itself. It is noticeable that in the second edition, doubtless under the
influence of preoccupation with ethical problems, some of Kant’s
utterances betray a tendency to relax the rigour of his thinking, and to
bring his theoretical teaching into closer agreement with his ethical
results than the theoretical analysis in and by itself at all justifies.
This tendency was, of course, reinforced by the persisting influence of
that view of the transcendental subject which he had held in the middle
’seventies, and from which he never completely emancipated either his
language or his thinking.[1093] Indeed in several of the passages added
in the second edition[1094] Kant even goes so far as to adopt language
which if taken quite literally would mean that the ‘I think’ is an
immediate consciousness of the mind’s purely intellectual activity--a
view which, as we have seen,[1095] is altogether alien to the Critical
position. It would, as he argues so forcibly elsewhere, involve a kind
of experience which does not conform to Critical requirements, and which
would lie open to the attacks of sceptics such as Hume.

In B 157-8 the difficulties of Kant’s position are again manifest.
Speaking of the representation of the self, he declares that “I am
conscious of myself ..., not as I appear to myself, nor as I am in
myself, but only that I am.” This may seem to imply that existence is
predicable of the transcendental self. He adds that though the
determination, _i.e._ specification in empirical form, of my existence
(_mein eigenes Dasein_) is possible only in inner sensuous intuition, it
is “not appearance and still less mere illusion.” But in the appended
note it is urged that my existence (_Dasein_) as self-active being is
represented in purely indeterminate fashion. Only my existence _as
sensuous_, and therefore as appearance, can be known, _i.e._ can be made
determinate.

The problem is more directly and candidly faced in the note to B 422.
That note is interesting for quite a number of reasons. It reveals Kant
in the very act of recasting his position, and in the process of
searching around for a mode of formulation which will enable him to hold
to a transcendental consciousness of the self’s existence and at the
same time not to violate the definition of existence given in the
_Postulates_, _i.e._ both to posit the transcendental self as actual and
yet to deny the applicability to it of any of the categories. After
stating that the ‘I think’ is an empirical proposition in which my
existence is immediately involved, he proceeds further to describe it as
expressing “an undetermined empirical intuition, _i.e._ perception,” and
so as showing that sensation underlies its assertion of existence. Kant
does not, however, mean by these words that the existence asserted is
merely that of the empirical self; for he proceeds:

     “...existence is here not a category, which as such does not apply
     to an indeterminately-given object.... An indeterminate perception
     here signifies only something real that is given, given indeed to
     thought in general, and so not as appearance, nor as thing in
     itself (_Noumenon_), but as something which actually [_in der
     That_] exists, and which in the proposition, I think, is denoted
     [_bezeichnet_] as such.”

The phrases here employed are open to criticism on every side. Kant
completely departs from his usual terminology when he asserts that
through an “indeterminate perception” the self is given, and “given to
thought in general” as “something real.” The contention, that the
existence asserted is not a category, is also difficult to accept.[1096]
It is equally surprising to read that its reality is given “neither as
appearance nor as thing [_Sache_] in itself (_Noumenon_)”; for hitherto
no such alternative form of real existence has been recognised.

But to press such criticisms is to ignore the spirit for the sake of the
letter. Kant here breaks free from all his habitual modes of expression
for the very good and sufficient reason that he is striving to develop a
position more catholic and comprehensive than any previously adopted. He
is seeking to formulate a position which, without in any way justifying
or encouraging the transcendent employment of the categories, will yet
retain for thought the capacity of self-limitation, that is, of forming
concepts which will reveal the existence of things in themselves and so
will enable the mind to apprehend the radical distinction between things
in themselves and things experienced. But he has not yet discovered that
in so doing he is committing himself to the thesis that the distinction
is mediated, not by the understanding, but by Reason, not by categories,
but by Ideas.[1097] As I have already indicated, this tendency is
crossed by another derived from his preoccupation with moral problems,
namely, the desire to defend, in a manner which his Critical teaching
does not justify, the noumenal existence of the self as a _thinking_
being.




THE TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC




