Book II

THE ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES


The distinction which Kant here introduces for the first time between
understanding (now viewed as the faculty only of concepts) and the
faculty of judgment (_Urtheilskraft_) is artificial and extremely
arbitrary.[1098] As we have seen,[1099] his own real position involves a
complete departure from the traditional distinction between conceiving,
judging, and reasoning, as separate processes. All thinking without
exception finds expression in judgment. Judgment is the fundamental
activity of the understanding. It is “an act which contains all its
other acts.” Kant is bent, however, upon forcing the contents of the
_Critique_ into the external framework supplied by the traditional
logic, viewed as an architectonic; and we have therefore no option save
to take account of his exposition in the actual form which he has chosen
to give to it. Since general logic develops its teaching under three
separate headings, as the logic of conception, the logic of judgment,
and the logic of reasoning, the _Critique_ has to be made to conform to
this tripartite division. The preceding book is accordingly described as
dealing with concepts, and this second book as dealing with judgments or
principles; while understanding and the faculty of judgment, now viewed
as independent, are redefined to meet the exigencies of this new
arrangement, the former as being “the faculty of rules,” and the latter
as being “the faculty of subsuming under rules, _i.e._ of distinguishing
whether something does or does not stand under a given rule (_casus
datae legis_).”

The reader need not strive to discover any deep-lying ground or
justification for these definitions.[1100] Architectonic, that ‘open
sesame’ for so many of the secrets of the _Critique_, is the
all-sufficient spell to resolve the mystery. As a matter of fact, Kant
is here taking advantage of the popular meaning of the term judgment in
the sense in which we speak of a man of good judgment; and in order that
judgment and understanding may be distinguished he then imposes an
artificial limitation upon the meaning in which the latter term is to be
employed.

As formal logic abstracts from all content, it cannot, Kant maintains,
supply rules for the exercise of “judgment.” It is otherwise with
transcendental logic, which in the pure forms of sensibility possesses a
content enabling it to define in an _a priori_ manner the specific cases
to which concepts must be applicable. The _Analytic of Principles_ is
thus able to supply “a canon for the faculty of judgment, instructing it
how to apply to appearances the concepts of understanding which contain
the condition of _a priori_ rules.”[1101] This will involve (1) the
defining of the sensuous conditions under which the _a priori_ rules may
be applied--the problem of the chapter on schematism; and (2) the
formulating of the rules in their sensuous, though _a priori_,
concreteness--the problem of the chapter on “the system of all
principles of pure understanding.”

Such is Kant’s own very misleading account of the purposes of these two
chapters. There are other and sounder reasons why they should be
introduced. In the _Analytic of Concepts_, as we have seen,[1102] the
transcendental deduction only succeeds in proving that _a priori_ forms
of unity are required for the possibility of experience. No proof is
given that the various categories are just the particular forms
required, and that they are one and all indispensable. This omission can
be made good only by a series of proofs, directed to showing, in
reference to each separate category, its validity within experience and
its indispensableness for the possibility of experience. These proofs
are given in the second of the two chapters. The chapter on schematism
is preparatory in character; it draws attention to the importance of the
temporal aspect of human experience, and defines the categories in the
form in which they present themselves in an experience thus conditioned
by _a priori_ intuition.




CHAPTER I

THE SCHEMATISM OF PURE CONCEPTS OF UNDERSTANDING[1103]


The more artificial aspect of Kant’s argument again appears in the
reason which he assigns for the existence of a problem of schematism,
namely, that pure concepts, and the sensuous intuitions which have to be
subsumed under them, are completely opposite in nature. No such
explanation can be accepted. For if category and sensuous intuition are
really heterogeneous, no subsumption is possible; and if they are not
really heterogeneous, no such problem as Kant here refers to will exist.
The heterogeneity which Kant here asserts is merely that difference of
nature which follows from the diversity of their functions. The category
is formal and determines structure; intuition yields the content which
is thereby organised. Accordingly, the “third thing,” which Kant
postulates as required to bring category and intuition together, is not
properly so describable; it is simply the two co-operating in the manner
required for the possibility of experience. Kant’s method of stating the
problem of schematism is, however, so completely misleading, that before
we can profitably proceed, the various strands in his highly artificial
argument must be further disentangled. This is an ungrateful task, but
has at least the compensating interest of admirably illustrating the
kind of influence which Kant’s logical architectonic is constantly
exercising upon his statement of Critical principles.

The architectonic has in this connection two very unfortunate
consequences. It leads Kant to describe schematism as a process of
_subsumption_, and to speak of the transcendental schema as “a _third
thing_.” Neither assertion is legitimate. Schematism, properly
understood, is not a process of subsumption, but, as Kant has already
recognised in A 124, of synthetic interpretation. Creative synthesis,
whereby contents are apprehended in terms of functional relations, not
subsumption of particulars under universals that are homogeneous with
them, is what Kant must ultimately mean by the schematism of the pure
forms of understanding. A category, that is to say, may not be viewed as
_a predicate_ of a possible judgment, and as being applied to a subject
independently apprehended; its function is to articulate the judgment as
a whole. The category of substance and attribute, for instance, is the
_form_ of the categorical judgment, and may not be equated with any one
of its single parts.

Thus the criticisms which we have already passed upon Kant’s mode of
formulating the distinction between formal and transcendental
logic,[1104] are no less applicable to the sections now before us. The
terminology which Kant is here employing is borrowed from the
traditional logic, and is out of harmony with his Critical principles.

Kant’s description of the schema as a third thing, additional to
category and intuition, and intermediate between them, is also a result
of his misleading mode of formulating his problem. What Kant professes
to do is to interpret the relation of the categories to the intuitional
material as analogous to that holding between a class concept and the
particulars which can be subsumed under it. This is implied in his use
of the plate and circle illustration.[1105] But as the relation holding
between categories and the material of sense is that of form and matter,
structure and content, the analogy is thoroughly misleading. As _all_
content, strictly so called, falls on the side of the intuitional
material, there is no content, _i.e._ no quality or attribute, which is
common to both. And thus it happens that the _inappropriateness_ of the
analogy which Kant is seeking to enforce is ultimately the sole ground
which he is able to offer in support of his description of the schema as
“a third thing.”

     “Now it is clear [!] that there must be a third thing, which is
     homogeneous on the one hand with the category and on the other with
     the appearance, and which thus makes the application of the one to
     the other possible.”[1106]

On the contrary, the true Critical teaching is that category and
intuition, that is to say, form and content, mutually condition one
another, and that the so-called schema is simply a name for the latter
as apprehended in terms of the former.

But there is a further complication. Kant, as we have already
observed,[1107] defines judgment as being

     “...the faculty of subsuming under _rules_, _i.e._ of
     distinguishing whether something does or does not stand under a
     given rule (_casus datae legis_).”

Now this view of judgment really connects with the syllogism, not with
the proposition.[1108] As Kant states in his _Logic_, there are

     “...three essential elements in all inference: (1) a universal rule
     which is entitled the major premiss; (2) the proposition which
     subsumes a cognition under the condition of the universal rule, and
     which is entitled the minor premiss; and lastly, (3) the
     conclusion, the proposition which asserts or denies of the subsumed
     cognition the predicate of the rule.”[1109]

Regarded in this way, as the application of a _rule_, subsumption is
more broadly viewed and becomes a more appropriate analogy for the
relation of category to content. And obviously it is this comparison
that Kant has chiefly in mind in these introductory sections. For only
when the subsumption is that of a particular instance under a universal
_rule_, can the necessity of a _mediating_ condition be allowed.

Such, then, are the straits to which Kant is reduced in the endeavour to
hold loyally to his architectonic. He has to identify the two very
different kinds of subsumption which find expression in the proposition
and in the syllogism respectively; and when his analogy between logical
subsumption, thus loosely interpreted, and synthetic interpretation,
proves inapplicable, he uses the failure of the analogy as an argument
to prove the necessity of “a third thing.” On his own Critical teaching,
as elsewhere expounded, no such third thing need be postulated. Even the
definitions which he proceeds to give of the various schemata do not
really support this description of them.

But though Kant’s method of introducing and expounding the argument of
this chapter is thus misleading, the contents themselves are of
intrinsic value, and have a threefold bearing: (_a_) on the doctrine of
productive imagination; (_b_) on the relation holding between image and
concept; and (_c_) on the nature of the categories in their distinction
from the pure forms of understanding.

(_a_) Kant gives definite and precise expression to the two chief
characteristics of the productive imagination, namely, that it deals
with an _a priori_ manifold of pure intuition[1110] and that it
exercises a “hidden art in the depths of the human soul.”[1111] Kant’s
description of the schema as “a third thing,” _at once intellectual and
sensuous_, seems to be in large part due to the transference to it of
predicates already applied to the faculty which is supposed to be its
source. The distinction between the transcendental schema and the
particularised image is also given as analogous to that between the pure
and the empirical faculties of imagination. In A 141-2 = B 180-1, Kant
speaks of the _empirical_ faculty of _productive_ imagination, and so is
led, to the great confusion of his exposition, though also to the
enrichment of his teaching, to allow of empirical as well as of
transcendental schemata, and thus contrary to his own real position to
recognise schemata of such empirical objects as dog or horse--a view
which empirical psychology has since adopted in its doctrine of the
schematic image. This passage was doubtless written at the time when he
was inclining to the view that the empirical processes run parallel with
the transcendental.[1112] Kant’s final view is that empirical
imagination is always reproductive. This brings us, however, to our
second main point.

(_b_) Kant makes a statement which serves as a valuable corrective of
his looser assertions in other parts of the _Critique_.[1113] Five
points set after one another, thus,....., form an image of the number
five. The schema of the number five is, however, of very different
nature, and must not be identified with any such image. It is

     “...rather _the representation of a method_ whereby a multiplicity
     [in this case five] may be represented in an image in accordance
     with a certain concept, than this image itself....”[1114]

This becomes more evident in the case of large numbers, such as a
thousand. The thought or schema of the number remains just as clear and
definite as in the case of smaller numbers, but cannot be so adequately
embodied and surveyed in a concrete image.

     “This representation of a general procedure of imagination in
     providing its image for a concept, I name the schema to this
     concept.”[1115]

But even in the simplest cases an image can never be completely adequate
to the concept. The image of a triangle, for instance, is always some
particular triangle, and therefore represents only a part of the total
connotation. As the schema represents a universal rule of production in
accordance with a concept, it resembles the concept in its incapacity to
subsist in an objective form. Images become possible only through and in
accordance with schemata, but can never themselves be identified with
them. Schemata, therefore, and not images--such is the implied
conclusion--form the true subject-matter of the mathematical sciences.
Images are always particular; schemata are always universal. Images
represent existences; schemata represent methods of construction.

There are three criticisms which must be passed upon this position. In
the first place, the selection of the triangle as an illustration tends
to obscure the main point of Kant’s argument. As there are three very
different species of triangle, the concept triangle is a class concept
in a degree and manner which is not to be found in the concepts, say, of
the circle or of the number five. So that while Kant may seem to be
chiefly insisting upon the _inadequacy_[1116] of the image to represent
more than a part of the connotation of the corresponding concept, his
real intention is to emphasise that the schema expresses the conceptual
rule whereby, even in images that cover the whole connotation, the true
meaning of the image can alone be determined.

Secondly, the above definition of the schema as being “the
representation of a general procedure of imagination in providing an
image for a concept” is obviously bound up with Kant’s view of it as “a
third thing,” additional to the concept, and as intermediate between it
and the image.[1117] But as we have already found occasion to note, in
discussing Kant’s doctrine of the “construction” of mathematical
concepts,[1118] this threefold distinction is out of harmony with his
Critical principles. It results from his retention of the traditional
view of the concept as in all cases a mere concept, _i.e._ an abstracted
or class concept. In defining the schema Kant is defining the true
nature of the concept as against the false interpretation of it in the
traditional class-theory; he misrepresents the logic of his own
standpoint when he interpolates a third kind of representation
intermediate between the concept and the image. The concept ‘triangle,’
_as a concept_, is (to employ Kant’s own not very satisfactory terms)
the representation of the method of constructing a certain type of
object; and the only other mode of representing this kind of object is
the image. There may, indeed, as Kant has himself suggested, be a
species of image that may be entitled schematic; but if that be
identified with a blurred or indeterminate or merely symbolic form of
representation, it can have nothing in common with the _transcendental_
or _conceptual_ schema, save the name.

Thirdly, the entire discussion of the nature of the schemata of
“sensuous concepts” and of their relation to the sense image, is out of
order in this chapter; and however valuable in itself, bewilders the
reader who very properly assumes for it a relevancy which it does not
possess. The pure concepts of the understanding, whose schemata Kant is
endeavouring to define, are altogether different in nature from sensuous
representations, and can never be reduced in any form or degree to an
image. They are wholly transcendental, representing pure syntheses
unified through categories in accordance with the form of inner sense.
This, however, brings us to our last main point.

(_c_) Kant’s manner of employing the term category is a typical example
of his characteristic carelessness in the use of his technical terms.
Sometimes it signifies the pure forms of understanding. But more
frequently it stands for what he now, for the first time, entitles
schemata, namely, the pure conceptual forms as modified through relation
to time. To take as examples the two chief categories of relation. The
first category of relation, viewed as a form of the pure understanding,
is the merely logical conception of that which is always a subject and
never a predicate. The corresponding schema is the conception of that
which has permanent existence in time; it is not the logical notion of
_subject_, but the transcendental conception of _substance_. The pure
logical conception of ground and consequence is similarly distinguished
from the transcendental schema of cause and effect.

This contrast is of supreme importance in the Critical philosophy, and
ought therefore to have been marked by a careful distinction of terms.
Had Kant restricted the term category to denote the pure forms, and
invariably employed the term schemata to signify their more concrete
counterparts, many ambiguities and confusions would have been prevented.
The table of categories, in its distinction from the table of logical
forms, would then have been named the table of schemata, and the
definitions given in this chapter would have been appended to it, as the
proper supplement to the metaphysical deduction, completing it by a
careful definition of each separate schema. For what Kant usually means
when he speaks of the categories _are_ the schemata; and the chapter
before us therefore contains their delayed definitions.[1119] As Kant
has constantly been insisting, and as he again so emphatically teaches
in this chapter, the pure forms of understanding, taken in and by
themselves, apart from the forms of intuition, have no relation to any
object, and are mere logical functions without content or determinate
meaning.

From this point of view the misleading influence of Kant’s architectonic
may again be noted. It forces him to preface his argument by
introductory remarks which run entirely counter to the very point which
he is chiefly concerned to illustrate and enforce, namely, the
inseparability of conception and intuition in all experience and
knowledge. He does, indeed, draw attention to the fact that the
conditions which serve to realise the pure concepts of understanding
also at the same time restrict them, but it is with their empirical
employment that he is here chiefly concerned.

Caird’s[1120] mode of expounding Kant’s doctrine of schematism may serve
as an example of the misleading influence of Kant’s artificial method of
introducing his argument. As Caird accepts Kant’s initial statements at
their face value, he is led to read the entire chapter in accordance
with them, and so to interpret it as being a virtual recantation of the
assumptions which underlie the statement of its problem. The truer view
would rather seem to be that the introduction is demanded by the
exigencies of Kant’s architectonic, and therefore yields no true account
either of the essential purpose of the chapter or of its actual
contents. Cohen not unjustly remarks that

     “...recent writers are guilty of a very strange misreading of Kant
     when they maintain, as if in opposition to him, a thought to which
     his doctrine of schematism gives profound expression, namely, that
     intuition and conception do not function independently, and that
     thought, and still more knowledge, is and must always be
     intuitive.”[1121]

Cohen fails, however, to draw attention to the cause of the
misunderstanding for which Kant must certainly share the blame.
Riehl,[1122] while adopting a somewhat similar view to that here given,
traces Kant’s misleading mode of stating the problem to his holding a
false view of the universality of the concept. Such criticism of Kant,
like that passed by Caird, is in many respects justified, but the
occasion upon which the admonition is made to follow would none the less
seem to be ill-chosen.

It may be asked why Kant in this chapter so completely ignores space. No
really satisfactory answer seems to present itself. It is true that time
is the one universal form of all intuition, of outer as well as of inner
experience. It is also true that, as Kant elsewhere shows, consciousness
of time presupposes consciousness of space for its own possibility, and
so to that extent may be regarded as including the latter form of
consciousness within itself. Nevertheless Kant’s concentration on the
temporal aspect of experience is exceedingly arbitrary, and results in
certain unfortunate consequences. Owing to the manner in which Kant
envisages his problem[1123] he is bound, indeed, to lay the greater
emphasis upon time, but that need not have involved so exclusive a
recognition of its field and function. Possibly Kant’s very natural
preoccupation with his new and revolutionary doctrines of inner sense
and productive imagination has something to do with the matter.

Though the definitions given of the various schemata, especially of
those of reality and existence, raise many difficulties, consideration
of them must be deferred.[1124] They can be properly discussed only in
connection with the principles which Kant bases upon them. Only one
further point calls for present remark. Kant does not give a schema for
each of the categories. In the first two groups of pure conceptual
forms, those of quantity and of quality, he gives a schema only for the
third category in each case. Number is strictly not the schema of
quantity as such, but of _totality_. The schema of quality is a
definition only of _limitation_.[1125] This departure from the demands
of strict architectonic is made without comment or explanation of any
kind. Kant delights to insist upon the confirmation given to his
teaching by the fulfilment of architectonic requirements; he is for the
most part silent when they fail to correspond. This architectonic was a
hobby sufficiently serious to yield him keen pleasure in its
elaboration, but was not so vital to his main purposes as to call for
stronger measures when shortcomings occurred.

In concluding this chapter Kant draws attention to the fact that the
sensuous conditions which serve to realise the pure concepts also at the
same time restrict their meaning. Their wider meaning is, however, of
merely logical character.[1126] Their function, as pure concepts, lies
solely in establishing unity of representation; they do not therefore
suffice to yield knowledge of any object. Objective application “comes
to them solely from sensibility.” In these statements Kant expounds one
of his fundamental doctrines, but in a manner which does less than
justice to the independent value of pure thought. As he elsewhere
teaches,[1127] it is not sense that sets limits to understanding; it is
the pure forms of thought that enable the mind to appreciate the limited
and merely phenomenal character of the world experienced.




