CHAPTER II

THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON[1495]


This introduction summarises the preceding argument, and distinguishes
the new problems of _Antinomy_ from those of the _Paralogisms_. In
rational psychology pure Reason attains, as it were, euthanasia; in the
antinomies an entirely different situation is disclosed. For though
rational cosmology is able to expound itself in a series of demonstrated
theses, its teaching stands in irreconcilable conflict with the actual
nature of appearances, as expressed through a series of antitheses which
are demonstrable in an equally cogent manner.


SECTION I

SYSTEM OF THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS[1496]

The first eight paragraphs of this section are of great textual
interest. They must have been written at a time when Kant still intended
to expound his entire criticism of metaphysical science in the form of a
doctrine of antinomy. For they define the Ideas of Reason as exclusively
cosmological,[1497] and give a very different explanation of their
origin from that which has been expounded in the preceding chapters.
Evidently, therefore, this part of the section must have been written
prior to Kant’s formulation of the metaphysical deduction from the three
species of syllogism. This is supported by the fact that the argument
begins anew, just as if the matter had not previously been discussed;
and that, though a new view of the nature of Reason is propounded, there
is not the least mention of the more Idealist view which it displaces.
Reason, Kant here teaches, is not a faculty separate from the
understanding, and does not therefore produce any concept peculiar to
itself. Reason is simply a name for the understanding in so far as it
acts independently of sensibility, and seeks, by means of its pure
forms, in abstraction from all empirical limitations, to grasp the
unconditioned. “The transcendental Ideas are in reality nothing but
categories extended to the unconditioned.” The intelligible, as thus
conceived by the understanding, expresses itself, as he later shows, in
a series of theses; while the sensuous expresses its opposite and
conflicting character in a series of antitheses.

Yet not all categories yield a concept of the unconditioned. That is
possible only to those which concern themselves with a series of members
conditioning and conditioned, and in reference to which, therefore, the
postulate of an unconditioned would seem to be legitimate, viz.: (1)
unconditioned quantity in space and time; (2) unconditioned quality
(indivisibility and simplicity) of reality in space (matter); (3)
unconditioned causality of appearances; (4) unconditioned necessity of
appearances. As this arrangement is determined by the needs of Kant’s
architectonic, no detailed comment is here called for. Its consequences
we shall have ample opportunity to consider later. As already noted,
Kant’s statement in A 414 = B 441, that “the category of substance and
accident does not lend itself to a transcendental Idea,” shows very
clearly that, at the time when he composed this passage, he had not yet
bethought himself of placing a separate and independent Idea at the
basis of rational psychology. But as Kant here strives to follow the
fourfold arrangement of the categories, the content of these paragraphs
must either have been later recast or have been composed in the interval
between his discovery of the metaphysical deduction of the categories
and his formulation of the corresponding deduction of the Ideas from the
three forms of syllogism. It may also be observed that the derivation of
the cosmological Idea from the hypothetical syllogism, which embodies
only the category of causality, clashes with the above specification of
it in terms of all four rubrics of category.

The remaining paragraphs (ninth to thirteenth) of this section must be
of later date, as they are developed in view of the independent
treatment of the theological Ideal.[1498] (Adickes, in dating the ninth
and tenth paragraphs with the preceding instead of with the concluding
paragraphs, would seem to have overlooked this fact.) In order to
justify the treatment of the Ideas of a first cause and of unconditioned
necessity, as _cosmological_, Kant now asserts that the antinomies
concern only appearances--“our [cosmical] Ideas being directed only to
what is unconditioned _among the appearances_,”[1499] _and not to
noumena_.[1500] His explanation of the nature of transcendental
illusion, and of the antinomies in particular, as being due to a failure
to distinguish between appearance and things in themselves, is thus
ruthlessly sacrificed to considerations of architectonic. Kant could
not, of course, consistently hold to the position here adopted; but it
causes him from time to time, especially in dealing with the third and
fourth antinomies, to make statements which tend seriously to obscure
the argument and to bewilder the careful reader.

Kant is far from clear as to the relation in which the concepts of the
totality of conditions and of the unconditioned stand to one
another.[1501] In A 322 = B 379 they would seem to be taken as exactly
equivalent concepts. In A 416-17 = B 443-5 they are apparently regarded
as distinct, the former only leading up to the latter. But discussion of
this important point must meantime be deferred.[1502]


SECTION II

ANTITHETIC OF PURE REASON[1503]

     ”[Antithetic] is the conflict between two apparently dogmatic
     judgments [_Erkenntnisse_] to neither of which can we ascribe any
     superior claim to acceptance over the other, _i.e._ by Antithetic I
     mean a _thesis_, together with an _antithesis_.” “Transcendental
     Antithetic is an investigation of the antinomy of pure Reason, its
     causes and outcome.”

The very existence of such antinomy presupposes a twofold condition:
first, that it does not refer to a gratuitous but to an inevitable
problem of human Reason, “one which it must necessarily encounter in its
natural progress”; and secondly, that the thesis and the antithesis
together generate a “natural and inevitable illusion,” which continues
to persist even after its deceptive power has been clearly disclosed.
Such conflict is caused by the fact that Reason seeks a unity which
transcends the understanding, and which nevertheless is meant to
conform to the conditions of the understanding. If the unity is adequate
to the demands of Reason, it is too great for the understanding; if it
is commensurate with the understanding, it is too small for
Reason.[1504] The theses express the higher unity at which Reason aims;
the antitheses are the judgments to which the understanding is
constrained by the nature of the appearances with which both it and
Reason profess to deal. If we hold to Reason, we make assertions
contradictory of the appearances; while if we place reliance on the
understanding, Reason condemns our conclusions.

This conflict is limited to those few problems above enumerated in which
we are called upon to complete a given series.[1505] Since totality,
whether in the form of a first beginning of the series or as an actual
infinity of the whole series, can never itself be experienced, these are
problems in regard to which experience can be of no assistance to us. It
can neither confirm nor refute any particular solution. The only
possible method of deciding between the competing claims is to watch or
even to provoke the conflict, in the hope that we may finally be able to
detect some misunderstanding, and so to resolve the conflict to the
satisfaction of both the litigants. Such is Kant’s description of what
he entitles his “sceptical method.”[1506]

Without here attempting a full discussion of the subject, it seems
advisable to point out at the very start what Kant’s exposition
seriously obscures, namely, the real character of the evidence upon
which the theses and the antitheses respectively rest. The latter are
not correctly stated as transcending experience, and as therefore
incapable of confirmation by it. The proofs which Kant offers of them
are, indeed, of a non-empirical _a priori_ character. They are
formulated in terms of the dogmatic rationalism of the Leibnizian
position, with a constant appeal to abstract principles. But, as a
matter of fact, they can be much more adequately established--in so far
as they can be established at all--through analysis of the spatial and
temporal conditions of material existence. As space and time are
continuous and homogeneous, any assertion which is true of a space or
time however small is likewise true of a space or time however large.
Any space consists of spaces, and must be regarded as itself part of a
larger whole.[1507] Any time consists of parts which are themselves
times, and is apprehensible only as following upon preceding times. It
is by such considerations as these that we are led to regard the
material world as unlimited, as infinitely divisible, and as having no
first state.

Kant’s method of demonstrating the theses--that the world is limited, is
finitely divisible, and has a first state--is no less misleading. Here
again his rationalistic arguments conceal the basis upon which the
various theses really rest. Their true determining ground is the demand
of Reason for some more satisfactory form of unconditionedness than that
which is found in the actual infinite. It is this demand which has led
philosophers to look around for proofs in support of the theses, and to
elaborate those rationalistic arguments which Kant here reproduces. Thus
the grounds of the antitheses are altogether different from those of the
theses; and in neither case are they properly represented by the
arguments which Kant employs.[1508]

The reasons why Kant in his detailed statement of the antinomies has
omitted, or at least subordinated, the above considerations, are complex
and various. In the first place, this doctrine of antinomy was in
several of its main features already formulated prior to his development
of the Critical philosophy. It forms part of his _Dissertation_ of 1770;
and at that time Kant was still largely in fundamental sympathy with the
Leibnizian ontology. Secondly, Kant is here professing to criticise the
science of rational cosmology, and is therefore bound to expound it in
more or less current form. And in the third place, he teaches that _the
antinomies exist as antinomies only when viewed from the false
standpoint of dogmatic rationalism_. Had he eliminated the rationalistic
proofs, the conflict of the antinomies, in its strictly logical form,
as the conflict of direct contradictories, would at once have vanished.
The general framework of this division of the _Dialectic_ demanded a
rationalistic treatment of both theses and antitheses, and Kant believed
that the rationalistic proofs which he propounds in their support are
unanswerable, so long as the dogmatic standpoint of ordinary
consciousness and of Leibnizian ontology is preserved. But even when
that important limitation is kept in view, Kant fails to justify this
interpretation of the conflict, and we must therefore be prepared to
find that his proofs, _whether of theses or of antitheses_, are in all
cases inconclusive. I shall append to each of his arguments a statement
of the reasons which constrain us to reject them as unsound. We shall
then be in a position to consider his whole doctrine of antinomy in its
broader aspects, and in its connection with the teaching of the other
main divisions of the _Dialectic_.


FIRST ANTINOMY

=Thesis.=--(_a_) The world has a beginning in time, and (_b_) is also
limited in regard to space.

=Thesis= _a._ =Proof.=--If we assume the opposite, namely, that the world
has no beginning in time, and if we define the infinite as that which
can never be completed by means of a successive synthesis, we must
conclude that the world-series can never complete itself. But the entire
series of past events _elapses_, _i.e._ completes itself at each moment.
It cannot therefore be infinite.

=Criticism.=--This argument gains its plausibility from the illegitimate
use of the term ‘elapse’ (_verfliessen_) as equivalent to ‘complete
itself.’ If it be really correct to define the infinite as that which
can never be completed, the conclusion to be drawn is that the temporal
series is always actually infinite, and that no point or event in it is
nearer to or further from either its beginning or its end.[1509] We may
select any point in the series as that from which we propose to begin a
regress to the earlier members of the series, but if the series is
actually infinite, it will be a regress without possibility of
completion, and one therefore which removes all justification for
asserting that at the point chosen a series has completed itself. It has
no beginning, and has no completion. What it has done at each moment of
the past it is still doing at each present moment, namely, coming out of
an inexhaustible past and passing into an equally inexhaustible future.
Time is by its given nature capable of being interpreted only as
actually infinite, alike in its past and in its future. It cannot
complete itself any more than it can begin itself. The one would be as
gross a violation of its nature as would the other. The present exists
only as a species of transition, unique in itself, but analogous in
nature to the innumerable other times that constitute time past. It is a
transition from the infinite through the infinite to the infinite. That
we cannot comprehend how, from an infinitude that has no beginning, the
present should ever have been reached, is no sufficient reason for
denying what by the very nature of time we are compelled to accept as a
correct description of the situation which is being analysed. The actual
nature of time is such as to rule out from among the possibilities the
thesis which Kant is here professing to be able to establish; time,
being such as it actually is, can have no beginning.

What thus holds of time may likewise hold of events in time. If time is
actually infinite, no proof can be derived from it in support of the
assumption that the world has had a beginning in time.

The phrase “by means of a successive synthesis” gives a needlessly
subjectivist colouring to Kant’s method of proof. The antinomy is
professedly being stated from the realist standpoint, and ought not
therefore to be complicated by any such reference. This objection
applies, as we shall find, still more strongly to Kant’s proof of the
second part of the thesis. The latter proof depends upon this
subjectivist reference; the present proof does not.

Kant limits his problem to the past infinitude of time. The reason for
this lies, of course, in the fact that he is concerned with the problem
of creation. The limitation is, however, misleading.

=Thesis= _b._--The world is limited in regard to space.

=Proof.=--Assume the opposite, namely, that the world is an infinite,
given whole of coexisting parts. A magnitude not given within the
determinate limits of an intuition can only be thought through the
synthesis of its parts, and its totality through their completed
synthesis. In order, therefore, that we may be able to think as a single
whole the world which fills all space, the successive synthesis of the
parts of an infinite world must be regarded as completed, _i.e._ an
infinite must be regarded as having elapsed in the enumeration of all
coexisting things. This, however, is impossible. An infinite aggregate
of actual things cannot therefore be viewed as a given whole, nor as
being given as coexistent. Consequently the world of spatial existences
must be regarded as finite.

=Criticism.=--From the impossibility of traversing infinite space in
thought by the successive addition of part to part, Kant here argues
that “an infinite aggregate of actual things cannot be viewed as a given
whole,” and consequently that the world cannot be infinitely extended in
space. That is, from a _subjective impossibility of apprehension_ he
infers an _objective impossibility of existence_. But Kant has himself
defined the infinite as involving this subjective impossibility; for in
the proof of thesis a he has stated that the infinitude of a series
consists in the very fact that it can never be completed through
successive synthesis. Kant is therefore propounding against the
_existence_ of the infinite the very feature which by definition
constitutes its infinitude. The implication would seem to be that the
concept of the infinite is the concept of that which _ex definitione_
cannot exist, and that there is therefore a contradiction in the very
idea of the actual infinite.

Deferring for a moment the further objections to which such procedure
lies open, we may observe that Kant, in arguing from a subjective to an
objective impossibility, commits the fallacy of _ignoratio elenchi_. For
when the conditions of objective existence are recognised in their
distinction from those of mental apprehension, the supposed
contradiction vanishes, and the argument ceases to have any cogency. The
use of the words ‘given’ and ‘whole’ is misleading. If space is
infinite, it is without bounds, and cannot therefore exist as a whole in
any usual meaning of that term. For the same reason it must be incapable
of being given as a whole. Its infinitude is a presupposition which
analysis of actually given portions of it constrains us to postulate,
and has to be conceived in terms of the definition employed in thesis
_a_. The given must always be conceived as involving what is not itself
given and what is not even capable of complete construction. In terms of
this presupposition an actual infinite, not given and not capable of
construction, can be represented with entire consistency.

But to return to the main assumption upon which Kant’s proof would seem
to rest: it is all-important to observe that Kant does not, either in
the _Critique_ or in any other of his writings, assert that the concept
of the actual infinite is inherently self-contradictory. This is a
matter in regard to which many of Kant’s critics have misrepresented his
teaching. Kant’s argument may, as we have just maintained, be found on
examination to involve the above assertion; but this, if clearly
established, so far from commending the argument to Kant, would have led
him to reject it as invalid. The passage in the _Dissertation_[1510] of
1770, which contains his most definite utterance on this point,
represents the view from which he never afterwards departed. It may be
quoted in full.

     “Those who reject the actual mathematical infinite do so in a very
     casual manner. For they so construct their definition of the
     _infinite_ that they are able to extract a contradiction from it.
     The infinite is described by them as _a quantity than which none
     greater is possible_, and the mathematical infinite as a
     multiplicity--of an assignable unit--than which none greater is
     possible. Since they thus substitute _maximum_ for _infinitum_, and
     a greatest multiplicity is impossible, they easily conclude against
     this infinite which they have themselves invented. Or, it may be,
     they entitle an infinite multiplicity an _infinite number_, and
     point out that such a phrase is meaningless, as is, indeed,
     perfectly evident. But again they have fought and overthrown only
     the figments of their own minds. If, however, they had conceived
     the mathematical infinite as a quantity which, when related to
     measure, as its unity, is _a multiplicity greater than all number_;
     and if furthermore, they had observed that _measurability_ here
     denotes only the relation [of the infinite] to the standards of the
     human intellect, which is not permitted to attain to a _definite
     conception of multiplicity_ save by the successive addition of unit
     to unit, nor to the _sum-total_ (which is called _number_) save by
     completing this progress in a finite time; they would have
     perceived clearly that what does not conform to the established law
     of some subject need not on that account exceed all intellection.
     An intellect may exist, though not indeed a human intellect, which
     perceives a multiplicity distinctly in one intuition [_uno obtutu_]
     without the successive application of a measure.”

The concluding sentences of this _Dissertation_ passage may be taken as
Kant’s own better and abiding judgment in regard to the question before
us. We must not argue from the impossibility of mentally traversing the
infinite to the impossibility of its existence. Indeed the essentials
of the above passage are restated in the ‘Observation’ on this
thesis.[1511] Thus the concept of the actual infinite is not only, as a
concept, perfectly self-consistent, it is also one which, in view of the
nature of time and of space, we are constrained to accept as a correct
representation of the actually given. The thesis of this first antinomy
runs directly counter to admitted facts. That Kant is here arguing in
respect to the world, and not merely in respect to space and time, does
not essentially alter the situation. For if space and time are
necessarily to be viewed as infinite, there can be no _a priori_
proof--none, at least, of the kind here attempted--that the world-series
may not be so likewise.

=Antithesis.=--(_a_) The world has no beginning in time; (_b_) has no
limits in space. In both these respects the world is infinite.

In these antitheses Kant assumes that space and time are actually
infinite, and from that assumption advances to the proof that this is
likewise true of the world in its spatial and temporal aspects. This, by
itself, ought to be sufficient evidence that Kant does not regard the
actual infinite as an inherently impossible conception. As the
antinomies are avowedly formulated from the realist, dogmatic standpoint
of ordinary consciousness, Kant is also enabled to assume that if the
world begins to be, it must have an antecedent cause determining it to
exist at that moment rather than at another.

=Antithesis= _a._ =Proof.=--Let us assume the opposite, namely, that the
world has a beginning. It will then be preceded by an empty time in
which it was not. But in an empty time no becoming is possible, since in
such a time no part possesses over any other any distinguishing
condition of existence rather than of non-existence. The world must
therefore be infinite as regards past time.

=Criticism.=--In this argument everything depends upon what is to be meant
by the term ‘world.’ If Kant means by it merely the material world, the
assumption of its non-existence does not leave only empty time and
space. Other kinds of existence may be possible, and in these a
sufficient cause of its first beginning may be found. The nature of
creative action will remain mysterious and incomprehensible, but that is
no sufficient reason for denying its possibility. If, on the other hand,
Kant means by the world ‘all that is,’ the assumption of its
non-existence is likewise the assumption of the non-existence of all
its possible causes. That, however, is for ordinary consciousness a
quite impossible assumption, since it runs counter to the causal
principle which is taken as universally valid. From this point of view
the argument consists in making an impossible assumption, and in then
pointing out the impossible consequence which must follow. By such a
mode of argument no conclusion can be reached. Kant’s decision ought
rather to have been that, as time is actually infinite, the world may be
so likewise, but that though _reality_ must in some form be eternally
existent, the _material world_ cannot be proved to be so by any _a
priori_ proof of the kind here given.

=Antithesis= _b._ =Proof.=--Let us assume the opposite, namely, that the
world is finite, existing in an empty limitless space. There will then
be not only a relation of things _in space_, but also of things _to
space_. But as the world is a totality outside of which no object of
intuition can be found, the relation of the world to empty space is a
relation to _no object_. Such a relation is nothing. Consequently the
opposite holds; the world must be infinitely extended.

=Criticism.=--That Kant himself felt the inadequacy of this argument, when
taken from the dogmatic standpoint, is indicated by the lengthy note
which he has appended to it, and which develops his own Critical view of
space as not a real independent object, but merely the form of external
intuition. From the standpoint of ordinary consciousness space is a
self-existent entity, and there is no insuperable difficulty in
conceiving a relation as holding between it and its contents. The
introduction of the opposed standpoint of the _Aesthetic_ therefore runs
directly counter to Kant’s own intention of expounding the antinomies
from the dogmatic standpoint which involves this realist view of space,
and of showing that they afford, in independence of the arguments of the
_Aesthetic_, an indirect proof of the untenableness of that
belief.[1512] The conclusion which ought to have been drawn is analogous
to that above suggested for thesis _a._ As space is actually infinite,
the material world may be so likewise; but that it actually is so,
cannot be established by an _a priori_ argument of the kind here
attempted.


SECOND ANTINOMY

=Thesis.=--Every composite substance in the world consists of simple
parts, and nothing anywhere exists save the simple or what is composed
of it.

=Proof.=--Let us assume the opposite, namely, that substances do not
consist of simple parts. If all composition be then removed in thought,
no composite part, and (as there are no simple parts) also no simple
part, and therefore nothing whatsoever, will remain. Consequently no
substance will be given. Either, therefore, it is impossible to remove
in thought all composition, or after its removal something that exists
without composition, _i.e._ the simple, must remain. In the former case
the composite would not itself consist of substances (with them
composition is a merely accidental relation, and they must, as
self-persisting beings, be able to exist independently of it). As this
contradicts our assumption, only the latter alternative remains, namely,
that the substantial compounds in the world consist of simple parts.

=Criticism.=--Kant here assumes, by his definition of terms, the point
which he professes to establish by argument. The substance referred to,
though never itself mentioned by name, is extended matter. Kant
identifies it with ‘composite substance.’ Substance, he further
dogmatically decides, is that which is capable of independent existence,
and to which all relations of composition are therefore merely
accidental. If these assumptions be granted, it at once follows that
composition cannot be essential to matter, and that when all composition
is thought away, its reality will be disclosed as consisting in simple
parts. Kant, however, makes no attempt to prove that extended matter can
be defined in any such terms. From the dogmatic point of view of
ordinary consciousness, though not from the sophisticated standpoint of
Leibniz, extension is of the very essence of matter; and, as Kant
himself believed,[1513] the continuity of extension is such as to
exclude all possibility of elimination of the composite. For he
maintains that, however far division be carried, the parts remain no
less composite than the whole from which the regress has started. On any
such view the extended and the composite are not equivalent terms. The
opposite of the composite is the simple; the opposite of the extended is
the non-extended. Kant is here surreptitiously substituting a Leibnizian
metaphysics in place of the empirical reality which is supposed to
necessitate the argument.

In the _Observation_ on this thesis Kant shows consciousness of the
defects of his argument. It does not apply to space, time, or change.

     “We ought not to call space a _compositum_ but a _totum_, because
     its parts are possible only in the whole, not the whole through the
     parts.”[1514]

As Kant further states, he is speaking only of the simples of the
Leibnizian system. This thesis is “the dialectical principle of
monadology.” Again in the _Observation_ on the antithesis, in commenting
on the mathematical proof of the infinite divisibility of matter, Kant
even goes so far as to declare that the argument of the thesis is based
on an illegitimate substitution of things in themselves, conceived by
the pure understanding, for the appearances with which alone the
antinomy is concerned.[1515]

     “...it is quite futile to attempt to overthrow, by sophistical
     manipulation of purely discursive concepts, the manifest,
     demonstrated truth of mathematics.”

=Antithesis.=--No composite thing in the world consists of simple parts,
and there nowhere exists in the world anything simple.

=Proof.=--Let us assume the opposite, namely, that a composite thing (as
substance) consists of simple parts. As all external relation, and
therefore all composition of substances, is only possible in space,
space must consist of as many parts as there are parts of the composite
that occupies it. Space, however, does not consist of simple parts, but
of spaces. The simple must therefore occupy a space. Now as everything
real which occupies a space contains in itself a manifold of
constituents external to one another, and therefore is composite, and as
a real composite is not composed of accidents (for without substance
accidents could not be outside one another), but of substances, the
simple would be a substantial composite, which is self-contradictory.

=Criticism.=--The Leibnizian standpoint is here completely deserted.
Instead of proceeding to demonstrate the direct opposite of the thesis,
Kant in this argument deals with the extended bodies of empirical
intuition. The proof given ultimately reduces to an argument from the
continuous nature of space to the continuous nature of the matter which
occupies it. But as the thesis and the antithesis thus refer to
different realities, the former to things in themselves conceived by
pure understanding, and the latter to the sensuous, no antinomy has
been shown to subsist. Antinomy presupposes that both the opposing
assertions have the same reference. Kant, as already noted, argues in
the _Observation_ to this antithesis that all attempts “made by the
monadists” to refute the mathematical proof of the infinite divisibility
of matter are quite futile, and are due to their forgetting that in this
discussion we are concerned only with appearances.

     “The monadists have, indeed, been sufficiently acute to seek to
     avoid this difficulty by not treating space as a condition of the
     possibility of the objects of outer intuition (bodies), but by
     taking these and the dynamical relation of substances as the
     condition of the possibility of space. But we have a concept of
     bodies only as appearances, and as such they necessarily presuppose
     space as the condition of the possibility of all outer
     appearance.”[1516]

How Kant, after writing these words, should still have left standing the
proof which he has given of the thesis may be partially explained as due
to the continuing influence of his earlier view,[1517] according to
which antinomy represents not a conflict between opposing views of the
world of ordinary consciousness, but between the demands of pure thought
and the forms of sensuous existence. That older view of antinomy here
gains the upper hand, notwithstanding its lack of agreement with the
general scheme of the _Dialectic_.

There is a further inconsistency in Kant’s procedure which may perhaps
be taken as indicating the early origin of this portion of the
_Critique_. He presents the mathematical proof of the continuity of
matter as conclusive. Yet in the _Metaphysical First Principles of
Natural Science_ (1786) he most emphatically states that “the infinite
divisibility of matter is very far from being proved through proof of
the infinite divisibility of space.”[1518]

Russell,[1519] in discussing the thesis and antithesis on their merits,
from the point of view of certain present-day mathematical theories,
makes the following criticism of Kant’s procedure.

     “Here, again, the argument applies to things in space and time, and
     to all collections, whether existent or not.... And with this
     extension[1520] the proof of the proposition must, I think, be
     admitted; only that _terms_ or _concepts_ should be substituted for
     _substances_, and that, instead of the argument that relations
     between substances are accidental (_zufällig_), we should content
     ourselves with saying that relations imply terms and complexity
     implies relations.”

Russell further argues that Kant’s assumption in the antithesis, that
“space does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces,” cannot be
granted. It

     “...involves a covert use of the axiom of finitude, _i.e._ the
     axiom that, if a space does consist of points, it must consist of
     some finite number of points. When once this is denied, we may
     admit that no finite number of divisions of a space will lead to
     points, while yet holding every space to be composed of points. A
     finite space is a whole consisting of simple parts, but not of any
     finite number of simple parts. Exactly the same thing is true of
     the stretch between 1 and 2. Thus the antinomy is not specially
     spatial, and any answer which is applicable in Arithmetic is
     applicable here also. The thesis, which is an essential postulate
     of Logic, should be accepted, while the antithesis should be
     rejected.”

But, as above observed,[1521] those mathematicians who adopt this view
so alter the meaning of the term point that it would perhaps be equally
true to say that the thesis, as thus interpreted by Russell, coincides
with what Kant believes himself to be asserting in the antithesis.


THIRD ANTINOMY

=Thesis.=--Causality according to the laws of nature is not the only
causality from which the appearances of the world can be deduced. There
is also required for their explanation another, that of freedom.

=Proof.=--Let us assume the opposite. In that case everything that happens
presupposes a previous state upon which it follows according to a rule.
That previous state is itself caused in similar fashion, and so on _in
infinitum_. But if everything thus happens according to the mere laws of
nature, there can never be a first beginning, and therefore no
completeness of the series on the side of the derivative causes. But the
law of nature is that nothing happens without a cause _sufficiently_
determined _a priori_. If, therefore, all causality is possible only
according to the laws of nature, the principle contradicts itself when
taken in unlimited universality. Such causality cannot therefore be the
sole causality possible. We must admit an absolute spontaneity, whereby
a series of appearances, that proceed according to laws of nature,
begins by itself.

=Criticism.=--The vital point of this argument lies in the assertion that
the principle of causality calls for a _sufficient_ cause for each
event, and that such sufficiency is not to be found in natural causes
which are themselves derivative or conditioned. As the antecedent series
of causes for an event can never be traced back to a first cause, it can
never be completed, and can never, therefore, be sufficient to account
for the event under consideration. Either, therefore, the principle of
causality contradicts itself, or some form of free self-originative
causality must be postulated. This argument cannot be accepted as valid.
Each natural cause is sufficient to account for its effect. That is to
say, the causation is sufficient _at each stage_. That the series of
antecedent causes cannot be completed is due to its actual infinitude,
not to any insufficiency in the causality which it embodies.[1522] To
prove his point, Kant would have to show that the conception of the
actual infinite is inherently self-contradictory; and that, as we have
already noted, he does not mean to assert. His argument here lies open
to the same criticism as we have already passed upon his argument in
proof of the thesis of the first antinomy.

=Antithesis.=--There is no freedom; everything in the world proceeds
solely in accordance with laws of nature.

=Proof.=--Let us assume the opposite. Free causality, _i.e._ the power of
absolute origination, presupposes the possibility of a state of the
cause which has no causal connection with its preceding state, and which
does not follow from it. But this is opposed to the law of causality,
and would render unity of experience impossible. Freedom is therefore an
empty thought-entity (_Gedankending_), and is not to be met with in any
experience.

=Criticism.=--We may first observe the strange relation in which the proof
of the thesis stands to that of the antithesis. According to the former,
freedom must be postulated because otherwise the principle of causality
would contradict itself. According to the latter, freedom is impossible,
and for the same reason. Now, as Erhardt has pointed out,[1523] a
principle cannot be reconciled with itself through the making of an
assumption which contradicts it. That would only be the institution of a
second contradiction, not the removal of the previous conflict. If the
proof of the thesis be correct, that of the antithesis must be false; if
the proof of the antithesis be correct, that of the thesis must be
invalid. For though the thesis and the antithesis may themselves
contradict one another, such conflict must not exist between the grounds
upon which they establish themselves. If the reasons cited in their
support are contradictory of one another, the total argument is rendered
null and void. The supporting proofs being contradictory of one another,
nothing whatsoever has been established. There will remain as a pressing
and immediate problem the task of distinguishing the truth from among
the competing alternatives; and until this has been done, the argument
cannot proceed. The assumption of freedom either does or does not
contradict the principle of causality. Antinomy is not the simple
assertion that both A and not-A are true, but that A and not-A, though
contradictory of one another, can both be established by arguments in
which such contradiction does not occur.[1524]

The proof given of the thesis would seem, as already noted, to be
untenable. The principle of natural causality is not self-contradictory.
What now is to be said regarding the proof of the antithesis? If the
principle of natural causality be formulated as asserting that every
event has an _antecedent_ cause determining it to exist, then certainly
free, spontaneous, or self-originating causality is excluded. Here, as
in Kant’s proof of the antithesis of the first antinomy, everything
depends upon definition of the terms employed. It must be borne in mind
that the antinomies are asserted to exist only on the dogmatic level.
Critical considerations must not, therefore, be allowed to intervene.
Now for ordinary consciousness the concept of causality has a very
indefinite meaning, and a very wide application. Causation may be
spontaneous as well as mechanical, spiritual as well as material. All
possibilities lie open, and no mere reference to the concept of causal
dependence suffices to decide between them. Free causality, so far as
_dogmatic_ analysis of the causal postulate can show to the contrary,
may or may not be possible.[1525] Kant has failed to establish the
antithesis save by the surreptitious introduction of conclusions which
presuppose the truth of his Critical teaching. This is especially shown
in the emphasis laid upon ‘unity of experience.’ The further
statement[1526] that freedom means lawlessness is only true if Kant’s
teaching is mutilated by reduction merely to its assertion of the
objective validity of the mechanistic principles of natural science.
Kant is both running with the hare and hunting with the hounds.

Though this antinomy is chiefly concerned with the problem of freedom,
_i.e._ of spontaneous origination _within_ the world, the proof of the
thesis refers only to the cosmological problem of a first cause.[1527]
The reasons of this oscillation we shall have occasion to consider in
dealing with the fourth antinomy. The terms world and nature play the
same ambiguous part as in the antithesis of the first antinomy; they
tend to be employed in the narrower, mechanistic sense of Kant’s own
Critical teaching.


FOURTH ANTINOMY

As the proofs of the thesis and antithesis proceed on lines identical
with those of the third antinomy, I shall omit detailed statement of
them.[1528] Kant again argues from the fact that every change has a
condition which precedes it in time. There is no difference in the
proofs themselves, but only in the nature of the inference which they
are made to support. In the third antinomy they lead to the assertion
and denial of free causality; in the fourth antinomy they lead to the
assertion and denial of an absolutely necessary being. The assertion is
required in order to save the principle of causality from
self-contradiction; the denial is also necessary, and for the same
reason. The illegitimacy of this procedure has already been pointed
out.[1529] Though the thesis and the antithesis will, if antinomy be
assumed to represent an actual conflict, contradict one another, no
such conflict is allowable in the grounds which profess to establish
them. We must not assert, as _argument_, that both A and not-A are true.

In the _Observation_ on the antithesis[1530] Kant has himself taken
notice of this “strange” situation.

     “From the same ground on which, in the thesis, the existence of an
     original being was inferred, its non-existence is inferred, and
     that with equal stringency.”

A necessary being is inferred to exist, because the past series of
events cannot contain all the conditions of an event, unless the
unconditioned is to be found among them. A necessary being is denied to
exist, because the series of merely conditioned events contains all the
conditions that there are. Kant’s defence of this procedure is as
follows:

     “Nevertheless, the method of argument in both cases is entirely in
     conformity even with ordinary human reason, which frequently falls
     into conflict with itself from considering its object from two
     different points of view. M. de Mairan[1531] regarded the
     controversy between two famous astronomers, which arose from a
     similar difficulty in regard to choice of standpoint, as a
     sufficiently remarkable phenomenon to justify his writing a special
     treatise upon it. The one had argued that _the moon revolves on its
     own axis_, because it always turns the same side towards the earth.
     The other drew the opposite conclusion that _the moon does not
     revolve on its own axis_, because it always turns the same side
     towards the earth. Both inferences were correct, according to the
     point of view which each chose in observing the moon’s motion.”

This example is not really relevant. In spite of Kant’s assertion to the
contrary, the point of view is one and the same in thesis and in
antithesis. In both cases the absolutely necessary being is viewed as
the first of the changes in the world of sense. To maintain that when
thus viewed it both is and is not demanded by the law of causality, is
as impossible as to assert that in one and the same meaning of our terms
the moon both does and does not revolve on its own axis.

That the proofs of the fourth antinomy are identical with those of the
third is due to the fact that Kant, under the stress of his
architectonic,[1532] is striving to construct four antinomies while only
three are really distinguishable. The third and fourth antinomies
coincide as formulations of the problem whether or not the conditioned
implies, and originates in, the unconditioned. The precise
determination of this unconditioned, whether as free causality or as a
necessary being, or in any other way, is a further problem, and does not
properly fall within the scope of the _cosmological_ inquiries, which
are alone in place in this division of the _Critique_.

The manner in which Kant, in treating of freedom, makes the
transition[1533] from the cosmological (or theological) unconditioned to
the psychological is significant. The cosmological unconditioned is
proved to exist by the argument of the thesis, and its existence is at
once interpreted as establishing at least in this one case the actuality
of free spontaneous causality. Kant remarks that this

     “...transcendental Idea of freedom does not by any means constitute
     the entire content of the psychological concept of that name, which
     is mainly empirical, but only that of absolute spontaneity of
     action.... The necessity of a first beginning, due to freedom, of a
     series of appearances we have demonstrated only in so far as it is
     required for the conceivability of an origin of the world.... But
     as, after all, the power of spontaneously originating a series in
     time has thus been proved (though not understood), it is now
     permissible for us to admit within the course of the world
     different series as capable in their causality of beginning of
     themselves, and so to attribute to their substances a power of
     acting from freedom.”

That each such successive series in the world can only have a relatively
primary beginning, and must always be preceded by some other state of
things, is no sufficient objection to such causality.

     “For we are here speaking of an absolutely first beginning not in
     time, but in causality. If, for instance, I at this moment arise
     from my chair in complete freedom, without being necessarily
     determined thereto by the influence of natural causes, a new
     series, with all its natural consequences _in infinitum_, has its
     absolute beginning in this event, although the event itself is
     only, with regard to time, the continuation of a preceding series.”

Thus Kant’s proof of freedom in the thesis of the third antinomy is
merely a corollary from his proof of the existence of a cosmological or
theological unconditioned; and further, this freedom is not, like the
cosmological unconditioned, proved to exist, but only to be “admissible”
as a possibility. Similarly in the antithesis, the only disproof of
freedom is the disproof of unconditioned causality _in general_. The
antinomy deals with the general opposition and relation between the
contingent and the unconditioned.

It is this same opposition exactly which constitutes the subject-matter
of the fourth antinomy. The terms used are different, but their meanings
are one and the same. For though Kant substitutes ‘absolutely necessary
being’ for ‘unconditioned causality,’ the former is still conceived as
belonging to the world of sense, as the unconditioned origin of its
changes. And as Kant is careful to add, only the causal, cosmological
argument can be employed to establish the existence of an absolutely
necessary being; nothing can legitimately be inferred from the mere
Idea. The verbal change is consequently verbal only; the argument of the
fourth antinomy coincides in result no less than in method of proof with
the argument of the third. It is impossible to define the unconditioned
in any more specific fashion save by an enquiry which entirely
transcends the scope of the argument that Kant is here presenting.
Kant’s procedure also lies open to the further objection that the
conception of an absolutely necessary being, which he here introduces
without preliminary analysis or explanation, is later shown by him[1534]
to be devoid of significance. He employs it, but precludes himself from
either investigating it or from drawing any serviceable consequences
from it. The situation is not without the elements of comedy. In order
to seem to mark a real distinction between the fourth and the third
antinomies, Kant has perforce to trespass upon the domain of theology;
but as he is aware that the trespass is forbidden, he seeks to mitigate
the offence by returning from the foray empty-handed. To such unhappy
straits is he again reduced by his over-fond devotion to architectonic.


SECTION III

THE INTEREST OF REASON IN THIS SELF-CONFLICT[1535]

This section, though extremely important, requires no lengthy comment.
It is lucid and straightforward. It may be summarised as follows. The
theses and the antitheses rest upon diverse and conflicting interests.
The theses, though expressed in dry formulas, divested of the empirical
features through which alone their true grandeur can be displayed,
represent the proud pretensions of dogmatic Reason. The antitheses give
expression to principles of pure empiricism. The former are supported by
interests of a practical and popular character: upon them morals and
religion are based. The latter, while conflicting with our spiritual
interests, far exceed the theses in their intellectual advantages. This
explains

     “...the zelotic passion of the one party, and the calm assurance of
     the other, and why the world hails the one with eager approval, and
     is implacably prejudiced against the other.”

No legitimate objection could be raised against the principles of the
empirical philosopher, if he sought only to rebuke the rashness and
presumption of Reason when it boasts of _knowledge_, and when it
represents as _speculative insight_ that which is grounded only in
_faith_.

     “But when empiricism itself, as frequently happens, becomes
     dogmatic ..., and confidently denies whatever lies beyond the
     sphere of its intuitive knowledge, it betrays the same lack of
     modesty; and that is all the more reprehensible owing to the
     irreparable injury which is thereby caused to the practical
     interests of Reason.”

Each party asserts more than it knows. The one allows our practical
interests to delude Reason as to its inherent powers; the other would so
extend empirical knowledge as to destroy the validity of our moral
principles. Kant regards the opposition as being historically typified
by the contrasted systems of Platonism and Epicureanism. It befits us,
as self-reflecting beings, to free ourselves, at least provisionally,
from the partiality of those divergent interests, and by application of
“the sceptical method,” unconcerned about consequences, to penetrate to
the primary sources of this perennial conflict. As Kant states in the
next section, the conflict is of such a character as to be genuinely
resolvable.

This section must have been written, or at least first sketched, at the
time when Kant still intended to bring his whole criticism of the
metaphysical sciences within the scope of his doctrine of
antinomy.[1536]


SECTION IV

OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL PROBLEMS OF PURE REASON, IN SO FAR AS THEY
ABSOLUTELY MUST BE CAPABLE OF SOLUTION[1537]

There are sciences the very nature of which requires that every question
which can occur in them must be completely answerable from what can be
presumed to be known. This is true of the science of ethics. When I ask
to what course of action I am committed in moral duty, the question must
be answerable in terms of the considerations which have led to its being
propounded. For there can be no moral obligation in regard to that of
which we cannot have knowledge. We must not plead that the problem is
unanswerable; a solution must be found. Kant proceeds to argue that this
is no less true of transcendental philosophy.

     “...it is unique among speculative sciences in that no question
     which concerns an object given to pure Reason is insoluble for this
     same human Reason, and that no excuse of an unavoidable ignorance,
     or of the unfathomable depth of the problem, can release us from
     the obligation to answer it thoroughly and completely. That very
     concept which enables us to ask the question must also qualify us
     to answer it, since, as in the case of right and wrong, the object
     is not to be met with outside the concept.”

The third and fourth paragraphs would seem to be later interpolations.
The section, like Section III., must have been written at the time when
Kant still regarded the doctrine of antinomy as covering the entire
field of metaphysics. Transcendental philosophy is identified with
cosmology, as dealt with in the antinomies. But in the third paragraph
the former is taken as a wider term. Also, in the first two paragraphs
the problems of pure Reason are regarded as soluble because their
objects are not to be met with outside the concepts of them; whereas in
the third paragraph they are viewed as soluble because their object is
given empirically. Again, in the second paragraph transcendental
philosophy has been taken as unique among speculative [_i.e._
theoretical] sciences; in the fourth paragraph mathematics is placed
alongside it.

Examination of this section as a whole (and the same is true of the
immediately following section) justifies the conclusion that at the time
when it was written Kant regarded the Ideas of Reason as having a purely
and exclusively regulative function, and consequently as exhausting
their inherent meaning in their empirical reference. He regards them as
entirely lacking in metaphysical significance. They are invented by
Reason for Reason’s own satisfaction, and must therefore yield in their
internal content the explanation of their existence, and must also
supply a complete and thorough answer to all problems which are
traceable to them. A dogmatic (_i.e._ ontological) solution of the
antinomies is, as we have already found, impossible; the Critical
solution considers the question subjectively,

     “...in accordance with the foundation of the knowledge upon which
     it is based.”[1538] “For your object is only in your brain, and
     cannot be given outside it; so that you have only to take care to
     be at one with yourself, and to avoid the amphiboly which
     transforms your Idea into a supposed representation of an object
     which is empirically given and therefore to be known according to
     the laws of experience.”[1539]

Kant’s argument in proof of this purely subjective interpretation of the
Ideas consists in showing that they are not presented in any given
appearances, and are not even necessary to explain appearances. The
unconditioned, whether of quantity, of division, or of origination, has
nothing to do with any experience, whether actual or possible.

     “You would not, for instance, in any wise be able to explain the
     appearances of a body better, or even differently, if you assumed
     that it consists either of simple or of inexhaustibly composite
     parts; for neither a simple appearance nor an infinite composition
     can ever come before you. Appearances demand explanation only in so
     far as the conditions of their explanation are given in perception,
     [and the unconditioned can never be so given].”[1540]

This standpoint, at once sceptical and empirical, is further developed
in the next section.


SECTION V

SCEPTICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL QUESTIONS[1541]

Applying the “sceptical method,”[1542] Kant argues that even supposing
one or other party could conclusively establish itself through final
refutation of the other, no advantage of any kind would accrue. The
victory would be a fruitless one, and the outcome “mere nonsense.”[1543]
The sole validity of the Ideas lies in their empirical reference; and
yet that reference is one which proves them to be, when objectively
interpreted, entirely meaningless. The cosmological Idea is always
either too large or too small for any concept of the understanding. No
matter what view is taken, the only possible object (viz. that yielded
by experience) will not fit into it. If the world has no beginning, or
is infinitely divisible, or has no first cause, the regress transcends
all empirical concepts; while if the world has a beginning, is composed
of simple parts, and has a first cause, it is too small for the
concepts through which alone it can be experienced. In other words, the
cosmological Ideas are always either too large or too small for the
empirical regress, and therefore stand condemned by sense-experience,
which can alone impart relation to an object, _i.e._ truth and meaning
to any concept. For, as Kant explicitly states, _we must not reverse
this relation and condemn empirical concepts, as being in the one case
too small, and in the other case too large for the Idea. Experience, not
Ideas, is the criterion alike of reality and of truth_.

     “The possible empirical concept is, therefore, the standard by
     which we must judge whether the Idea is mere Idea and
     thought-entity (_Gedankending_), or whether it finds its object in
     the world.”[1544]

When two things are compared, that for the sake of which the other
exists is the sole proper standard. We do not say “that a man is too
long for his coat, but that the coat is too short for the man.”[1545] We
are thus confirmed in the view that the antinomies rest upon a false
view of the manner in which the object of the cosmological Ideas can be
given; and are set upon the track, followed out in the next section, of
the illusion to which they are due.

This reduction of the Ideas to mere thought-entities is one of the two
alternative views which, as we have already stated,[1546] compete with
one another throughout the entire _Dialectic_. We may, for instance,
compare the above explanation of the conflict between the Ideas and
experience with that given in A 422 = B 450. In the latter passage the
antinomies are traced to a conflict between Reason and understanding. If
the unity is adequate to the demands of Reason, it is too great for the
understanding; if it is adequate to the understanding, it is too small
for Reason. Kant does not here allow that the claims of Reason are _ipso
facto_ condemned through the incapacity of experience to fulfil them. On
the contrary, he implies that it is through the Ideas that we come to
realise the merely phenomenal character of everything experienced.

Our task, in this Commentary, is only to distinguish the passages in
which those two conflicting tendencies appear, and to trace the
consequences which follow from Kant’s alternation between them.
Discussion of their significance had best be deferred to the close of
the _Dialectic_, where Kant dwells upon the regulative function of
Reason. At present we need merely note that the main content of the
above sections, in which the sceptical view is expounded, is of early
date, prior to the working out of the _Paralogisms_ and of the _Ideal_.


SECTION VI

TRANSCENDENTAL IDEALISM AS THE KEY TO THE SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL
DIALECTIC[1547]

In this section subjectivism is dominant. The type of transcendental
idealism expounded is that earlier and less developed form which
connects with the doctrine of the transcendental object.[1548] It shows
no trace of Kant’s maturer teaching. No distinction is drawn between
representation and the objects represented. To the transcendental
object, the “purely intelligible cause” of appearances in general, and
to it alone, Kant ascribes “the whole extent and connection of our
possible perceptions.”[1549] Appearances exist only in the degree to
which they are constructed in experience. As they are mere
representations, they cannot exist outside the mind. Independently of
such construction, they may indeed be said to be given in the
transcendental object, but they only become objects to us on the
supposition that they can be reached through extension of the series of
our actual perceptions. It is in this form alone, as conceived in a
regressive series of possible perceptions, and not as having existed in
itself, that even the immemorial past course of the world can be
represented as real;

     “...so that all events which have taken place in the immense
     periods that have preceded my own existence mean really nothing but
     the possibility of extending the chain of experience from the
     present perception back to the conditions which determine it in
     time.”[1550]

A similar interpretation has to be given to all propositions which
assert the present reality of that which has never been actually
experienced.

     “In outcome it is a matter of indifference whether I say that in
     the empirical progress in space I can meet with stars a hundred
     times farther removed than the outermost now perceptible to me, or
     whether I say that they are perhaps to be met with in cosmical
     space even though no human being has ever perceived or ever will
     perceive them. For even if they were given as things in themselves,
     without relation to possible experience,[1551] they are still
     nothing for me, and therefore are not objects, save in so far as
     they are contained in the series of the empirical regress.”[1552]

The distinction between appearances and things in themselves must
always, Kant observes, be borne in mind when we are interpreting the
meaning of our empirical concepts; and this is especially necessary when
those concepts are brought into connection with the cosmological Idea of
an unconditioned. The antinomies are due to a failure to appreciate this
fundamental distinction, and the key to their solution lies in its
recognition.

     “It would be an injustice to ascribe to us that long-decried
     empirical idealism which, while it admits the genuine actuality of
     space, denies the existence of the extended beings in it....”[1553]

This is in line with the passages from the _Prolegomena_ commented upon
above.[1554]


SECTION VII

CRITICAL DECISION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL CONFLICT OF REASON WITH
ITSELF[1555]

Kant’s argument is as follows. The antinomies rest upon the principle
that if the conditioned be given, the entire series of all its
conditions is likewise given. If the objects of the senses were
independently real, there would be no escape from this assumption, and
the dialectical conflict would consequently be irresolvable.
Transcendental idealism, as above stated, reveals a way out of the
dilemma. As appearances are merely representations, their antecedent
conditions do not exist _as appearances_, save in the degree in which
they are mentally constructed. Though the appearances are given, their
_empirical_ conditions are not thereby given. The most that we can say
is that a regress to the conditions, _i.e._ a continued empirical
synthesis in that direction, is _commanded_ or _required_. The
cosmological argument can thus be shown to be logically invalid. The
syllogism, which it involves, is as follows:

If the conditioned be given, the entire series of all its conditions is
likewise given.

The objects of the senses are given.

Therefore the entire series of all their conditions is likewise given.

In the major premiss the concept of the conditioned is employed
transcendently (Kant says transcendentally), in the minor empirically.
But though the inference thus commits the logical fallacy of _sophisma
figurae dictionis_, the ground of its occurrence, and the reason why it
is not at once detected, lie in a natural and inevitable illusion which
leads us to accept the sensible world in space as being independently
real. Only through Critical investigation can the deceptive power of
this illusion be overcome. Owing to its influence, the above fallacy has
been committed by dogmatists and empiricists alike. It can be shown that
in refuting each other

... “they are really quarrelling about nothing, and that a certain
     transcendental illusion has caused them to see a reality where none
     is to be found.”[1556]

The existence of antinomy, Kant further argues, presupposes that theses
and antitheses are contradictory opposites, _i.e._ that no third
alternative is possible. When opposed assertions are not contradictories
but contraries, the opposition, to use Kant’s terms, is not analytical
but dialectical. Both may be false; for the one does not merely
contradict the other, but makes, in addition, a further statement on its
own account. Now examination of the illusion above described enables us
to perceive that the opposites, in reference to which antinomy occurs,
are of this dialectical character. _Theses and antitheses are alike
false._ Since the world does not exist as a thing in itself, it exists
neither as an infinite whole nor as a finite whole, but only in the
degree in which it is constructed in an empirical regress. We must not
apply “_the Idea of absolute totality, which is valid only as a
condition of things in themselves_,”[1557] to appearances. (The words
which I have italicised mark the emergence of Kant’s non-sceptical,
non-empirical view of the nature and function of the Ideas of Reason.)
Thus antinomy, rightly understood, does not favour scepticism, but only
the “sceptical method,” and indeed yields an indirect proof of the
correctness of Critical teaching. This proof may be presented in the
form of a dilemma. If the world is a whole existing in itself, it is
either finite or infinite. But the former alternative is refuted by the
proofs given of the antitheses, and the latter alternative by the proofs
of the theses. Therefore the world cannot be a whole existing in itself.
From this it follows that appearances are nothing outside our
representations; and that is what is asserted in the doctrine of
transcendental idealism.

In A 499 = B 527 Kant uses ambiguous language,[1558] which can be
interpreted as asserting that in the regress there can be no lack of
given conditions. Such a statement would presuppose positive knowledge
regarding the unknown transcendental object.[1559] The opposite, more
correct, view is given in A 514-15 = B 542-3 and A 517 ff. = B 545 ff.,
though in the latter passage with a reversion to the above
position.[1560]

The earlier manuscripts, which Kant has so far been employing, probably
terminate either, as Adickes suggests,[1561] at the end of this section,
or at the close of Section VIII., which is of doubtful date. Section IX.
is certainly from a later period; it represents a more complex
standpoint, in which Reason is no longer viewed as possessing a merely
empirical function, and in which consequently the theses and antitheses
are no longer indiscriminately denounced as being alike false. Under the
influence of his later, more Idealistic preoccupations, Kant so far
modifies the above solution as to assert _that in the ease of the last
two antinomies both theses and antitheses are true, when properly
interpreted_.


SECTION VIII

THE REGULATIVE PRINCIPLE OF PURE REASON IN REGARD TO THE COSMOLOGICAL
IDEAS[1562]

The principle of pure Reason, correctly formulated, is that when the
conditioned is given a regress upon the totality of its conditions is
_set as a problem_. As such it is valid,

     “...not indeed as an _axiom_ ... but as a _problem_ for the
     understanding ..., leading it to undertake and to continue,
     according to the completeness in the Idea, the regress in the
     series of conditions of any given conditioned.”[1563]

It does not anticipate, prior to the regress, what actually exists as
object, but only postulates, in the form of a rule, how the
understanding ought to proceed. It does not tell us whether or how the
unconditioned exists, but how the empirical regress is to be carried out
under the guidance of a mere Idea. Such a rule can be regulative only,
and the Idea of totality which it contains must never be invested with
objective reality. As the absolutely unconditioned can never be met with
in experience, we know, indeed, beforehand that in the process of the
regress the unconditioned will never be reached. But the duty of seeking
it by way of such regress is none the less prescribed.

Kant proceeds to give a somewhat bewildering account of the familiar
distinction between _progressus in infinitum_ and _progressus in
indefinitum_, and to draw a very doubtful distinction between the series
in division of a given whole and the series in extension of it.[1564]
The illustration from the series of human generations is an unfortunate
one; the discovery that it began at some one point in the past would not
necessarily violate any demand of Reason. Such a series is not
comparable with those of space, time, and causality.[1565] The only
important result of this digression is the conclusion that whatever
demand be made, whether of regress _in infinitum_ or of regress _in
indefinitum_, in neither case can the series of conditions be regarded
as being given as infinite in the object.

     “The question, therefore, is no longer how great this series of
     conditions may be in itself, whether finite or infinite, for it is
     nothing in itself; but how we are to carry out the empirical
     regress, and how far we should continue it.”[1566]

We have already noted[1567] Kant’s ambiguous suggestion in A 499 = B
527, that in the empirical regress there can be no lack of given
conditions. The statement, thus interpreted, is illegitimate. The most
that he can claim is that, were further sensations not forthcoming, we
should still have to conceive those last obtained as being preceded by
empty space and time, and as lacking in any experienced cause. Under
such circumstances we should experience neither finitude nor
unconditionedness, but only incapacity to find a content suitable to the
inexhaustible character of the spatial and temporal conditions of
experience, or in satisfaction of our demand for causal antecedents. In
A 514-15 = B 542-3 Kant shows consciousness of this difficulty, but in
dealing with it adopts a half-way position which still lies open to
objection. He recognises that, since no member of a series can be
empirically given as absolutely unconditioned, a higher member is always
_possible_, and that the search for it is therefore prescribed; none the
less he asserts that in regard to _given wholes_ we are justified in
taking up a very different position, namely, that the regress in the
series of their internal conditions does not proceed, as in the above
case, _in indefinitum_, but _in infinitum_, _i.e._ that in this case
more members _exist and are empirically given_ than we can reach through
the regress. In given wholes we are commanded to _find_ more members; in
serial extension we are justified only in _inquiring_ for more. This
half-way position is a makeshift, and is in no respect tenable. The
evidence for the infinite extensibility of space and time is as
conclusive as for their infinite divisibility. And when we consider
sensuous existence under these forms, it is just as possible that the
transcendental object may, beyond a certain point, fail to supply
material for further division, as that it may fail to yield data for
further expansion. What Kant asserts of the latter, that further advance
must always remain as a possibility, and for that Reason must always
call for the open mind of further inquiry, without any attempted
anticipatory assertion either _pro_ or _contra_, alone represents the
true Critical standpoint. The cessation of data may really, however, be
due to an increase in the subtlety of the conditioning processes that
incapacitates them from acting upon our senses;[1568] by indirect means
this disability may be overcome. Reason, in its conception of an
unconditioned, prescribes to us a task that is inexhaustible in its
demands. We have no right to lay down our intellectual arms before any
barrier however baffling, or to despair before any chasm however empty
and abrupt.


SECTION IX

THE EMPIRICAL EMPLOYMENT OF THE REGULATIVE PRINCIPLE OF REASON IN REGARD
TO ALL COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS[1569]

SOLUTION OF THE FIRST AND SECOND ANTINOMIES

=Statement.=--The fundamental fact upon which, as Kant has already stated,
the regulative principle of Reason is based, is that it is impossible to
experience an absolute limit. It is always _possible_ that a still
higher member of the series may be found; and that being so, it is our
duty to search for it. But as we are here dealing with possibilities
only, the regress is _in indefinitum_, not _in infinitum_.

     “...we must seek the concept of the quantity of the world only
     according to the rule which determines the empirical regress in it.
     This rule says no more than that however far we may have attained
     in the series of empirical conditions, we should never assume an
     absolute limit, but should subordinate every appearance, as
     conditioned, to another as its condition, and that we must then
     advance to this condition. This is the _regressus in indefinitum_,
     which, as it determines no quantity in the object, is clearly
     enough distinguishable from the _regressus in infinitum_.”[1570]

We are acquainted only with the rule, and not with the whole object. Any
assertion, therefore, which we can make, must be dictated solely by the
rule, and be an expression of it. Neither the thesis nor the antithesis
of the first antinomy is valid; there is a third alternative. The
sensible world is neither finite nor infinite in extent; it is
infinitely extensible, in terms of the rule.

Unfortunately Kant is not content to leave his conclusion in this form.
He complicates his argument, and bewilders the reader, by maintaining
that this is a virtual acceptance of the antithesis, in that we assert
negatively, that an absolute limit in either time or space is
empirically impossible;[1571] and affirmatively, that the regress goes
on _in indefinitum_, and consequently has no absolute quantity.

Kant also repeats the argument of the preceding section in regard to
given wholes.[1572] When the problem is that of subdivision, the regress
starts from a given whole, and therefore from a whole whose conditions
(the parts) are given with it. The division is, therefore, _in
infinitum_, and not merely _in indefinitum_. This does not, however, he
argues, mean that the given whole consists of infinitely many parts. For
though the parts are contained in the intuition of the whole, yet the
whole division arises only through the regress that generates it. It is
a _quantum continuum_, not a _quantum discretum_.[1573] This argument
has been criticised above.[1574] Kant here ignores the possibility that
the parts of matter, though extended, may be physically indivisible, or
that they may be centres of force which control, but do not occupy, a
determinate space.


REMARKS ON THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE MATHEMATICAL-TRANSCENDENTAL AND
THE DYNAMICAL-TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS[1575]

=Statement.=--Kant again[1576] introduces the distinction between the
mathematical and the dynamical. The mathematical Ideas synthesise the
homogeneous, the dynamical may connect the heterogeneous. In employing
the former we must therefore remain within the phenomenal; through the
latter we may be able to transcend it. The way is thus opened for
propounding, in regard to the third and fourth antinomies, a solution in
which the pretensions of Reason no less than those of understanding may
find satisfaction. Whereas both the theses and the antitheses of the
first and second antinomies have to be declared false, those of the
third and fourth antinomies _may both be true_--the theses applying to
the intelligible realm, and the antitheses to the world of sense.

=Comment.=--When the distinction between the mathematical and the
dynamical is thus extended from the categories to the Ideas, its
validity becomes highly doubtful. Space and time are certainly
themselves homogeneous, and the categories of quality and quantity, in
so far as they are mathematically employed, may perhaps be similarly
described. But when the term is still further extended, to cover the
pairs of correlative opposites with which the first two antinomies deal,
those, namely, between the limited and the unlimited, the simple and the
infinitely divisible, Kant would seem to be making a highly artificial
distinction. The first two antinomies deal not with space and time as
such, but with the sensible world in space and time; and within this
sensible world, even in its quantitative aspects, qualitative
differences have to be reckoned with. Common sense does, indeed, tend to
assume that the unlimited and the simple must, like that which they
condition, be in space and time, and so form with the conditioned a
homogeneous series. But this assumption ordinary consciousness is
equally disposed to make in regard to a first cause and to the
unconditionally necessary.

Kant further attempts[1577] to distinguish between the mathematical and
the dynamical by asserting that the dynamical antinomies are not
concerned with the quantity of their object, but only with its
_existence_. He admits, however, that in all four cases a series arises
which is either too large or too small for the understanding; and that
being so, in each case the problem arises as to the _existence_ of an
unconditioned.

The artificiality of Kant’s distinction becomes clear when we recognise
that the opposed solutions, which he gives of the two sets of
antinomies, can be mutually interchanged. As the sensible world rests
upon intelligible grounds, both the theses and the antitheses of the
first two antinomies may be true, the former in the intelligible realm
and the latter in the sensuous. Similarly, both the theses and
antitheses of the third and fourth antinomies may be false. In the
sensible world, about which alone anything can be determined, the series
of dynamical conditions forms neither a finite nor an infinite series.
There is a third alternative, akin to that of the antitheses, but
distinct in character from it, namely, that the series is infinitely
extensible. Kant’s differential treatment of the two sets of antinomies
is arbitrary, and would seem to be due to his having attempted to
superimpose, with the least possible modification, a later solution of
the antinomies upon one previously developed. In the earlier view, as we
have already had occasion to observe, Reason has a merely empirical
application. Its Ideas are taken as existing “only in the brain.” Only
their empirical reference can substantiate them, or indeed give them the
least significance. And as they are by their very nature incapable of
empirical embodiment, all assertions which involve them must necessarily
be false. Later, Kant came to regard Reason as having its own
independent rights. Encouraged by his successful establishment of the
objective validity of the categories, progressively more and more
convinced of the importance of the distinction, which that proof
reinforced, between appearances and things in themselves, and
preoccupied with the problems of the spiritual life, his old-time faith
in the absolute claims of pure thought reasserted itself. Through Reason
we realise our kinship with noumenal realities, and through its demands
the nature of the unconditioned is foreshadowed to the mind. The theses
and antitheses, which throughout the entire history of philosophy have
competed with one another, may both be true. Their perennial conflict
demonstrates the need for some more catholic standpoint from which the
two great authorities by which human life is controlled and directed,
the intellectual and the moral, may be reconciled. Neither can be made
to yield to the other; each is supreme in its own field. The distinction
between appearances and things in themselves, recognition of which is
the first step towards an adequate theory of knowledge, and without
which the nature of the intellectual life remains self-contradictory and
incomprehensible, itself affords the means of such a reconciliation. The
understanding is the sole key to the world of appearance, the moral
imperative to the realm of things in themselves. Reason with its demand
for the unconditioned mediates between them, and enables us to realise
our dual vocation.

This radical alteration of standpoint was bound to make the employment
of manuscript representing the earlier and more sceptical attitude
altogether unsatisfactory; and only Kant’s constitutional unwillingness
to sacrifice what he had once committed to paper can account for his
retention of the older expositions. He allows his previous treatment of
the first two antinomies to remain in its sceptical form, and, by means
of the distinction between the mathematical and the dynamical, develops
his newer, more Idealist view exclusively in reference to the third and
fourth antinomies. That it is no less applicable to the others, we have
already seen.

Though the Idealist view, _as here expounded_, may be thus described,
relatively to the sceptical view of Reason, as later, that is not to be
taken as meaning that it represents the latest stage in the development
of Kant’s Critical teaching. It seems to belong to the period prior to
that in which the central sections of the _Analytic_ were composed. The
evidence[1578] for this consists chiefly in its subjectivist references
to the nature of appearances. It would seem to be contemporary with
Kant’s doctrine of the transcendental object.


SOLUTION OF THE THIRD ANTINOMY[1579]

=Statement.=--As appearances are representations only, they must have a
ground which is not itself an appearance;[1580] and though the effects
of such an intelligible cause appear, and accordingly are determined
through other appearances, its causality is not itself similarly
conditioned. Both it and its causality lie outside the empirical series;
only the effects fall within the realm of experience. And that
causality, not being subject to time, does not require to stand under
another cause as its effect. In this way Kant derives from his
transcendental idealism an explanation of the possibility of an action
being at once free and causally determined. This explanation he takes as
applying either to a first cause of the whole realm of natural phenomena
or to a finite being regarded as a free agent. The proof of the
possibility of this metaphysical, or, as Kant entitles it,
“transcendental freedom,” removes what has always been the real
difficulty that lay in the way of “practical freedom.” The conception of
freedom is a transcendental Idea which can neither be derived from
experience nor verified by it. It is created by Reason for itself;[1581]
and reveals the _possibility_ that in this third antinomy both thesis
and antithesis may be true. The alternatives--“every effect must arise
from nature,” and “every effect must arise from freedom”--are not
exclusive of one another. They may be true of one and the same event in
different relations.[1582] The event may be free in reference to its
intelligible cause, determined as an existence in space and time. Were
appearances things in themselves, freedom and causality would
necessarily conflict: by means of the above ontological distinction
freedom can be asserted without any diminution in the scope allowed to
the causal principle. All events, without a single possible exception,
are subject to the law of natural determination; and yet every event may
_at the same time_ proceed from a free cause.


POSSIBILITY OF HARMONISING CAUSALITY THROUGH FREEDOM WITH THE UNIVERSAL
LAW OF NATURAL NECESSITY[1583]

=Statement.=--The above conclusion is so seemingly paradoxical that Kant
devotes this and the following section to its further elucidation. How
can events be both free and determined? The answer lies in recognition
of the two-sided character of every natural existence. It is, in one
aspect, mere appearance; in another, it has at its foundation a
transcendental object. It is an appearance of the latter, and for its
complete comprehension this latter must be taken into account. Now there
is nothing to _prevent_ us from attributing to the transcendental object
a causality which is not phenomenal. Such causality may make the
appearance just that appearance which it is. In the world of sense every
efficient cause must have a specific empirical character, since only so
can it determine one effect rather than another according to the
universal and invariable law expressive of its nature. We must similarly
allow to the transcendental object an intelligible character, and trace
to it all those appearances which as members of the empirical series
stand to one another in unbroken causal connection. This transcendental
object, owing to its intelligible character, is not in time. Its act
does not either arise or perish, and is not, therefore, subject to the
law of empirical determination which applies only to the changeable,
_i.e._ to events subsequent upon previous states. Such supersensuous
causality can find no place in the series of empirical conditions, and
though it can be conceived only in terms of the empirical character
which is its outcome, the difference between it and natural causality
may be as complete as that which subsists between the transcendental and
the empirical objects of knowledge. In its empirical character the
action is a part of nature, and enters into a causal nexus which
conforms to universal laws.[1584] All its effects are inevitably
determined by antecedent natural conditions. In its intelligible
character, however, this same active subject must be considered free
from all influence of sensibility and from all determination through
natural events. In so far as it is a noumenon, there can be no change in
it, and therefore nothing which is capable of explanation in terms of
natural causes. Even its empirical effects are not traceable to it as
events in time. For as events these effects are always the results of
antecedent empirical causes. What is alone due to noumenal causality is
that empirical character in virtue of which appearances are what they
are, and owing to which they stand in specific and necessary causal
relations to one another.

     “...the empirical character is _permanent_, while its effects,
     according to variation in the concomitant, and in part limiting
     conditions, appear in changeable forms.”[1585]

Empirical causality is itself in its specific nature conditioned by an
intelligible cause.[1586]


EXPLANATION OF THE RELATION OF FREEDOM TO NECESSITY OF NATURE[1587]

=Statement.=--No single appearance can be exempted from the law of natural
causality. For it would then be placed outside all possible experience,
and would be for us a fiction of the brain, or rather could not be
conceived at all. Nothing, therefore, _in nature_ can act freely or
spontaneously. But while thus recognising that all _events_ without
exception are empirically conditioned, we may, as already pointed out,
regard empirical causality as itself an effect of a non-empirical and
intelligible power.[1588] In events there may be nothing but nature, and
yet nature itself, or perhaps even some of the existences composing it,
may rest upon powers of a noumenal order. Kant proceeds to show that
such an hypothesis is not only allowable, but is indispensable for
understanding the distinguishing features of human life in its practical
aspect.

Man is a natural existence, and his activities are subject to empirical
laws. Like all other objects of nature, he has an empirical character,
and in virtue of it takes his place as an integral part of the system of
nature. But man is unique among all natural existences in that he not
only knows himself as a sensible existence, but also, through pure
apperception, becomes aware of himself as possessing faculties of a
strictly intelligible character.[1589] Such are the faculties of
understanding and Reason, especially the latter in its practical
employment. The “ought” of the moral imperative expresses a kind of
necessity and a form of causation which we nowhere find in the world of
nature. The understanding can know in nature only what actually is, has
been, or will be. Nothing natural can be other than it is in the
particular relations in which it is found. Moral action transcends the
natural in that it finds its cause, not in an appearance or set of
appearances, but in an Ideal of pure Reason. Such action must indeed be
possible under natural conditions, but such conditions do not determine
its rightness, and consequently cannot determine its causality.

     “Reason ... does not here follow the order of things as they
     present themselves in appearance, but frames to itself with perfect
     spontaneity an order of its own according to Ideas, to which it
     adapts the empirical conditions, and according to which it declares
     actions to be necessary even although they have never yet taken
     place, and perhaps never will take place. And at the same time it
     also presupposes that Reason can have causality in regard to all
     these actions, since otherwise no empirical effects could be
     expected from its Ideas.”[1590]

If such action of pure Reason be admitted to be possible, it will have
to be viewed, purely intelligible though it be, as also possessing an
empirical character, i.e. as conforming to the system of nature. Its
empirical consequences will be the effects of antecedent appearances,
and will empirically determine by natural necessity all subsequent acts.
In this empirical character, therefore, there can be no freedom. Were
our knowledge of the circumstances sufficiently extensive, every human
action, so far as it is appearance, could be predicted and shown to be
necessary. How, then, can we talk of actions as free, when from the
point of view of appearances they must in all cases be regarded as
inevitable? The solution is that which has already been given of the
broader issue. The _entire_ empirical character, the whole system of
nature, is determined by the intelligible character. And the former
results from the latter, not empirically, and therefore not according to
any temporal, causal law. It does not arise or begin at a certain time.
The intelligible character conditions the empirical series _as a
series_, and not as if it were a first member of it.

     “Thus what we have missed in all empirical series is disclosed as
     possible, namely, that the condition of a successive series of
     events may itself be empirically unconditioned.”[1591]

The intelligible character lies _outside_ the series of appearances.
“Reason is the _abiding_ (_beharrliche_) condition of all free
actions....”[1592] Freedom ought not, therefore, to be conceived only
negatively as independence of empirical conditions, but also positively
as the power of originating a series of events. The empirical series is
in time. Reason, which is its unconditioned condition, admits of nothing
antecedent to itself; it knows neither before nor after. The series is
the immediate effect of a non-temporal reality.

In illustration of his meaning, not, as he is careful to add, with the
profession of thereby confirming its truth, Kant points out that moral
judgment upon a vicious action is not determined in view of the
inheritance, circumstances and past life of the offender, but is passed
just as if he might in each action be supposed to begin, quite by
himself, a new series of effects. This, in Kant’s view, shows that
practical Reason is regarded as a cause completely capable,
independently of all empirical conditions, of determining the act, and
that it is present in all the actions of men under all conditions, and
is always the same. To explain why the intelligible character should in
any specific case produce just this particular empirical character, good
or bad,

     “...transcends all the powers of our Reason, indeed all its rights
     of questioning, just as if we were to ask why the transcendental
     object of our outer sense-intuition yields intuition in _space_
     only and no other.”[1593]

In conclusion Kant states that his intention has not been to establish
the reality of freedom, not even to prove its possibility. Freedom has
been dealt with only as a transcendental Idea; and the only point
established is that freedom is, so to speak, a _possible possibility_,
in that it is _not contradicted_ either by experience or by anything
that can be proved to be a presupposition of experience.

=Comment.=--Adequate comment upon this section is difficult for many
reasons. The section is full of archaic expressions from the earlier
stages of Kant’s Critical teaching. Secondly, the section anticipates a
problem which is first adequately dealt with in the second _Critique_.
And lastly, but not least, the discussion of freedom in connection with
a cosmological antinomy leads Kant to treat it in the same manner as the
general antinomy, and in so doing to ignore the chief difficulty to
which human freedom, as an independent problem with its own peculiar
difficulties, lies open. For it is comparatively easy to reconcile the
universality of the causal principle with the unconditionedness of the
transcendental ground upon which nature _as a whole_ is made to rest. It
is a very different matter to reconcile the spontaneous origination of
_particular_ causal series, or the freedom of _particular_ existences,
such as human beings, with the singleness and uniformity of a natural
system in which every part is determined by every other.
Self-consciousness, with the capacity which it confers of constructing
rational ideals, certainly, as Kant rightly contends, creates a
situation to which mechanical categories are by no means adequate. But
the mere reference to the conceivability of distinct causal series,
having each a pure conception as their intelligible ground, does not
suffice to meet the fundamental difficulty that, on Kant’s own
admission, each such separate series must form an integral part of the
unitary system of natural law. In only one passage does Kant even touch
upon this difficulty. Speaking[1594] of Reason’s power of originating a
series of events, he adds that while nothing _begins_ in Reason itself
(as it admits of no conditions antecedent to itself in time), the new
series must none the less have a beginning in the natural world. But the
proviso, which he at once makes, indicates that he is aware that this
statement is untenable. For he adds the qualification that though a
beginning of the series, it is never an absolutely first beginning. In
other words, it is not a beginning in any real sense of the term. As the
argument of his next paragraph shows, it is the entire system of
nature, and not any one series within it, which can alone account, in
empirical terms, for any one action.

It is open to Kant to argue, as he has already done,[1595] that the
transcendental object conditions each separate appearance as well as all
appearances in their totality, and that the specific empirical character
of each causal series is therefore no less noumenally conditioned than
is nature as a whole. But this does not suffice to meet the
difficulty--how, if all natural phenomena constitute a single closed
system in which everything is determined by everything else, a moral
agent, acting spontaneously, can be free to originate a genuinely new
series of natural events. We seem constrained to conclude that Kant has
failed to sustain his position. A solution is rendered impossible by the
very terms in which he formulates the problem. If the spiritual and the
natural be opposed to one another as the timeless and the temporal, and
if the natural be further viewed as a unitary system, individual moral
freedom is no longer defensible. Only the “transcendental freedom” of
the _cosmological_ argument can be reckoned as among the open
possibilities.

As regards the character of the Critical doctrine which underlies this
section, we need only note that the statement in A 546-7 = B 574-5, that
man knows himself through pure apperception as “a purely intelligible
object,”[1596] does not conform to Kant’s final teaching. The section
can be dated through its unwavering adherence to the subjectivist
doctrine of the transcendental object.[1597]


SOLUTION OF THE FOURTH ANTINOMY[1598]

=Statement.=--The above solution is adopted. Both thesis and antithesis
may be true, the latter of the world of sense and the former of its
non-empirical ground. All things sensible are contingent, but the
contingent series in its entirety may nevertheless rest upon an
unconditionally necessary being. The unconditioned, since it is outside
the series, does not require that any one link in the series should be
itself unconditioned. “Reason follows its own course in the empirical,
and again a peculiar course in its transcendental use,” _i.e._ it limits
itself by the law of causality in dealing with appearances, lest in
losing the thread of the empirical conditions it should fall into idle
and empty speculations; while, on the other hand, it limits that law to
appearances, lest it should wrongly declare that what is useless for the
explanation of appearances is therefore impossible in itself. This does
not prove that an absolutely necessary being is really possible, but
only that its impossibility must not be concluded from the necessary
contingency of all things sensuous.

=Comment.=--Kant’s method of distinguishing[1599] this conclusion from
that of the preceding antinomy is again artificial. “Necessary being” is
not in conception more _extramundanum_ than “unconditioned cause.” If
Kant’s distinction were valid, the argument of the fourth antinomy would
no longer be cosmological; it would coincide with the problem of the
_Ideal of Pure Reason_.


CONCLUDING NOTE ON THE WHOLE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON[1600]

=Statement.=--When we seek the unconditioned entirely beyond experience,
our Ideas cease to be cosmological; they become transcendent. They
separate themselves off from all empirical use of the understanding, and
create to themselves an object, the material of which is not taken from
experience, and which is therefore a mere thing of the mind (_blosses
Gedankending_). None the less the cosmological Idea of the fourth
antinomy impels us to take this step. When sensuous appearances, as
merely contingent, require us to look for something altogether distinct
in nature from them, our only available instruments, in so doing, are
those pure concepts of things in general which contingent experience
involves. We use them as instruments in such manner as may enable us to
form, through analogy, some kind of notion of intelligible things. Taken
in abstraction from the forms of sense, they yield that notion of an
absolutely necessary Being which is equivalent to the concept of the
theological Ideal.


CONCLUDING COMMENT ON KANT’S DOCTRINE OF THE ANTINOMIES

We may now, in conclusion, briefly summarise the results obtained in
this chapter. Kant fails to justify the assertion that on the dogmatic
level there exist antinomies in which both the contradictory
alternatives allow of cogent demonstration. His proofs are in every
instance invalid. The real nature of antinomy must, as he himself
occasionally intimates, be defined in a very different manner, namely,
as a conflict between the demand of Reason for unity and system, and
the specific nature of the conditions, especially of the spatial and
temporal conditions, under which the sensuous exists. In this wider form
it constitutes a genuine problem, which demands for its solution the
fundamental Critical distinction between appearances and
things-in-themselves, and also a more thoroughgoing discussion than has
yet been attempted of the nature of Reason and of the function of its
Ideas. It is to these connected questions that Kant devotes his main
attention in the remaining portions of the _Dialectic_, so that in
passing to the _Ideal of Pure Reason_ he is not proceeding to the
treatment of a new set of problems, but to the restatement and to the
more adequate solution of the fundamental conflict between understanding
and Reason.

The observations which closed our comment upon the _Paralogisms_ are
thus again in order. The teaching of the sections on the _Antinomies_,
no less than that of those on the _Paralogisms_, is incomplete, and if
taken by itself is bound to mislead. The Ideas of an unconditioned self
and of an unconditioned ground of nature have thus far been taken as at
least conceptually possible, and as signifying what may perhaps be real
existences. These Ideas are in certain of the remaining sections of the
_Dialectic_ called in question. They are there declared to be without
inherent meaning. They are useful fictions--_heuristische
Fiktionen_--and in their psychological nature are simply _schemata_ of
regulative principles. Their theoretical significance consists merely in
their regulative and limitative functions. They must not be regarded,
even hypothetically, as representing real existences. In the practical
(_i.e._ ethical) sphere they do indeed acquire a very different
standing. But with that the _Critique of Pure Reason_ is not directly
concerned. The reader may therefore be warned not to omit the chapter on
the _Ideal of Pure Reason_, on the supposition that it embodies only a
criticism of the Cartesian and teleological proofs of God’s existence.
It is an integral part of Critical teaching, and carries Kant’s entire
argument forward to its final conclusions. Only in view of the new and
deeper considerations, which it brings to light, can his treatment even
of the _Antinomies_ be properly understood. Its main opening section
(Section II.) is, indeed, among the most scholastically rationalistic in
the entire _Critique_; but in the later sections it unfolds, with a
boldness and consistency to which we find no parallel in the treatment
of the _Paralogisms_ and of the _Antinomies_, the full consequences of
the more sceptical of Kant’s alternating standpoints. It disintegrates
the concepts of the unconditioned, which have hitherto been employed
without analysis and without question; and upon their elimination from
among the legitimate instruments of Reason, the situation undergoes
entire transformation, the two points of view appearing for the first
time in the full extent of their divergence and conflict. For Kant’s
Idealist view of Reason and of its Ideas still continues to find
occasional statement, showing that he has not been able decisively to
commit himself to this more sceptical interpretation of the function of
Reason; that he is conscious that the Idealist view alone gives adequate
expression to certain fundamental considerations which have to be
reckoned with; and that unless the two views can in some manner be
reconciled with one another, a really definitive and satisfactory
solution of the problem has not been reached. When, therefore, we speak
of Kant’s final conclusions, we must be taken as referring to the
twofold tendencies, sceptical and Idealist, which to the very last
persist in competition with one another. The greater adequacy of Kant’s
argument in the chapter on the _Ideal of Pure Reason_ and in the
important _Appendix_ attached to the _Dialectic_ consists in its
forcible and considered exposition of both attitudes. Most of the
sections on the _Antinomies_ must, as we have seen, be dated as among
the earliest parts of the _Critique_. Their teaching is correspondingly
immature. The chapter on the _Ideal_ and the _Appendix_, on the other
hand, were among the latest to be written, and contain, together with
the central portions of the _Analytic_, our most authoritative
exposition of Kant’s Critical principles.




