Chapter III:

"his thin hands tightly clinched,"
  changed to:
"his thin hands tightly clenched,"


Chapter IV:

"In another letter (June 29, 1866) he encloses a photograph* and comments on"
(accompanied by the footnote:  "* See p. 54.", referring to
a "carte de visite" photograph facing that page, which cannot be included
in this ASCII text)
  changed to:
"In another letter (June 29, 1866) he encloses a photograph and comments on"


Chapter V:

"English annalists and poets, -- Geoffrey of Monmouth, Sir Thomas Mallory,"
  changed to:
"English annalists and poets, -- Geoffrey of Monmouth, Sir Thomas Malory,"
  (the latter spelling is given in every other instance in the book).


Chapter VII:

"This is the sixth letter I've written since nine o'clock to night,"
  changed to:
"This is the sixth letter I've written since nine o'clock to-night,"

"The Song of the Chattahooche" changed to:  ". . . Chattahoochee".


Chapter XI:

The poem by Mrs. Lawrence Turnbull had only the ending quotation mark
in the original text.  An opening quotation mark was added.


Chapter XIII:

"Where men his Self must see,"
  changed to:
"Where men his Self must see."

`"Corn" while representing'
  changed to:
`"Corn", while representing'

`"An Evening Song", "My Springs", "A Ballad of the Trees and the Master",'
  changed to:
`"An Evening Song", "My Springs", "A Ballad of Trees and the Master",'


The numerous references to "Shakspere" were NOT standardized to "Shakespeare",
although both spellings occur in the text.  This is primarily due
to the references to Lanier's book, "Shakspere and His Forerunners".

Please note that other titles relating to Lanier are also now online.


Accents cannot be displayed correctly in ASCII.  The following lines
are given to show where accents occurred in the original:

notably the Moncures, the Maurys, the Latane/s, and the Flournoys,
characteristic of the old re/gime.
  (and other occurrences of "regime")
They fe^ted me to death, nearly. . . .  Indeed, they were all
"His dialogue reads too often like a catalogue `raisonne/' of his library."
A party of hunters -- including Philip Sterling and Paul Ru"betsahl,
  (and other occurrences of "Ruebetsahl")
"A terrible me^le/e of winged opposites is forever filling the world
into contemporary life, and occasionally an exquisite lyric like "Nirva^na".
  (and other occurrences of "Nirvana")
play his overture to `Tannha"user'.  The `Music of the Future' is surely
found a seat, and the ba^ton tapped and waved, and I plunged into the sea,
  (and other occurrences of "baton")
of the San Fernando Cathedral and of the Mission San Jose/ de Aquayo
into `La Me/lancolie', which melted itself forth with such eloquent lamenting
The director of the Peabody Orchestra, who had been a pupil of Von Bu"low,
  (and other occurrences of "Buelow")
the Germania Ma"nnerchor Orchestra, -- one of the many companies of Germans
with appealing to the (ae)sthetic emotions of an audience,
  (and other occurrences of "aesthetic" and "aesthetical")
with stringing notes together -- mere trouve\res of a day --
She was the daughter of the Marquis de la Figanie\re,
when this now-hatching brood of my Ephemer(ae) shall take flight
without enjoying the poet's nai"ve enthusiasm and his clear insight
by followers of Arnold and Brunetie\re, after many class-room
that the English poetry written between the time of Aldhelm and C(ae)dmon
  (and other occurrences of "Caedmon")
with deeds of manhood before Zu"tphen and touch their hearts
and had coo"perated with him in the series of lectures
how to coo"perate with other men in the prosecution of inquiry."
These lectures, suggested by those given at the Colle/ge de France,
Gayarre/'s histories, the "War between the States", by Alexander H. Stephens,
  (and other occurrences of "Gayarre")
open-minded not prejudiced, modern and not medi(ae)val.  His characteristics
of the e/lite of all ages encircles a mountain which is dominated
before it displays its magic, like the modern spiritualistic se/ance-givers
how blank, world-bound, and wearying is the stone fac,ade of hopelessness
thoroughly musical; Sophocles and (Ae)schylus were both teachers of the chorus.
to King Arthur's court, `ge/rt' (as sweet Sir Thomas Malory hath it)





End of this Etext of "Sidney Lanier", by Edwin Mims




