CHAPTER III—AUSTERITIES


One is a postulant for two years at least, often for four; a novice for
four. It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier
than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years. The
Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their
order.

In their cells, they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations,
of which they must never speak.

On the day when a novice makes her profession, she is dressed in her
handsomest attire, she is crowned with white roses, her hair is brushed
until it shines, and curled. Then she prostrates herself; a great black
veil is thrown over her, and the office for the dead is sung. Then the
nuns separate into two files; one file passes close to her, saying in
plaintive accents, “Our sister is dead”; and the other file responds in
a voice of ecstasy, “Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ!”


At the epoch when this story takes place, a boarding-school was
attached to the convent—a boarding-school for young girls of noble and
mostly wealthy families, among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de
Saint-Aulaire and de Bélissen, and an English girl bearing the
illustrious Catholic name of Talbot. These young girls, reared by these
nuns between four walls, grew up with a horror of the world and of the
age. One of them said to us one day, “The sight of the street pavement
made me shudder from head to foot.” They were dressed in blue, with a
white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their
breast. On certain grand festival days, particularly Saint Martha’s
day, they were permitted, as a high favor and a supreme happiness, to
dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of
Saint-Benoît for a whole day. In the early days the nuns were in the
habit of lending them their black garments. This seemed profane, and
the prioress forbade it. Only the novices were permitted to lend. It is
remarkable that these performances, tolerated and encouraged, no doubt,
in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to
give these children a foretaste of the holy habit, were a genuine
happiness and a real recreation for the scholars. They simply amused
themselves with it. _It was new; it gave them a change_. Candid reasons
of childhood, which do not, however, succeed in making us worldlings
comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one’s hand
and standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in front
of a reading-desk.

The pupils conformed, with the exception of the austerities, to all the
practices of the convent. There was a certain young woman who entered
the world, and who after many years of married life had not succeeded
in breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever any
one knocked at her door, “forever!” Like the nuns, the pupils saw their
relatives only in the parlor. Their very mothers did not obtain
permission to embrace them. The following illustrates to what a degree
severity on that point was carried. One day a young girl received a
visit from her mother, who was accompanied by a little sister three
years of age. The young girl wept, for she wished greatly to embrace
her sister. Impossible. She begged that, at least, the child might be
permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could
kiss it. This was almost indignantly refused.




CHAPTER IV—GAYETIES


Nonetheless, these young girls filled this grave house with charming
souvenirs.

At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister. The recreation
hour struck. A door swung on its hinges. The birds said, “Good; here
come the children!” An irruption of youth inundated that garden
intersected with a cross like a shroud. Radiant faces, white foreheads,
innocent eyes, full of merry light, all sorts of auroras, were
scattered about amid these shadows. After the psalmodies, the bells,
the peals, and knells and offices, the sound of these little girls
burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees. The hive
of joy was opened, and each one brought her honey. They played, they
called to each other, they formed into groups, they ran about; pretty
little white teeth chattered in the corners; the veils superintended
the laughs from a distance, shades kept watch of the sunbeams, but what
mattered it? Still they beamed and laughed. Those four lugubrious walls
had their moment of dazzling brilliancy. They looked on, vaguely
blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of
the hives. It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house of
mourning. The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns; the
gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence. Thanks to these
children, there was, among so many austere hours, one hour of
ingenuousness. The little ones skipped about; the elder ones danced. In
this cloister play was mingled with heaven. Nothing is so delightful
and so august as all these fresh, expanding young souls. Homer would
have come thither to laugh with Perrault; and there was in that black
garden, youth, health, noise, cries, giddiness, pleasure, happiness
enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses, those of
the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale, those of the throne as
well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mère-Grand.

In that house more than anywhere else, perhaps, arise those children’s
sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of
thoughtfulness. It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of
five years exclaimed one day: “Mother! one of the big girls has just
told me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remain
here. What happiness!”


It was here, too, that this memorable dialogue took place:—

_A Vocal Mother_. Why are you weeping, my child?

_The child_ (aged six). I told Alix that I knew my French history. She
says that I do not know it, but I do.

_Alix_, the big girl (aged nine). No; she does not know it.

_The Mother_. How is that, my child?

_Alix_. She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any
question in the book, and she would answer it.

“Well?”


“She did not answer it.”


“Let us see about it. What did you ask her?”


“I opened the book at random, as she proposed, and I put the first
question that I came across.”


“And what was the question?”


“It was, ‘What happened after that?’”


It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy
paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder:—

“How well bred! it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just
like a person!”


It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once
picked up a confession which had been written out in advance, in order
that she might not forget it, by a sinner of seven years:—

“Father, I accuse myself of having been avaricious.

“Father, I accuse myself of having been an adulteress.

“Father, I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen.”


It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six
years of age improvised the following tale, which was listened to by
blue eyes aged four and five years:—

“There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a
great many flowers. They plucked the flowers and put them in their
pockets. After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their
playthings. There was a wolf in that country; there was a great deal of
forest; and the wolf was in the forest; and he ate the little cocks.”


And this other poem:—

“There came a blow with a stick.

“It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat.

“It was not good for her; it hurt her.

“Then a lady put Punchinello in prison.”


It was there that a little abandoned child, a foundling whom the
convent was bringing up out of charity, uttered this sweet and
heart-breaking saying. She heard the others talking of their mothers,
and she murmured in her corner:—

“As for me, my mother was not there when I was born!”


There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through
the corridors with her bunch of keys, and whose name was Sister Agatha.
The _big big girls_—those over ten years of age—called her
_Agathocles_.

The refectory, a large apartment of an oblong square form, which
received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the
garden, was dark and damp, and, as the children say, full of beasts.
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects.

Each of its four corners had received, in the language of the pupils, a
special and expressive name. There was Spider corner, Caterpillar
corner, Wood-louse corner, and Cricket corner.

Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed. It was not
so cold there as elsewhere. From the refectory the names had passed to
the boarding-school, and there served as in the old College Mazarin to
distinguish four nations. Every pupil belonged to one of these four
nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at
meals. One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral
visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter
the class-room through which he was passing.

He inquired of another pupil, a charming brunette with rosy cheeks, who
stood near him:—

“Who is that?”


“She is a spider, Monseigneur.”


“Bah! And that one yonder?”


“She is a cricket.”


“And that one?”


“She is a caterpillar.”


“Really! and yourself?”


“I am a wood-louse, Monseigneur.”


Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities. At the beginning of
this century Écouen was one of those strict and graceful places where
young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august. At
Écouen, in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament,
a distinction was made between virgins and florists. There were also
the “dais” and the “censors,”—the first who held the cords of the dais,
and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament. The
flowers belonged by right to the florists. Four “virgins” walked in
advance. On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear
the question put in the dormitory, “Who is a virgin?”


Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a “little one” of seven
years, to a “big girl” of sixteen, who took the head of the procession,
while she, the little one, remained at the rear, “You are a virgin, but
I am not.”





