CHAPTER VIII—THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS


The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep.

He sat down beside her and began to think. Little by little, as he
gazed at her, he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom of
mind.

He clearly perceived this truth, the foundation of his life henceforth,
that so long as she was there, so long as he had her near him, he
should need nothing except for her, he should fear nothing except for
her. He was not even conscious that he was very cold, since he had
taken off his coat to cover her.

Nevertheless, athwart this reverie into which he had fallen he had
heard for some time a peculiar noise. It was like the tinkling of a
bell. This sound proceeded from the garden. It could be heard
distinctly though faintly. It resembled the faint, vague music produced
by the bells of cattle at night in the pastures.

This noise made Valjean turn round.

He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden.

A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the melon
beds, rising, stooping, halting, with regular movements, as though he
were dragging or spreading out something on the ground. This person
appeared to limp.

Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy. For
them everything is hostile and suspicious. They distrust the day
because it enables people to see them, and the night because it aids in
surprising them. A little while before he had shivered because the
garden was deserted, and now he shivered because there was some one
there.

He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors. He said to
himself that Javert and the spies had, perhaps, not taken their
departure; that they had, no doubt, left people on the watch in the
street; that if this man should discover him in the garden, he would
cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up. He took the
sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap of
old furniture, which was out of use, in the most remote corner of the
shed. Cosette did not stir.

From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon
patch. The strange thing about it was, that the sound of the bell
followed each of this man’s movements. When the man approached, the
sound approached; when the man retreated, the sound retreated; if he
made any hasty gesture, a tremolo accompanied the gesture; when he
halted, the sound ceased. It appeared evident that the bell was
attached to that man; but what could that signify? Who was this man who
had a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox?

As he put these questions to himself, he touched Cosette’s hands. They
were icy cold.

“Ah! good God!” he cried.

He spoke to her in a low voice:—

“Cosette!”


She did not open her eyes.

He shook her vigorously.

She did not wake.

“Is she dead?” he said to himself, and sprang to his feet, quivering
from head to foot.

The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind. There
are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies,
and violently force the partitions of our brains. When those we love
are in question, our prudence invents every sort of madness. He
remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal.

Cosette was pale, and had fallen at full length on the ground at his
feet, without a movement.

He listened to her breathing: she still breathed, but with a
respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction.

How was he to warm her back to life? How was he to rouse her? All that
was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts. He rushed
wildly from the ruin.

It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a
fire in less than a quarter of an hour.




CHAPTER IX—THE MAN WITH THE BELL


He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden. He had
taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his
waistcoat.

The man’s head was bent down, and he did not see him approaching. In a
few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him.

Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry:—

“One hundred francs!”


The man gave a start and raised his eyes.

“You can earn a hundred francs,” went on Jean Valjean, “if you will
grant me shelter for this night.”


The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean’s terrified countenance.

“What! so it is you, Father Madeleine!” said the man.

That name, thus pronounced, at that obscure hour, in that unknown spot,
by that strange man, made Jean Valjean start back.

He had expected anything but that. The person who thus addressed him
was a bent and lame old man, dressed almost like a peasant, who wore on
his left knee a leather knee-cap, whence hung a moderately large bell.
His face, which was in the shadow, was not distinguishable.

However, the goodman had removed his cap, and exclaimed, trembling all
over:—

“Ah, good God! How come you here, Father Madeleine? Where did you
enter? Dieu-Jésus! Did you fall from heaven? There is no trouble about
that: if ever you do fall, it will be from there. And what a state you
are in! You have no cravat; you have no hat; you have no coat! Do you
know, you would have frightened any one who did not know you? No coat!
Lord God! Are the saints going mad nowadays? But how did you get in
here?”


His words tumbled over each other. The goodman talked with a rustic
volubility, in which there was nothing alarming. All this was uttered
with a mixture of stupefaction and _naïve_ kindliness.

“Who are you? and what house is this?” demanded Jean Valjean.

“Ah! pardieu, this is too much!” exclaimed the old man. “I am the
person for whom you got the place here, and this house is the one where
you had me placed. What! You don’t recognize me?”


“No,” said Jean Valjean; “and how happens it that you know me?”


“You saved my life,” said the man.

He turned. A ray of moonlight outlined his profile, and Jean Valjean
recognized old Fauchelevent.

“Ah!” said Jean Valjean, “so it is you? Yes, I recollect you.”


“That is very lucky,” said the old man, in a reproachful tone.

“And what are you doing here?” resumed Jean Valjean.

“Why, I am covering my melons, of course!”


In fact, at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him, old Fauchelevent
held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in
spreading over the melon bed. During the hour or thereabouts that he
had been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them. It
was this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar
movements observed from the shed by Jean Valjean.

He continued:—

“I said to myself, ‘The moon is bright: it is going to freeze. What if
I were to put my melons into their greatcoats?’ And,” he added, looking
at Jean Valjean with a broad smile,—“pardieu! you ought to have done
the same! But how do you come here?”


Jean Valjean, finding himself known to this man, at least only under
the name of Madeleine, thenceforth advanced only with caution. He
multiplied his questions. Strange to say, their rôles seemed to be
reversed. It was he, the intruder, who interrogated.

“And what is this bell which you wear on your knee?”


“This,” replied Fauchelevent, “is so that I may be avoided.”


“What! so that you may be avoided?”


Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air.

“Ah, goodness! there are only women in this house—many young girls. It
appears that I should be a dangerous person to meet. The bell gives
them warning. When I come, they go.”


“What house is this?”


“Come, you know well enough.”


“But I do not.”


“Not when you got me the place here as gardener?”


“Answer me as though I knew nothing.”


“Well, then, this is the Petit-Picpus convent.”


Memories recurred to Jean Valjean. Chance, that is to say, Providence,
had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine
where old Fauchelevent, crippled by the fall from his cart, had been
admitted on his recommendation two years previously. He repeated, as
though talking to himself:—

“The Petit-Picpus convent.”


“Exactly,” returned old Fauchelevent. “But to come to the point, how
the deuce did you manage to get in here, you, Father Madeleine? No
matter if you are a saint; you are a man as well, and no man enters
here.”


“You certainly are here.”


“There is no one but me.”


“Still,” said Jean Valjean, “I must stay here.”


“Ah, good God!” cried Fauchelevent.

Jean Valjean drew near to the old man, and said to him in a grave
voice:—

“Father Fauchelevent, I saved your life.”


“I was the first to recall it,” returned Fauchelevent.

“Well, you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the olden
days.”


Fauchelevent took in his aged, trembling, and wrinkled hands Jean
Valjean’s two robust hands, and stood for several minutes as though
incapable of speaking. At length he exclaimed:—

“Oh! that would be a blessing from the good God, if I could make you
some little return for that! Save your life! Monsieur le Maire, dispose
of the old man!”


A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man. His countenance seemed
to emit a ray of light.

“What do you wish me to do?” he resumed.

“That I will explain to you. You have a chamber?”


“I have an isolated hovel yonder, behind the ruins of the old convent,
in a corner which no one ever looks into. There are three rooms in it.”


The hut was, in fact, so well hidden behind the ruins, and so cleverly
arranged to prevent it being seen, that Jean Valjean had not perceived
it.

“Good,” said Jean Valjean. “Now I am going to ask two things of you.”


“What are they, Mr. Mayor?”


“In the first place, you are not to tell any one what you know about
me. In the second, you are not to try to find out anything more.”


“As you please. I know that you can do nothing that is not honest, that
you have always been a man after the good God’s heart. And then,
moreover, you it was who placed me here. That concerns you. I am at
your service.”


“That is settled then. Now, come with me. We will go and get the
child.”


“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “so there is a child?”


He added not a word further, and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows
his master.

Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette, who had grown rosy again
before the flame of a good fire, was lying asleep in the old gardener’s
bed. Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more; his hat,
which he had flung over the wall, had been found and picked up. While
Jean Valjean was putting on his coat, Fauchelevent had removed the bell
and kneecap, which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that
adorned the wall. The two men were warming themselves with their elbows
resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese,
black bread, a bottle of wine, and two glasses, and the old man was
saying to Jean Valjean, as he laid his hand on the latter’s knee: “Ah!
Father Madeleine! You did not recognize me immediately; you save
people’s lives, and then you forget them! That is bad! But they
remember you! You are an ingrate!”





