XXVI

THE HYPNOTIST

    "Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power
    and signs and lying wonders."--_2 Thessalonians ii. 9._

    "And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those
    miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the
    beast."--_Revelation xiii. 14._

    "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead."--_Ephesians v.
    14._


Just where the natural and the supernatural exists is a most difficult
psychological problem. Many marvellous doings and strange apparitions,
from the beginning, were attributed to the supernatural. These same
wonders are now known to be the application of physical and psychological
laws. The "enchanters," "soothsayers," "diviners," "magicians," and
"fortune tellers" have awed the simple-minded and superstitious in all
ages. A clear understanding of Hypnotism, Mesmerism, Telepathy, Odylic
Force, Psychological Phenomena, Clairvoyance, Black Art, and Spiritism,
will throw light on many of these supposed supernatural mysteries. Under
whatever name demonstrations may be known, they are all various phases of
certain well-established laws touching our physical, mental, and psychical
being.

One of the most common, and best understood, of these mystery workings is
Hypnotism which, defined, is "an artificial trance, or an artificially
induced state, in which the mind becomes passive." The subject, however,
acts readily upon suggestion or direction; and upon regaining normal
consciousness, retains little or no recollection of the actions or ideas
dominant during this condition. Hypnotism is purely mental and physical;
but this strange power which one can exercise over another strikingly
illustrates the influence which Satan exercises over millions of blinded
subjects. We shall avoid any attempt to discuss the science and philosophy
of Hypnotism; this phase of the subject is not germane to our discussion.

All these subtle laws of mind, acting in relation to the body, only now
being understood by scholars, are undoubtedly familiar to our common
Enemy. We believe that centuries before man knew anything about psychic
laws, as understood to-day, strange, unaccountable influences were
operating on the wills and consciences of men. Hypnotism is a form of
sleep; but during the time the subject can receive and obey instructions.
They are absolutely under the control of the hypnotist.

Paul caught an extraordinary vision of sin when he exclaimed to the
Ephesians: "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead." Here is a
fearful figure of sin: that it is sleep--semi-consciousness--
unconsciousness; yet they think, act, move about, enjoy, love, hate, etc.,
etc., and they are as one asleep. Observe this state is, if allowed to
remain _in articulo mortis_, Hypnotism, conducted by the Master of Black
Art; and they obey his will, over against observation, warning, wisdom,
experience of others, even of themselves. Voices may call loud and long,
but do not awaken the soul under the satanic spell.

There are many freaks of hypnotic influence which illustrate vividly the
power of sin--and back of the sin, the sin Personality. We have seen
subjects placed under hypnotic sleep, and they would remain in this
condition for twenty-four hours. The demonstration was made in a large
department store, facing a stone-paved street, which roared day and night
with cars and heavy traffic. Hundreds of people swarmed about the sleeping
man, laughing and talking loudly. Not until the hypnotist came and touched
the subject did he arouse from the heavy slumber.

A still more remarkable demonstration is reported to have been
accomplished in an Eastern city. We give as authority the _Associated
Press_. After the subject was placed under the hypnotic trance, he was
dressed like one being prepared for burial, then put in a coffin, hauled
to the cemetery in a hearse. The "corpse" was then lowered in a grave of
the proper depth, the grave filled to the ground level. The air tube from
the coffin to the top was large enough to enable a light to be reflected
on the face of the sleeper. "Buried alive," said the report. He was left
in the grave several hours.

If superior mind force can accomplish such marvellous feats on human will,
what may we expect from supernatural mind force with a burning ambition to
subdue? The columns of our _dailies_ are filled with reports of the doings
of men and women that cannot be explained on any other hypothesis. Think
of the insane, unreasonable, illogical risk in all manner of sin--for
what? A momentary taste of some "forbidden fruit." We hear that
self-preservation is the first law of our being; but how often this law is
utterly ignored for sensuous gratification. Those who do these things are
unable to understand their insane conduct until it is all over. "Oh, I can
see it all now," is the despairing cry so often heard. Of course, the
hypnotic spell is removed. How easy it is to sit and philosophize on the
actions of people. "Why would any sane person do such a thing?" A sane
person would not; the why of all these human twists is very simple when we
are willing to admit the literal teaching of God's book concerning our
indefatigable Enemy. "The apostate angel and his followers by pride and
blasphemy against God and malice against men became liars and murderers by
tempting men to do sins" (Jude 6, R. V.).

Why did the Prodigal Son do such an insane, sinful act? Why? Well, he came
to himself, but not until the harm was wrought. Why have ten thousand
prodigals since that day been guilty of the same insane conduct? The
answer is obvious. Why did Judas sell his Lord?--He who had been so highly
honoured: chosen, ordained, sent out? "Satan entered into Judas;" there
you have the whole truth. By and by, Judas came to himself; then remorse
and despair not only caused him to return the money, but destroy himself.

In a subsequent chapter we shall discuss more particularly the suicide
problem; but we are satisfied Judas was a victim of two satanic schemes:
the hypnotic spell deadened his reason and judgment to do the deed; then,
after the Crucifixion, despair gripped him like a vice. Who would say that
Judas was excluded from the Saviour's dying prayer: "Father forgive them"?
Peter denied Christ, then lied and blasphemed about it. He was restored;
but Satan's power over Judas was not broken. His end was Satan's finished
work. What he did to Judas he purposes to do with every "subject"--utter
destruction.

We once saw a snake charm a bird; the serpent's head was lifted several
inches--eyes blazing, and red tongue flashing. The bird fluttered, gave a
piteous wail, but was helplessly walking into the jaws of death. Now the
question arises: what about the freedom of the will? Do we ever cease to
be free agents? Certainly we do not; the hypnotic subject exercises free
choice; that is never destroyed, but he acts under a compelling _vis
uturga_--power behind.




