IX

AN ANGEL OF LIGHT

    "For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
    themselves into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan
    himself is transformed into an angel of light."--_2 Corinthians xi.
    13-14._


The Devil is a person, with a great personality; but like human beings, he
is not equally endowed in all the attributes of his nature. However, the
Book gives us no information as to his weaknesses. He is all superlative
strength; but if at any point there is a special endowed faculty that
would seem to overshadow the others, it is surely manifested when Satan is
transformed into an _angel of light_. The reason for this is obvious; it
is a return to his old office of "light bearer." When he can effectively
serve his purpose by this startling transformation--darkness to light--he
is at once in a realm where he is familiar with every inch of the
territory.

A close observation of the signs of the times--the happenings in social
and religious circles--will reveal the fact that _light_ is not only his
most familiar rôle, but his favourite rôle. The world is attracted by
things that are bright, beautiful, cheerful; anything that hides the
sombre side of life, throws a mystic veil over its realities, and helps us
to forget--whether it be books, music, lectures, or the nonentities of
society--outweigh all else in the casting of accounts and in forming
comparative estimates.

If Satan were allowed to pose for a full sized picture of himself, just as
he wishes to be seen by the children of this generation, no portrait
painter could produce a specimen of rarer beauty; it would grace the walls
of the most exclusive parlour, and attract special attention in any great
art gallery of the world. There would be no sharp angles, no coarse,
sensuous lines, no out-of-date adornment--the traditional fiery-red would
not appear, but rather the most delicate tints and shades of colour. The
features would be the most graceful and artistic combination of curves and
circles. The "hairy one," the jackal, the snake, the lion, the shadow, the
spoiler at once become as "beautiful as a dream." Amazing transformation!

"The devil of to-day" is not only an apostle of sunshine, but of beauty.
This world is full of beauty; and why should we not forever keep the ugly
and distorted in the background? The development of the beautiful should
be one of the fine arts. Think only of beauty; speak only of beauty; see
only the _beautiful_; then the sinful and unlovely will disappear. An
angel of light--how suggestive!

As an apostle of sunshine his mission is to flood the world with light,
and he does it; but observe--it is _his_ light; it neither warms nor
illuminates, but for spectacular purposes it answers every demand. It
reveals new standards of duty; proves the wrathful things in the Word of
God to be spurious, and the old plan of salvation obsolete and unsuited to
the present day needs. Such words as self-denial, crucifixion, dead to
sin, judgment day, cross bearing, etc., so prominent in the New Testament,
must not be given a literal interpretation. Such truths cast an
unnecessary gloom over the souls of otherwise happy people.

"The devil of to-day" believes that ethical culture should be the slogan,
the watchword, the shibboleth of every pulpit and rostrum. Religion
without refinement is absurd; the esthetic taste should be looked after
more than belief in some abstract Bible doctrine; then the race would be
free from the bondage of creed and fear. True religion is nothing more
than a just appreciation of art, literature, science, philosophy, and
nature. God is in all these things rather than some musty, stereotyped
statement of faith.

He further believes it is a waste of energy for women to be organizing
into societies to study and help conditions among the slums or heathen
lands, and urging upon the hard worked people to pay a tenth of their
income to support missionaries who are better fed and housed than
themselves. Far better devote the time to social clubs, book circles,
euchre and bridge parties, and dressing properly.

We want to call attention again to a truth often overlooked: the Devil and
demons are never satisfied in a disembodied state; when they cannot enter
the souls of men, they seek something else. They will enter a swine when
there is nothing better available. We believe "the prince of the air" can
wield a powerful influence, unincarnated, _in the air_, but he schemes
and works best when he can possess and direct intelligent flesh and blood.

Just now the machinery of the Church and all the auxiliaries are devoting
their energies to various branches of social service; this is good,
Christlike, and necessary; the point we raise, germane to this subject, is
not the work, but the abuse of the idea: social service and
humanitarianism are not religion. They are the fruits of the Good
Samaritan spirit in the world, but they cannot take the place of personal
relationship to God. "Though I give my body to be burned, and all my goods
to feed the poor," says Paul, "it profiteth me nothing" without
love--divine love. The angel-of-light gospel places the emphasis on works
without faith. Love the world, enjoy its lusts and allurements, disregard
all Puritanic ideals of life, be a part of all worldliness--but be kind,
cheerful, optimistic, generous, benevolent: help humanity. "Pay the
fiddler," then dance as you please. Do penance when your conscience lashes
you; but buy indulgences by works of supererogation. "On with the dance,
let joy be unconfined."

A concrete example will illustrate the proposition before us, and also
reveal the power of polished, cultured emissary of "sunshine and smiles."
The little city had a population of about fifteen hundred people; there
were four churches of nearly equal strength. Each congregation had a large
flourishing organization of young people. Scarcely any worldliness
obtained--dancing and card playing rarely ever. The pious, consecrated
young people attracted no little attention. Finally there came to the
place a young woman fresh from college and conservatory as teacher of
music and delsarte. She was an adept at all the niceties of modern
society; things took on new colour at once. The work began with a literary
club, then cards, then the dance. She was beautiful and magnetic; in six
months the "stupid meetin's" of the League and Christian Endeavour were
abandoned for things more exhilarating. The religious foundation which had
been crystallizing for years among the simple hearted boys and girls gave
place to the gayeties imported from the classic circles of city and
college life. She moved among them "an angel of light."




