XXVII

DEVIL POSSESSION

    "As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed
    with a devil. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb
    spake."--_Matthew ix. 32-33._

    "O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good
    things?"--_Matthew xii. 34._


One characteristic, which has been prominent in the varied manifestations
of Satan studied so far, is adaptability. Methods that were available in
the days of our Lord cannot be used successfully now. By some secret
unknown to us the Devil enters into the souls of men. This is a mystery;
so is, also, the filling of the Holy Spirit a mystery. The Devil possessed
King Saul, Judas, Ananias and Sapphira, and many are the instances
recorded in the ministry of the Saviour. Devil possession, it seemed, was
very common; Christ was continually casting them out, and He also gave His
Apostles power likewise to cast them out.

We do not believe the Enemy has abandoned his old profession: an evil
spirit despises a disembodied state; if people are fortified and shielded
against his entrance--then the swine. As cold air whistles and roars about
every crack and cranny, entering in from all directions, so evil
spirits--Devil and demons--press their entrance into the soul. If it is
true they cannot enter except by permission,--they pry and pound until
resistance is impossible, unless divine reinforcement comes to the rescue.

There are maniacs, violent, desperate, incurable, to-day as truly demon
possessed as was the man who lived among the tombs. This, however, is not
his modern _modus operandi_; desperate maniacs could then terrorize a
whole community. Our great asylums have solved this problem; even the
immediate family is relieved of the burden and fear. Those who do not
accept the theory of demon possession should explain a case at present in
one of our institutions. It is a boy, at the time it attracted attention,
only twelve years of age, thin, emaciated, and by no means abnormal in any
particular. This child would remain quiet for days; during this time he
possessed no strength beyond one of his age. At unexpected moments he
would be seized with violent contortions, frothing at the mouth, and
snapping like a mad dog; and a continuous flow of the most obscene
language and blasphemy while the spell lasted. This is not the strangest
part: he had the strength of a giant; it required four or five men to
overpower him. One man was helpless in his hands; he would literally hurl
them to the floor. Compare this story with the one in the fifth chapter of
Mark: "And when He was come out of the ship, immediately there met Him out
of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, who had his dwelling among the
tombs; and no man could bind him, no not with chains, because that he had
been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked
asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man
tame him."

In countries where the gospel light has not yet shown full-orbed, demon
possession with manifestations similar to those of Bible times are known
to be common. F. B. Meyer relates numerous cases in Russia; many by prayer
were cast out in the name of Jesus Christ. "I confess," he says, "these
incidents have greatly impressed me. I wonder how far it would be right to
deal with certain forms of drunkenness and impurity as cases of
demon-possession. It may be there is more of this demon work among us than
we know, and especially in cases of mania." Dr. Howard Taylor, of the
China Island Mission, it is said, was accustomed to diagnose the symptoms
of demon-possession in the same way as of any other disease. Dr. Nevins,
of the Presbyterian Mission Board, tells of hundreds of cases, witnessed
by himself, where by faith in the Son of God the demons were cast out, and
the victims were clothed and in their right mind.

Cotton Mather says of Salem witchcraft: "Those persons said to be
bewitched would swoon, froth at the mouth, their bodies would cramp into
irregular shapes; meanwhile they would utter accusations against good
people who, they said, had bewitched them. This excited sympathy of the
court. As soon as the court rendered judgment, those bewitched victims
would be relieved of their physical cramps and mental torture." Salem
witchcraft was real cases of demon-possession, but the court blundered in
that the demons were located in the wrong persons.

Sir Walter Scott says that similar manifestations of Satan as were
witnessed at the time of the Salem witchcraft occurred simultaneously in
every country on earth. He writes again: "Anna Cole, living at Hartford,
was taken with strange fits which caused her to express strange things
unknown to herself, her tongue being guided by a demon. She confessed to
the minister that she had been familiar with a devil." Pages could be
filled with modern examples which coincide so exactly with New Testament
records that we have no doubt the causes are the same.

Professor Webster, late of Wheaton College, said in a lecture before the
students: "I once knew a man possessed of a demon. He became so vicious
that he had to be confined in a cell in jail. When he heard any one swear
or blaspheme, he would go into convulsions of laughter. When any one used
the name of God or Christ, he would curse everything good, and foam at the
mouth. He possessed superhuman strength, like the man living among the
tombs."

The soul is God's masterpiece, created to be the habitat of the Paraclete,
but may, as truly, become the habitat of a demon. We believe that Diabolus
has so organized his forces that his minions represent various sins; they
are specialists--skilled labourers: drink demons, lust demons, lying
demons, anger demons, theft demons, pride, blasphemy, etc. Demon
possession to-day expresses itself in sins we try to control by means of
courts, education, etc. Homes become a miniature hell because of drink,
pride, lust, or lying demons.

Our penitentiaries are crowded with men who were controlled by a demon,
forced them into drink, anger, or theft, until the deed was committed. We
may feel thankful that there are so few Scriptural cases of demon
possession about us--the old time possession. The wise Enemy has shifted,
but at the same time has greatly enlarged his field of operation. There
are no witch victims to-day: the courts would not punish the witches, but
the bewitched would be safely cared for in an asylum. But observe, there
are ten thousand other insidious ways in which he possesses men and women,
enlarging his kingdom daily; his victims multiply, but not among the
tombs. The name of Jesus continues to be the only remedy.




