XVIII

THE WORLD'S TEMPTER

    "Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
    showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and
    sayeth unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
    down and worship me."--_Matthew iv. 8-9._


Temptation is a seduction: meaning to allure or entice one to evil. It is
submitting a proposition which carries with it inducements of pleasure or
gain. The mind that accedes readily and willingly to an act is not
tempted. A temptation is a clash of wills, one being superior to the other
if the contest results in a yielding. The word embodies the idea of an
elastic--"stretched to the snapping point." If there is no response, no
struggle against desire--it is not a temptation. The Master was very man
as well as very God; yet strange as it may seem--_He was really tempted_,
and just as we are.

Our purpose in this discussion is not to analyze the different phases of
our Lord's temptation--the tests to which He was subjected,--but we wish
to emphasize one thing: He was _tempted_. The appeals came from His old
time enemy; His rival for supremacy. He was not taken unawares; the facts
were clearly before Him, just who and what it all meant--yet He was
tempted. The diabolical assault did not cease until His threefold nature
was "stretched to the snapping point." It came from an inferior being, and
for sake of illustration, had the scheme succeeded, the Sun of
righteousness would have gone down forever. Not only would the great plan
of human redemption have proved abortive, but Satan would have snatched
the sceptre from the hand of the Anointed One and shouted his victory in
the face of God. We are amazed to think of the only Begotten being near
the yielding point in the presence of the fallen Lucifer, but the Book
says He was tempted.

Some may contend that He could not have yielded; all the while He was
conscious of divine security. This conclusion forces another untenable
proposition: If He could not have yielded, His humanity was not real, but
veiled in His divinity; the temptation was only a shadow. We insist that
as a man Jesus was tempted; He could have called to His aid supernatural
intervention, but He did not. The issue was met as every man must meet it;
it was manhood that conquered. Had He yielded, both manhood and divinity
would have become subservient to the enemy. "Fall down and worship me" was
the proposition.

Now we wish to make a few deductions from our Lord's temptation. Whatever
includes the greater includes the lesser--_a fortiori_. Natural man
reached his highest expression in Jesus of Nazareth; He was God's exponent
of human perfection. There were no weaknesses, no lack of pose or
symmetry; His penetration and judgment of others were absolutely accurate.
From the beginning He had known the Evil One who faced Him. Now, with all
those perfect endowments, the record says _He was tempted_. The ingenuity
of Satan was sufficient to bring out all the resources of the Son of God.
Here was the greatest, wisest, purest and strongest man that ever walked
upon the earth--susceptible, influenced, strained to the "snapping point,"
when attacked by the Tempter. What will be the inevitable fate of you and
me, dear reader, whenever he selects us as his victims?

The unmistakable teachings of the Word are that every temptation to which
man is or ever has been subjected came fresh from the seething caldron of
the pit. The student of human conduct has observed universal adaptability
of all temptation. A great sagacious intelligence seems to be managing
personally, through his cohorts, this campaign of promising propositions.
There are some who can be incited to commit horrible crimes, such as
murder, incendiary, born perhaps with vicious tendencies, but this class
is comparatively small; others are susceptible to deeds of milder
character. It would matter little to an army approaching a fortification
where or how the attack should be made if the walls at every point were
weak and crumbling. No time is spent in reconnoitre and playing for
position; but if the battlements be strong, a faulty place must be located
if there be one. Satan rarely ever blunders in laying his temptations; he
is a most skillful strategist. As the world's tempter he reveals an
ingenuity that is truly astounding; it should cause the bravest heart to
shudder once the eyes are opened to the source. Knowledge of his
approaches, marches, countermarches, advancings, and retreats--all with a
specific object--ought to be a great breakwater.

A writer gives us a striking word picture of Satan's methods: "As the
enemy who lays siege to a city finds out the weakest portion of the wall,
or the best spot to batter it, or the lowest and safest place to scale it,
or where the intervening obstacle may be easiest overcome, or where an
advantage may be taken, or where an entrance may be effected, or when is
the best time, or what is the best means to secure the desired end, so the
arch-deceiver and destroyer of souls goes about, watchful, intent upon
ruin, scanning all the powers of the mind, inspecting all the avenues to
the heart and assailing every unguarded spot. Sometimes he attacks our
understanding by injecting erroneous doctrine; sometimes our affections by
excessive devotion to things we love; sometimes our wills by strengthening
them in wrong directions; sometimes our imaginations by vain, foolish,
trifling thoughts; and sometimes our feelings by too high or too low
excitation."

Some one has called Satan and his subordinates not omnipresent, but
"shifting imps." They swarm the air, invisible, because they are spirit,
watching for opportunities to edge their way into the hearts of mankind.
They are shifting position, always to a point of least resistance. Like a
current of electricity, always flowing from a point of higher potential
pressure to one of lower, if points are connected by a conductor. The
metallic substances from which the current starts and towards which it
flows are called "electrodes," and are always of different potentiality.
The current passes from the one of higher to the lower. Man in his own
strength is the lower, and unprotected by the Spirit of God cannot resist
the evil currents flowing from Satan continually.




