XII

THE DOUBLE ACCUSER

    "Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about
    all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his
    hands, and his substance is increased in the land."--_Job i. 10._

    "Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and
    the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down,
    which accused them before our God day and night."--_Revelation xii.
    10._


When we consider the Diabolus character--his strength and opportunity,
whereby he visits his vengeance upon a weak, susceptible race, we can
readily understand that his make-up would be far from complete without a
continuous outflow of slander. But his courage and audacity stand out in
glaring relief when we find him an Accuser. It does not require large
intelligence or bravery to be a slanderer--only baseness of character--but
to be an accuser, face to face with false charges, especially in the
presence of One who has power over all things, reveals an impudent bravery
that dazes the judgment.

When questioned of God about his presence among devout spirits--as they
were assembled for worship--he answered in the manner of a guilty boy:
"Just going to and fro in the earth." Peter tells us that his mission of
going to and fro is of seeking and devouring. He is then reminded of Job's
character--how that this saint is perfect and just; Satan's blighting
influence has not been able to touch and overthrow the aged Job. In his
shrewd rejoinder Satan accuses God of two sins: _partiality and
falsehood_.

Translated into its literal meaning, the language would be about as
follows: "I deny that Job is perfect; but for the protection you have
thrown around him he would be as other men. His pretended piety is
hypocrisy; he serves you because you have blest him with abundance; he has
not fallen into sin because you have hedged him about. If you treated Job
as you treat others, his holiness would soon be about as genuine as mine."

Satan accuses God of protecting His servant and blessing him in material
things in a special and partial manner, viz: "a respecter of persons." But
the fiercest accusation is hidden in his reply to God's question, also put
in the form of a question, and finished by an emphatic declaration: Job is
not the man God said he was; "but put forth Thine hand and touch all that
he hath, and he will curse Thee to Thy face." A being who can stand before
the Lord God, of whom the hosts of heaven sing and shout--he, himself,
once among the number--saying: "Holy, Holy, Holy," and accuse Him of being
guilty of partiality and falsehood--what may _we_ expect from him? The
Word says he accuses the saints day and night.

Observe that he accuses the _saints_, those who are striving in
righteousness. The man who lies, cheats in business, accumulates a
fortune, and lives all the vices without apology is not an object of
malicious accusation. The scandals in select circles cause only a ripple,
even though the offenses occupy much space of the associated press. The
principles of such affairs are often staged as heroes and heroines for the
entertainment of a morbid public taste. Satan accuses the saints; the
presumption is shouted from the housetops: "There is none that doeth good,
no not one."

The saints--every good man and woman--must at some time face charges
against their moral or religious character. This hellish machination goes
on day and night. It is reasonable to conclude that much of the unrest,
depression, and backslidings among the people of God may be traced to this
cause; innocent men and women have not only cast away their hope through
rumoured accusations, but have been driven to desperation and suicide.

The reader must keep in mind the suggestion made in a former chapter: that
while Satan has the power by his presence of himself, or his minions, to
create an atmosphere, unfathomable, impenetrable, yet surcharged with
horror and dread; but his activities are seldom apart from human
instrumentalities. Just as he is the arch slanderer, through the word of
mouth, so is he the accuser, both of God and saints, through human
personalities under his control.

A flood sweeps away, or lightning destroys a man's possessions; he looks
up, curses and accuses God of cruelty and injustice. Death enters the
home; the mourners charge God falsely. His accusations are confined to no
particular method; the one most suited to the case is used, whether
self-condemnation or from another. Self-reproach, through memory and
meditation, is a most powerful agency in carrying on this work. Once we
begin to think on our ways--seeking to turn our steps unto the testimony
of God--we face a life of sins and blunders mountain high and
unsurmountable. But when faith takes wings and lifts the agonizing soul
"out of the mire and clay," an everlasting reminder of the _past_ clings
to us, often robbing us of peace and joy. How many Christians have grown
weary and given up because of memories blackened by consequences of past
sins--sins which God said, if we confess and forsake, He would "remember
them against us no more forever."

If the truth, which can never be revealed until the Judgment Day, could be
known! Our asylums are swarming with unfortunates who have lost mental
balance because of remorse and condemnation, resulting from an accusing
memory. Wherever Satan is unable to lure the saints into actual
transgression their life and usefulness are often destroyed by tormenting
spirits accusing them day and night The Book holds out no deliverance from
this scourge until the Accuser is forever cast down by the wrath of God at
the final shifting of the scene.




