XX

THE TRAPPER

    "And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil,
    who are taken captive by him at his will."--_2 Timothy ii. 26._

    "Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler."--_Psalm
    xci. 3._


To be a trapper requires something more than setting traps and baiting
them. The old trapper returns from a season spent among mountains, rivers,
and forests--ladened with valuable furs of every kind: beaver, bear,
otter, fox, mink, wildcat, coon, opossum, etc. Remember the animal kingdom
is infinite in variety; no two alike. A trap that will catch a beaver will
not answer as a bear trap; a coon and a mink are as far removed from each
other as a polished American and a native of Madagascar. A coon will not
go within a rod of a chain, but have little if any keenness of scent for
protection. A rat will not go near an object if the smell of human hands
is on it.

Volumes of natural history would be inadequate to give the details of
differentiation of the animal kingdom. The old trapper in his log cabin
has never read a page of zoölogy, but is far more familiar with the ways
of the furry folk than the scientists who write our books on natural
history. The trapper is a graduate from the school of Association; he has
studied the traits and pranks of the forest inhabitants by observation at
close range. He knows just where the mink can be caught, and just how the
trap must be baited and concealed; he has the same information about all
the rest, and can apply it. Once when a child, we were enraptured until
late bedtime by the stories of an old trapper: telling about "the
different varmints." Without drawing on his imagination, he could have
added many chapters to the tales of "Uncle Remus." The facts about our
furry friends are far more interesting than fiction; the trapper knows
about these facts.

The Psalmist calls Satan a fowler; one who sets traps for old and young as
the fowler sets traps for fowls. How is it done? Leaves and weeds are
carefully cleared away, and the trap is skillfully set by a trigger, so
that the slightest touch will spring it. The ground is also cleared for
several rods leading off in front of the trap; suitable food is scattered
under the trap and all along the clean strip of ground. The birds
excitedly follow the line of "food"--walking under the trap where it is
scattered in abundance. In the scuffle, the trigger is soon touched;
behold the trap falls, and they are caught; oh, how they beat their heads
against the prison bars until they are covered with blood, but all is
over. They are caught in the snare of the fowler.

Every animal and fowl will flee from the approach of danger; the trap must
be hid, or in some way made to appear as something harmless; nature has
endowed them to seek always self-preservation. With nothing but instinct
to guide, they are easily caught by the skill and cunning of man, but
never caught in the open; some, however, are more easily caught than
others, but they must be trapped.

The Bible teaches that the Devil is a trapper; his snares are set
everywhere--they are man traps; no spider ever spun a web more accurately
for the moth than Satan's traps to catch men. It requires certain bait and
certain traps for each particular animal and bird, but the snares for men
are legion. Man has a threefold nature: body, mind, and spirit; each of
these have many avenues of approach. As the trapper gains his knowledge of
the furry tribe by association, so the Trapper of men, by the application
of supernatural powers, in close contact and intimate association through
the past millenniums, has become intimately acquainted with man.

There are no facts touching his habitat, food, passions, ambitions,
weaknesses, yearnings, etc.--whether in the realm of body, mind or
spirit--but the cunning trapper of the pit is more minutely acquainted
than man is acquainted with himself.

If guileless and unsuspecting men and women were the only victims, the
situation would not be so serious; not that one soul is of more value than
another, but the facts are: _no one_ seems to be capable of discovering
his hidden snares. The greatest and wisest--Alexanders, Anthonys,
Napoleons, kings, sages and philosophers--have been captured by him at his
will. What a shudder would go over the race if it could penetrate the veil
of mystery and see the traps towards which we are moving; moving on to
certain capture, but for Providential oversight and guidance. Domestic
traps, political traps, social traps, business traps, religious traps;
the location and bait are suited to individual likes and dislikes.

  "My soul be on thy guard; ten thousand foes arise."

Our country is just beginning to awake to a system of trapping now being
carried on in every city and town, so gigantic and heinous that we are
dazed and frightened at its boldness. The great White Slave Traffic is
carried on by traps, pure and simple; as carefully planned and skillfully
executed as the methods of an old trapper who remains in the primeval
forest to supply the fur market. The feelers and tentacles of this human
devil-fish are running out in the highways and hedges: the factories,
mills, department stores. But the traffic is not confined to the poor,
uneducated girls at the ribbon counter or waist factory; girls of culture
and experience are caught, but the bait used is very different. When once
caught, not one in ten thousand ever escapes.

A being less than a fallen archangel could never have instituted the White
Slave Traffic. A man or woman not incarnated by the Devil or some of his
minions could never promulgate a system so vile, so inhuman, so hellish,
as the traffic of innocent flesh and blood, to be offered and burned on
the altars of lust for gain. Compared with the White Slave Traffic, as it
is prosecuted by the panderers and procurers, negro slavery, at its worst,
the extermination of which the bloodiest war ever fought on this planet
was waged, is like the vilest ribaldry ever sung in a den of vice to a Te
Deum. Lest we forget--Satan is an expert trapper--the king of trappers.




