II

THE ORIGIN OF EVIL

    "And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the
    Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out
    into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him."--_Revelation
    xii. 9._


It requires but a casual survey of this problem to reach a conclusion that
its hideousness cannot be explained by any other hypothesis than the power
of an invisible Personality. When we scrutinize the footprints of the
race, it will be found that progress has been along a dark, slimy trail;
the infidels and philosophers who are loud in their boastings of inherent
goodness will have difficulty in reconciling this fact. All who think are
confronted with an ever-recurring question--yea, exclamations: why do such
things happen? What meaneth these barbarities, ravages, cruelties? Why so
much domestic discord, ending in ruin--so many suicides? Why do men and
women hurl themselves over the precipice of vice and deadly
indulgences--when even a novice might easily see the inevitable?

For a parallel we are reminded of an incident in war: log-chains were used
when the cannon-ball supply was exhausted; lanes the width of the chain
length were mowed through the ranks of the opposing army. These chasms of
death were closed up each time, only to be cut down again by the next
discharge. The pathway of ruin is thronged--the "broad road" is easy;
however, there is something stranger than this utter blindness: the
victims laugh and shout on this highway, paved as it is by the macadam of
crushed humanity.

Now, can there be found a rationale for this dreadful twist in human
affairs--this seeming unfathomable conundrum? We cannot believe that God
would create a "footstool" in which sin, suffering, and misery were to
abound; no such provision could have been in the divine plan. In the Word
of God alone we find the explanation of it all. The Word gives an
unmistakable account of an insurrection in heaven: "Michael and his angels
fought against the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, and
prevailed not." This strange warfare was inaugurated by the great
archangelic leader.

This "war in heaven" could have but one ending: the complete overthrow of
the disturber and his followers. They were cast out, and are, beyond a
doubt, swarming around this sin-blinded planet--invisible, yet personal
and all but omnipresent. When we remember that one-third of the angelic
population of heaven cast their lot with this chieftain, his strength and
personality can be somewhat understood. It is written: "The tail
(influence) of the dragon drew the third part of the stars (angels) of
heaven, and cast them down to the earth." In their relation to heaven, the
dragon and his angels met with irremediable ruin; now, defeated,
humiliated, maddened, doomed, this fallen archangel and his innumerable
myrmidons are filling the whole earth with every curse that can be
conjured up by their superior, supernatural intelligence. There can be no
room to doubt the truth of this hellish propaganda, as he is called the
"god of this world."

It must be kept clearly in mind that the powers of darkness can, in no
sense, mean an ethereal, impersonal spirit of evil--or perverseness of
weak human nature; but rather a Being who rules and commands legions upon
legions of subjects--_demons_, each of them endowed with all the powers
and gifts possessed when they were ministering emissaries of God. They are
now "the angels which kept not their first estate."

We have no way to estimate the size of this satanic army, marshalled for
the destruction of the race and the overthrow of Christ's kingdom.
However, we read in the tenth chapter of Revelation that two hundred
million were turned loose in the earth at one time. Ten thousand were in
the country of the Gadarenes when the Master entered there; no wonder the
entire land was kept in terror, even though their incarnation seemed to
have been limited to one man living in a graveyard. Seven demons were cast
out of one woman.

We should keep in mind the distinction between "the devil" and demons;
there is but one _Devil_, but the demons are swarming the length and
breadth of the whole earth. Just as God directs His angels in ministeries
of righteousness, so this god of darkness directs his angels to do his
nefarious will. There are feats so daring and important that the Devil, it
seems, will not trust to his underlings. He engineered in person the
temptations of the Master; he entered the heart of Judas, and caused him
to sell his Lord, then commit suicide.

The Bible undoubtedly teaches that Satan and his cohorts, having access to
our fallen natures (which became so through his contribution of "forbidden
fruit"--his great triumph in the Garden), are inciting this world to all
the crimes known to our criminal dockets. Think of the train wreckers,
rapists, incendiaries, white slavers, riots, strikes, grafters, gamblers,
etc.; and as Paul has catalogued them: "unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, maliciousness, envy, deceit, malignity, whisperers,
backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil
things, disobedient to parents, covenant breakers, without natural
affection, implacable, unmerciful."

No one can consider this long, gruesome list of iniquities without a
feeling that they originated, somehow, in the realm of supernatural
darkness. The worst things that can be said of fallen humanity is its
availability and susceptibility to the machinations of this past master of
the Pit, whose only ambition is to rob the blood of its purchase
possessions by wrecking the souls for whom Christ died. Our sinful nature
responds to his touch; the wonderful gamut of the soul is capable of being
swept its entire length by his skill. A master player on God's greatest
instrument--His masterpiece. All the fearful deeds committed seem to be
acts of volition, and they are; but in the dark background lurks another
superior will responsible for the initiative.




