XIX

THE CONFIDENCE MAN

    "In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which
    believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is
    the image of God, should shine unto them."--_2 Corinthians iv. 4._


History is one long, tragic recital of human sorrow and suffering; but
there is far more unwritten history than has ever been recorded on the
printed page. Along the march of civilization all that has come down to us
are the lives and doings of great men; we know little of the heart agonies
of the race--such as cannot be recorded--language is inadequate. Most of
history is a record of man's inhumanity to man, but historians deal with
these dark pages only on the higher levels. The greatest suffering, the
bitterest cries of anguish, the deepest wails of despair are in the
lowlands of human life: down where its pathos can never be known. The
darkest tragedies of war are lost by the gallant heroism of some officer;
the blood and carnage are overshadowed and forgotten by the heralds of
victory. The real pathos of war remains unnoticed by the chroniclers and
correspondents; it is found in the heart suffering of the dying in the
trenches; the black pall that settles over the homes made desolate by the
news from the front.

The saddest stories of life will never be told; they are the voiceless
agonies and smothered sobs from victims of human treachery and deceit.
Millions are shambling on their weary way, waiting for the end, whose
hearts are dead and buried in graves of misplaced confidence. More
domestic lights have been extinguished, more love dreams turned from a
sweet phantasy to an horrid nightmare, more bodies fished from the river,
more shocking tragedies have resulted directly from this cause--misplaced
and wrecked confidence--than from all other causes of human wretchedness.

An illustration from actual life will serve to bring the caption of this
chapter--the Confidence Man--out in bold relief. An honest old farmer,
whose horizon had not extended beyond the obscure Indiana neighbourhood,
sold his little home and started for Kansas, hoping to enlarge his
possessions and give his sons and daughters a larger sphere of
opportunity. That they might see the wonders of a great city, arrangements
were secured for a three days' stop-over at St. Louis. The Confidence Man
saw them pass through the iron gate into the lobby. He first noted the
train on which they had come to the city. With great enthusiasm he greeted
the old gentleman, introduced himself, extending a business card of his
"firm." With cunning palaver, and the guilelessness of the farmer--item
after item of information as to name and where they came from were
obtained. The man who said he thought he recognized the old gentleman soon
became satisfied of it--having an uncle living in the same county--and "I
have often heard him speak of you, etc., etc."

It required only a short time to not only gain the confidence of the
whole family, but also to get all the facts concerning their business
affairs: how much the little farm brought, and how much they had left to
begin life in the west, and actual cash on hand. There was not a hitch in
the scheme; the new friend (?) loaded them with kindnesses and courtesies,
paid all the bills at lunch and theatre--took the young people into the
mysteries of the great wonderland--all so new and strange.

It was the last afternoon; father and Mr. Confidence Man were returning
from a tour of sightseeing. They met a man walking in great haste; looking
up he saw the two men, and suddenly laid violent hands on the "farmer's
friend," demanding the payment of a note three days overdue. They
quarrelled; all manner of apologies were made, that he was "entertaining
an old friend, etc.," all of which caused the Shylock to grow more enraged
and unreasonable; they almost came to blows.

Finally the old man's benefactor asked to see him for a moment alone. Then
meekly humble, and with many regrets, asked for a loan of enough to pay
the note. "We will go right down to my office, and I will reimburse you
with big interest for the kindness." The honest old man was only too glad
for an opportunity of returning, by such a little act, the kindness that
had been shown him. The note was almost one thousand dollars; when the
bills were counted out, less than ten dollars remained in his purse--the
savings of a lifetime.

Proceeding on their way until they reached the first saloon, "It is my
treat, uncle," said the man. After the drinks were served, he asked to be
excused for a moment, and stepped into a back room from the bar--he was
seen no more. After a long time, the barkeeper informed the old man that
his _friend_ was one of the worst crooks in St. Louis. With less than ten
dollars he staggered out of the saloon, wandered over the city dazed and
half insane. On the following day he was found down on the wharf crying
like a child. What had happened? He had been in the hands of a Confidence
Man.

There are being formed in all walks of life--high and low--associations
and alliances, spurred on and incited by extravagant promises--the hook
baited according to the fish--which culminates in certain disaster. The
pathway of life is strewn with victims of Confidence friends--instead of
friends. As in all these subtle and dangerous diversions we believe every
trap and scheme are under the direct control and supervision of
Satan--playing the rôle of Confidence Man. Many with a natural impulse for
pleasure knock, and at once arms are wide open to receive them; lust
beckons, and the Broad Way becomes choked with her votaries; covetousness
shouts her promises, and the love of money soon burns out every high and
holy aspiration. Fame holds the chaplet in full view, and men are ready to
exchange heaven in order to have it pressed upon their brow.

But alas, in the end--in the end--"it biteth like a serpent and stingeth
like an adder." When the curtain falls, too late to recover, we shall be
found on eternity's shore, shipwrecked, robbed, ruined--victims of the
great seducer. No one but an incarnate devil could stoop to the low plane
of Confidence Man in business and social life; but think of what it means:
by flattering promises, smiles, and kindness force an entrance into the
heart life, and when once in possession, desecrate, prostitute, and
destroy. We insist that it takes a devil-possessed man to operate in this
particular field, and the world is full of such. We therefore conclude he
is the god of this planet, blinding the eyes of his unnumbered victims.




