X

THE SOWER OF TARES

    "The kingdom of heaven is like a man that sowed good seed in his
    field: but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the
    wheat and went away."--_Matthew xiii. 24-25._

    "The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the
    kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one; the enemy
    that sowed them is the devil."--_Matthew xiii. 38-39._


The parable of the Sower is one of common-sense appeal; the sensible
farmer sows only good seed. The growing of tares among the wheat is not in
the original plan. Good seed were sown, but behold the tares! Whence came
they? While the servants slept an Enemy came and sowed them. The Master
gives us His own interpretation: He is the sower--the good seed are the
children of the kingdom, men and women into whose hearts the Truth has
entered--the converted part of the Church. The sleeping of the servants is
the unwatchfulness of the Church: coldness, indifference, backslidden. The
Enemy seizes the opportunity--the carelessness of Christ's servants--and
sows _bad seed_. The enemy is the Devil--the Wicked One; the bad seed are
the children of the Devil. Growing side by side in this world-field are
the children of God and the children of the Devil.

The tare, or cheat, in appearance resembles the wheat; it grows exactly
the same height, and viewed casually, or at a distance, cannot be
detected from the genuine. Only the threshing and sifting bring out the
difference. These tares are the propaganda of the Devil, but a perfect
imitation of the children of the kingdom. They make a profession, adhere
to the same rules and regulations, profess and maintain, outwardly, a
standard of morality, wear all the regalia--even particular about details.
We observe another striking resemblance: strange as it may seem, these
tares--children of the Devil--seek as their guide no books of heathen
philosophy, or twentieth century atheism; they make great capital of the
Bible; the ceremonies and ordinances are carried out to the letter. On a
day of dress parade and review they meekly grade A 1.

Such an inconsistency is so glaring as to be almost unthinkable; but the
parable teaches it beyond a doubt. The Devil sows into the Church his
children: _a corrupt profession of Jesus Christ_. In a former chapter we
studied the Devil as a _destroyer_; and it will be remembered that in a
preceding parable he came as a vulture devouring the seed; now he seeks to
further weaken and hinder by adulteration. While continuing the
battering-ram process from without, a reversed method is used; he scales
the ramparts and places his cohorts on the inside, and, wherever possible,
assumes leadership in a campaign of self-destruction. We are amazed at
such audacity, but the Master, who is a rival in the field, has
illuminated the parable for us.

There is a note of optimism ringing out in the land to the effect that the
day of triumph is at hand; doors are opening, walls are crumbling,
conservative nations are studying our religion, municipalities are being
renovated, higher standards in public life are demanded, the Church is
lifting the race out of superstition and prejudice--we are about to see a
"nation born in a day." What does it mean? It means that Satan is being
chained--defeated, etc. This sounds good and plausible; but a closer
inspection will reveal, not a retreat, not an armistice, not a victory,
but a _change of base_.

Twenty years ago a leading teacher said: "Unless the signs of the times
fail, the true Church of Christ is about to enter upon the most serious
struggle of her history. She is no longer called merely to fight an open
foe without, but as Dr. Green, of Princeton, says, 'the battle rages
around the citadel,' and she is forced to fight the traitors within. The
real enemy is to be found on the inside." If such a condition were true
then, what is it to-day, since the last two decades have been the most
revolutionary in the history of the Church on the line of skepticism and
advanced thought?

The _Free Thinkers' Magazine_ recently had this to say: "Tom Paine's work
is now carried on by the descendants of his persecutors; all he said about
the Bible is being said in substance by orthodox divines, and from chairs
of theology." Another writer observes: "No need of Bridlaughs and
Ingersols wasting time preaching against the early chapters of Genesis,
sneering at the story of temptation, cavilling at the record of long
lives, denying the confusion of tongues, doubting if not denying the
deluge, when Christian ministers, on account of their official position,
are doing the same work more effectually."

"Freedom of thought in religion," said an orthodox preacher at Tom Paine's
one hundredth anniversary, "just what he stood for, is what most of us
have come to. In his own day vilified as an atheist--to-day he is looked
upon as a defender of just principles of faith." There is a wide range of
opinions found in the growing crop of tares: some are literalists,
touching Biblical interpretation, getting the minutia of husks, but
rejecting the kernel--the envelope, but missing the message; others remain
in the Church, preach a gospel shelter under her roof--eat her bread, but
deny the supernatural _in toto_. Few, if any, are honest enough to step
out.

The Devil prefers his _cheat_ to grow in the same soil prepared for the
wheat. No place is so wholesome and convenient for the children of the
Devil as inside the Church of God. Why is not the wrath of God poured out
on the children of the Devil who have assumed place and power in His
Church? The same processes used for the removal of the tares would injure
and uproot some of the wheat. There is now no remedy; at an unguarded
moment the harm was done. The Enemy continues to enter every available
door, sowing, sowing, sowing--beside all waters. Not until the angelic
reapers thrust in their sickles for the harvest will the children of the
Devil cease to occupy, influence, and control.




