XXX

THE RATIONALE OF SUICIDE

    "And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and went and
    hanged himself."--_Matthew xxvii. 5._

    "He drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that
    the prisoners had been fled."--_Acts xvi. 27._


The Devil was a murderer from the beginning of human history; his first
bloodshed was fratricide--growing out of religious jealousy. He is the
father of murder and murderers. This crime, provoked or unprovoked, is
monstrous; the passions that incite it were born in the pit. Then what may
be said of self-murder: suicide? It is the most fearful, unnatural,
abnormal of all forms of demise. Every impulse of reason and judgment
revolts at the thought. The Master Himself drew back from death; the Book
says death is an enemy.

Various and satisfactory explanations always follow the news of suicide,
"financial reverses," "ill health," "public exposure," "domestic
troubles," "melancholia," etc., etc. These explanations will not stand
under the light of close scrutiny; reverses and misfortunes are generally
contributing causes, but not sufficient to answer fully the horrors of
suicide.

We hesitate to discuss this gruesome subject, but the character study of
these pages would not be complete without it. We speak not with any degree
of dogmatism or claim of superior insight to hidden truth, but in the
fear of God we are persuaded that not a single case of suicide, since the
race took up its painful march, came about from natural causes. Satan, the
embodiment of monstrosities, is responsible.

Suicide is numbered among our vexing problems; reckoned on the basis of
population, suicide has increased one hundred and fifty per cent. in two
decades. Scientists are tremendously interested; thoughtful people are
alarmed. Psychological and sociological authorities tell us that
_poverty_, _disappointed affection_, and _dissipation_ are the chief
causes. The problem can never be solved by social and scientific
speculation. We must cross over the borderland into the supernatural
before all the angles of the problem are met and satisfied.

There is some strange history connected with suicide. Greek philosophers
wrote about it; whether among heathen or civilized peoples, it was
considered a disgrace. The Greeks buried them at night--on the public
highways, and without religious ceremonies; and their goods were
confiscated for the Crown.

We wish to emphasize a former statement: suicide is _unnatural_; it sets
aside her first law. The law of self-preservation holds good in every walk
of life; when we cease to love life, the deepest principle of our being is
out of balance. The body is holy, and when it is destroyed, the highest
_felo de se_ is committed; not only so, it is assuming the prerogative
which belongs alone to God. "It is appointed unto man once to die." Life
is a sacred gift.

There are two kinds of suicide: the responsible and irresponsible. The
first often appears to have been deliberately planned, the act of a sane,
rational mind. However, the best alienists say some phase of insanity
always accompanies this rash act. The second are mentally deranged, for
which there are many causes. Two classes, also, as to character are found
among the unfortunates: the religious and irreligious. What then may we
conclude from the most mysterious tragedy on earth?

Satan always scores a victory when a neighbourhood is shocked by the news
of a suicide; the victory is direct and indirect. If the victim is
prepared or unprepared, sane or insane, the crime can somehow never be
forgiven. A strange demoralizing influence is always felt; a feeling of
horror and depression. If the victim is pious, and many, many are the most
devout in the church, do they forfeit their salvation by the _felo de se_?
Not necessarily. Now we wish to say here, with every word underscored: _no
sane, devout person will destroy themselves_. Where, then, is the motive
and victory of Satan? Much, every way. The whole church or community will
be religiously paralyzed. It is generally believed that no self-murderer
can be saved. But behold a sainted mother in Israel found hanging in the
barn: we have in mind just such an incident, and remember also the gloom,
the depression, the silent whispers, the downcast look on the faces of all
who knew her. Satan may know that he has nothing directly to gain, but,
indirectly, doubt and discouragement prevail. Anything to get the world to
doubt God.

A very devout man, writing of a personal experience, says: "There seemed
to be some designing spirit near me for days that constantly whispered in
my ear, and sometimes it seemed almost audible, "Go kill thyself; you have
disgraced your Redeemer and you are not fit to live." Scores of such
testimonies are on record.

Think of the logical traps used by the Designer to incite the deed: if
poverty, "My family will be cared for better than I can." If a suffering
body, "This will cure me of my pain." If fear of exposure, "That will end
it--charity will forgive me then." If hopeless over some sin, "Better die
than face the disgrace. It will solve all the problems," says the Tempter.
It is often remarked concerning some one: "How cowardly;" but it is not
cowardice; it is inability to answer the Devil's logic to commit suicide.

Again, gruesome as it is, and here is more strange evidence in favour of
the satanic explanation: It is fearfully contagious. Professor Bailey, of
Yale, said that the report of a suicide by any special method will be
followed by others in the same manner. Morbid, despondent people hear of
it and follow the example. That which should be revolting in the extreme
possesses a strange charm. Ingersol toured the country at one time
advocating suicide as the best way out of life's difficulties. Many took
his advice and a fearful epidemic followed. One young man in a rural
community of Illinois committed suicide; three others, all associates,
followed in a few weeks. No special motive could be given for either. We
are forced to place the blame where it belongs, and sympathize with the
victims.




