XXIV

THE DEVIL'S HANDMAIDEN

    "Be not drunk on wine wherein is excess, but be ye filled with the
    Spirit."--_Ephesians v. 18._

    "No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God."--_1 Corinthians vi.
    10._


The fallen Lucifer knew from the beginning that his work must necessarily
be in competition with the Son of God; therefore he has invested his
genius to originate a duplicate for all that Christ has done for us.
Knowing that the letter killeth, but the spirit maketh alive, he seeks to
furnish all the appearances, and as far as possible duplicate experiences:
Reformation without repentance; conviction without conversion; conversion
without regeneration; membership without adoption; baptism with water
without the baptism of the Holy Ghost; physical and emotional pleasure
without the "joy of salvation."

The prophet Isaiah exhorts the people to say: "Praise the Lord," and,
"with joy draw water out of the wells of salvation," and, "Cry out and
shout, thou inhabitant of Zion, etc." The Psalmist, also, gives out a
continuous stream of joyous praise. In all ages people have at sundry
times and places shouted out the joy of the Lord. This emotional
expression is by no means the only test of experimental salvation, as
nothing honours God so much as simple, unemotional faith; but there are
times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord. This contrast of
emotional experience we wish to examine.

We must keep in mind the bitter rivalry between the Prince of light, and
the Prince of darkness. The heart of a contest of this character is the
expulsive power of the one over against the other. Satan studies
assiduously every experience, every angle of advancement of Christ's
kingdom, and proceeds to furnish a duplicate. He knows that the followers
of Jesus often rejoice with a fullness of joy--unspeakable, as it were; to
meet this, he soon discovered that the exhilaration of drunkenness
produced a splendid expulsive power. He proposes and promises his
followers all the joys furnished by his rival; however pleasant they are
always shams, and "at last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an
adder."

A beverage that would produce drunkenness has been a curse from the
earliest history. We call attention to two events, each one of which was
so great that it left a blight sufficient to turn the course of human
history into darker and bloodier channels. The first followed closely upon
the remarkable deliverance from the Flood. The Ark had settled; life began
its routine, fresh from the awful calamity. Noah built an altar and
worshipped God; but before the perfume of the holy incense evaporated,
that faithful servant of the Most High became _beastly drunk_, and his son
Ham looked upon his nakedness and shame. The children of Ham must carry
the curse until the end. The other followed closely upon a deliverance
from fire. Lot was a citizen of Sodom, but he had not defiled himself;
the iniquity of the place came up before God, and He destroyed it; not,
however, until His angel led this righteous man to a place of safety.
Through the entreaties of his designing daughters, as they were resting in
the mountains, Lot became intoxicated unto idiocy. We must draw a veil
over the shameful scene that occurred during his debauch; but the tribes
of Moab and Ammon, war-like savages of the desert unto this day, was the
terrible resultant. They are the incorrigible followers of the Crescent
rather than the Cross.

Wherever drunkenness has touched humanity it has blighted and withered
like a Sirocco from Sahara. No one but a fallen archangel could have
invented such a beverage. Yet the character of liquors used by the race in
its infancy for carnival pleasures, compared with the output of the modern
distillery and brewery, are as moonshine to the blistering heat of the
summer sun. Satan profits by experience; he has not been idle during the
centuries. Solomon warned against "looking upon the wine when it was red,
and turneth itself in the cup"--fermentation. If fermented grape juice
should, at that time, bring forth such an inspired warning, what language
would be necessary to depict the character of the low grade, adulterated
fire-water sold in the saloons and dives of America and Europe?

The true spirit and character of liquor cannot be understood if viewed as
a stimulating beverage, satisfying and inflaming human passions. Its
Author soon discovered that such an unmixed evil must answer at the bar of
an outraged individual and public conscience. He saw that if liquor
succeeded in all he had planned, it must send its roots deeper down than
taste and appetite. Hence this handmaiden of the Devil has now become one
of the most gigantic trusts on earth, blooming out into commercial,
political, and industrial proportions. The whole business lives and moves
and has its being on misery and bloodshed on one side of the counter; loot
and plunder, coupled with an insane lust for gold, on the other side of
the counter.

It has not one redeeming feature; but so carefully has it sheltered itself
by a devil-fish organization that it stands like a Gibraltar. It has
become so great that the actual investments in the business aggregate
billions; an army larger than the combined forces, North and South, at any
one time during the Civil War are being supported; over one hundred
millions go annually into the national exchequer. China has been called a
sleeping giant; woe to the nations once she is awakened. In the liquor
traffic we have a giant that never sleeps. Twenty-four hours each
day--like Giant Despair--he enslaves and imprisons the multitudes. So
tremendous has this organization grown that its work does not stop with
social demoralization, but with little difficulty can dictate governmental
policies, throttle legislation, and bribe juries.

Again, we cannot judge or estimate the liquor traffic until we follow it
down through its labyrinth of social, financial, and moral declension. Not
until we see it face to face, glaring and defiant, in the haunts where
finished products are on exhibition. The "Scarlet Annex," temples of
lust, and the White Slaver's headquarters are united in the place where
labour troubles are hatched, mob violence gathers fuel, and feud hatred is
crystallized into bloodshed. Where gamblers, thugs, yeggmen, murderers,
anarchists, jail-birds, and burglars hold high carnival. We must see the
bloated faces, the bleeding Magdalenas, human beasts, and wife beaters, as
they wallow in filth and obscenity, before the perspective is correct.

The inauguration of liquor as a duplicate for God's greatest manifestation
of Himself--the infilling of the Holy Spirit--was a master stroke. In a
wild, reckless debauch it supplements man's every need and hunger. In the
crazed brain there is a vision of wealth, power, revenge, joy. The
drunkard is clay in the liquor-demon's hand; if a coward, liquor makes him
bold; if sympathetic, liquor deadens his heart; if honest, liquor makes
him a thief; if a loving father or son, liquor makes him a brute. Behold
the Handmaiden of the Devil--King Alcohol: the most efficient ally of the
"angel of the bottomless pit."




