XXVIII

DEVIL OPPRESSION

    "So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
    sore boils from the sole of his foot to his crown."--_Job ii. 7._

    "Who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
    devil."--_Acts x. 38._


A necessary concomitant of demon possession is its influence upon the
individual's moral faculties; an entirely new type of moral tastes are
developed: tempers, sympathies, and, especially, doctrines which are
diametrically opposed to genuine spiritual religion and revelation. Demon
possession bitterly and persistently rejects, whether by a nominal
professor or unbeliever, the doctrines of repentance, new birth, etc.,
through a blood atonement.

In demon possession the fight is on the inside; in demon oppression the
fight is on the outside. In the one, Satan controls the man: body, mind
and soul; in the other, he depresses, afflicts the man: body, mind, and
soul. In the one, the victim is the incarnation of evil; in the other the
victim is generally the purest and holiest of men and women.

The Devil or demons may be ejected by the power of the Holy Ghost, but the
hellish enterprise is never given up; all the engineering of the pit is
utilized to keep ransomed souls out of the kingdom. Once a choice is made,
all hell is aroused unto wrath and riot to torment, nag, and finally drag
the discouraged pilgrim back into sin and apostasy. This is often
accomplished successfully through an afflicted body. Who knows but that
the drama enacted in the land of Uz has been repeated many, many times
since Job sat on his ash pile?

"But," says the objector, "sickness and disease come as a result of
exposure, natural laws violated, inoculation by infection and contagion."
True, but remember he is the "prince of the power of the air." What he did
once he can do again, and more efficiently. Think of the strenuous war
being waged on germs, microbes, and bacilli; we have diseases more violent
than ever before. Yet when the race of life was less complicated and
simple, none of the modern precautions were thought of; flies swarmed
about everything placed on the table, and their mission thought to be one
of beneficence. There are many actual and implied statements in the Bible
which teach that disease and sickness are often the result of demon
oppression; a large part of our Lord's ministry was relieving those who
were oppressed of the Devil and demons.

Then his work is just as effective in the realm of the mind; the mental
faculties, filled with confusion and doubt, are incapable of exercising
their normal functions. Multitudes are able, because of their
intelligence, to guard the approaches through the physical organism, or to
the extent of subjection at least; but are as completely oppressed in mind
as others are in body. We do not claim that any are entirely immune from
his attacks; but he is wise and sagacious enough to select such victims
for specific oppression as will best satisfy and gratify his diabolical
pleasure in seeing the followers of his rival suffer. He oppresses only
such as he is unable to possess. Many have been so troubled mentally that
Christian living becomes a life and death struggle. Here we find another
example of "wrestling not with flesh and blood."

But some of Satan's greatest victories and rejoicings come from soul
oppression. We believe this to be the real secret of our Lord's agony in
the garden; it was the Devil's last opportunity to thwart the great plan
of salvation. Oh, to cheat Calvary; put our "Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world" in such physical, mental, and soul burdened agony
He would refuse at the last moment to do all the will of His Father. How
near he came to accomplishing the diabolical scheme we learn from the
story as given by inspiration. We remember His piteous remark as they left
the Paschal room: "My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even unto death";
then He cries out in anguish: "If it is possible, let this cup pass from
Me." Never was He nearer the great Father heart, and never was He more a
man than at this time; and as a man, perhaps during the terrible crisis,
He did not analyze His sufferings and emotions. All the powers of hell
were combined to crush Him at the hour for which He came into the world.

Every student of soul tragedy can appreciate, in a limited degree, the
experiences of Gethsemane. Paul had this exact experience in mind when he
wrote of the "evil days" in which we had to "wrestle." What are evil
days? Days when the heavens are brass, and the fountains of prayer are
dried up; a cold, sinking sensation clutches the heart. The mind is in a
jumble, plans are thwarted, the mail brings a message of some deception or
betrayal, the hand slips, fires go out, trains missed, pressing duties
remain undone; nervous anxiety and evil forebodings chill the soul. The
mind and heart are filled with dread; cold perspiration swells into beads
upon the brow. Evil days! Oh, how we stumble and blunder; we cannot even
think of advancement. Paul says we can only stand still, and having done
all, stand. Many who are not familiar with the nature of such "days" will
cast away their faith, believing that their "feelings" are the index to
the state of grace in the heart.

But, thank God, a crushing defeat came to this traitor-prince in that the
full programme leading up to the world's great Atonement was carried out
to the letter. It was not the physical fear of death which caused the
blood-sweating agony of our Lord; if so, thousands have met the martyr's
end far more triumphantly than did He. Some believe it was the weight of
the world's sin breaking His heart. Both the physical dread of death and
sin burden may have entered into the garden tragedy; but it was, we repeat
with emphasis, the myrmidons of hell taking the advantage of His humanity
at the crisis of His life: _It was Devil Oppression_.

Devil oppression does not always come in a diseased body, a confused mind,
or in days of soul depression. But sometimes they are new, instantaneous,
fierce, overwhelming, and always from different angles and approaches. A
vile suggestion, a remembered sin, long ago under the blood, a strong
inclination to commit revolting deeds. An eminent, and deeply-pious divine
of the South tells in his autobiography that while alone in his study, in
meditation and prayer, he was strangely assaulted by the Devil. For more
than an hour the inclination to blaspheme was almost beyond his control;
it seemed that vile oaths would well up in his mouth and almost leap from
his tongue. So terrible was the attack that deliverance came only after a
long struggle on his face crying out audibly to God. Then the dark cloud
of bat-winged vampires, almost visible, left as mysteriously as they came.
It was Devil Oppression.




