XVII

THE DEVIL'S RIGHTEOUSNESS

    "Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain."--_Jude 11._

    "For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to
    establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto
    the righteousness of God."--_Romans x. 3._


We are becoming, according to the canons of this world, a righteous
nation; the standard of civic and commercial righteousness is elevated as
never before. Sleuth-hounds are scenting every indication of misrule and
running to earth evil-doers, high and low. Our cities are keeping tab
rigidly on sewerage, cesspools, and outhouses; a persistent war is being
waged on flies, mosquitoes, and germs of all kinds. Private citizens are
everywhere organizing to coöperate with officials for public welfare.
Corporation and municipal rings must answer at the bar of an outraged
public conscience.

Righteousness is in the air; it resounds from the pulpit, platform and
press. Chautauqua specialists who have discovered some deflection in the
political and social woof and warp declare, amid salutes of fluttering
handkerchiefs, the righteousness of twentieth century standards. Preaching
on the cardinal doctrines of the Bible has been displaced by rhetorical
messages on altruism: light, ethics, mercy, cleanness, goodness. "The
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man," with a flavour of
intellectualism, is the gospel that is now being emphasized with much
gusto, and never fails to solicit the indorsement of all denominations.
"Be good and do good" is the _multum in parvo_ of present day
righteousness.

Who but a chronic faultfinder could object to this upward move, so obvious
now in all directions? The world is getting kinder, more sympathetic, more
charitable; creed lines are dissolving like snow under an April sun;
sectarian prejudice is dying under the withering frown of new ideals. Does
this not indicate a gradual leavening of the "whole lump"? The spirit of
Christ, they tell us, is being adopted everywhere. He is mounting the
throne of universal empire, and the time surely is not far distant when
the social, political, commercial and domestic life will be regenerated by
His influence. Yes--it would appear so to be; much that is done bears a
Christian label; it comes in the name of Christ; but, says a writer, "it
is the Christ of Bethlehem and not the Christ of the Cross." It is the
human Christ and not the sacrificial--the exponent of a blood Atonement.

The righteousness that has the full swing of modern religionists makes
much of Christ's "example," His beautiful character and
self-abandonment--"He went about doing good." Much attention is given to
studying His leadership, His pedagogy, His art of public address, His
humanity. His example and not His sacrifice saves the world; step by step
the human Christ has displaced the Christ of Calvary; His atonement was
misguided zeal. This propaganda, on the surface, is reasonable and
popular; but close scrutiny will reveal a poison as dangerous as it is
subtle. It leaves out the Blood; it is a glorification of Man. "Count the
number of the beast, for it is the number of man."

This issue is an old one; it became an entering wedge in the religious
life when the first services were held after the Fall. Cain and Abel made
altars; Cain piled his high with beautiful, luscious fruits of the field.
No festal board ever looked more tempting, loaded with sweet smelling
fruit, having variegated colours, than the altar which Cain presented to
God. They were the results of his own sweat and toil; he offered them as
the "first fruits." But God rejected the offering; somehow the very beauty
and attractiveness of it all insulted Him.

Abel's altar was smeared with blood; on top lay a limp, bleeding lamb.
Nothing attractive about this picture; our esthetic nature recoils at the
gore and cruelty of such an offering. Yet God graciously accepted this
bloody, unsightly offering; and no doubt rained fire upon it--anyhow, Abel
was justified. Why did God reject the one and accept the other? Cain and
Abel alike had been taught from their infancy that "without the shedding
of blood there shall be no remission of sin." By transgression man stood
as an alien before God; he had forfeited divine favour. Notwithstanding,
Cain boldly brought before God a bloodless sacrifice, and presumes to
force Him to accept it. Through all the millenniums before Christ every
approach to God must contain in the sacrifices and offerings an element
which reminded God of the coming Atonement. He declared: "For the life of
the flesh is the blood, and I have given it to you upon the altar to make
an atonement for your soul. For it is the blood that maketh an atonement
for the soul" (Lev. xvii. 11).

Coming directly to the point: all this new notion of things, touching
Man's religion, fast becoming prevalent is the "way of Cain," with a
twentieth century touch and terminology. What is the essence of this new
righteousness? what does it do? Observe, it sets aside God's estimate of
man, and ignores the plan of redemption He established at the beginning in
types and shadows, then consummated in the atoning death of His Son on the
Cross. The righteousness of to-day has much in it to commend; but it
utterly disregards the only feature upon which God places emphasis. The
Blood and the Cross, as of old, is an offense; they have found a more
excellent way, but it is the "way of Cain." It is offering
self-righteousness rather than seeking the righteousness of God. The
bloody offering of Abel suggested suffering, punishment, death,
judgment--but it honoured God. Modern righteousness scoffs at the Abel
offerings by hanging a wreath of flowers on the Cross, bearing a perfumed
tag, "With sympathy." It is Cain setting up business in town once more. A
sacrificial propitiation for sin is unnecessary when we have "inherent
goodness." The modern righteousness contends that each man has
self-redemptive qualities; all he needs is a chance. Salvation is not
internal, but external.

The Cainites are filling the earth; they are preaching the popular
sermons, writing the magazine articles, the poetry, the fiction; they
occupy the chief synagogue seats of seminaries; they are conspicuous at
all chatauquas and baccalaureate occasions.

It is a well-known psychological fact that evil cannot exist apart from
Personality--whether it be bad laws, bad books, bad town, or a bad house.
Whence comes all this audacious, undermining insult to the whole sweep of
God's plan for saving the world? Whence comes all this preaching about
righteousness which places the crown on man, and robs the Cross of its
glory? The righteousness being sounded in double diapason and angelus keys
is _the righteousness of the Devil_. Bear in mind it is _Righteousness_,
and a high type of it, he demands; he wants the offering of Cain to cover
up all the needs of the soul--cheat the blood of its merit--insult God,
and lead the race through a bowery of flowers, fruits, and music on to its
ruin. Anything to cheat the depositum of the Gospel--that which gives a
title to heaven--the precious Blood. The righteousness that leaves out the
Blood is the "way of Cain"--"the righteousness of the Devil."




