XV

THE DEVIL A THEOLOGIAN

    "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
    shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
    doctrines of devils."--_1 Timothy iv. 1._


Theology is defined as "the science which treats of God, His existence,
character, government, and doctrines," or the science of religion--a
system of truth derived from the Scriptures. The caption of this
article--The Devil a Theologian--jars our spiritual nerve centres. There
are three things necessary to produce a theologian: experience,
information, ability. From every possible view-point the Devil is
preëminently qualified to formulate a system of doctrinal statements
having all the earmarks of genuineness and credentials of authenticity.

In our discussion of the Devil's theology we shall not, at the present,
touch upon the theories and vile imaginations of demon-possessed men, but
the finer phases of truth, beautifully presented by his apostles with a
show of orthodox reasonableness. By the term Devil's
theology--doctrines--we do not mean his beliefs--get the distinction--but
what he wants us to believe. He is every whit orthodox; he believes the
Old Book; he does not indorse the _new theology_, or the so-called higher
learning, only as it may be turned to his advantage. The Word of God is a
mighty reality to him; he has met its blazing truths, and has been burned
by its power. He has millions of skeptics and doubters blindly following
his delusions, but he is a believer in the "old school"; he "believes and
trembles."

We call attention to the term "doctrines"--therefore religious beliefs:
reasonable, plausible, satisfying beliefs. What are they? First: Ritualism
is Religion; when we have gone through a certain proscribed
programme--whether it be a chant, reading prayers, or burning a dim
light--there you are. How do we know we are religious? We have gone the
rounds, said the required number of Ave Maries, counted the rosary, etc.,
etc., therefore the work is done. It sounds harsh to place these beautiful
ceremonies, which have doubtless comforted so many hearts, in the enemy's
catalogue; but the Pharisees were rigid ritualists, yet Christ denounced
them as miserable hypocrites--"whited sepulchres." Anything he can get us
to adopt, having a semblance of reality, yet does not save--does not deal
directly with the sin question, he shouts over our delusion. He
appropriates Ritualism for Religion and it becomes his doctrine.

A second doctrine: Good Resolution for Regeneration. There has never been
as much strenuous evangelism, of a certain quality, as we are having
to-day. Great cities unite in stupendous revival effort; no expense is
spared; the leading masters of assemblies are called as workers. The zeal
and motives of it all are commendable; but the bane of such evangelism is
this: the work stops at the resolution period. Men are brought under
conviction, and the Devil at once proposes his compromise. Not until the
"big meeting" closes do the convicted multitudes discover the deception.
Herein is the explanation of the lethargy, depression, and utter
indifference which so often obtain after a "sweeping revival." Faith is
then shaken, and sometimes permanently, in the truth of a conscious,
know-so salvation. If the Prodigal Son had stopped after passing a good
resolution with himself he would have died at the swine pen without the
knowledge of the father's love, the kiss, the robe, the ring, and the
fatted calf. A sinner must not only "quit his meanness" but straighten out
his meanness. Regeneration is not by the will of the flesh, the will of
man, not of blood; but it is to be born of God--born from above--a new
creature. Doctrines floating under the banner of evangelism which do not
get believers into the kingdom must be listed with the enemy.

A third doctrine: Sentiment is Salvation. We are a sentimental people;
esthetic and humanitarian developments of recent years have done much to
soften our barbarian instincts. If sentiment were salvation, this land
would be redeemed. Many think we are rapidly becoming a saved nation;
those who enjoy such reflections should stand at the entrance of any
theatre on Sunday, or a pleasure garden, or a ball park; then hurry around
to the entrance of the finest, best equipped church in the city for
comparison. Sentiment is educated emotion. Rome used to shout over the
bloody scenes in the amphitheatre; now we can weep over the unfortunate
girl who goes down in spectacular glory behind the footlights. Sentiment
makes us rejoice with those who do rejoice, and weep with those who weep;
it moves us to deeds of charity. Satan then has no difficulty in
persuading us that we are religious--spiritually redeemed; if we weep over
our loved ones, our emotions are very religious. The most grief we ever
witnessed at a funeral was in the home of a saloon-keeper; the dead wife
and mother, a depraved opium and morphine eater; the home was utterly
irreligious, but the grief was hysterical, explosive. The sacrifices of
God are a broken and a contrite heart--over sins committed, producing a
godly sorrow, and not a sentiment.

Again, the Devil takes great delight in telling the unsaved and unchurched
masses that religion is all selfishness; the poor are made to feel that
the Church is the rich man's institution. Notwithstanding the efforts of
God's people to reach and help the lost they are represented as mean and
selfish, pretending a pious fraud, with no bread for the hungry and no
helping hand for the needy. We build stately temples of worship to gratify
our pride and vanity with money earned by the sweat and toil of the poor
man; money that ought to be given to the poor. Judas protested against
breaking the alabaster box. The church is a place for dress parade; the
humble and meanly clad are not wanted. All such is malicious slander
against God, His Church and His people; but as stereotyped as this may
sound, it is being used effectually everywhere. If a church preaches
salvation from sin, it is the poor man's best friend; but reference to the
church and the preacher is often hissed in gatherings of toiling men.
Unless there shall come to this land the establishment of the
righteousness of Christ, as taught in His Gospel, we shall see another
reign of terror; the fires of restlessness, hate, and discontent are
smouldering in every shop, factory, and mine. "The Golden Age will never
come until it is brought in by the Golden Rule of Christ." The Devil is
busy keeping these facts from becoming known. The doctrine stated: we are
in it to serve a selfish end; take away our hope of advantages, and our
faith becomes religious junk.




XVI

THE DEVIL A THEOLOGIAN (_Continued_)


One of the Devil's tactics is to make much ado about nothing. It is
astonishing how sane people can be deluded over childish non-essentials.
Think of the doctrine of Abstinence; at certain seasons be holy with a
vengeance. It is a mortal sin to let down during certain days and moons;
no meats, no riotous gormandizing, no wine, no dancing, no theatre going,
when the season is holy. But are we not so commanded concerning the
Sabbath day? The Sabbath day must be kept holy, but if our moral standard
and relationship fall below during the week what we are supposed to make
them on Sabbath, our piety is a farce.

An incident will illustrate. It was a steamboat excursion; drinking and
dancing were freely indulged in by the hilarious passengers. A _parson_
was among them; he danced not, neither did he look upon the wine that was
red. He looked sad--_it was Lent_. One week later we beheld this same
_parson_ in full evening dress gracefully waltzing with one of the lambs
of his flock. Amazing spectacle! Robes of holiness to-day, with fastings
and prayers; to-morrow, broadcloth, perfume, patent leathers, and arms
encircling a maiden in the dizzy whirl of the dance. Paul saw such times
coming and warned against them.

There are many more, but we shall mention only one more: the gigantic
system of saints' worship. What does this mean? Anything that diverts and
absorbs the attention away from things fundamental is surely of evil
origin. His fall began when he conceived hatred and jealousy of Jesus; now
if he can get people to pay a part or all of their homage to Mary, or any
one of the many "saints," just so the Son of God is robbed of His glory
and neglected, his devilish malice is somewhat gratified. There is a long
list of dead worthies who are reverenced and supplicated unto daily; but
high over all is the "Virgin Mother of God." After the birth of the
Saviour Mary was the wife of Joseph, and bore children as a natural
mother--she was not a virgin. "Thou shalt have no other gods before me;"
"Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven images--thou shalt not bow down
to them." "Doctrines of Devils."

Spiritual minded students of the Bible and human conduct are forced to the
conclusion that the Devil is not only a wise theologian, but he is a great
_preacher_; and, as we have learned, he has a mighty gospel which he
preaches with effectiveness and power. He has clearly defined doctrines
which he promulgates at such times and places as will best meet the
desired end. But with cunning craftiness he preaches his dogmas and tenets
everywhere: housetops, society parlours, centres of business,
legislatures, court rooms, barrooms, and bawdy houses, as well as in
pulpits. This sounds like a strange mixture: "the sacred desk" associated
with such an array of evil--_ad absurdum_. If the pulpit is immune, why
Paul's exhortation? Doctrines presuppose a preacher, and also an effort to
gain an audience whenever and wherever possible.

Yes, the Devil preaches, and if doors are barred he forces an entrance:
home and foreign missions, slums, emigrants, aristocrats and sports. He
has access to scores of avenues where the Gospel of Christ never enters;
but under the cover of human interests he takes the field with our Lord
Jesus and His ministers, offering a more beautiful, excellent, easier and
successful way. As God's method of saving the world is by the foolishness
of preaching, what better agency of opposition could be launched than
_preaching_? Nothing. Far stronger is the expulsive than the opposing
power. The most dangerous poison in the world is the kind that hides its
death in a cup of sweetness; a child eats a sugar-coated pill and never
recovers. Hell is peopled by the multitudes who have drunk at the Devil's
fountain of soothing, satisfying poison. He keeps his deluded patrons from
the fountain of cleansing by an easier way to delectable fountains, the
waters of which paralyze with the chill of death.

We note another very remarkable fact concerning the Devil's doctrines and
his style of preaching. Christ's ministers often fail because of a lack of
adaptability; "he overshot his crowd" is the comment often heard. The
genius of this subject does not make this mistake; he is a past-master at
adaptability; to those who have a feeble, fluttering conscience for
spiritual things he has the sincere milk of the word that soothes and
sustains; but for his robust followers, whom he has bound in chains
stronger than those which bound Prometheus, he gives the meat of
diabolism, prepared and seasoned by a skill of six thousand years'
practice.

Place your ear at the keyhole where his children are conducting a "revival
meeting"--high carnival of sin--and hear the ideas of God, salvation,
preachers, the Church, and the hereafter. This is the strong gospel
referred to; the gospel that fires the masses with hate and prejudice
against the only means of human redemption. Yes, he preaches, preaches,
preaches, and from every nook and corner; ten messengers to one preaching
the Christ; his preachers support themselves, and touch the highways and
byways; his lines are gone out into all the earth, circumscribing sea and
land. The Devil gets an intelligent hearing. He has a long catalogue of
doctrines, but he does not believe a single one of them. We should be wise
enough to eliminate them from our creed also.




