VII

THE GREAT MAGICIAN

    "Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against
    the wiles of the devil."--_Ephesians vi. 11._

    "For they are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth
    unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world."--_Revelation xvi.
    14._


From the earliest records of history men have lived who seemed to possess
strange, occult powers. Magicians--performing miracles, setting aside,
apparently, well-known physical laws. Moses met the sorcerers and
magicians of Egypt in close competition. There are men to-day, on lecture
platforms, performing feats which are miracles; there seems to be no
visible explanation.

"The hand is quicker than the eye," it is said; watches are pounded to
pieces before your eyes, the fragments crammed into a gun; the gun is
discharged, and the watch will be hanging on a hook, running as if nothing
had happened. We once saw a man sewed up in a tarpaulin, placed in a huge
trunk, and the trunk strapped securely. In less than five minutes the man
came out from an enclosure where the trunk was placed; not one buckle
loosened, and not one stitch in the tarpaulin broken. Cannonballs are
taken from hats; live ducks, rabbits, and a dozen tin vessels are drawn
from one hat in rapid succession. Cards are made to jump out of the deck
when called by name. One magician laid his assistant on a table, cut off
his head with a large knife, lifted the gory head by the hair and placed
it on another table; then carried on a conversation with the severed head
in the presence of the astonished audience.

Every one knows these wonderful feats are done by some kind of magic, but
for all we can see they are done; the most astute observer cannot detect
the secret. The Apostle exhorts the believers to put on the whole armour
of God, to be able to stand (not to be swept away or captured) against the
wiles of the Devil. Then the Devil is a trickster--a sleight-of-hand
performer--a magician. One of his many methods to accomplish his purpose,
we find, is delusion: practicing sleights, tricks, and works of magic on
the gullibility of his victims.

How many unsophisticated men and boys have been robbed in daylight on a
street corner by some little "game," or trick, by a sharper. Farms have
been deeded away for nothing in return. Now, if we were to catalogue all
the tricks of all the conjurers of all ages, we have in this evil
chieftain a consummation, an embodiment of them all; he is not only a
magician, but the chief of them. He incessantly seeks victims more
astutely than the crook seeks the ignorant with a purpose of robbery.
Observe the text says, "wiles of the devil"; not one, but many; while we
are penetrating and avoiding one of his "wiles," behold, we are in the
meshes of another. Human intellect cannot fathom the feats of magic
performed in friendly entertainment, where every opportunity is given to
examine--then how much more are we at the mercy of séances concocted, not
to entertain, but to delude and capture.

The astrologers, soothsayers, and magicians; the clairvoyants, ancient and
modern, are insignificant compared with this great magician. Is he not
superior and supernatural, possessed with unearthly powers? Are there any
combinations and hidden laws of which he is unacquainted? Besides, no one
is more familiar with the weaknesses and susceptibility of human nature
than he. So astute and cunning are his "wiles"--tricks of magic--Paul
seems to feel that only the girdings and enduements of God, giving
spiritual illumination to the things invisible, can withstand them. The
antithesis of the Apostle's exhortation leaves no doubt in our mind as to
his meaning: if we strive and contend in our own wisdom, deception and
defeat are inevitable.

To be explicit, does it not look as if multitudes are under a
delusion--seeing things through distorted and false lenses--when words and
actions, by the best and truest people on earth, are seen as blatant
hypocrisy? Does it not look as if a sleight-of-hand expert were
manipulating the ideals of this pleasure-mad generation; hiding the true
character and dangers which lurk in every indulgence and excess? "Presto,
veto--change;" there you are, safe, satisfied, happy. "Spirits of devils,"
declares the seer of Patmos, "working miracles, going to the kings, and to
the whole world." The arena wherein he practices his deadly delusions is
the whole world. No places exempt; no peoples immune. The whole armour of
God is the only sure protection.




VIII

THE ROARING LION

    "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring
    lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour."--_1 Peter v. 8._


Thus far we have studied Diabolus under various titles and cognomens which
deal almost exclusively with the secret side of his nature: the propaganda
of hidden arts. The caption of this chapter will indicate quite a
different proposition. This title swings him into full view, stripped of
all deception and legerdemain. The lion walks up and down the earth,
showing no quarters, making no apologies for his presence. When he roams
in the forests, he is king; he allows no beast to interfere or question
his rights, and none dare to do it. He kills, tears to pieces, and devours
whatever he can catch; his roar strikes terror to all the forest dwellers.

The lion, therefore, is noisy; his approach is with loud demonstration.
There is something in noise that weakens and frightens; the keen clap of
thunder, the shout of an approaching army, the blast of ram's horns, the
loud proclaiming of the sword of the Lord and Gideon are historical
examples of victories by noise. The lion is also powerful; no other beast
has a chance in a match with him. One stroke with his mighty paw is death.
He walks about conscious of his strength; an ox or a buffalo are no more
his equal than a mouse contending with a cat. The lion is vicious; his
going forth has one definite object--"seeking to devour."

The lion presupposes that all the earth belongs to him; deer, antelopes,
panthers, buffaloes, horses, cattle, etc., have no rights or possessions
of which he feels under the slightest obligation to respect. The Devil
does not come out _in person_: hoofs, horns, claws, bushy mane--the
make-up of a lion, building up his kingdom by tearing down and destroying
men and institutions opposed to him. He does these things, as a lion, by
incarnating himself in men, evil combines, corrupt politics, vicious
society, the liquor traffic, the White Slave system, etc. As he
appropriates and embodies these institutions by entering in and possessing
the men who are leaders, he no longer acts as a conjurer or snake, but a
_Lion_. The fullness of the earth, and they that dwell therein, belong to
him, to use, desecrate, prostitute, kill, devour, or destroy, just so he
may best serve and satisfy his insatiable appetite. Cities are to be
officered and governed, not for the peaceful protection of their citizens,
but for plunder, boodle, and graft. Men who desire to be public servants
in deed and in truth must fight "a roaring lion." The man who steps to the
front with a desire to question and curtail the exploitations of the
"officials," the "traffic," the "gang," places his life at once in
imminent peril. Threats, black hand letters, pistols, poison, bombs, and
torches are the instruments boldly used to destroy the man or men who do
not believe that these human lions should be allowed to filch and devour
the privileges and possessions of others.

We find our "adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, walking about,
seeking whom he may devour," has three methods which he uses according to
the exigencies of the case. It is first a "roar," a bluff, or bulldoze:
the threat of the "boss," whether he be a political boss, an
ecclesiastical boss, or a liquor boss, accomplishes wonders in coercion;
it frightens and cowers the weak-kneed and backboneless. The crack of the
slave-driver's whip brought the obstreperous negro into humble submission.
Men in office, in pulpits, in editorial rooms, have been awed into silence
by the roar of men "higher up." Then truth, righteousness, justice, and
conscience are crucified; and behind the scene leering devils hold a
jubilee of triumph.

However, the bluff and bulldoze will not always succeed; and when these
loud, but mild methods fail, the boycott is ordered. Those who can stand
undaunted in the presence of roaring threats will quail before the
prospects of financial ruin. Employees are discharged, patronage cut off,
positions given to others, preachers asked to resign. Somehow evil is so
compactly organized, wires of connection are so completely in touch with
every nook and corner, that the "boss" sits quietly at the switchboard and
issues orders. The "big stick" and boycott have carried many elections;
municipal, state, and national; they have made merchandise of sovereignty,
and bargain counters of conscience. "Your clerk must take his name off
that petition, or we will withdraw our patronage;" "His wife is an active
worker in the W. C. T. U.--you must discharge him," were the identical
words overheard in a private office. Business and public men dread the
boycott. Behind the boycott is our "adversary, the Devil."

But the bluff and boycott by no means mark the limit when the self-assumed
rights and privileges of the lion are questioned. Few can rise above the
threat and intimidation; but the roaring activities of the boss will not
always suffice. The lion in corrupt politics, in evil traffics, in
priestly bigotry and intolerance, will not hesitate to stab, shoot, or
burn to get rid of an offensive opposer. It is not necessary to discuss
facts so well known as these; but we are investigating the sources; we
want to locate the bacilli rather than examine the pustule.

We wish to reiterate a previous statement; the "roaring lion" is never
heard if the still fight, the oily snake methods serve to a better
advantage. The Apostle's exhortation is timely: "Be vigilant, be
sober"--be on the alert constantly, and be at your best, as an "adversary"
who knows no boundary lines in his work of subjugation and destruction has
declared war to the end.




