XXIX

DEVIL ABDUCTION

    "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
    shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits."--_1
    Timothy iv. 1._

    "And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of
    light."--_2 Corinthians xi. 14._


We used the above Scriptures in a former chapter, but with special
reference to "doctrines"; the part we wish to emphasize now, "giving heed
to seducing spirits": that is to say, be led away or abducted by the Devil
or demon. There are four classes of people who may be subjected to the
seductive influence of evil spirits. We should keep in mind that the
"prince of this world" and his emissaries were once angels, and of course,
when necessary, can bring their angelic attributes into seductive
usefulness.

One of the problems facing the Church and all religious workers is to keep
the converts or communicants in line; steady them in the presence of
deflecting influences. The Church is suffering from the inroads of every
conceivable brand: isms, cults, fads, worldliness, etc., which always
mean, not only usefulness paralyzed, but the loss of Church and Bible
ideals. How many among us who once ran well, but are now tilted,
side-tracked, derailed, and ditched. We are encompassed about with ten
thousand plausible, seductive tenets, arguments and theories, which if
yielded to will result in utter religious ruin.

There are four classes of possible victims, all sincere and
conscientious, none of which are basely wicked. First: the unregenerate
who are blindly seeking the light, but following the inner voice and
promptings, rather than the Word of God. These become easy victims to the
charms (?) of Christian Science, Theosophy, Spiritualism, Mormonism, etc.
Once inducted, there follows a mental refreshing, and a carnal peace,
which bring the "soul rest" and "assurance" they eagerly sought. These
cults are lauded and believed as modern "revelations," but they are only
_new clothes_ stretched over the dried mental mummies which lived and
moved in the early centuries and dead civilizations. Various shades and
deductions from old Hindoo philosophy, Egyptian magic, Gnosticism,
Stoicism, Æstheticism, Asceticism are paraded so as to catch the cultured,
twentieth century devotee. In whatever form it may come, the beauty
worshippers of Æstheticism, the mental anesthetics of Christian Science,
or the debasing sensuality of Mormonism, it is "led away by the Devil or a
demon."

A writer on modern Spirits says: "Extraordinary spiritism of to-day is but
the continuation of the worship of the old idol Tammuz, as worshipped by
the corrupt Israelites and Canaanites, and the Adonis, as worshipped by
the Greeks. The indecent practices of these mediums made it necessary to
seek darkness to cover their vileness." Ezekiel, in the eighth chapter,
speaks of it; the Delphic Oracle practiced the same iniquity: the
personification of lust.

The second class of possible victims is the regenerated believer or
nominal professor of religion. It is the belief of the writer that no
greater havoc is being wrought anywhere in the realm of religious
aspiration than is being done to-day among professing church-members,
sane, perchance--who once knew the secrets of saving faith. To this class
there seems to be two horns in the dilemma of abduction. As an eminent
author says: "If we give the preponderant attention to the providences
which appertain to the body, there is danger of becoming deistical and
materialistic in our views. If we study the word alone, without due
appreciation of the Spirit and providence, there is danger of drifting
away into dead formality, drying up, becoming creedistic, theoretical, and
unspiritual."

What can check the materialistic trend of the times? What can save the
Church from reflex influences of modern materialism? Somehow, we have
reached the place where things must appeal to the senses: we must taste,
handle, smell, see, etc.; things in the Church, as well as out, have
jostled down to a metallic basis: something for so much. In the same
degree, deny it as we will, our religion ceases to be a religion of faith.
Then, on the other hand, the history of Christendom from the beginning,
without an exception, proves the second horn to the dilemma: as we lose
the spiritual afflatus, we become ceremonial. Upon this reef of rocks our
Church is crashing to-day. We see only the material; we have a mania for
statistics, figures. Our Sunday-schools seek organization, grades,
banners, honour rolls, numbers. Great schools are pushed with enthusiasm
by unconverted officers and teachers. About ninety per cent. swarm out
and away from the Church and rarely if ever remain for the preaching of
the Word. In fearful, glaring reality we can see in all this ceremonialism
and dress parade Demoniacal Abduction.

The third class is much smaller; they are the select few who live in the
inner circle of things. Having been brought from darkness unto light they
seek to walk in all the light, and to live continually in the good,
acceptable, and perfect will of God. This class are the sworn,
uncompromising enemies of Satan's kingdom; but often their zeal is without
knowledge. Perchance, many are weak and unlearned. Satan will leave the
multitude of mystery workers and formalists to make havoc among these
saintly ones. All that he accomplishes here cuts like a two-edged sword:
the individual ruin, and the deadening, paralyzing influence to the cause
of truth. By what method does he gain access? Abduction is only possible
here where preponderant emphasis is placed on the leadership of the Spirit
without careful, diligent adhesion to the Word. The Word is the Spirit's
weapon; without it he is handicapped. What is the result? Fanaticism,
dreams, visions, wild-fire, extreme positions on dress, food, domestic
relations, etc., until they are "led away by a demon beyond recall."
Shipwrecked, "affinities," free love, infidelity, are inevitable. Wherever
societies, communities, or churches become inoculated with the virus of
any of these phases of fanaticism--untold harm surely follows. The Devil
is responsible for the religious "craze," and will then exaggerate by lies
and misrepresentation before the unbelievers.

The fourth class are, of all, the most to be pitied, and no work of the
"angel of the pit" is so hellish as his operation and strategy upon an
awakened soul. Those who are in religious work are grieved continually at
seeing the process chilled and defeated at a point which would soon result
in deliverance from the bondage of evil. Satan actually assumes the person
of the Holy Ghost. Strange and amazing as this sounds, it is nevertheless
true. As soon as the soul is awakened he assumes a general godfather sort
of relation to the penitent one. Advice and suggestions flood his mind:
his pride, clothes, reputation, business, and all are used as arguments.
"You should be a Christian--join the church--it is your duty; but when you
make a start, _be sure_ you have a genuine experience. You are
conscientious--anything but a hypocrite with you. Now this is not an
opportune time, etc., etc.," on and on, until the penitent refuses to
arise and go to his Father's house. Procrastination; Satan literally drags
him away from the mercy seat.

How can he do this? Where is the Holy Ghost all this time? Why does He not
protect His identity? So long as a man is in sin he has a nature that is
not subject to the law of God, and cannot be: carnal mind, old man. On
this territory Satan has right of way; under the guise of one seeking to
help them in their confusion and sorrow, he manipulates until prevenient
grace is grieved away. The poor deluded soul has been "led away by a
demon." It is Devil Abduction.




