XXXI

DEVIL WORSHIP

    "Then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of
    his salvation. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
    abominations provoked they him to anger. They sacrificed unto devils,
    not to God; to gods whom they knew not."--_Deuteronomy xxxii. 15-17._

    "But I say the things which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed
    to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have
    fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the
    cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and the
    table of devils."--_1 Corinthians x. 20-21._


Satan's consuming passion is thirst for power. He is the "prince of
darkness," but also the "god of this world," and this long period of
satanic rule is called _night_. God's glorious Sabbath of rest was
superseded by the black intervention of toil and suffering. Satan's
scheming fight has been for the rulership of this world. He succeeded in
winning the entire antediluvian world, which to save the coming
generations necessitated the Flood. He began adroitly with the only
remaining family; swept the postdiluvian peoples into midnight heathenism.
To-day, nearly one billion descendants of Noah worship not God--but
_demonian_--demons, just what the Greeks and Romans worshipped in
Apostolic times. No less than two hundred and fifty million are devil
worshippers by name.

Satan began his fight of opposition by assuming the form or incarnating
himself in the body of a snake. Therefore it is not an accident, growing
out of mythological tradition, that serpent worship has been the chief
religion of many peoples. The Egyptians worshipped Set, which personified
all evil--enemy of all good--they called Typhon, a monstrous serpent-like
animal. To this god human sacrifices were offered on great religious
holidays. It is no accident that the millions who know not the true God
nevertheless, some way, learned to worship the Devil, and generally in the
form of a serpent. The Egyptians had a serpent-god in Typhon; the
Canaanites worshipped a snake in the days of Abraham; the Babylonians
worshipped Python, which is a specie of the most deadly reptile on earth,
and another name for Typhon. On the monuments and tablets of many dead
civilizations the engravings of serpents show their particular customs of
devil worship. The American Indians were snake worshippers; in Ohio an
altar more than a half mile in length remains in good preservation. This
altar is one of the wonders, being a perfect outline of a gigantic snake.
We readily see that tribal association and tradition have had nothing to
do with the customs of our own aborigines; the same being who inspired the
peoples of the Old Orient, millenniums ago, to worship the snake-devil
inspired our red men in his primeval forest.

David speaks of demon worship: "Yea they sacrificed their sons and
daughters unto _Shadim_." Jereboam built places to worship evil spirits;
the ordained priests to serve the altars of "Satyrs," and children were
offered. The Molech of the Canaanites was also devil worship; when the
Israelites forgot God, they "caused their children to pass through the
fire unto Molech," an evil god. The damsel whom Paul delivered possessed
the spirit of Python--the snake. The priestesses of the Delphic oracles
prophesied by the spirit of Python; this was the dominant religion
throughout Greece. The Aztec war god of the Montezumas, where two hundred
and fifty thousand human skulls were found in the temple, was a bloody
system of devil worship. The Yezidis of Persia, descendants of the early
Python worshippers, worship the Devil to-day, and are known as such.

We are not confined to heathenism, ancient or modern, to find the same
religion of "divinations." The best authorities of Spiritualism believe
that the supernatural, occult demonstrations, as produced in their
séances, are from demon agencies. The whole system of mythology grew out
of what is to-day the work of mediums. The Old Testament is filled with
statements concerning "familiar spirits"; they heard voices, received
messages, saw physical disturbances--just as may be witnessed at any
spiritual séance. The most reliable of mediums do not deny that evil
spirits (damned demons) come to them at times. One fact is noteworthy:
when men and women become spiritists, they discard all the essentials of
the Christian faith. They are modern types of demon possession. It is no
unusual thing during a séance to hear a regular clash of voices:
blasphemy, oaths, vulgar, obscene language, terrible threats, etc.

What connection do we find between Devil worship and modern Spiritualism?
First, the moral condition among the spiritists is exactly as it was among
the ancient priests and priestesses in the temples of Devil worship; they
literally worshipped the Devil in their corrupt, degrading practices. Now,
among the votaries of Spiritualism, every iniquity, crime, and indecency
known among men and women are daily carried on. Such is the testimony of
one of their travelling lecturers. One of their noted mediums when under
control delivered this message: "Curse the marriage institution; cursed be
the relation of husband and wife; cursed be all who sustain the legal
marriage." From what source could we expect such a vile deliverance?

Second, their mediums actually pray to Satan. One of their advocates at
the opening of a debate with a Christian minister at San Jose, Cal.,
prayed in the following language: "O Devil, Prince of Demons in the
Christian's Hell; oh, thou Monarch of the bottomless pit; thou King of
Scorpions, I beseech thee to hear my prayer. Thou seest the terrible
straits in which I am placed, matched in debate with a big gun of
Christianity. Remember, O Prince of Brimstone, that when thou stretchest
forth thine arm the Christian God cannot stand before thee for a moment.
Bless thy servant in his labours for thee; fill his mouth with wisdom;
enable him to defend thee from the false charges of thy sulphurous
Majesty, so that this audience may know and realize that thou art a prayer
hearing and a prayer answering devil" (abbreviated). Similar prayers are
frequently published in the _Banner of Light_, the organ of this cult;
prayers formulated in the same language as prayers offered to the God of
heaven.

It cannot be doubted that Pagan religion and modern Spiritualism are Devil
worship, shifting under various forms and ceremonies in different ages and
places. Rev. B. Clough, missionary in Ceylon, says: "I now state, and I
wish it to be heard in every corner of the Christian world, that the devil
is regularly, systematically, and ceremoniously worshipped by a large
majority of the inhabitants of the Island of Ceylon." We repeat: his
consuming passion is to be worshipped.




