XI

THE ARCH SLANDERER

    "For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
    shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
    evil."--_Genesis iii. 5._

    "But put forth thine hand now and touch all that he hath, and he will
    curse thee to thy face."--_Job i. 11._


It is the first scene of the human drama; the staging is in an earthly
Paradise; perfection is written on everything animate and inanimate. With
but one restriction man roams through Edenic beauties, a being "good and
very good," happy and holy. His communion with God is unbroken; fountains
of love are opened in his heart as he beholds the beautiful mate at his
side. Our wildest imaginations cannot estimate the glories of that
life-morning; but behold the Serpent. He utters his first words in the
scheme of ruin, and it is a slander against God. "Aha, He knows if you eat
you will be like He is--knowing all things, be as gods; He is not treating
you fairly; the case is misrepresented. You will not die, but you will be
wise. Why does He keep back such privileges from you?" As a result of this
slander, the Paradise is lost. Flowers, fruits, peace and plenty are
exchanged for weeds, briers, toil, sweat, suffering, death.

Again we find his impudent presence on the day Job is offering sacrifices.
Reading between the lines, we can imagine a conversation like this: "You
here? You are looking for some pretense to discount My people; you say
none are good--all hypocrites. What do you think of My servant Job? What
have you to say about him?"

"Oh, of course," says the slanderer, "you have him hedged around--blessing
him continually. It pays Job to be good; just take away your special care
of his material welfare and see--he will curse Thee to Thy face."

An artist once painted a picture of the human tongue in a way to represent
his conception of how the "tongue of slander" should appear. It was long,
coiled like a serpent, tapering at the end into a barbed spear point; from
each of the papilla, scarcely visible, was a needle point, from which
oozed a green, slimy poison. The slandering tongue is "a fire, a world of
iniquity--it defileth the whole body--it is set on fire of hell."

The slanderer is no respecter of persons; he rakes and scrapes the
uttermost parts of the earth for victims: king and peasant, rich and poor,
priest and prophet; living or dead suffer alike when once this vile,
inhuman spirit touches them. Bacon said: "Calumny crosses oceans, scales
mountains, and traverses deserts with greater ease than the Scythian
Abaris, and, like him, rides on a poisoned arrow." The winds of the
Arabian desert not only produce death, but rapid decomposition of the
body; so doth slander destroy every virtue of human character. The
cloven-hoof slanderer, like the filthy worm, leaves behind a trail of
offal and stench though his pathway wind through a bower of earth's
sweetest flowers. A writer has said: "So deep does the slanderer sink in
the murky waters of degradation and infamy that, could an angel apply an
Archimedian moral lever to him, with heaven as a fulcrum, he could not in
a thousand years raise him to the grade of a convict felon."

  "Whose edge is sharper than a sword; whose tongue
   Out-venoms all the worms of Nile; whose breath
   Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie
   All corners of the world; kings, queens, and states,
   Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
   This viperous slander enter."

Iago is said to be the greatest villain in fiction or history; the
revolting crimes of Herod--slaughtering the innocent--does not compare
with Iago. Herod saw in the Man Child a possible rival, and blinded by
jealousy and ambition, he becomes the most heartless murderer--of all
times. But what was the crime of Iago? Slander! With no object in view, no
advantage to gain, and too much of a coward to make an open charge, he
slanders by insinuation the beautiful Desdemona until the enraged Othello
strangles her to death.

How can we reconcile this base passion in human character, as slander has
no other avenue of expression? It is unnatural, inhuman, and hellish. The
wolf and tiger devour to satisfy hunger; the vulture eats and fattens on
rotting carcases, but the slanderer does neither. With the blood cruelty
of a savage beast, the degraded appetite of the scavenger, the destroyed
victims of fiendish passion only intensify and burn, but never satisfy the
slanderer. This spirit was never born among men; its origin is the region
of the damned, where hunger gnaws, thirst fires, lust arouses, revenge
consumes--but satisfaction is unknown. The hot breath of slander comes
from a bourne where dead hopes spring up eternal.

The caption of the chapter denominates the Devil as the arch slanderer; we
use it because there is no word of sufficient strength to convey the idea;
"arch" fails to convey the whole truth in this case. Archangel is an
intelligible term, as there are many of high order; there is, however, but
One slanderer. Just as he is the "father of liars"--propagating all
lies--his relation to liars does not admit of comparison. He slandered
from the day of his fall; he is the father of slanderers. Whether it be
circulated in the "submerged world," the quiet circles of church life, or
among the "Four Hundred" of fashion--it is a deflected arrow from the one
great quiver.

No being--holy men, angels, or the Son of God--can escape the tongues
dripping the venom of slander through the subtle incarnation of that
fountainhead of every evil suggestion or insinuation. Whatever destroys
happiness, creates doubt and suspicion among the people, ending in
litigation, divorces, and murders, fulfills the mission of slander. The
caldron from which exudes this vile stench--filling all the earth--is
seething and boiling in the Bottomless Pit, or wherever the throne of his
majesty--the Devil--is located. The society of earth will never be free
from the poison of evil-speaking until the Archslanderer is arrested,
chained, and located in the penitentiary prepared for him from the
foundation of the world.




