XXI

THE INCOMPARABLE ARCHER

    "Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God.... Stand therefore,
    having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate
    of righteousness.... Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith
    ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
    wicked."--_Ephesians vi. 13, 14, 16._


When traps, tricks, seductions, and quackery, temptations, etc., fail,
Satan adds victims to his long list by destroying them at long range.
While in a mountain peak vision of inspiration Paul sees the enemy as a
wrestler, a trickster, a schemer, and even a more dangerous rôle than
either: a skilled marksman. By keeping close to God, and keeping ourselves
unspotted from the world, we may stay his blighting touch from personal
contact; but there seems to be no absolute safety until we are shielded by
the "whole armour of God."

There are "evil days," days of visitation and distress, over which no one
has control; at such times we may not be conscious of any satanic
presence; yet confusion, doubt, fear and anxiety have complete control
over mind and heart. These days, and their depressing effect, can only be
warded off by the protection of the "whole armour"; for emphasis, Paul
mentions it twice in the same paragraph. An armour is a coat of mail
covering the body, made so as to be impenetrable to the missile of death.
The Apostle does not stop with a partial equipment; the head and feet
also must be properly covered. Especially does he emphasize the
_shield_--that great polished, concave steel disk, strapped to the left
arm, so that a thrust from sword, arrow, or spear can be easily deflected.
As it is carried on the arm it can be raised or lowered so as to protect
the whole body.

This arrow-protecting shield must be wrought in faith, that mysterious
relation which unites the soul with God. The antithesis of Paul's language
implies that when Satan makes certain efforts to wound the soul, the
shield of faith alone can save. The fight is not ended when we come out
victor in a hand to hand conflict, but must next prepare to meet a shower
of "fiery darts." A dart is an arrow shot from a bow; a fiery dart is a
flaming torch attached to the arrow.

In all ages, until the days of powder and firearms, soldiers were equipped
with bow and arrows. Arrowheads were made of steel, and as keen as
needles. The battle-axe and broadsword were used when the lines met, but
showers of arrows would fall upon the enemy with as much fatality as a
round of grape and canister. Often the arrows would be freshly dipped in a
deadly poison, and in that case the slightest wound would result in
certain death. When a fort or city was being besieged, the arrows would
carry a ball of tow, having been saturated in oil; hundreds of these
flaming darts would fall on the inside of the fortification and start a
general conflagration.

This method was practiced by the American Indians when they could not
reach a fort, blockhouse, or stockade because of the white man's gun;
these flaming torches, falling in great number, were more to be dreaded
than the tomahawk and scalping knife of the savages.

Satan shoots "fiery darts"--arrows--at us; he may come, as he did to the
Master, and find nothing in us; our hearts may be clean. But from a source
entirely unexpected--here comes a flaming arrow--burning its way into the
heart, igniting with hatred and misunderstanding friends and enemies in a
manner never dreamed of before. How often the blow comes from the one
place least expected, and for that reason all the more deadly. We are
guarded in some directions, but over the walls of our stockade the Devil
sends his fiery darts, and we are swept away in a satanic conflagration.
It requires the "whole armour"--and the shield of faith to quench the
flaming arrows from his quiver. He is the world's incomparable archer;
when all other methods fail, he shoots us with poisoned, fiery darts.

The mother of Achilles baptized him in the river Styx, making him
invulnerable to the weapons of the enemy; she held him by the heel during
the baptismal ceremony; the heel only remained untouched by the protecting
waters of the fabulous Styx. One of the gods became acquainted with this
fact, and shot him to death in the heel, the one vulnerable spot. Again,
we repeat, we are not safe without the "whole armour of God," and the
"shield of faith." Bear in mind, also, the Incomparable Archer takes a
more deliberate aim if it is a shining mark, and exults most when he can
lay low in the dust, wounded and disabled, one dowered with unusual
capacity for noble service.




XXII

THE FATHER OF LIARS

    "Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will
    do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
    because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh
    of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it."--_John viii. 44._

    "Sin has many tools, but a lie is a handle which fits them all."--_O.
    W. Holmes._


Satan opened his propaganda with a slanderous lie; this lie was believed
by the innocent parents of the race. Simple and modest as this lie seemed
to be, it opened a crevice in the moral government of God. Confidence,
fellowship, and filial relations were destroyed by the breach. The nature
and character of a lie may best be understood, and we can get the estimate
God places on it, by carefully studying the damages it wrought. Eden was
lost, God's favour lost, peace and plenty lost, innocence lost;
humiliation, fear, banishment, toil, sweat, suffering and death took the
place of Eden's pristine glories.

Nothing so reveals the depths to which Lucifer had fallen--and his great
intelligence, losing none of its acumen, exercised in a way fitting to his
depravity of character, as the launching of a lie. He has done nothing
since--which more clearly exemplifies the Being our Bible teaches that he
is. An egg was laid and a lie was hatched; this lie has gone out
spreading at a geometrical progression until the infinitude of God's
footstool has felt the discordant jar.

A lie, and the Father of it; think of this tremendous statement. The
thought will overwhelm our intelligence. Suppose all the peoples that have
lived on the earth were lined up: to simplify matters--consider the
billion and a half supposed to be living on the earth to-day; just a small
part of the number belongs to civilized, christianized nations. What is
the situation? Under all the light of education and moral standards,
justice, full and untrammelled, can scarcely be had, because of false
swearing. An eminent authority says nine-tenths of the race has a price;
this means that only one-tenth will rigidly adhere to the whole truth. How
few will swear to their own hurt and change not.

Let us study this gigantic proposition from another view-point: every
unregenerated heart is full of deceit. In every unregenerated heart there
is a germ of all the sins of the Decalogue; lying is one of the "shall
nots." A close student of men will agree with the Apostle Paul, when he
said: "I have no confidence in the flesh." Carnality will not swear
against its own interests; the status of civilization, whether in religion
or morals, does not seem to control this matter. When we consider the
falsehood and false swearing which obtain among the _best_ people,
socially, financially, and so often religiously, then think of the
millions living without moral standards, we can begin to appreciate the
amount of lying carried on in this world.

As lying is one of the outputs of carnality, and human selfishness is the
tap root of carnality, and selfishness dominates the entire race, with
rare exceptions here and there, we can understand how easily and naturally
prevarication and lying become efficient tools to further personal
interests. We once attended a celebrated criminal case in court; scores of
witnesses were summoned on both sides; a bar of attorneys fought
desperately every inch of ground. The prosecution covered the case beyond
any question to the perfect satisfaction of the jury. And the witnesses
were, in the main, both respectable and intelligent.

But behold, when the defense produced their side of the case, the
witnesses equally honest looking and intelligent, every point of evidence
made by the prosecution was absolutely refuted. A new story was told; a
new case from the one just stated. Think of it--on both sides there were
eye-witnesses; then every witness on one side or the other perjured
themselves--and perhaps all of them on both sides.

So completely has the father of liars woven the spirit of falsehood into
the moral fibre of men that a sense of its fearful character is almost
obliterated. Men make fortunes, secure positions, are elected to office,
destroy rivals, win unsuspecting love, seduce innocence, and subdue
kingdoms, by being an obedient offspring of their father, inheriting his
disposition and ability to breathe out falsehood. Liars are children of
the Devil.

Think of the almost infinite resources for evil: "father of liars" does
not fully justify the situation. While it is true he originated the first
lie, and the lying spirit has ever widened through the stream of racial
propagation; but the clearer interpretation signifies that he is the
father of _lies_. "See," he whispers, "the advantages to be gained--don't
be white livered--tell it; get the hush money--make the promise--swear you
did not see it--tell her how devotedly you love her, etc." Who has not met
these insidious pulls on the conscience?

Yes, but he is only acting now as a tempter. Quite true; but when the will
gives away, the oath, the promise, the false statement is made under a
furious lashing of the conscience. The lie belongs to him; he
originated--suggested--formulated it; then literally drew it out with
quite as much pain as is felt during the extraction of a tooth by a
dentist.

It has been said: "The Devil will leave his own brat on your door-step,
then accuse you of being its father." This is an inelegant, though a
striking statement of a great truth. When he is unable to bring
forth--deliver, etc.--his own conception, he at once charges us of being
guilty of the thing conceived: the lie, vile imagination, or whatever it
may be, quoting Scripture to prove it: "As a man thinketh in his heart, so
is he." "Now," he declares, "you are guilty anyhow; why not enjoy the
benefits?" Father of lies; millions of them spawned every day and hour:
big lies, little lies, business lies, social lies, political lies, and not
a few--religious lies, black lies, white lies, church lies.




