XIII

SATAN A SPY

    "And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered
    the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from
    walking up and down in it."--_Job i. 7._


The spy is the most dangerous man in the army; more is he to be feared
than the genius of a Napoleon or a Lee. The sphere in which he operates
has no duplicate in military activities; his bravery, boldness, and daring
are unexcelled. Whether he be called from the ranks, or from among the
commissioned officers, his counsel and suggestions get a hearing in the
highest commandery of the army.

The movements of a spy are unknown even to his own corps, much less to the
enemy. After receiving authority for such a perilous undertaking he is a
free lance, going and coming at will. Not only does he go beyond the
enemy's line, but mingles freely with them in the camp. There is nothing
in his appearance to indicate who or what he is. To-day he is a civilian
peddling fruits among the soldiers, or innocently driving a yoke of steers
along the street or country road; to-morrow he is within the camp, dressed
in their gay uniform, familiar with passwords and countersigns. Then he
appears as a decrepit old woman, seeking a son who "run away to jine the
solgers." In a few hours he is quietly resting or joking with the boys of
his own regiment.

When a spy is captured all military courtesies are set aside; he is not
even allowed the honour of a court-martial; but without trial he is
executed at once.

It is of special interest, in view of the application to our subject, to
notice the particular business of a spy. Just as his movements are
unknown, so is his mission unknown. He hurries to and fro, gathering up
such bits of information here and there as he deems important for the
cause he represents. If he belongs to the Federal forces he appears
clothed in the "butternut gray"; then by tactics of bravery and nerve he
enters the Confederate gray lines. The slightest blunder is certain death.
He takes a mental inventory of the whole situation, but in such a way as
to attract the attention of no one. The strength of the fortifications,
the size and number of the batteries, the commissary department, and the
chances and probabilities of reinforcements. In a moment, under the cover
of night, he fades out into the darkness and is gone. The budget of
information is placed at the earliest possible moment into the war
councils of his own army.

Satan plays the rôle of a crafty spy; he has access, by some mysterious
power, to the heart life of men. At no point of the game for immortal
trophies is he so dangerous as when he can take advantage because of his
secret knowledge of men's weaknesses and sins. Only a vicious degenerate
can be tempted into all the crimes known to the docket of the Bible; few
beings on this planet but are fortified at some point of character. They
may be weak in many ways--but early training or environment have helped
them to become strong in some particulars.

The spy seeks to know when and where a blow may be struck in the enemy's
lines, at a place of least resistance. The soul battles are exactly the
same; we have no special battles where we are strong; things that might
overcome another will mean nothing to us. Our battles are ever fought
around the points of weak fortification; the enemy rarely, if ever, has
the pleasure of shouting over our downfall from the best that is in us.

The victories of athletic games--the pugilistic bouts in the sporting
arena, the mortal duel with rapiers, the battle-fields where thousands
fell--have been lost and won by the application of this principle. The
general with his field-glass sees a weakening in the enemy's line and
orders a charge; the duelist observes a shortening of breath or an awkward
movement and seizes the opportunity. It is the weak link in the chain of
life that breaks; sins of the lower nature--sensuality--might not appeal
to some who fall an easy victim to pride, ambition, or covetousness;
others who are liberal, honest to the cent, unassuming, are helpless when
tempted in the realm of lower passions. We are at an incalculable
disadvantage when our enemy is familiar with our vulnerable points.

So long as the heart is unregenerated and unpurified by the cleansing
power of the Holy Ghost, Satan has access to every nook and corner of our
heart life. He enters and discovers every vulnerable and invulnerable
section of the soul's fortification. The tempted and fallen are often
unable to tell how it was done. "Why did you go there?" or, "Why did you
do it?" Oh, so many, many times do we hear the answer: "I do not know." A
friend once showed me a little iron safe in which he kept his valuable
papers. This safe had a very ingenious lock; the combinations were such,
and the mechanism so wonderful, that it was capable of _three hundred
thousand combinations_.

Why and how are sane men and women overcome? They were met at a certain
place, under peculiar circumstances; met by several--a word, a smile, an
argument, a pressure of the hand. How was it done? They do not know.
Somehow the attack came in a way which rendered them helpless to resist.
One effort failed--a dozen failed; but as often as it failed the Expert
changed the _combination_, until the door yielded, and an entrance into
the citadel of Mansoul was effected. _Three hundred thousand
combinations._

The spy has information from within; and, therefore, the most dangerous
man in the army. Satan, by his supernatural powers directing his practice
and experience for several millenniums, is a crafty, sagacious spy,
acquainted with all the weaknesses and emotions of the human heart. Who is
equal to such an enemy? Contending alone, _no one_ on this sin-burdened
footstool.




