V

DIABOLUS--DEMONIA--ABADDON-APOLLYON

    "Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
    cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
    angels."--_Matthew xxv. 41._

    "And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless
    pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek
    tongue hath his name Apollyon."--_Revelation ix. 11._


We now desire to analyze more minutely the Greek names Diabolus and
Demonia; reference was made to this distinction in a former chapter. In
the Authorized Version the two names are often translated or rather _used_
interchangeably; devil for demon, and vice versa. We read of a "legion of
devils," "seven devils," "cast out devils," "possessed with devils," etc.
Technically--literally translated, these statements are incorrect. Demonia
should never read devil--but _demon_; diabolus always means, not a devil,
but _the Devil_.

_Diabolus._ This name designates him more as to his ruling and authority
than to the elements of his character. We have noticed already the meaning
of Devil, but from the original word we get more explicit meaning as to
his rank of authority. As Lucifer we do not know his ruling rank, but in
his lost estate he ranks as Commander-in-chief. Whatever we may say of
him, the prefix, "arch," designating his angel rank, can be logically
attached: archspoiler--arch-deceiver--archaccuser--archslanderer, etc.

However, if accurately defined, diabolus means
_Calumniator_--archcalumniator; a propagator of calumny. Acting in the
capacity of calumniator, he seeks out and defames the innocent. He sends
out a million rumours daily which would be, if tangible, cases for libel
in any court.

_Demonia._ A demon--a fallen angel--evil spirit, an imp. Literally, a
_shade_--a dark spot, moving as noiselessly and rapidly as a shadow. The
many references in the New Testament to "devil," and "devils," should
always be _demons_; the great multitude, so often found in one place, come
from the innumerable concourse which constitute the "powers of darkness."
Shadow spirits, men and women who are controlled by these dark, shadowy
imps, "love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil." The
transformation, as we learned, which took place with Lucifer was just as
great and radical with his angel followers; the difference was only that
of degree of rank.

_Abaddon-Apollyon._ We have coupled the Hebrew and Greek names together,
as each means exactly the same. We call the attention of the reader to the
variety of names, all of which are so nearly alike, but convey a
significant difference. Abaddon-Apollyon means _destroyer_. He has been
discussed as a "spoiler," but one who destroys carries the work farther
than the spoiler. As Abaddon or Apollyon he is the king of the abyss, or
"Bottomless Pit," and when he appears it is with purpose and equipment for
destruction. Just as God sent the "Destroying Angel" throughout Egypt,
bringing a curse upon Pharaoh for his hardness of heart, this mighty
messenger of the Abyss visits his destruction wherever and whenever he
finds, not the absence of the typical blood upon the door, but when he
finds it, or any evidence of allegiance to the One whose sacrificial blood
he seeks to destroy.

As Abaddon-Apollyon he assumes the part of Finisher of his task; when we
see him a _destroyer_, we have a full-sized photograph--leaving out not a
single line of countenance, or a single character or attribute of his
composite nature. He may soil, spoil, deceive, traduce, accuse, slander,
wound, etc., but the ultimate aim is destruction. "When sin is finished it
bringeth forth death." We see how the two great Rivals stand over against
each other in their respective spheres: "For this cause the Son of God was
manifested, that He might destroy the works of the devil." With the same
degree of purpose, the Devil seeks to destroy the work of the Son of God.

The Devil seeks to destroy truth, righteousness, virtue, religion, hope,
faith, visions of God, power of the Blood, thoughts of eternity and
heaven. Every beautiful, holy thing on earth he would destroy, leaving
behind only black, charred cinders where once were the flowers of Eden.
Just as he destroyed the earthly Paradise in the long ago, so he would
blot from our hopes and aspirations the Paradise of the soul. His ambition
and supreme joy would be to turn this world over to God blighted and
wrecked by his finishing touches, while hell echoed with triumphant
shouts--an infernal jubilee. Abaddon-Apollyon: archdestroyer.




VI

THE DEVIL A "BLOCKADE"

    "Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again;
    but Satan hindered us."--_1 Thessalonians ii. 18._

    "But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty
    days; but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help
    me."--_Daniel x. 13._


We find another striking interpretation couched in the title of devil. The
Church in its organization is called _militant_, because it is engaged in
a moral and religious warfare. The writings of Paul bristle with military
terms, as two mighty armies are contending and contesting for dominion.
Each army is fighting under a leader; the surging campaign has changed its
base of operation--the battle-field has been transferred from heaven to
this planet. The rivalry between Christ and Satan has, many times, changed
_modus operandi_, but the spirit of the contest and the end--all for which
they contend--change not.

The title-word of this chapter is not a Bible term; we appropriate and
accommodate it because of its military meaning. Strictly in keeping with
the use of terms, the "blockade" belongs to naval operations; but any
movement, reconnoitre, or countermarch, which interferes, hinders, or
hedges up the way of progress, is a blockade. A campaign ends in failure
because of obstructions thrown up, access to base of supplies cut off,
reinforcements thwarted in reaching the scene of activities, etc., convey
the idea set forth in the key Scriptures used giving emphasis to the
chapter heading.

The Apostle Paul had all the advantages of equipment; his intellectual
attainments the very best; he was a recognized leader of men, a chosen
vessel of the Lord, and full of the Holy Ghost. No man besides the Master
was more able to withstand the opposition of the "prince of darkness." Yet
Satan actually prevents him from going to Thessalonica to comfort and
strengthen the struggling church at that place--literally hedges up the
way.

A careful examination of the tenth chapter of Daniel gives us a
conversation between the prophet and a "voice,"--a "vision"--having an
appearance "like the similitude of the sons of men"; evidently an angel of
high rank, whose mission was to encourage Daniel, but he also acknowledges
that the "prince of Persia" hindered him from coming twenty days. This
mighty angel, it seems, was helpless trying to reach Daniel, until Michael
came upon the scene. It was Michael who led the triumphant battle against
him when he was overthrown in heaven. He alone was able to meet the
"prince of Persia," the _Devil_.

We can, therefore, understand how successfully Satan can hinder--blockade
the progress of righteousness wherever he chooses to concentrate his
depraved energies. Volumes would be required to record the worthy
enterprises in the Church of God which went down in failure, yet with no
tangible explanation. Sudden reverses, turning the whole current of
affairs, are daily happenings; revival efforts to reach certain
communities, certain individuals, find insurmountable hindrances. It is
the work of the "blockade."

Such occurrences are generally regarded as "unfortunate coincidents"
rather than a resultant of some deep-laid plans--invisible and impersonal.
A baby cries at a critical moment, a dog creates an uproar, the fire-bell
rings, the engine becomes disabled; landslides, swollen streams, sudden
illness, and many others similar, which are never credited to the proper
source or cause. The Bible concedes to Satan the dignity of being the god
of this world; therefore he must of necessity control, to some extent, the
physical phenomena, directing them to an advantage. We do not venture a
dogmatic position as to what extent the hindrances in the physical world
are due to his power; but the Bible most clearly teaches that he is an
obstructionist.

There are hundreds of ways and places where moral and religious blockades
obtain. It would seem that in the blaze of the last century of
civilization war would be impossible. Why could not our Civil War have
been averted? In the retrospect, we can see how easily it might have been
settled without such horror and bloodshed. The Hague with its millions of
endowment is grinding away on international troubles, yet arbitration
fails more often than it succeeds. But war continues, and all efforts in
that direction generally meet a "stone wall of opposition."

Must we conclude that all these lapses, coming in direct conflict with
human weal and happiness, are just "happen-sos"? Unthinkable! "Satan
hindered," declares the great apostle. "The prince of Persia withstood me
twenty and one days," says the angel.




