III

LUCIFER

    "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How
    art thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the
    nations!"--_Isaiah xiv. 12._

    "And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven,
    burning as it were a lamp."--_Revelation viii. 10._

    "And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto
    the earth; and to him was given the key of the bottomless
    pit."--_Revelation ix. 1._


It is reasonable to believe that all intelligent beings are morally free;
and if free, are on probation. Intelligence, will-power, free agency, and
probation are logically inseparable, regardless of place or environment.
Without question, in the natural world this is true, and therefore must be
true in the spiritual world. That men, angels, archangels, and redeemed
spirits never attain a state of character beyond the possibility of free
choice is a most fearful responsibility.

But for the imperialism of intelligent will, the _fall of angels_ is
unreasonable, improbable, impossible. Just how temptation can assail the
inhabitants of heaven--the land, we are told, "where the wicked cease from
troubling and the weary are at rest"--is beyond all human comprehension.
Startling as this truth appears to be, the Bible teaches it in
unmistakable language.

"Lucifer, son of the morning," an archangel, a great being, created in
holiness, standing near the Throne of God. His name means "light bearer,"
indicative of his glorious office. We can scarcely imagine such honour,
such power, such distinction. Just what the high-calling of "light bearer"
was, as it was performed under the highest commission in the universe, the
Book fails to tell us; but the office of Lucifer was surely the peer of
Michael or Gabriel, if not above them in rank. Brilliancy and splendour
radiated from his person.

May we dare, not altogether by the imagination, to venture into that
remote, prehistoric time when the Second Person of the Trinity--the
Anointed One--the Logos, a being of perfection, made in the image of the
invisible God, became a Manifestation. That One of whom "the whole family
in heaven and earth is named"; sharing the glory and honour equally with
the Father, on a throne in the heavenlies. Milton and others believe that
the presence of this Manifestation aroused in Lucifer a consuming spirit
of ambition and envy; he at once aspired to the place and power which God
reserved for His only begotten Son.

We get still another side-light on the personality of Lucifer, when we
consider his gigantic scheme. Aaron Burr planned the overthrow of his
country, and dreamed of rulership; such a vision were impossible in the
mind of any but a master of assemblies--an empire builder. Lucifer saw
himself a ruler above that of a Creator, as "all things were made by Him."
No wonder the inspired exclamation concerning him: "How art thou fallen,
O Lucifer." When the climax of his overthrow came, he "fell like lightning
out of heaven." The honourable cognomen is now lost forever; the glory of
holiness has given place to the dishonour of despair. In the language of
the poet, he "preferred to rule in hell rather than serve in heaven." This
light bearer of Paradise is still a prince, but in the dark regions of
endless woe; "ruler of the darkness of this world."

This archangel who felt himself capable of heavenly authority finds an
easier task here below. Speaking to the Master, hear his presumption and
audacity, "all these things (the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them) will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me." What was
the condition named? The restoration of what he had lost: that the Son of
God pay him homage and obeisance. Baffled in this crowning stroke, he
slunk away only to study the vantage more discreetly, reinforce, and
reassert.

Let us keep in mind that intelligence and personality are not affected by
the status of character; magnetic power and influence over others are not
lost when the life is wholly given over to evil. Piety and holiness may be
displaced by treachery and hate, but the force of personality remains. If
any change takes place, the individual becomes more subtle and more
insidious in schemes to further selfish interests. If a righteous man,
endowed with unusual powers, fall into a life of sin, he carries over into
his wickedness all his former gifts and faculties--nothing is lost.

This proposition enables us to further appreciate the marvellous
capabilities of the fallen Lucifer. Besides the Trinity, there are none
superior in the universe. God allows His enemies, both men and devils, to
continue a proprietary control of their talents, whether they be one or
ten. There will be no devestments until the last shifting of the scene.
When we remember all the attributes, previous advantages, and present
opportunities of the greatest of all apostates, the conundrum of human
actions, individually and nationally, begins slowly to unravel. The fight
is not alone with men in sin, but with the "prince of the powers of the
air."

When Lucifer rebelled and met the just rebuke of God's wrath, all his
glory, power, and brilliancy became demonized. Then, through all the
millenniums there has been not one hour of relaxation; no armistice for
the invisible warfare. Just as saints grow in faith, vision, and divine
illumination, devils sink lower and lower; but at the same time develop in
skill and efficiency by a continual application of their debased energies.

It is therefore reasonable to believe that our "common Enemy" is far more
formidable than the day he was cast into the earth. Our ability to
encounter him successfully becomes a more hopeless struggle with the
passing days. If, in the days of Paul, it were expedient to have on the
"whole armour of God" to meet him, nothing short of "all the fullness of
God" is the paramount need to-day.




