XXXIII

THE ARREST AND IMPRISONMENT

    "For the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he
    knoweth that he hath but a short time."--_Revelation xii. 12._

    "And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
    bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the
    dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him
    a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him
    up, and set a seal upon him."--_Revelation xx. 1-3._


The fact of a possible victory through the Name of our great Conqueror
does not alone satisfy all the items of the indictment. If such were the
only background to the picture, great as it is, the human drama is not
only a fierce tragedy, but a miserable farce. Thank God, personal victory
is not all; there is a rift in the dark satanic cloud which has hung over
the world for so many millenniums. Satan is in great wrath, and his power
and influence grow steadily stronger; more and more his iron grip fastens
about the throat of the world. The Apostasy of which Christ and His
Apostles wrote is becoming a reality.

Satan will score one more gigantic victory; then is our "blessed hope of
His glorious appearing," when He shall come and catch away His Bride--the
Church, both dead and alive; that part of His following who are united to
Him and are earnestly yearning for His coming. This event is called by
devout scholars "The Rapture." Just where, how, when, or how long, we have
only a vague prophetic conjecture. "Where, Lord?" they ask. "And He said
unto them, Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered
together."

When the Rapture shall have taken place, Satan will have undisputed
dominion; then shall the "Man of Sin" appear, setting himself up as
God--to be worshipped. His reign will be the Great Tribulation; all the
influences of righteousness will, for the time, be removed--the earth will
reek in corruption and bloodshed. It is implied that, so terrible will be
this time, divine intervention must necessarily shorten the Tribulation,
else no flesh will be left on the earth. The Great Tribulation will be the
climax of the Devil's rule on earth. It seems that he will incarnate
himself in a Man, giving him supernatural knowledge and power.

However, something spectacular and sensational will soon occur. When the
leader of a gang of thugs or desperadoes is arrested, his followers are
filled with fear and consternation; then think of the excitement. An Angel
officer will break in on the scene--yes, that is exactly what the Book
tells us: the High Sheriff of Heaven will suddenly step down from
headquarters, and will lay hold--arrest the Old
Dragon--Satan--Devil--Serpent (observe all his names are mentioned).
Whatever his titles and distinctions of the past have been, they will not
save him in that hour. The Apocalyptic Vision is unmistakable.

Some can see in this wonderful language only an allegory: the good
influences are to gradually bind the influences of evil, and to expect
such an event as the literal arrest of the Devil is a wild, irrational,
unscientific, unreasonable dream. Our Lord said, speaking of the time of
the end, that the same social conditions as prevailed in the days of Noah
were to be repeated: wicked ones waxing worse and worse; scarcely any
living in the fear of God. To expect to see a gradual regeneration of
society, politics, commerce, and the Church--until evil will be overruled,
chained as it were--seems to be a gigantic travesty on language and the
teaching of the Bible.

We prefer to stand by the Book rather than human interpretation--fixed up
to justify the methods and results of modern religious propaganda. An
angel appears--evidently an archangel: one belonging to the rank of which
the fallen Prince formerly belonged. This Sheriff of the skies is equipped
for his undertaking; Officers carry handcuffs with which to bind
prisoners--the angel has a great chain in his hand; he lays hold--arrests
the old skulking, hateful, murderous Devil. This angel-officer has also a
key, and it is the key which locks the door of the bottomless pit. This
door has been wide open; Satan and his emissaries could go and come at
pleasure. Just as an officer arrests a desperado and leads him off to
prison--so will the archangel arrest the Devil and lock him up in the pit
of darkness and despair. What will be done with his millions of cohorts?
We can judge only by inference. We want to stay close to the inspired
record; of one thing, however, we are confident: the footstool of God
will be absolutely cleared of Devil and demons; "that they shall deceive
the nations no more."

The prophetic picture of the divine court proceedings is very specific: we
have the exact length of the prison sentence--_one thousand years_. When
we remember the crimes, unnumbered crimes, the sentence seems to be an
example of court leniency. But this is only a "binding over," as it were,
to the real trial and judgment yet to come. This will be temporary
imprisonment; but oh, it will be such a glad, happy day. The vision of
Isaiah, thirty-fifth chapter, will be literally fulfilled. The sceptre so
long in the hand of a traitor--usurper--will pass into the hand of the
Prince of Peace. Yes, we will strengthen our weak hands and confirm our
feeble knees--Satan at last locked up. We shall witness with joy
unspeakable and full of glory--"the Restoration of All Things." "And the
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea." Thank God forever.




XXXIV

THE FINAL CONSUMMATION

    "And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
    brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
    tormented day and night forever and ever."--_Revelation xx. 10._


After the long term of imprisonment shall have ended, we are told that
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison for a season. This is difficult to
explain; but we do not presume to question the administration of God's
government: "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" Satan, like
many other confirmed, apostate criminals, immediately on being released,
plunges more deeply into crime than before. The long term of imprisonment
and punishment hardens and, if possible, more nearly consumes him with
wrath.

At once he launches another world-wide campaign of deception, gathering,
rallying, mustering, and drilling his forces: those who by an exercise of
free choice, notwithstanding the glorious millennium reign, actually fall
away and enlist under the black pirate flag once more. He encompasses the
whole face of the earth; like a deposed crown prince, he leads an
aggressive warfare to regain the honours and influence which he so long
enjoyed on the earth.

Now if the binding of Satan is only a figure of the leavening power of
righteousness overpowering the evil--what is the _thing_ which shall be
unchained and loosened? Such a contention is as unanswerable as it is
untenable. We will repeat once more, with each word underscored: _Good or
Evil cannot exist except in a Personality_. The same school of theologians
who deny the personality of Satan, many of them, see nothing in the Person
of Christ except a _Christ spirit_, inherent good, etc.; all of which is
unadulterated infidelity. Just another method of "blasting at the Rock of
Ages."

Satan shall be locked in a prison for one thousand years--then he shall be
loosed, and every moment of his freedom will be occupied in preparation
for the last Armageddon. He does not foresee future events, and it is
possible he does not understand this to be his final struggle; otherwise
he would be unable to inspire such a following. As we read this brief but
vivid picture of the Gog and Magog engagement, the marshalling and
shifting for position of Napoleon and Wellington, preparatory to their
decisive battle, in comparison to this gathering, will be like a cadet
sham engagement. It seems that the lines of fortification will reach out
over the entire earth, mobilizing around the Holy City. The saints, also,
are gathered into encampment; whether for preparation to meet the forces
of Satan, or for protection, the prophecy does not state; but all the
powers of light and darkness are brought face to face.

The battle never reaches a real encounter; the impudence and rebellion of
the deposed prince and ex-convict arouses the wrath of God as never
before. The cup of His indignation is full to the overflowing, and He
brings the fearful conflict to a spectacular ending. The destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah was a microscopic event compared with the rain of fire
that shall fall in consuming vengeance upon the Devil and his followers,
both men and demons. The saints shall be delivered in that awful hour, and
this is the last shifting of the scene; the bell will ring, as it were,
and the curtain will fall, closing out the long tragic history of the old
world.

We are not dogmatic as to the chronological order of these mighty events,
but as closely as we can gather them from the Word, the next move of these
wonders in heaven and in earth will be the ushering in of the Last
Judgment. The _Deis Ira_ breaks in upon the universe; the Great White
Throne will swing into view. During the vision of millennial vision, its
reign--John saw "thrones"; Christ and His Church ruling jointly the
kingdoms of earth; He then is the Chief Shepherd, the King of kings and
Lord of lords--holding the sceptre of universal empire. But now when the
_Deis Ira_ dawns, there will be just One Throne, and God Himself will sit
upon it.

If the reader wishes a detailed description of this Last Day, it can be
found in the sixth chapter of Revelation, where the whole programme is
thrown into a composite picture: "The Opening of the Seven Seals." Each
seal is a separate prophecy or act of events from Alpha to Omega of
things. Language breaks all bounds of rhetoric, poetry, and definition:
"And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a
great earthquake, and the sun became as black as the sackcloth of hair,
and the moon became as blood, and the stars of the heaven fell unto the
earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of
a mighty wind. And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled
together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places."

Note the effect this marvellous demonstration will have upon the followers
of the traitor-prince: "And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and
the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks
of the mountains; and said to the rocks and the mountains, fall on us, and
hide us from the face of Him that sitteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of His wrath has come; and who shall
be able to stand."

All the souls that have lived on the earth, good and bad, saints and
sinners, Devil and demons, will stand before the Throne and be judged. The
words, thoughts, and deeds of men and devils shall be made known. The
final doom of the Devil and his angels will be shown up in detail before
an assembled universe: the Godhead, angels, archangels, cherubim and
seraphim, and all that have lived upon this planet. Hence, the last and
final scene of the Epilogue: "And the devil that deceived them was cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone ... and shall be tormented day and
night forever and ever." Amen and Amen.




