XXIII

KINGSHIP OF SATAN

    "Wherein in time past ye walked according to the prince of the power
    of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of
    disobedience."--_Ephesians ii. 2._

    "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
    principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
    this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places."--_Ephesians
    vi. 12._


In a former chapter we discussed the origin of Satan, he being an
archangel--Lucifer--a great shining leader of the heavenly hosts; now in
his fallen estate he is no less a leader. A writer has said: "He seems to
have been the rightful prince of this earth, but he has become the
traitor-prince through being untrue to the trust; and the usurper-prince
through seeking to retain control of the earth as his own dominion,
through deceiving man, to whom the earth's dominion was given, into
obeying him, and in utter defiance of God." The angels which kept not
their first estate, but went down with his insurrection, are his subjects.

He is superior in all villainies, but the Scriptures call him a King
ruling his cohorts, and is the "angel of the bottomless pit." As angel he
retains his old title, but as _king_, his relations stand out
significantly. As chief Devil--archdemon--the title would imply rather
_Primus inter pares_; as commander-in-chief, a general of the highest
rank. He is all these things: he gives special oversight to field
operations, conducts personally great campaigns, retreats here, advances
there, charges yonder--but his real aim is to get this world back under
his own control; he would put himself in God's place--drive Him out,
dethrone Him, kill Him off, that he might take it all to himself, and rule
supremely.

However, he is _king_, and as such he is raised above the rank of
leadership and commander. We are already familiar with his rank, but the
purpose of this chapter is to show, specifically, that as a king his
kingship has a much wider range than the bottomless pit. It is threefold.
First, as angel of the bottomless pit, he is king of the _underworld_, the
land of shadows, gloom, utter darkness; the land of eternal despair. We
must depend upon the _Infernos_, evolved from a burning imagination, in
order to get any conception of that region. Fearful as the scenes are, a
close reading of the Scriptures will reveal a condition of things so
terrible that the things seen by Dante and Virgil are not overdrawn. Over
this land of woe and suffering Satan is the unlimited monarch.

Second, he is king of the _upper world_. This statement sounds very
strange; it would appear that God is entirely ruled out of His creation.
But observe the language: "prince of the power of the air." Just what this
means in its fullness no one should dare to be dogmatic, but certainly the
language cannot be meaningless words. We can but conclude that Satan, in
some measure, controls the forces of the physical world: storms, cyclones,
cloud bursts, tidal waves, lightning bolts, earthquakes, etc. Certainly,
as a _destroyer_, he uses the agencies of destruction; his business is to
fill the world with doubt, fear, distress and suffering.

A man has a little child killed by lightning, and he curses God. Does this
not look as if a diabolical schemer was manipulating the affair some way?
We must admit his power is permitted, and that proposition forces another
to the front. Why does God allow or permit his ravages? We have no answer;
the ravages go on. We might ask with just as much reason: "Why doesn't God
kill the Devil?" He certainly is able to do it, or at least stop his
progress. But He does not; Satan is evidently running at large, filling
the world with broken hearts and all the accompanying evils which,
otherwise, would not occur.

That we may be able to strengthen our opinion as to the prerogatives of
this "prince of the power of the air," let us remember the circumstances
of Job's calamities. This case is undoubtedly authentic, and the record
says that Satan actually controlled the powers of the air. The servant of
Job thought God rained fire on the sheep and burned them, but the whole
affair had been turned over to the tormentor. The visitations sent on the
faithful man of Uz were not from the hand of God; they were manipulated by
his satanic lordship--the Devil. Then a great wind came--possibly a
tornado or cyclone--and blew the house down wherein Job's children were
enjoying themselves.

Concerning Satan's relation--controlling and directing the forces of
nature--we shall not conture a dogmatic position. The definite statements
and incidents from the inspired record are significant indeed. Strange
things occur: a great vessel loaded with Sunday revellers goes down with
scarcely a moment's warning; a tidal wave destroys thousands; an
earthquake leaves a city in ruins with fearful loss of life. Does the
loving, compassionate Father send these calamities? Would it not be a
terrible indictment? But the Bible gives incidents where He did send
death-dealing visitations upon the people. Certainly. Many believe that
God uses Satan, in his vicious administration, to visit His wrath upon
places and people. However, God has given him the title of "prince of the
power of the air"--the "wickedness in high places."

The third realm of his kingship is terrestrial; in this he is given a
stronger title than prince or king; "The god of this world." Besides, he
is the "prince of darkness," and the "prince of this world." So real are
his presence and power manifested here that Paul declares the contest is
like a wrestling boute. This figure, examined closely, will open up a
great continent of truth concerning our enemy, of whom we must meet in
hand to hand conflict. See the wrestlers writhe and strain; agony is
depicted on their faces; the muscles contract into hard knots,
perspiration bursting from every pore. All the strength of every nerve and
muscle, wrought up to their full capacity, is exerted. "We wrestle," he
declares, and not with flesh and blood; but "against principalities and
against powers," "rulers of the darkness of this world."

The great religious reformers since Paul's day have left a similar
testimony concerning this terrestrial enemy; his personality has never
been questioned by men who were positive powers in the realm of spiritual
warfare. After Martin Luther had produced a nation-wide reformation,
having been delivered from the bondage of a Benedictine monk by a
revelation to his own soul that the "just shall live by faith," he
declared: "Satan semper mehi dixit falsum dogma." Shall we deny the oft
told story that Luther threw his inkstand at them (demons) when they
actually appeared unto him in person? Is it unreasonable? They were
alarmed at his triumphs, and wanted to terrify him. The kingship of Satan
in the under world and upper world are Bible statements; his kingship in
the world about us is a Bible fact confirmed by human testimony.




