CHAPTER IV.

Thus far I have been trying to impress upon you the reasons why you
should cultivate individuality and independence in word and deed. I
have claimed that each one of you has a “call” to some specific work,
indicated by God’s gifts to you of brain, or heart, or hand. But I would
not have you only, or indeed chiefly, concerned with the evolution of
your powers for your own sake. If you acquire, let it be that you may
dispense; if you achieve, that others may sun themselves in the kind glow
of your prosperity. The people who spend all their strength in absorbing
are failures and parasites. It is alike the business of the sun and of
the soul to radiate every particle of light that they can muster. There
is reason to believe that this is precisely what they are for. And so,
having made sure of your light, strength and discipline, strike out from
the warm and radiant center of a self-poised brain and heart, into the
lives about you, and you will find that “What is good for the hive is
also good for the bee.” The luminous characters of history have done
this, always. Losing their lives in those of other men, they have found
them in the crest of the world’s gratitude and fame. What they have done
on a grand scale, we, from identical motives, may do on a small one.
Such natures are as different from those who cultivate their strongest
gift simply for their own sake, as a _lighthouse_ is different from a
_dark lantern_. “Self-culture” is much in vogue nowadays, and has for
its high priests some of the most incisive minds of this or any age.
But self-culture stops in the middle of the sentence I would fain help
you to utter. It says: “Make the most of your powers;” it does not say
“_for others’ sake_ as well as your own.” It claims that if we set the
candle of our gifts upon the candlestick of modern society, its light
will inevitably radiate according to its power of shining, and thus while
brightening ourselves we shall have done our utmost toward lighting up
the general gloom. But self-culture forgets that a candle is no type of
you and me. We are human spirit-lamps, whose rays should be directed and
intensified by the blow-pipe of an unceasing purpose; for we are all so
made that unless we _will_ to light up other lives, we can never do so to
the limit of our power. Self-culture is never base; it is often noble,
but it can never be the noblest aim of all.

Why is the memory of Mrs. Browning loved beyond that of almost any
poet who has sung? Because “the cry of the human” is so strong in that
wondrous voice of hers. Why is the name carved deepest on the republic’s
heart that of its martyr President? Because he gave their manhood back
to four millions of slaves, and lived and toiled for his people’s sake,
“with malice toward none, with charity for all.” Why was the lamentation
well nigh universal when under the sea flashed the telegraphic message,
“John Stuart Mill is dead?” Because this quiet thinker lived for other
men; because he “struck out from the center,” from himself, that pitiful
pivot on which so many human wind-mills turn, and measured, in the swift
flight of its benignant thought, the long radius between him and the
remotest circle of human need; because, more than any other philosopher
of his day, he labored for the time when “all men’s weal shall be each
man’s care.”

Nay, while I mourn, as I have seldom mourned for an historic character,
the cloud that early dimmed, for Stuart Mill, the Star of Bethlehem, I
will not, as a woman, withhold from his memory the tribute of my humble
gratitude. But while I speak of all these lives, shining like beacon
lights of our own day, I would not fail to point you in conclusion toward
a wide-armed cross upon a lonely hillside, while I repeat his words who
said, “And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me.” Dear girls,
CHRIST is the magnet of humanity, and she has found the best vocation,
and the highest, who brings most souls diseased within the healing
power of his immortal gospel. This is a work for which women have gifts
preëminent. The Saxon word for lady means “a giver of bread,” and is full
of beautiful significance, but America’s new century shall evolve another
meaning, freighted with greater blessing for humanity: lady, giver of the
bread of life! In later years we have had a revelation of our duty to
the ungospeled masses, the “elbow heathen,” as an evangelist has called
them, to the intemperate (who, as a rule, are quite beyond the hearing
of the pulpit’s voice), and to the dusky dwellers in the Zenana, whose
faces are misty with the unshed tears of generations passed in misery
and shame. Two thirds of the Church of Christ are women. By the freer
life and richer opportunity which you and I enjoy; by society’s growing
tolerance, not to say its kindly appreciation, of our activities; by the
heart transformed and the peace imparted through the gospel, the voice of
our Redeemer pleads for our consecrated service. I would not undervalue
the culture of the intellect, but would exalt the culture of the heart.

In all that has been written until now, I have simply tried to outline
the new horizon opened up to the gentler sex as the supreme outgrowth
of that civilization which He introduced, of whom history records the
significant fact that women were “last at his cross, first at his
sepulchre.” To attempt some delineation of the landscape enclosed by
that far-reaching horizon is my more difficult task in the chapters now
to follow. Many letters have come to me as a result of the articles thus
far; they bristle with questions and are eloquent with aspiration. Later
on I may ask space for a “symposium” with these “inquiring friends” in
the genial pages of our tolerant CHAUTAUQUAN. One speaking with authority
exhorts me to “Be practical—that’s what we want!” As if I hadn’t been!
But every mind is the prisoner of its own material and method. I can
but give of such things as I have; can only tell what life has told to
me. According to my own habits of thought, the sequence seems logical,
when I turn for a while from the presentation of the modern outlook for
women, with its opportunity and hope, to the _rationale_ of this new
horizon stretching so far away. Let us note the pathway that has led
up to this more hopeful point of view, asking the inevitable question,
“Why does that seem natural and fitting for a young woman to do and to
aspire to now, which would have been no less improper than impossible, a
hundred years ago?” Sweet friends, it is because _the ideal of woman’s
place in the world is changing in the average mind_. For as the artist’s
ideal precedes his picture, so the ideal woman must be transformed
before the actual one can be. In an age of brute force, the warrior
galloping away to his adventures waved his mailed hand to the lady
fair who was enclosed for safe keeping in a grim castle with moat and
drawbridge. But to-day, when spirit force grows regnant, a woman can
circumnavigate the globe alone, without danger of an uncivil word, much
less of violence. We shall never span a wider chasm than this change
implies. All our inventions have led up to it, and have in nothing else
wrought out beneficence so great as they have accomplished here, purely
by indirection. In brief, the barriers that have hedged women into one
pathway and men into another, altogether different, are growing thin, as
physical strength plays a less determining part in our life drama. All
through the vegetable and animal kingdoms the fact of sex does not widely
differentiate the broader fact of life, its environment and its pursuits.
Hence, the immense separateness which sex is called in to explain when
we reach the plane of humanity, is to be accounted for largely on other
purely artificial grounds. In Eden it did not exist, nor in the original
plan of creation, as stated in these just and fatherly words: “And God
said, ‘Let us make man in our own image, after our own likeness. Let
them have dominion.’ … So God created man in his own image, in the image
of God created he him, male and female created he them, and God blessed
them, and said unto them, ‘ … replenish the earth and subdue it … and
have dominion over every living thing.’” After the fall came the curse,
which was no part of the original design, and from which the gospel’s
triumph is releasing us, for there is “neither male nor female in Christ
Jesus.” I believe that the origin of evil came in with man’s supremacy
over one who was meant to be his comrade, and that Paradise regained will
come only when the laureate’s prophecy is realized:

    “Two heads in council, two beside the hearth,
     Two in the noisy business of the world,
     Two in the liberal offices of life;
     Two plummets dropped to sound the abyss of science
     And the secrets of the mind.”

The times when a new ideal is moulded, in church, state, or society, mark
the epochs of history. Amid what throes did Europe pass from that of
supreme authority in the church to the incomparably higher one of supreme
liberty in conscience; from the divine right of kings to the divine right
of the people. But there was to come a wider evolution of the same ideal,
namely, the coequal power of the copartners, man and woman, in working
out the problem of human destiny. This newest and noblest of ideals marks
the transition from physical force ruling, to spiritual force recognized.
The gradual adjustment of everyday occupation, custom and law, to this
new ideal, marks ours as a transition period. Those who have the most
enlargement of opportunity to hope from the change, will, in the nature
of the case, move on most rapidly into the new conditions, and this helps
to explain, I think, why women seem to be climbing more rapidly than
men, to-day, the heights of spiritual power, with souls more open to the
“skyey influences” of the oncoming age.

More women study to-day than men; a greater proportion travel abroad
for purposes of culture; a larger share are moral and religious. Half
of the world’s wisdom, three fourths of its purity, and nearly all its
gentleness, are to-day to be set down on woman’s credit side. Weighted
with the alcohol and tobacco habits, Brother Jonathan will have to make
better time than he is doing now, if he keeps step with Sister Deborah
across the threshold of the twentieth century. For the law of survival
of the fittest will inevitably choose that member of the firm who is
cleanliest, most wholesome, most accordant with God’s laws of nature
and of grace, to survive. To the blindness or fatuity which renders him
oblivious of the fact that the coming woman is already here, our current
writer of the W. D. Howells and Henry James school owes the dreary
monotony of his “society novel.” Not more “conventional” was the style
of art known as “Byzantine,” which repeated with barren iteration its
placid and colorless “type,” than are the dudesque pages of this pair
of literary martinets. The “American novel” will not be written until
the American woman, a type now to be found in Michigan, Madison, Boston,
Cornell, and other universities, shall have taken her place, twentieth
century product that she is, beside the best survivals of young men in
similar institutions, and wrought out the Home, the Church, the State
that are to be. Measuring each other on all planes, these life partners
will know each other’s value, and no appeal to the divorce court will be
made to relieve them, a few years after marriage, from an incompatibility
that has ripened into open war. Happy homes will dot the country from
shore to shore, in which both the man and the woman will do their best to
lift the world toward God.

“Self-knowledge, self-reverence, and self-control; these three alone lead
life to a sovereign power,” and these are fast becoming essential to any
ideal of womanly character which the modern age will recognize as the
product of its institutions. Of self-knowledge, these talks have said
much. Self-reverence I would fain help you to develop in your character
as a woman. If my dear mother did me one crowning kindness it was in
making me believe that next to being an angel, the greatest bestowment
of God is to make one a woman. With what contempt she referred to the
old Jewish formula in which the less refined sex rolled out the words,
“I thank thee, O God, that thou hast not made me a woman,” and with what
pathos she repeated the gentle prayer of the other, “I thank thee, O God,
that thou hast made me as it pleased thee,” with the pithy comment, “What
could have pleased Him better, I should like to know, than to make one
so rare, so choice, so spiritual as woman is?” Perhaps some of you may
have thought you wanted to be a boy, but I seriously doubt it. You may
have wanted a boy’s freedom, his independence, his healthful, unimpeding
style of dress, but I do not believe any true girl could ever have been
coaxed to be a boy. Reverence yourself, then, if you would learn one of
the first elements of “How to Win” in this great world race, with its
“go-as-you-please” terms, but its “Lucifer-may-take-the-hindmost” penalty
for failure.

What will the new ideal of woman _not_ be? She will never be written
down in the hotel register by her husband after this fashion: “John
Smith and Wife.” He would as soon think of her writing “Mrs. John Smith
and Husband.” Why does it not occur to any one to designate him thus?
Simply because he is so much more than that. He is a leading force in
the affairs of the church; he helps decide who shall be pastor. (So will
she.) He is perhaps the village physician, or merchant (so she will be,
perhaps—indeed, they are oftentimes in partnership, nowadays, and I
have found their home a blessed one). He is the village editor. (Very
likely she will be associate.) He is a voter. (She will be, beyond a
peradventure.) For the same reason you will never read of her marriage
that “the minister pronounced them _man_ and _wife_” for that functionary
would have been just as likely to pronounce them “husband and woman,” a
form of expression into which the regulation reporter will be likely to
fall one of these days, it being, really, not one whit more ridiculous
than the time-worn phrase, “man and wife.” The ideal woman of the future
will never be designated as “the Widow Jones,” because she will be so
much more than that—“a provider” for her children, “a power” in the
church, “a felt force” in the state. I think George Eliot is the first
woman to attain the post-mortem honor of having her husband called “her
widower,” John W. Cross having been thus indicated in English papers of
the period. A turn about is fair play, and the phrase is really quite
refreshing to one’s sense of justice. The ideal woman will not write upon
her visiting card, nor insist on having her letters addressed, to Mrs.
John Smith, or Mrs. Gen. Smith, as the case may be, but will, if her
maiden name was Jones, fling her banner to the breeze as “Mrs. Mary Jones
Smith,” and will be sure to make it honorable. She will not be the lay
figure made and provided to illustrate the fashions of Monsieur Worth and
lesser lights of the same guild, but will insist that the goddess Hygiea
is the only true modiste, and will dutifully obey her orders. As the
Louvre gallery proves that when men were but the parasites of the court
they too decked themselves with ear-rings, high heels, powdered hair and
gaudy garments, so the distorted figures in the detestable fashion plates
of to-day are the irrefutable proofs of woman’s fractional estate; but
this will not be so to-morrow, when she finds her kingdom—which is her
own true self. The ideal woman will cease to heed the cruel “Thus far and
no farther,” which has issued from the pinched lips of old Dame Custom,
checking her ardent steps throughout all the ages past, and will be
studious only to hear the kindly “Thus far and no farther” of God.

The ideal woman will play Beatrice to man’s Dante in the Inferno of his
passions. She will give him the clue out of materialism’s Labyrinth. She
will be civilization’s Una, taming the Lion of disease and misery. The
State shall no longer go limping on one foot through the years, but shall
march off with steps firm and equipoised. The keen eye and deft hand of
the housekeeper shall help to make its everyday walks wholesome; the
skill in detail, trustworthiness in finance, motherliness in sympathy,
so long extolled in private life, shall exalt public station. Indeed,
if I were asked the mission of the ideal woman, I would reply: IT IS TO
MAKE THE WHOLE WORLD HOMELIKE. Some one has said that “Temperament is
the climate of the individual,” but home is woman’s climate, her vital
breath, her native air. A true woman carries home with her everywhere.
Its atmosphere surrounds her; its mirror is her face; its music attunes
her gentle voice; its longitude may be reckoned from wherever you happen
to find her. But

    “Home’s not merely four square walls.”

Some people once thought it was, and they thought, also, that you might
as well throw down its Lares and Penates as to carry away its weaving
loom and spinning wheel. But it survived this spoliation; and when
women ceased to pick their own geese and do their own dyeing, it still
serenely smiled. The sewing machine took away much of its occupation;
the French and Chinese laundries have intruded upon its domain; indeed,
men, by their “witty inventions,” are perpetually encroaching on “woman’s
sphere,” so that the next generation will no doubt turn the cook stove
out of doors, and the housekeeper, standing at the telephone, will
order better cooked meals than almost any one has nowadays, sent from
scientific caterers by pneumatic tubes, and the debris thereof returned
to a general cleaning-up establishment; while houses will be heated, as
they are now lighted and supplied with water, from general reservoirs.

Women are fortunate in belonging to the less tainted half of the race.
Dr. Benjamin Ward Richardson says that but for this conserving fact it
would deteriorate to the point of failure. A bright old lady said, after
viewing a brewery, distillery and tobacco factory: “Ain’t I thankful that
the women folks hain’t got all that stuff to chew and smoke and swallow
down!” It behooves us to offset force of muscle by force of heart, that
what our strong brothers have done to subdue the material world for us,
who are not their equals in physical strength, may be offset by what we
shall achieve for them in bringing in the reign of “Sweeter manners,
purer laws.” For the world is slowly making the immense discovery that
not what woman does, but what she is, makes home a possible creation.
It is the Lord’s ark, and does not need steadying; it will survive the
wreck of systems and the crash of theories, for the home is but the
efflorescence of woman’s nature under the nurture of Christ’s gospel. She
came into the college and elevated it, into literature and hallowed it,
into the business world and ennobled it. She will come into government
and purify it, into politics and cleanse that Stygian pool as the
waters of Marah were cleansed; for woman will make homelike every place
she enters, and she will enter every place on this round earth. Any
custom, or traffic, or party, on which a woman can not look with favor
is irrevocably doomed. Its welcome of her presence and her power is to
be the final test of its fitness to survive. All Gospel civilization is
radiant with the demonstration of this truth:

    “It is not good for man to be alone.”

The most vivid object lesson on history’s page is the fact that his
deterioration is in exact proportion to his isolation from the home of
woman’s pure companionship. To my own grateful thought, the most sacred
significance of woman’s work to-day lies in the fact that she occupies
the outer circle in this tremendous evolution of the Christian idea of
home. Ours is a high and sacred calling. Out of pure hearts, fervently
let us love God and humanity; so shall we be Christ’s disciples, and so
shall we safely follow on to know the work whereunto we have been called.

    “’Tis home where’er the heart is,”

and no true mother, sister, daughter or wife, can fail to go in spirit
after her beloved and tempted ones, as their adventurous steps enter the
labyrinth of the world’s temptations. We can not call them back.

    “All before them lies the way.”

There is but one remedy; we must bring the home to them, for they will
not return to it. Still must their mothers walk beside them, sweet and
serious, and clad in the garments of power. The occupations, pleasures
and ambitions of men and women must not diverge so widely from each
other. Potent beyond all other facts of everyday experience is the
rapidly increasing similarity between the pursuits of these two factions
that make up the human integer. When brute force reigned, this rapport
was at zero. “Impediments to the rear,” was the command of Cæsar and the
rule of every warrior—women and children being the hindrances referred
to. But to-day there is not a motto more popular than that of the
inspired old German, “Come, let us live for our children;” and as for
women, “the world is all before them where to choose.”

No greater good can come to the manhood of the world than is prophesied
in the increasing community of thought and works between it and the
world’s womanhood. The growing individuality, independence and prestige
of the gentler sex steadily require from the stronger a higher standard
of character and purer habits of life. This blessed consummation, so
devoutly to be wished, is hastened, dear girlish hearts, by every prayer
you offer, by every hymn you sing, by every loving errand of your willing
feet and gentle hands. You are the true friends of tempted manhood,
bewildered youth and every little child. The steadfast faith and loyal,
patient work you are to do, will be the mightiest factor in woman’s
contribution to the solution of this Republic’s greatest problem, and
will have their final significance in the thought and purpose, not that
the world shall come into the home, but that the home, embodied and
impersonated in its womanhood, shall go forth into the world.

I have no fears for the women of America. They will never content
themselves remaining stationary in methods or in policy, much less sound
a retreat in their splendid warfare against the saloon in law and in
politics. The tides of the mother’s heart do not change; we can count
upon them always. The voice of Miriam still cheers the brave advance, and
all along the line we hear the battle cry: “Speak unto the children of
Israel, that they go forward.”




THE CATLIN PAINTINGS.

BY O. T. MASON.


If you will enter the National Museum at Washington, and give your cane
or umbrella to the venerable gentleman at the stand, you will see some
wonderful old pictures. Turn abruptly to your right, cast a patriotic
glance at the clothing and camp furniture of the Father of his Country,
and a few steps will bring you into the museum lecture room, whose east,
south, and west walls are covered with quaint sketches of American
aboriginal life, mounted in the dingiest possible black frames. This is
the Catlin Collection, by far the most celebrated Indian paintings in the
world, since the dreadful fire in the Smithsonian Institution burned up
the Stanley portraits in 1864. A few words about this wonderful painter
would certainly interest you before you begin to look at his pictures.

George Catlin was born in Wilkesbarre, Luzerne county, Pennsylvania,
in 1796. His father was a lawyer, and, naturally, took every pains to
educate his son for that profession, sending him at last to Yale College
to finish his course. But that which has often happened to boys was
true in George’s case—he loved fishing and painting more than he loved
the bar. His law practice lasted two years, after which he established
himself in New York and Philadelphia as a portrait painter. In the year
1832 he saw a delegation of Indians from St. Louis, a town of 25,000
inhabitants, then headquarters for the Central Superintendency (see
painting 311), and was so overwhelmed by their appearance that nothing
could overcome his desire to visit them in their homes. Convinced
that the noble savage would rapidly decline before the advance of
civilization, and realizing as if by inspiration the value which a
pictorial history of the dying race would possess to future students of
primitive history, he set out alone for St. Louis, with pen and brush,
to accomplish this noble design. Here he became acquainted with Mr.
Chouteau, a gentleman thoroughly conversant with the Indian country and
character, who secured for the painter a free ride to the mouth of the
Yellowstone in a little, rude steamer called the “Yellowstone.”

He devoted eight years, from 1832 to 1840, to his enterprise, visiting
forty-eight tribes of Indians residing within British America, the United
States and Mexico. Speaking of these years in after life he says: “I
have seen them in their own villages, have carried my canvas and colors
the whole way, and painted my portraits from life as they now stand in
the gallery. Some of them have been taken while I have been paddling my
canoe, or leading my pack-horse through trackless wilds, even at the
hazard of my life.”

On his return to the East from this remarkable Odyssey, Mr. Catlin
exhibited his sketches, together with such a collection of weapons,
dress, ornaments and implements as it will never be possible to procure
again, in Philadelphia, New York and Boston, to great crowds of visitors.
The papers were filled with praises respecting it. The _United States
Gazette_ says: “There can be no mistake or exaggeration in pronouncing
the exhibition of these views of the scenery and natural history of the
western country the most important and interesting object for public
attention which has ever been offered to the eastern division of the
United States.”

Many of Mr. Catlin’s friends were anxious for the government or some well
founded institution to buy the collection, but nothing was accomplished.

In 1840 Mr. Catlin took his pictures abroad, prospects having been held
out to him of getting a handsome price for them. The Chancellor of the
Exchequer admitted the packages free of duty, and the whole was set up in
a room 106 feet long, in Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, London.

Numerous assemblages, comprising many of the distinguished members of
the fashionable and the literary world visited the entertainments and
listened to the lectures of Mr. Catlin.

It is just a little to be feared that the painter added to the genius of
the artist a modicum of the showman’s vanity, in support of which theory
the following is quoted from the London _Morning Post_: “This valuable
collection of portraits, landscapes, scenes from savage life, weapons,
costumes, and an endless variety of illustrations of Indian life, real
as well as pictorial, continues to attract crowds of spectators. We are
happy to find our prediction fully borne out by fact, that the exhibition
only required to be made known to the public to be fully appreciated.
The most pleasing attention is paid by Mr. Catlin and his assistants to
gratify the curiosity of visitors, to point out the peculiarities of the
various subjects through which they wander, and to explain everything
which strikes the eye and attracts the observer to inquire into its use
or meaning. During our visit on Saturday the company were startled by
a yell, and shortly afterward by the appearance of a stately chief of
the Crow Indians stalking silently through the hall, armed to the teeth
and painted to the temples, wrapped in a buffalo robe, on which all his
battles were depicted, and wearing a tasteful coronet of war eagle’s
quills. This personation was volunteered by a nephew of Mr. Catlin, who
has seen the red man in his native wilds, and presents the most proud
and picturesque similitude of the savage warrior that can be conceived.
His war-whoop, his warlike appearance and dignified movements seem to
impress the assemblage more strikingly with a feeling of the character
of the North American Indian than all the other evidences which crowded
the walls. Subsequently he appeared in another splendid costume worn
by the braves of the Mandan tribe, also remarkable for its costly and
magnificent head-dress, in which we see the ‘horns of power’ assume a
conspicuous place. The crowds that gathered around him on each occasion
were so dense that Mr. Catlin could scarcely find space to explain in
full detail all the costumes; but we are glad to find he is preparing a
central stage where all may enjoy a full and fair sight of ‘the Red Man,’
as he issues from his wigwam, clad in the peculiar robes and ornaments of
his tribe, to fight, hunt, smoke, or join in the dances, festivals, and
amusements of each nation.”

This, of course, smacks a little of Buffalo Bill, but it pleased the
Europeans amazingly. Mr. Catlin gave exhibitions in Waterloo rooms,
Edinburgh; in the Louvre, at Paris, where Louis Philippe gave him ample
space; and in many other European cities, occupying in all about eight
years. During this time he published “Manners and Customs,” etc.; “The
North American Portfolio;” “Eight Years’ Travels.” In 1861 he published a
little work on “The Breath of Life,” certainly the funniest serious book
we have ever read. In 1862 appeared “Last Rambles Among the Indians,” etc.

As many other people have done concerning their own handiwork, Mr.
Catlin overestimated the intrinsic value of his paintings and specimens,
and made the mistake of thinking that everybody would surely be as
enthusiastic as himself. The British government did not buy the
gallery. Even the platform and Mr. Catlin’s nephew could not save the
ship. In Belgium financial embarrassment overtook the painter and his
works. The whole material was likely to go under the hammer, when Mr.
Thomas Harrison, a wealthy Philadelphian, advanced the money and took
the collection as security, with the understanding that it could be
redeemed. This proving beyond Mr. Catlin’s means, all of the paintings
and specimens were transferred to Philadelphia and stored until Mr.
Harrison’s death, when his widow presented the entire gallery to the
National Museum, together with such dresses, etc., as time and moths had
spared.

Perhaps you have heard that the Washington pictures are not the
originals. The facts are these: After transferring his material in
Belgium to Mr. Harrison, Mr. Catlin traveled throughout North America,
and even in South America, making aboriginal sketches. This second
collection was exhibited for a time in the west corridor of the
Smithsonian. On his death, in 1872, the pictures were packed up and
stored in the Smithsonian building until 1876, when they were transferred
to the Philadelphia Exposition. They are now to be seen in the permanent
exhibition there.

Now for the pictures. A great American ethnologist says “Catlin is the
great American Indian liar;” another, quite as eminent, says that when he
showed one of these pictures to a Sioux Indian, the latter was affected
to tears at the recognition of a dear friend long deceased. Both were
right. Recently M. Achille Collin, a French sculptor, was employed
to produce several busts of celebrated Indians, from photographs and
portraits, for the New Orleans Exposition. Among them was Osceola,
whose portrait is in the Catlin gallery. Fortunately, the Museum has
also Osceola’s death mask. M. Collin found that Catlin had placed the
eyes too far apart, and had perpetrated several other little artistic
outrages, yet the sculptor was able to rectify these and to produce a
wonderful bust of the wily Seminole. In one sense everything is wrong in
these paintings, in another sense they are teeming with life and spirit.
A French critic said in the Paris _Constitutionnel_: “A professional
painter is perfectly lost in the presence of a nature new to him, in such
singular lands, such original colors of sky, foliage and men.” You must
know a language in order to appreciate its beauties, you must know Indian
life to appreciate Catlin. His images do not pose, they fly across the
canvas. M. Schindler, whose lifelike portraiture of fishes has given him
a world-wide reputation, and who has lived among the Sioux and painted
them, has the same admiration of these savage portraitures, whose shadowy
looks are ominous of their fast fading originals. A workman in the Museum
whose business it is to arrange Indian costumes says that in those things
which anybody can do, Catlin was careless; but in the arrangement of
dress, ornaments and weapons, which nobody now knows how to fix, he is an
invaluable guide. It may not be known to all that the numberless tribes
formerly living within our domain belonged to a few well defined stocks,
recognizable by language, institutions, and customs. East of the Rocky
Mountains, where most of these pictures were painted, were the Athapascan
of the north, the Algonquin and Iroquois of the east, the Cherokee and
Muskokee of the south, and the Dakotan of the west. In the great interior
basin were the Shoshones, and west of the Sierras the Flatheads, Chinuks,
and many other little known stocks.

The Algonkin stock is represented in Mr. Catlin’s gallery by portraits
and groups of Sacs and Foxes, Sheyennes, Blackfeet, Chippewas and
Ottawas, Crees, Menomonees, Pottawatomies, Kickapoos, Kaskaskias, Weeahs,
Peorias, Piankeshaws, Mohegans, Delawares and Shawnees.

The celebrated league of the Iroquois by representatives from the
following tribes looks down upon us as Oneidas, Tuscaroras and Senecas.

John Ross, a civilized and well educated chief, with four other
celebrated faces, represents the Cherokee stock. The great Muskogee or
Creek confederacy includes paintings of distinguished Creeks, Choktas,
Seminoles, and Yuchees. Most of the last two stocks were well instructed
by Protestant missionaries, previously to their transfer into the Indian
Territory. It is this fact alone which explains their steady increase
while so many other tribes have melted away. It was among the Dakotas,
however, that Catlin’s enthusiasm first took fire and increased most
fervently. In addition to the many landscape and hunting pictures, whose
scenes are laid in this romantic country, you will see staring at you
from these dingy frames, men and women of many Dakotan tribes, Kansas,
Osages, Ponkas, Omahas, Otoes, Missourias, Iowas, Mandans, Blackfeet
Sioux, Crows, Assiniboins, Winnebagos, and Sioux proper. A few Comanches,
Pawnee Picts, Weecos, Pawnees and Arikarees, Flatheads and Chinuks
complete the list.

Of all the tribes visited by Mr. Catlin, the Mandans awaken the most
lively interest, not only by their impressive ceremonies, but because the
whole tribe were extinguished by smallpox and suicide in 1837, excepting
about forty who afterward fell victims to their enemies.

Look along on the wall until you find the pictures numbered 504, 505,
506 and 507. In these, by a series of tableaux, the painter presents
to us the annual ceremony of initiation, called the Sun dance by the
modern Dakotas, and witnessed two years ago by Miss Alice Fletcher. This
ceremony continues four days and nights in succession, in commemoration
of the subsiding of the flood, and also for the purpose of conducting
all the young men, as they arrive at manhood, through an ordeal of
voluntary torture, which when endured entitles them to the respect of
the chiefs, to the privileges of going on war-parties, and of taking
a wife. The floor and sides of the medicine lodge are ornamented with
green willow boughs. The young men who are to do penance by torture lie
along the sides of the lodge, their bodies covered with clay of different
colors, their respective shields and weapons hanging over their heads.
In the middle of the lodge the medicine man prays to the Great Spirit
and watches the young men through their four days’ fast, preparatory to
the torture. Near the medicine man lies a scalping knife, and a bunch
of splints which are to be passed through the flesh of the novitiates
like belaying pins. The Buffalo dance takes place several times each day
outside the lodge in which the young men lie. The principal actors in
this dance are eight men with the skins of buffaloes around them and a
bunch of green willows on their backs. The evil spirit, Okeehedee, enters
the village from the prairie, alarming the women, who cry for assistance
and are relieved by the old medicine man. Okeehedee is at length disarmed
of his lance, which is broken by the women, and he is driven by them in
disgrace out of the village. On the fourth day of the festival the young
men are subjected to the torture, which in many forms amounts essentially
to this: Two gashes, parallel and near together, are cut quite through
the skin, either on the breast, back or arms, looking for all the world
like those on the sides of a sheep dressed for market. A wooden pin is
thrust from gash to gash, under the intervening strip of skin. One end
of a long and strong rawhide line is wrapped or belayed around this peg
securely. Now comes the tug of war, the problem always being either to
tear this peg out by breaking the strip of flesh or to see how much
pain the sufferer can stand. He is hauled up to the roof of the lodge,
suspended from an elastic sapling, or dragged around the camp; finally
having fastened the end of the line farthest from him to a post, he tugs
away with might and main until his flesh is torn loose.

Turn now away from this dreadful scene and take a look at the funny side
of Indian life. Here is a fellow whose eager haste after a buffalo ends
in being thrown on the monster’s back and taking a bison ride over the
prairie. There the clans contend nip and tuck for mastery in the ball
play. On this canvas a celebrated archer is showing how many arrows he
can shoot before the first one falls. Perhaps your delicate sensibility
will not enjoy the dog dance, where the Sioux braves are dancing up
grotesquely and biting off pieces of a heart taken raw and bleeding
from a dog. Well, here is a sham battle of Mandan boys, their school of
practice every morning at sunrise, and just there a prairie-dog village.
This picture, No. 337, is the celebrated Pipestone quarry on the Couteau
des Prairies, 300 miles northwest of the Falls of St. Anthony, on the
divide between the St. Peters and the Missouri. Here is where from time
immemorial the Indians have obtained for making pipes that beautiful red
steatite, which the mineralogists now call _catlinite_, after our hero.
There are many more just as strange and interesting stories hanging about
this dear old Smithsonian, and some day THE CHAUTAUQUAN may let you into
the secret. You notice here and there that the fatal pointer has gone
quite through the noble brave, and that accounts for solicitude about
your cane and umbrella at the beginning. You will find them at the door,
and don’t fail to reclaim them with your check.




GEORGE BANCROFT.

BY PROF. W. W. GIST.


George Bancroft is the Nestor of American men of letters. Born October
3, 1800, he received his early training at Exeter Academy, and graduated
at Harvard in 1817. He is now eighty-four years old, and his life
has touched every administration in the history of our nation except
Washington’s. What mighty changes have been wrought in the land since
George Bancroft, a manly youth, stepped forth from his _alma mater_ a
full-fledged graduate! Two generations have passed away and a third
is now on the stage of action. Webster, Clay, Calhoun and Benton had
not yet reached the zenith of their power. These men have passed
away, and another group, equally great, of whom Abraham Lincoln was
the central figure, became conspicuous leaders in the most thrilling
period of our history, and have passed away likewise. Indeed, there are
thousands of voters to-day who were born during the exciting events of
Lincoln’s administration. At the time George Bancroft graduated which,
in the general acceptation of the term, marked the commencement of his
life’s work, Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Arthur, Blaine, Cleveland, and
Generals Sherman and Sheridan had not been born. Some of these have won
never-fading honors in events that have attracted the attention of the
whole world, and are numbered among our heroes. At that time Harvard was
a very different institution from what it is now; American literature was
in its infancy; Washington Irving had scarcely gained a recognition on
the other side of the waters.

Forty-five years ago Bancroft held a government office and secured for
Nathaniel Hawthorne an appointment in the Boston Custom House. Hawthorne
was then a literary man with some reputation, but his pen did not afford
him a livelihood. His great masterpieces were written during the next
quarter of a century, and twenty years have passed since the announcement
of his death cast a gloom over the literary world, while his friend and
benefactor still survives in the full vigor of his intellectual powers.

Macaulay and Bancroft were born in the same year; the former has been
dead nearly twenty-five years; the latter is giving finishing touches to
his great history, which merits a place with Macaulay’s and Gibbon’s.

George Bancroft’s father was the Rev. Aaron Bancroft, D.D., who as a
young man participated in the battles of Lexington and Bunker Hill, and
who in later years won an honorable name as a theologian and man of
letters, his “Life of Washington” attracting considerable attention in
Europe. The son inherited many of the admirable characteristics of the
father.

After his graduation at Harvard, George Bancroft spent five years in
Europe, receiving a degree from the University of Göttingen, mastering
the principal modern languages, giving special attention to the study of
history, visiting the most important nations of the continent, and above
all communing with some of the greatest minds of the age. It was his rare
privilege to meet, and to enjoy the friendship of, such men as Wolf, the
distinguished classic scholar, Wilhelm von Humboldt, Goethe, Cousin,
Alexander von Humboldt, Chevalier Bunsen, Niebuhr, and others scarcely
less distinguished.

Returning to his native land in 1822, he spent one year as tutor of Greek
in Harvard, and afterward assisted in establishing a preparatory school
at Northampton. The subject of United States history already absorbed his
mind, and the next few years were spent in special study for his great
work.

Bancroft has held a number of offices. In 1838 President Van Buren
appointed him collector at the port of Boston, and he discharged the
duties of the office with marked ability. In 1845 he entered President
Polk’s cabinet as Secretary of the Navy. A number of important events
of this administration are linked with his name. Through his influence
the naval academy at Annapolis was established, and he introduced many
needed reforms into the naval service. He ordered the United States fleet
to assist Captain Fremont in taking possession of California, and as
Acting Secretary of War he issued orders for the United States army to
march into Texas at the commencement of the Mexican war. In 1846 he was
appointed minister to England, and held the position for three years.
While in England unusual courtesies were extended to him, and every
facility was granted for carrying on his historical researches, official
state papers and many valuable private libraries being accessible. He
also visited Paris for the purpose of study, and received valuable
assistance from Guizot and Lamartine. In 1867 he was appointed minister
to Berlin and remained abroad a number of years, calling forth a special
commendation from President Grant for his wise diplomatic services.

Mr. Bancroft has done considerable literary work in addition to writing
his “History of the United States.” When a young man he published a
volume of poems; he has contributed a great many articles to magazines,
and has delivered a number of memorial addresses on prominent Americans.
In 1859 he prepared a paper on “Prescott” for the New York Historical
Society; also one on “Washington Irving.” In 1860 he delivered an address
in Cleveland at the unveiling of the statue of Commodore Oliver H. Perry,
and February 12, 1866, he delivered before the two houses of Congress a
memorial address on President Lincoln.

Bancroft is known most widely, however, as an historian, and his noble
history is a monument more durable than granite. He brought to his task
a mind philosophic in character, broad in grasp, impartial in judgment,
believing firmly in God’s superintending care, rich in scholarship, and
with enough of the imaginative and poetical to quicken and vivify all his
intellectual powers. He has bestowed nearly sixty years of conscientious
labor on this great historical work, the first volume of which appeared
in 1834, fifty years ago.

The historian requires peculiar talent for his work. He must have such
patience and energy as will enable him to carry on any research that
will throw light on the subject he is investigating; he must weigh all
evidence as coolly as the most unprejudiced judge; he must not assume
the part of an advocate until he has examined the subject from every
standpoint and reached an unbiased conclusion; he must grasp the real
ideas and principles that underlie the events and are hastening the
progress of civilization; he must have sufficient imagination to see the
events as real, and to make his readers see them as such; in addition, he
must have a copiousness of illustration and a fluency of language that
will enable him to present his subject in an attractive form. In short,
he must be a scholar, an explorer, a philosopher, and a rhetorician. Few,
if any, have possessed all these qualifications in a preëminent degree;
Bancroft certainly possesses them all in no small degree.

Gibbon will doubtless ever hold an honorable place as an historical
writer; and yet he attempts to account for the rapid spread of
Christianity entirely on human grounds, and refuses to recognize the
greatest force then at work in effecting changes among the nations of
the world. Macaulay well says of Gibbon: “He writes like a man who had
received some personal injury from Christianity and wished to be revenged
on it and all its possessors.” No such charge can be made against George
Bancroft. He is a firm believer in God, recognizes Christianity as the
most powerful factor in the progress of civilization, and continually
evinces his unfaltering belief in God’s superintending care over human
affairs. The opening paragraph of his address on President Lincoln may be
taken as his creed on God in history. Notice how clear his statement and
triumphant his faith:

“That God rules in the affairs of men is as certain as any truth of
physical science. On the great moving power which is from the beginning
hangs the world of the senses and the world of thought and action.
Eternal wisdom marshals the great procession of the nations, working in
patient continuity through the ages, never halting and never abrupt,
encompassing all events in its oversight, and ever effecting its will,
though mortals may slumber in apathy or oppose with madness. Kings are
lifted up or thrown down, nations come and go, republics flourish and
wither, dynasties pass away as a tale that is told; but nothing is by
chance, though men, in their ignorance of causes, may think so. The deeds
of time are governed, as well as judged, by the decrees of eternity.”

A quotation from his history will show his estimate of Christianity:

“To have asserted clearly the unity of mankind was the distinctive
character of the Christian religion. No more were the nations to be
severed by the worship of exclusive deities. The world was instructed
that all men are of one blood; that for all there is but one divine
nature and but one moral law; and the renovating faith taught the
singleness of the race, of which it embodied the aspirations and guided
the advancement.”[E]

Notice also this noble tribute to Christianity in his history:

“The colonists, including their philosophy in their religion, as the
people up to that time had always done, were neither skeptics nor
sensualists, but Christians. The school that bows to the senses as the
sole interpreter of truth had little share in colonizing our America. The
colonists from Maine to Carolina, the adventurous companions of Smith,
the proscribed Puritans that freighted the fleet of Winthrop, the Quaker
outlaws that fled from jails with a Newgate prisoner as the sovereign—all
had faith in God and in the soul. The system which had been revealed
in Judea—the system which combines and perfects the symbolic wisdom of
the Orient and the reflective genius of Greece—the system, conforming
to reason, yet kindling enthusiasm; always hastening reform, yet always
conservative; proclaiming absolute equality among men, yet not suddenly
abolishing the unequal institutions of society; guaranteeing absolute
freedom, yet invoking the inexorable restrictions of duty; in the highest
degree theoretical, yet in the highest degree practical; awakening the
inner man to a consciousness of his destiny, and yet adapted with exact
harmony to the outward world; at once divine and human—this system was
professed in every part of our widely extended country, and cradled
our freedom. Our fathers were not only Christians; they were, even in
Maryland by a vast majority, elsewhere almost unanimously, protestants.
Now the Protestant Reformation, considered in its largest influence on
politics, was the awakening of the common people to freedom of mind.”[F]

In a recent private letter to Dr. Buckley, of the _Christian Advocate_,
Bancroft uses these words quoted in that paper:

“Certainly our great united commonwealth is the child of Christianity;
it may with equal truth be asserted that modern civilization sprung into
life with our religion; and faith in its principles is the life-boat on
which humanity has at divers times escaped the most threatening perils.”

And again:

“The principles that govern human affairs, extending like a path of
light from century to century, become the highest demonstration of the
superintending providence of God.”[G]

But it is not necessary to multiply quotations illustrative of his faith
in the Deity. Throughout the whole of his writings he manifests a devout,
reverential state of mind, and keeps constantly before the reader the
idea that God is the great power back of those mighty movements that stir
the nations of the world.

The philosophic cast of his mind is clearly revealed in all his
discussions of causes and results. He firmly believes that “the problems
of politics can not be solved without passing behind transient forms to
efficient causes,” and he ever seeks to find the real origin of an event.
He dates the American Revolution back to the Reformation under Luther
and Calvin, and in relating the events that led to a separation from
the mother country he discusses with great clearness and elaborateness
three points essential to the proper understanding of the subject: In the
first place he speaks of the emancipation of the mind at the Reformation,
and the consequent birth of the idea of freedom. In the second place he
discusses the growth of this idea of freedom in the nations of Europe
and on this continent. In the third place he describes with wonderful
fairness the violent discussions that arose in England and in this
country when the colonists raised a protest against the tyrannies of the
mother country. Referring to the origin of our present liberty, he says
explicitly:

“The Reformation was an expression of the right of the human intellect to
freedom.”[H]

He thus speaks of the influence of Luther and the Reformation: “At his
bidding truth leaped over the cloister walls and challenged every man
to make her his guest; aroused every intelligence to acts of private
judgment, changed a dependent, recipient people into a reflecting,
inquiring people; lifted each human being out of the castes of the middle
age, to endow him with individuality, and summoned man to stand forth as
man. The world heaved with the fervent conflict of opinion. The people
and their guides recognized the dignity of labor; the oppressed peasantry
took up arms for liberty; men reverenced and exercised the freedom of
the soul. The breath of the new spirit moved over the earth; it revived
Poland, animated Germany, swayed the north; and the inquisition of Spain
could not silence its whispers among the mountains of the Peninsula. It
invaded France; and, though bonfires of heretics, by way of warning,
were lighted at the gates of Paris, it infused itself into the French
mind, and led to unwonted free discussions. Exile could not quench it.
On the banks of the Lake of Geneva, Calvin stood forth the boldest
reformer of his day; not personally engaged in political intrigues,
yet, by promulgating great ideas, forming the seed-plot of revolution.…
Calvinism was revolutionary; wherever it came it created division.… By
the side of the eternal mountains and perennial snows and arrowy rivers
of Switzerland, it established a religion without a prelate, a government
without a king.… It entered Holland, inspiring an industrious nation
with heroic enthusiasm; enfranchising and uniting provinces; and making
burghers, and weavers, and artisans, victors over the highest orders
of Spanish chivalry, the power of the inquisition, and the pretended
majesty of kings. It penetrated Scotland, and while its whirlwind bore
along persuasion among glens and mountains, it shrunk from no danger,
and hesitated at no ambition; it nerved its rugged but hearty envoy
to resist the flatteries of the beautiful Queen Mary; it assumed the
education of her only son; it divided the nobility; it penetrated the
masses, overturned the ancient ecclesiastic establishment, planted free
parochial schools, and gave a living energy to the principle of liberty
in a people. It infused itself into England, and placed its plebeian
sympathies in daring resistance to the courtly hierarchy; dissenting
from dissent, longing to introduce the reign of righteousness, it invited
every man to read the Bible, and made itself dear to the common mind, by
teaching, as a divine revelation, the unity of the race and the natural
equality of man.”[I]

It is evident that Bancroft has studied the Reformation, not simply in
its outward political aspect, but so as to understand the different
shades of theological belief that influenced the minds of the great
reformers. His parallel between Luther and Calvin is a fine specimen
of composition, noted for its vigorous English, clear, discriminating
judgments, and polished style: “Both Luther and Calvin brought the
individual immediate relation with God; but Calvin, under a more stern
and militant form of doctrine, lifted the individual above pope and
prelate, and priest and presbyter, above Catholic church and national
church and general synod, above indulgencies, remissions and absolutions
from fellow-mortals, and brought him into immediate dependence on
God, whose eternal, irreversible choice is made by himself alone, not
arbitrarily, but according to his own highest wisdom and justice. Luther
spared the altar, and hesitated to deny totally the real presence;
Calvin, with superior dialectics, accepted as a commemoration and a seal
the rite which the Catholics revered as a sacrifice. Luther favored
magnificence in public worship, as an aid to devotion; Calvin, the
guide of republics, avoided in their churches all appeals to the senses
as a peril to pure religion. Luther condemned the Roman Church for
its immorality; Calvin for its idolatry. Luther exposed the folly of
superstition, ridiculed the hair shirt and the scourge, the purchased
indulgence, and dearly bought, worthless masses for the dead; Calvin
shrunk from their criminality with impatient horror. Luther permitted
the cross and the taper, pictures and images, as things of indifference;
Calvin demanded a spiritual worship in its utmost purity. Luther left
the organization of the church to princes and governments; Calvin
reformed doctrine, ritual, and practice; and, by establishing ruling
elders in each church, and an elective synod, he secured to his policy a
representative character, which combined authority with popular rights.
Both Luther and Calvin insisted that, for each one, there is and can be
no other priest than himself; and, as a consequence, both agreed in the
purity of the clergy.”[J]

While the rhetoric of Bancroft is not faultless, it certainly deserves a
place in our classic English. In the discussion of grave historical and
philosophical questions, his stateliness of expression and his dignity
of style challenge our admiration. His descriptions are very fine, and
suggest a mind keenly alive to the beautiful and the poetical; but
they do not reveal that spontaneity so characteristic of Irving, nor
that indefinable symmetry so noticeable in Hawthorne. If his style is
sometimes declamatory, I think it is generally in a connection such that
the cultivated taste will pronounce it admissible.

Thoroughly versed in the historic lore of this and other countries,
broad in his general scholarship, remarkably free from prejudice, an
uncompromising American, and yet not an American in a narrow and bigoted
sense, careful and systematic in his methods of labor and recreation,
unswerving in his belief in the superintending providence of God, George
Bancroft justly merits the high place of honor and esteem so willingly
accorded to him, and his noble example should be a never-failing source
of inspiration.

[E] Vol. III., p. 6.

[F] Vol. II., p. 177.

[G] Hist., Vol. II., p. 545.

[H] Hist., Vol. III., p. 183.

[I] Hist., Vol. III., p. 99.

[J] Hist., Vol. I., p. 212.

       *       *       *       *       *

GOING TO THE BOTTOM THE ONLY WAY TO REACH THE TOP.—First go to the bottom
of everything which you have to do. Know all its principles. If it be
a trade, know not only its rules, but the reasons for them. If it be
merchandise in raw materials, or in one or more manufactured articles,
be sure to learn the whole process, from the planting of the seed, or
the digging of the ore, to the completed fabric. Do this by observation,
conversation with the heads of departments, and with workmen in different
specialties. This was the plan of the late William E. Dodge.—_From Dr. J.
M. Buckley’s “Oats or Wild Oats.”_




HOW PERSEUS BEGAN TO BE GREAT.

BY ELIZABETH P. ALLAN.


     Fair Perseus slept upon enchanted ground,
     And to him came, but with no stir or sound,
     The goddess Pallas, whose clear, shining eyes
     Read all men’s hearts that are beneath the skies.

    “Many there be,” she cried, “who dwell at ease,
     Who neither do nor dare—art thou of these?
     Or dost thou to some glorious deed aspire?
     Hast thou a heart of clay, or soul of fire?”

     Then answered Perseus, vehement, “But I
     Would do great deeds, though for them I should die.
     Point me, O goddess, to the monster’s lair,
     And give me leave to show what I can dare!”

    “Nay,” said the voice divine, “thy stripling arm
     Must first set free from danger’s fierce alarm
     _Thy mother’s life!_” With this young Perseus woke,
     Nor knew the peril whereof Pallas spoke.

     But straight to Seriphus he hied with speed,
     To find his Mother Danæ in sore need,
     And rescuing her from danger and from dread,
     _Then_ went he forth to win the Gorgon’s head.

     O, sons and daughters of our happy land,
     Whose waking dreams are filled with actions grand,
     Ere yet in search of these afar you roam,
     Free every burdened heart that sighs at home!




CANADA OF TO-DAY.

BY M. VICTOR DU BLED.

An Abridged Translation for THE CHAUTAUQUAN, from the _Révue des deux
Mondes_.


Canada, for so long a time apparently forgotten by her mother country,
came out from her isolation and again called back to herself the
attention of France by sending to the Exposition of 1855 specimens of
her products. In 1856 M. de Belveze, commander of the French frigate
“Capricieuse,” was sent into Canadian waters. His mission resulted in
the establishment of a French consulate, and the reduction of the tariff
which permitted the two countries to enter upon commercial relations.

From 1854 to 1862 material and intellectual progress here marched by the
side of great political progress. Public works, canals, and interior
colonization, all, during this time received a vigorous impulse.

There is no such thing as spontaneous generation in politics any more
than in natural history. Questions give rise to other questions, and the
philosophy of history shows them springing up, one after another, from
some mysterious source, obeying a sort of atavism, and producing often a
most unexpected result. Excitement over representation, fixed according
to the population of the country, gave birth to the confederacy. On
October 1, 1864, a conference assembled at Quebec, composed of delegates
from the maritime provinces, and from the Canadian government. After
a long and stormy session, during which threats of resorting to arms
were now and then heard, the cause of the confederation triumphed by a
large majority. A basis of federal union was submitted to the several
legislatures for ratification, and on July 1, 1867, the confederacy was
established in the midst of public rejoicings. They gave to the united
provinces the name of the Dominion of Canada. Lower Canada was called
Quebec, and Upper Canada Ontario.

The Legislature is composed of a Governor-general, a sort of a
constitutional viceroy, named by the crown; of a Senate, and a House
of Commons. The Senate consists of seventy-six members, appointed for
life by the crown, of whom twenty-four each are from Quebec and Ontario.
The House of Commons is representative, its members being elected for
five years. The Dominion now includes Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia,
New Brunswick, Prince Edward’s Island, British Columbia, Manitoba, and
the territory of the North-West, or Hudson’s Bay Territory. Thus it is
fulfilling the prediction of the great American statesman, William H.
Seward: “Canada is destined to become the seat of a great empire, the
Russia of North America, but a Russia with civilization more advanced
than the Russia of Europe.” An illustrated paper of the Dominion has
published a patriotic caricature representing the Canadian Gulliver
with a debonair and placid figure, without any implements save his own
gigantic arms and hands, seizing and swallowing the greater part of the
American continent, while a crowd of Lilliputians, armed to the teeth,
Turks, Yankees, Germans and Italians, survey him with an envious and
astonished air.

In order to develop her resources, and to open the way for immigration,
that her immense tracts of unused land may more rapidly become the
granary of the world, Canada is furrowing her domains with canals and
interlacing them with lines of railroads. The Grand Trunk railway,
traversing the country from Portland, Me., to Detroit, has been built,
with its Victoria bridge (one of the most noted structures in the world)
crossing the St. Lawrence opposite Montreal. Immense sums of money have
been spent in order to convert the St. Lawrence into a canal. And now she
is constructing a transcontinental road, which, binding the two oceans
from Port Moody to Halifax, will cross the entire confederation. They
expect to finish this route in 1886, and it is estimated that the journey
from Liverpool or Havre to Japan will be a thousand miles shorter by this
road than by the transcontinental routes of the United States.

Almost in the middle of the Dominion, at an equal distance from the pole
to the equator, lies the territory of Manitoba. There lived in 1869, a
population half nomadic, called the half-breeds, sprung from marriages
between the French Canadians and the Indians. They spoke the French
language, and professed the Catholic religion. After the delivery of
this country by the Hudson’s Bay Company to the Dominion, the government
determined to direct toward it a stream of English emigration. They sent
a governor and some surveyors to reside at Winnipeg, the capital. But
the natives warned them they might look for trouble if they attempted
to place, without consulting them, new inhabitants upon the land which
they and their ancestors, from time immemorial, had held and enjoyed.
The government was not to be frightened, and so the conflict came.
The half-breeds obliged the governor to leave, and constituted a
provisional government, with a president at its head. They then drew up
a declaration, of which the following is the preamble:

    “We, the representatives of the people, assembled in council at
    Fort Garry, November 24, 1869, after having invoked the God of
    nations, … solemnly declare, in the name of our constitution and
    in our own name, before God and men, that we refuse to recognize
    the authority of Canada, which pretends to have the right to
    command us and impose upon us a despotic form of government.”

Later, however, they changed their opinion, and entered into negotiations
with the federal government. But at the moment when all things had been
arranged without bloodshed, the English colonists, who were very numerous
around Lake Winnipeg, rose in insurrection against the half-breeds. The
president of the latter, Louis Riel, who took upon himself the _rôle_ of
dictator, had the leading mutineers seized, and their chief, named Scott,
was tried, condemned and shot. Far from establishing his authority, this
execution discouraged the natives themselves, and when two battalions
of militia under Col. Wolseley arrived on the ground, they were
welcomed as liberators by the half-breeds, and Riel, with his leading
accomplices, fled to the United States. A compromise was then effected,
and Manitoba was annexed to the Dominion as an autonomous province. It
sends to Parliament two senators and five representatives. Winnipeg
contains 30,000 inhabitants, and property has increased its value to an
extraordinary degree, as the following anecdote will show: A parishioner
of Archbishop Taché, obliged to leave the country, sought the archbishop,
and excusing himself for not being able to pay the rent of his church
pew, offered as part payment a small piece of land; “scarcely what would
pay for a low mass,” timidly said the poor man. Ten years later that land
brought $14,000.

In spite of the expenses occasioned by her canals and railroads, the
people of the Dominion are, perhaps, among all the tax-payers of the
civilized world, those upon whom the smallest rates are levied. There is
no standing army, only a simple militia of about 50,000 men. The total
expenses of government in 1884 amounted to $28,730,157. The receipts
for the same year were $36,800,000. The minister of finances, in making
out his estimates for the year 1885 placed them as follows: Expenses,
$29,811,639; receipts, $31,000,000, which were to be raised as follows:
Duties, $20,000,000; excises, $5,500,000; postoffice returns, $1,900,000;
public works, $3,000,000; interest on investments, $750,000; other
sources, $800,900. Duties on goods supply the source of two thirds of
all the receipts. In 1880 they adopted a very strict system, which,
without any distinction, exacts duties from English goods as from any
other nation. On the other hand, England has granted to them the right of
concluding treaties of commerce with foreign nations.

The only difference of opinion in regard to the question of tariff
existing between the two parties is that the liberals wish the laws of
entrance to be more moderate than the conservatives have made them, but
neither of them will adopt the cosmopolitan theories of European free
trade. The English compare protection to a bullet, Canadian tariff to
a museum of instruments of torture, and declare that in following the
example of the United States, the Dominion has forgotten the fable of the
frog which wished to become as large as an ox. The Canadians hold that
they shall do what they think best for their country, and that duties are
the taxes least inconvenient to raise; that they save national work; and
that they not only have made up the deficits of the past, but have put
into the treasury an excess, so they have been able to reduce them to the
amount of two and one-fourth millions dollars. The tariff for protection
has become a tariff for revenue.

Since 1853 especially, public instruction has made great progress.
These people who, under the patronage of the crown of England, have
realized the ideal conception of a conservative and Christian republic,
hold that public schools are among the luxuries of a young nation, and
do not hesitate to impose upon themselves heavy sacrifices, as they
believe they will result in good to their children. In the province of
Quebec alone, government expended during the year 1882-83, $350,000
for school buildings, while the contributions paid directly by the
people amounted to more than $2,000,000. In a population of 1,359,027
inhabitants, statistics show that there are 5,039 schools of different
grades; 7,211 professors and teachers, and 245,225 scholars, making an
average of one scholar for every six inhabitants. As to universities
and colleges, they do not come under the school regulations, but are
independent institutions, which, however, may receive appropriations
from the government on condition of making a report each year to the
superintendent. When in a school district there live a number of families
who profess a different religion from that of the majority, they have
the right to have for their children separate schools, under the care
of three officials, chosen by them. Thus Catholics and Protestants have
equal privileges, and everything is done to secure respect for religion,
independence to the citizen, and his active and constant interest in
educational matters. The circulars of the present superintendent, M.
Ouimet, define in clear terms the spirit of the school laws in Quebec:
“In our system of primary instruction we first teach the children the
catechism of true religion, in order that they may know how to serve
God; then the manuals of agriculture and of design, in order to put them
in condition to serve their country. _For God and country!_ Behold the
words which the Canadian legislature has inscribed on the walls of her
educational institutions. The state unites itself to the two systems of
religion in the matter of education, and does not authorize any school to
be atheistical, but demands of it to be Christian before it accords help.
It does not provide that one church shall be helped rather than another.
Full and entire liberty it demands, and from this comes perfect harmony
among the people.”

Religious liberty marches by the side of educational liberty. Each church
supports itself; the state no longer takes cognizance of clergy or
congregations, to protect them, to annoy them, or to persecute. They can,
as the citizens, found a university, a college, or a school.

Men such as Labelle and Racine have accomplished wonderful results in
planting in the most barren regions, at the peril of their lives, strong
and flourishing colonies. “Go west,” incessantly repeated Horace Greeley
to young Americans. “Go north, French Canadians and Catholics,” said
Father Labelle, with a prophetic foresight.

Canadian literature only dates back to 1840. Before that time it was made
up of songs. Such a literature was absolutely essential to the gay and
sociable race who consoled itself, in all its troubles, with stanzas.
There was a time when France held the government under control by her
songs. Did any Canadian patriot attract attention by some great deed?
At once a song was written. Was the question that of elections? They
addressed themselves to some crude poet, and sharp, malign couplets soon
overran the country. The festival of St. Jean Baptiste has furnished many
a contribution to this list, and Sir George Cartier owes in great part
his popularity to the fact that he composed one for the first banquet, in
1834. Often among the remote rural districts are found people possessing
magnificent tenor voices, which would make the fortune of an impressario
who would come from the other side of the water to look them up.

“We are yet amateurs,” said one of their writers to me. Without endorsing
this very modest judgment, one can but admit that up to the present time
our American cousins have been more occupied with making history than
with writing it. Action has absorbed thought. They have run, closely
pressed on all sides, to the conquest of political liberties. The books
which they published during their unsettled national history partook of
the character of the times, as the great work of Garneau will show, which
was a revelation to his countrymen, and was of more value to them than
an army, since it assured them of a nation’s faith and the certainty of
success. The greater part of the writers have been obliged to tax their
ingenuity for a livelihood, and too often politics, that deceptive siren,
keeps them from those severe studies which alone will bring talent to
maturity.

In poetry, MM. Crémazie and Louis Fréchette have left behind them all
rivals. High inspiration, poetic fervor, appreciation of nature, and
love of country have made them true poets. One can not read without
emotion some of the productions of M. Crémazie. His patriotic songs,
which seem to have been breathed from the very heart of the country
itself, in a language harmonious and vibrating, do not for an instant
decline in interest or power. The verses of M. Fréchette are written in a
graceful style, and possess a youthful freshness. In history, MM. l’Abbé
Casgrain, Benjamin Sulte and Joseph Tassé have become distinguished. M.
Tassé, in his book “Canadians of the West,” tells of the pioneers of the
American continent, those who penetrated into the icy regions of the
pole, who crossed the Rocky Mountains, and spread over the fertile plains
of Mexico; and has shown that of them all the French in the Canadian
settlements were the only ones who treated the Indians honorably and
kindly, and who succeeded in winning their respect and affection.

The group of prose writers and romancers is increasing every day. One of
the best, without doubt, is M. J. C. Taché, the author of three legends,
each of which characterizes an epoch in the history of the Indians. M.
de Gaspé, with his “Ancient Canadians,” and M. Joseph Marmette, with his
historic romances have acquired a well merited reputation.

What, then, shall be the aim in the future of Canadian literature? To
acquire new strength and vigor without ceasing the study of the past;
to revive the glorious annals; to gather with a pious care its legends;
to identify itself also with the present; to paint the manners and the
contemporaneous social life; to note and to report the majestic symphony
of their land; never to lose sight of the thought of Carlyle, that the
universe is a temple as well as a workshop. Such will be the duty of
Canadian writers.

The Canadians through all the years since their country passed out of
the hands and the control of the French, have clung to them with great
affection, drawn by some profound and mystic instinct, by the lines of
heredity, the power of traditions, the religion of memory. They are not
ignorant of the fact that if they had remained united to France, they
would not now have, in all probability, their free social and religious
institutions; they would likely have formed an administrative colony
such as Algeria. They know that it was England who sent them, under hard
circumstances, perhaps, to the school of liberty, and to her they are
indebted for their prosperity, but they look to France still as their
mother country. Why should not that country give them some more solid
proof of its affection? While with South America the annual exchanges of
France are counted by the hundred million, and great numbers of French
people emigrate there, her total commerce with Canada does not exceed
$15,000,000, and it is with great difficulty that she has commenced to
send thither a few of her citizens. Why should not French emigration
direct itself toward a country where wages are good, the soil fertile,
where property offers itself to all, and where a welcome is awaiting
them? Why should not the French go to visit the Canadians and learn of
them how a people became and remain free?




SOME AMERICAN MUSEUMS.

BY CLARENCE COOK.


Under this heading it is intended to give in successive numbers of THE
CHAUTAUQUAN descriptions of the principal Art Museums of our country:
The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New
York, the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia, and the
Corcoran Art Gallery in Washington. We begin in the present number with
the Boston Museum.

In the year 1870 the trustees of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts were
organized under a charter from the Massachusetts legislature. It was not,
however, until 1876 that a building was erected in which the pictures,
casts, antiquities, engravings and objects of curiosity which formed the
nucleus of its present extensive collections could be exhibited to the
public.

Up to the time when the first portion of the present building was
erected, the amateur or the student of the fine arts in Boston or its
neighborhood had been obliged to take a good deal of trouble, and to
spend much time, if he would see the few objects that existed there—in
public institutions or in private houses—in the domain of painting,
sculpture, antiquities, or in that of the minor arts—now classed together
in popular speech under the incorrect title of bric-a-brac.

Beside the permanent exhibition of the pictures which belonged to it, the
Athenæum Library had generously devoted some of its rooms every season
for several successive years to the exhibition of pictures painted by
American artists, an exhibition answering to those held yearly by the
National Academy of Design and the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts.
Beside these regular exhibitions, there had been many occasional ones of
importance, such as that of the Spanish pictures belonging to the Duc de
Montpensier, which gave to those of us who had not visited Europe, the
opportunity of seeing respectable specimens of the works of Zurbaran,
Herrera, Morales, Murillo, Ribalta and Velasquez. There was also in the
Athenæum a small but well selected collection of plaster-casts of antique
sculpture, so that for a long time this institution was an art center of
no little value and importance. The Athenæum was not, however, an art
institution, but a library, and the time came when the increase of the
library made it necessary to give up its art collections and devote all
its space to books.

The collections of the Athenæum were the most important, both in number
and in value, to be found in Boston, but there were many interesting
objects scattered about which it was felt would be of much greater
service to the community if they could be brought together under
one roof, and made to work in common for the education of the whole
community. The late Francis C. Gray had bequeathed to Harvard College his
large and valuable collection of engravings together with a fund for its
maintenance, and it was found that its usefulness, whether for purposes
of enjoyment or as a means of education was very much restricted by its
being so far away from the capital. Yet it had been impossible to find
a proper place for it in Boston, and it therefore remained shut up in
Cambridge. The Institute of Technology had formed, under the direction
of Prof. William R. Ware, a collection of architectural ornament, but
as this was lodged in the Institute building it could only be seen and
studied at such times as suited the convenience of the professors and
their pupils. The Social Science Association had called the attention of
the public to the need that existed of a large and complete collection of
casts of antique sculpture. But—what to do with such a collection, could
it be brought together?

In a city like Boston, a want so deeply felt could not long remain
unsatisfied, and the matter having been widely discussed, and a general
interest created in the public mind, the first steps were taken with
generous unanimity, and as has been stated, a charter was procured from
the legislature, the Museum was organized by the naming of trustees, and
the city having given a site, no difficulty was met with in raising a
subscription of $261,000 toward a building. The plans of Messrs. Sturgis
and Brigham, submitted in competition, were selected, and on the 3d of
July, 1876, one wing of the front of the building was opened to the
public. This was filled by the collections of the Athenæum, and by the
Gray collection of engravings, both permanently loaned to the Museum,
by the casts of antique sculptures purchased with funds bequeathed by
the late Charles Sumner, the Egyptian collections presented by Mr. C.
Granville Way, and valuable gifts from Mr. Lawrence and other persons.
The space at the disposal of the trustees was soon overcrowded, and in
1878 a fresh subscription of $126,000 having been raised, the front
was completed and opened to the public in 1879. At the present time
of writing the need is seriously felt for more room, and it is hoped
that the means may soon be provided for taking a third step toward the
completion of the original plan of the building.

The building containing the collections of the Boston Museum of Fine Art
is constructed of red brick and terra cotta on a basement of granite.
It stands in the new quarter of the city, and is built like all other
structures in that part of the city, on piles. It is rather ornate in its
character, and compared with its massive neighbor, Trinity Church, has
a somewhat effeminate look, but it is solidly built, and planned with
great good sense, and with a steady view to convenience. On entering,
the visitor finds himself in a large hall, in the center of which rises
an ample staircase conducting to the second floor. At the right and left
are doorways leading to the rooms containing the casts from antique
sculpture. By taking either of these doorways we can make the circuit
of the whole series of apartments, but as the present arrangement is
only temporary, awaiting the completion of the building for a logical
disposition of the material, it may be better to pass at once to the rear
of the hall, and taking the door at the left hand, enter


THE EGYPTIAN ROOM.

The contents of this room were chiefly collected between the years 1828
and 1833, by a Scotch gentleman, Mr. Robert Hay. After his death they
were purchased by Mr. C. Granville Way, of Boston, and presented to the
Museum in 1872. Several fine pieces of sculpture, collected in Egypt in
1835 by the late Mr. John Lowell, the founder of the Lowell Institute,
have been added to this room by the gift of Mr. Lowell’s heirs. The
valuable and interesting casts from bas-reliefs and statues are the gift
of General Charles G. Loring, the director of the Museum, to whose zeal
and efficiency the institution owes so much of its usefulness.

The room is finely lighted by large windows, and General Loring, who is
much interested in botany, generally keeps here a few fine specimens
of tropical plants, especially such as belong to Egypt. Thus, on the
occasion of my last visit, I had the pleasure of seeing there a fine
specimen of the papyrus plant waving its graceful fans in salute to
Pasht and Amenophis, hard by. The giant figure of Amenophis III., the
Memnon of the Greeks (1500 B. C.) is a cast from the granite original
in the British Museum. Near it is the statue of Pasht, the Cat-headed,
in black granite, with the cartouch of Amenophis III., and there are
also several blocks of red granite, probably portions of a throne, with
a few fragments of sculpture—the colossal head of a king, pieces of
the lid of a sarcophagus in green basalt, and two capitals cut out of
sandstone, showing the lotos and papyrus forms. In the center of the room
are several mummy cases, and in glass cases are disposed mummied heads,
skulls, hands and feet, with mummies of animals, the cat, the dog, the
dog-faced ape, the hawk and the ibis. In one of these cases is a hand
still bearing a ring on the fourth finger. The remaining cases contain
very interesting specimens of mummy-cloth of various dates and quality,
one of the most important being a robe of justification supposed to be
worn in the trial of the deceased before Osiris. It is sixteen feet in
length by six feet nine inches in width, and has a fringe. The remaining
contents of this room consist of various objects gathered from the
tombs and from the mummy cases in such number and variety as to make it
impossible to describe them in the narrow space at my command. But while
there can be no doubt as to the value of the collection as a means of
study in a field of wide interest and importance, it may be said, so far
as art is concerned, the Way collection is of less value than the Abbott
collection in the Historical Society of New York City. Each collection,
however, supplements the other in a most interesting way, and taken
together, they enable a student to make a fair beginning in the study of
Egyptian antiquity.


THE FIRST GREEK ROOM

Opens directly from the Egyptian Room, and contains casts of archaic and
early Greek sculpture. Here will be found the Lions from the gate of
Mycenæ, the funeral slabs of Orchomenos, of Aristion, and of the soldier
of Marathon, the Dresden Pallas, the relief of Demeter, Persephone, and
Triptolemus, from Athens, and the so-called Leucothea, and the infant
Bacchus from the Villa Albani, with several interesting archaic reliefs
from the same collection. There have lately been added to the Museum a
number of the funeral slabs or _stele_ discovered at Athens and preserved
in the museum there, objects of great beauty and interest, properly
belonging, either in this room or in immediate connection with it, but
placed for temporary convenience, in the Roman and Renaissance Room. The
most important objects in this First Greek Room are the casts from the
sculptures of the eastern and western Pediments of the Temple of Minerva
at Egina, consisting of five figures from the eastern pediment and ten
from the western, arranged as they are believed to have been originally.
Passing from this room to


THE SECOND GREEK ROOM

We find ourselves in the midst of a group of statues, most of them of
the Praxitelean type and making too sharp a contrast by their grace and
sensuous refinement to the hardness and severity of the contents of the
room just left. It must be remembered, however, that owing to the small
space at the command of the Museum authorities it has not been possible
to follow a strict chronological order, and we must therefore be content
for the present to follow the arrangement of the separate rooms. We have,
therefore, here, the casts from the Parthenon frieze, the Theseus and
the Fates from the eastern and the Ilissus from the western Pediment of
the same building, with the Torso of the Victory, also from the eastern
Pediment, together with several figures from the temple of the Wingless
Victory (Nikè Apteros) on the acropolis. But space fails us to enumerate
all the casts contained in the rooms devoted to antique sculpture; and
why attempt a mere catalogue? The Venus of Milo is here, and the lately
discovered Hermes with the infant Dionysus, the Niobe and her daughter,
the Ludovisi Mars, the Diana of the Louvre, the Apollo Belvidere, the
Eirene and Plutus, the Faun of Praxiteles, and the glorious mask of the
Ludovisi Juno. Indeed, we miss few works of prime importance, and there
are many casts here that can not be found elsewhere in America, and which
are yet essential to even a superficial study of the rise and progress
of Greek sculpture. Passing on, we come to the other rooms where are the
Laocoön, the Dying Gladiator, the younger Agrippina, the Sophocles, the
Demosthenes, the Menander, the Æsculapius, the Discobulus, the Silenus
and the infant Bacchus, and the Boy taking a Thorn from his Foot (the
Spinario), with many another famous and less famous work, enabling us to
carry on the study until the stream dies away to rise again in new beauty
in the art of the early Italian Renaissance. While no capital piece can
be said to be wanting to this collection there remain many pieces to be
added which are needed for fullness of knowledge, but every year sees
important acquisitions, and there can be no doubt, judging from the past
history of the Museum, that if the wished for addition to the building
could be made, the missing gaps in the sculpture would speedily be filled
up by gift. But before leaving the antique rooms we must mention the
two sarcophagi from Vulci, now deposited in the Museum, and which, it
is earnestly to be hoped, will become its property, since they are not
only deeply interesting in themselves, but have an added value from their
great rarity. They represent the bodies of two married pair reposing upon
the lids of the two sarcophagi, as on the marriage-bed. The finer of the
two groups is carved in alabaster, the other is in travertine; the one
in alabaster has a monumental beauty and sweet dignity that is surpassed
by nothing of the kind that exists, and considering its great beauty and
rarity it is said there is only one other example of this treatment of
the subject, and that is in the Vatican.

Crossing the Hall of Entrance, to which we have returned, we find
ourselves in the last of the antique sculpture rooms, where are placed
some of the most interesting of the Roman works just enumerated. Nothing
would be gained by an attempt to catalogue the rooms at present, as
their contents are likely to be changed at any time when the projected
enlargement of the Museum is carried out. The space in this portion of
the building, the addition built in 1879, answering to that occupied in
the older portion by the first and second Greek Rooms, is here thrown
into one large apartment filled with the


CASTS OF ARCHITECTURAL ORNAMENTS.

The principal object here is the cast of the Caryatid Portico of the
Pandroseion, one of the portions of the complex structure generally
called the Erechtheium, from the name of one of its parts dedicated to
the worship of Erechtheus. The Portico with its Caryatids is given here
of the full size of the original, and is so placed (until the great
court can be built in which these large objects are to be shown) that a
good view of it can be obtained from a considerable distance, while it
is well lighted by a large window at one side. The remaining objects in
this room are casts in great numbers from Greek and Roman architectural
ornament, from the ornament of the Italian Renaissance, from the
Alhambra, from the Gothic buildings of France, Germany and England,
the specimens from England including twelve out of the thirty angels
composing the so-called angel choir of Lincoln Cathedral. These figures
of angels playing on musical instruments are of the thirteenth century,
and are among the most beautiful works of their time. In this room again
we find it impossible to do justice to our subject; the variety is too
great and the range of artistic development covered by the example too
extensive to be dismissed in less than an entire article, and even that
would be insufficient. Turning to the right at the end of this room we
come to


THE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE,

Where the works of Michelangelo, Donatello, Ghiberti, Luca della Robbia,
and a few other such names meet us in some of their best works. Here is
the Lorenzo of Michelangelo with the statues of Day and Night, the David
of Donatello, the Cupid of Michelangelo with his unfinished bas-relief
of the Virgin and Child, the Mercury of John of Bologna, and various
bas-reliefs of the time with the singing boys of Donatello and those
of Luca della Robbia. Here, too, is the cast of the trial plate, “The
Sacrifice of Isaac,” made by Ghiberti in competition with Brunelleschi
and Donatello for the Florence Baptistery Gates, interesting in itself,
and in connection with that most important event in the history of modern
art.

The last room on this floor is filled with specimens of Greek, Roman,
and Asia Minor pottery, with a sufficient number of examples of the
sculpture, pottery, and glass of Cyprus, a small but well-chosen group of
figurines from Tanagra, and the results of the late researches at Assos
by the members of the American Society of Archæology. This room is full
of interesting objects, but it is uncomfortably crowded and necessarily
ill-arranged. In the next article we shall describe the contents of the
second floor of the Museum.




NATURAL HISTORY AND PEOPLE OF BORNEO.

Report of a lecture delivered March 7th in the National Museum of
Washington, D. C., by Mr. Wm. T. Hornaday, Chief Taxidermist of the
Museum.


The island of Borneo is the home of the Head-hunter, the land of the
orang-utan, the Garden of the Sun, and perhaps even the sepulchre of the
missing link. There is a possibility of its being the cradle of a great
empire which shall be at the zenith of its glory when the greatness
of the United States shall have passed away, like that of Greece and
Rome, and Washington have become the Athens of America. The center of
human progress will probably eventually move into regions now peopled
by savages only, and the Kaffir or Dyak of the thirtieth century will
perhaps study the archæology of the Yankee with the same interest that we
now bestow upon the ruins of Carthage and Mycenæ.

Borneo is situated nearly in the middle of the Malay Archipelago. Its
greatest length is 850 miles, greatest width 630 miles, and its area is
192,000 square miles. The whole of New England, the Middle States and
Virginia could be set down in the evergreen forests, which everywhere
cover its surface, and still be surrounded by a wide belt of jungle.
The whole interior is very mountainous. The rivers and creeks are the
highways of Borneo, and other roads are practically unknown. Nothing
could be more arduous, and full of risk to life and limb, than overland
travel through such dense forests and over such rugged mountains as
confront the explorer at every step. The interior is practically an
uninhabitable wilderness. Even in this age of daring and persevering
travelers, no white man has ever crossed the island from one side to the
other. The interior is still a land of mystery, whence come marvelous
accounts of a race of men with tails, with detailed descriptions of their
appearance and habits, stories implicitly believed by many natives.
The climate of Borneo is what one would least expect, considering its
equatorial position. The temperature is very agreeable all the year
round. The mercury usually stands at 80° Fahrenheit in the morning, 88°
at midday, seldom reaching 90°, and never exceeding 93°. The annual
variation of temperature is only 24°—from 69° to 93°. Usually there are
about 200 rainy days in the year, and from 158 to 178 inches of rain.

The vegetation of Borneo is probably unsurpassed by that of any other
country in the world, either in luxuriance, economic value, or, the
possession of wonderful forms. On the spurs of Mount Kina Balu are found
four species of pitcher plants (Nepenthes), of marvelous size and form
and gorgeous colors. The largest pitchers of _Nepenthes rajah_ measure
thirteen inches in length, twenty in circumference, and hold five pints
of water. Among the curiosities of vegetation is the tapang tree, which,
in lieu of spur roots, throws out enormous slab-like buttresses. The
_cocoa_ palm bears a bountiful crop of nuts, which in turn yield oil and
a coarse kind of sugar. The _sago_ palm yields the valuable pearl sago
of commerce. The _areca_ palm produces the betel-nut, which, together
with a fresh pepper-leaf and a bit of moist lime, is in the mouth of
nearly every East Indian native in lieu of tobacco. The _nipa_ palm
yields salt, toddy, excellent syrup and sugar, and the leaves are made
into kadjangs for boat awnings and roofing material for houses. The
_gomouti_ palm produces the best toddy, and the cabbage is esteemed by
the natives as food. The _nibong_ palm is valuable for its timber. The
primeval forests are rich in timber trees, one of which, the _bilian_,
furnishes wood which seemingly never decays. Bamboo grows abundantly in
the interior, and is of great use to the natives.

Of the many fruits of the forest we can only refer to the durian. In size
and shape it resembles a roundish pineapple, and is set all over with
sharp conical spines, three fourths of an inch long, and stout enough to
pierce the hide of a rhinoceros. When the fruit is ripe, the pod opens of
its own accord. Although the smell of the pod is most offensive, we find
inside four or five large cells, in each of which are from three to five
horse-chestnuts, coated thickly with the most delicious paste that ever
tickled the palate of man.

The agricultural products consist of sago, gambier, rice, sugar-cane and
cotton, which is grown to a limited extent by the Dyaks. The cultivation
of coffee is now engaging the attention of enterprising English planters,
and may eventually become the most important industry of the island.

The whole island teems with animal life in great variety of forms. It
would appear, judging from the success of Mr. A. R. Wallace, to be a
paradise for the entomologist. This gentleman once collected seventy-six
species of beetles in one day, many of which were new and of remarkable
form, and during his stay of fifteen months in Sarawak he took over 500
species. There are a number of handsome species of butterflies, including
the magnificent _Ornithoptera Brookana_. This butterfly is eight inches
in width, and of a rich, velvety black color, on which is a broad band
of metallic green scales, resembling a humming-bird’s feathers. Of all
insects Borneo is richest in moths. At one place, on a mountain top, Mr.
Wallace took 200 specimens in a single night, representing 130 species.
In the same place he took in twenty-six nights 1,300 specimens of moths.

The fishes include quite a variety of fresh-water species, among which
may be mentioned the curious tree-climbing perch, the thread-fish, the
celebrated _gourami_, the jumping-fish, or _Periophthalmus_, which hops
about on land in search of small crustaceans stranded by the receding
tide; and the very rare and curious little fish known to icthyologists as
_Luciocephalus pulcher_. The Malays capture a great many fish in small
streams by poisoning the water with an extract made from the pounded
roots of the tuba plant, and either spearing or netting the fish when
they rise to the surface to breathe.

Among the reptiles, the most important is the crocodile, which attains
a maximum length of seventeen feet, and is very destructive to human
life. It seldom happens that a person escapes or is rescued, after
being seized in this burly reptile’s powerful jaws. Some years ago the
Sarawak government began a war of extermination against the crocodiles,
by offering a reward of 35 cents a foot for all killed in the Territory.
In 1878, 266 crocodiles were killed, and $738 paid out in rewards. I
discovered a crocodile’s nest containing fifty-five eggs. The native
crocodile hunters use hook and line. The hook, or _alir_, as it is called
by the Malays, is a simple contrivance made of wood, tied at the end
of a tough bark rope. Another saurian, the gavial, is found in Borneo.
It is not unlike that of the Ganges, called by Dr. Gray, _Tomistoma
schlegelli_. This species inhabits the headwaters of some of the rivers,
and is rarely seen. In the swampy forest near the coast, small reptiles
are very abundant. There are pythons in Borneo twenty-four feet long. Two
twelve-foot specimens were brought to me, and a monster python twenty
feet six inches long, I purchased alive in a cage, and put to death for
its skin and skeleton.

Notwithstanding the contrary opinion of many observers, I think it can
not be said with truth that Borneo is rich in bird-life. There are 392
species on the island. The finest bird is the argus pheasant. In life
its plumage has a soft, velvety richness which is never seen in a dry
specimen. These birds are extremely shy, and are taken by the natives
in snares. Hornbills of several varieties are numerous. A bird of great
commercial value is the swallow which builds the edible nest, so dear to
the palate of the Chinese mandarin. These nests are built in caves, and
are of a gelatinous substance resembling white glue. Their shape is like
a small soup ladle with a broad, flat handle about an inch long. There
are two kinds of nests, the white and the black, the former being most
prized. A picul (133 pounds) of these is worth from two to three thousand
dollars.

Borneo is favored with a great variety of very interesting mammals. So
far as is at present known, there are ninety-six species, thirty-three
of which are not found elsewhere. In apes and monkeys the island is
especially rich. At the head of the list is the huge, red-haired
orang-utan, of which we will speak presently. Then comes the long-nosed
monkey, with its immense flabby proboscis. The _Nasalis_ is a large
species of monkey, found in the same localities as the orang, always
over the water, and usually in large troops. It is something marvelous
to watch a troop of monkeys, when terrified by an attack with firearms.
They head directly away from the danger, and gallop madly through the
tree-tops along the larger branches. Another interesting mammal is the
long-armed ape, _Hylobates concolor_. This animal is extremely wary, and
so rapid in its flight as to render pursuit exceedingly difficult. The
flying lemur is also found here. Another curious monkey is the tarsier,
a small, nocturnal animal. The krah, _Macacus cynomolgus_, actually
swarms in the low trees along the river banks. The clouded leopard, the
otter-cat, and civet cats of two species occur, and also several other
small members of the cat tribe. Two species of bear are found, the
smallest known. The Indian elephant occurs in the extreme northeastern
part of the island; also the rhinoceros and tapir. These three are very
rare. The thin-haired deer is very common in Sarawak Territory, and is
frequently noosed by the natives. The muntjac, or rib-faced deer, is
occasionally met. Wild hogs are very abundant and destructive. They
sometimes measure forty inches at the shoulder, and are good swimmers.
Many beautiful squirrels are found here, and also, remarkable bats, the
bear cat, otter, porcupines, and other small mammals which fall an easy
prey to the hunter-naturalist.

The orang-utan is found only in Borneo and Sumatra, but is more abundant
in the former island. It is most numerous in the Sarawak Territory. This
animal occupies the fourth highest place in the animal kingdom—first,
man; second, gorilla; third, chimpanzee; and fourth, orang-utan. This
name signifies “Jungle-man,” and is derived from two Malay words,
“orang,” man, and “utan,” jungle. The latter word is usually corrupted
into “otang” or “outang.” The animal itself is rare and difficult to
find. In August, 1878, I went on a hunting expedition for orangs to the
Sadong River, at the mouth of which I settled and commenced prospecting.
One day two men arrived from the headwaters of the Simujan River. They
said they had seen two _mias_ (orangs), and suggested that I should go up
to their village for a week or so. This I did, and was very successful,
taking thirty-one orangs during my first month. In my visit of three
months I secured forty-three orangs. Of these twenty-seven fell to my
rifle, the remainder being shot for me by natives. Our plan of hunting
was to paddle leisurely up and down the streams in a Malay sampan, or
dug-out canoe, and watch the tree-tops on both sides as far back as we
could see. I was armed with a Maynard rifle and field glass, while three
stout Malays or Dyaks furnished the motive power at the paddles. Once in
sight of an orang it was a comparatively easy matter to send a ball into
its breast. On one occasion, while paddling up the Simujan River on a
bright forenoon in September, the Malay suddenly exclaimed “Mias! Mias!
Tuan!” The other paddlers backed water at once, but we saw nothing until
the boat had been backed several yards. Then we espied simply the knee of
a large orang which was lying asleep on a branch about twenty feet above
the water, and twenty yards from us. Its body was completely hidden by
the foliage, so I stood up in the boat and fired at its leg to arouse
it. It started up instantly, growling hoarsely with pain and rage, and
started to swing away with a reach that was surprising in its length.
Fortunately, the water was deep; there were no screw-pines to hinder our
progress, and in a moment our sampan was directly under the old fellow,
who then climbed high into the tree-top to escape us. It was a huge
old mias chappin, the species with the expanded cheeks, long-haired,
big and burly. It growled savagely at us, and one of my Malays kept
saying, “Chappin! Mias Chappin! Fire, sir, fire! That’s Mias Chappin.
Big—big.” My companions were all intensely excited, but I knew the old
fellow was ours, and waited for a good shot. In a moment the opportunity
came, and I fired twice in quick succession at the orang’s breast. It
stopped suddenly, hung for a moment by its hands, then its hold gave
way, and it came plunging downward, snapped off a large dead limb on the
way, and fell broadside into the water, with a tremendous splash which
sent the spray flying all over us. As we seized the arms and pulled
the massive head up to the surface of the water, the old fellow gave a
great gasp, and looked reproachfully at us out of his half-closed eyes.
I will never forget the strange, and even awful sensation with which I
regarded the face of the dying monster. There was nothing in it in the
least suggestive of anything human, but I felt as if I had shot some grim
and terrible gnome or river-god—a satyr, indeed. It was a perfect giant
in size, larger than even the natives had ever seen before. Its head,
body and limbs were of grand proportions, and its weight could not have
been much, if any, less than 190 pounds. This individual is now in the
National Museum, to the extreme left of the group of orangs in the Mammal
Hall. The tallest specimen I secured measured four feet six inches, but
my largest one, that just described, measured half an inch less in height.

There are two species of orang found in Borneo: _Simia Wurmbii_,
characterized in the males by very broad, flat cheek calossities, and
_Simia satyrus_. English naturalists recognize a third species, _Simia
morio_, but without any tenable grounds for doing so.

Orangs in a state of nature are seldom if ever seen on the ground. At
night this animal builds a nest in the forks of a tree or on the top of
a small sapling, by breaking off a quantity of green boughs, and piling
them in the crotch. On these he lies upon his back, grasping with hands
and feet the largest branches within reach. Orangs are perfectly harmless
to human beings unless brought to bay on the ground. They are then as
fierce as tigers. Their food consists of wild fruits, particularly the
durian when in season, the tender shoots of the _Pandanus_, and the
leaves of certain trees.

Although the aboriginal inhabitants of Borneo are divided into several
tribes and scores of sub-tribes or clans, they may with reasonable
exceptions be described as one body, or sub-race, viz.: Dyaks. In general
terms, a Dyak may be described as a Bornean semi-savage, of Malay
extraction, with straight black hair, a yellowish brown complexion, and
smooth face of the Malay type. He is rather below medium stature, but
athletic, and of active and warlike disposition. He is usually clad
only in a bark loin-cloth, but sometimes wears a sleeveless jacket, and
particularly in war, on which occasions it is made of skins or padded
cloth. He is armed with sword and spear, and possibly the _sumpitan_ also
for blowing poisoned arrows. He invariably lives in the jungle, in a long
house-village set up high on posts. Although he has no religion whatever,
and worships nothing, he has profound regard for the rights of property,
respects his wife, and treats her and his children with the highest
consideration. His sustenance is rice, fowls, pigs and fruit grown by
himself, wild animals slain in the forest, and wild fruit, supplemented
by a few things which he receives in exchange for wax, gum, rattans and
gutta, although these are generally given for brass-wire, beads, cloth
and other ornaments. He has no written languages, builds no monuments,
makes no pottery, and only one kind of coarse cloth, carves rather neatly
in wood, and works but little in iron. His bearing is independent,
dignified, respectful. He is a trustworthy friend, but a dangerous foe.

In my judgment the aboriginal inhabitants of Borneo may be divided into
four great tribes: The Kyans, Mongol Dyaks, Land Dyaks and Sea Dyaks.
This classification differs very widely from any hitherto proposed.[K]

The Kyan tribe is numerically the greatest, probably exceeding a quarter
of a million. They are less civilized than the other tribes, are
exceedingly warlike and aggressive. They decapitate their slain enemies,
and keep the cleaned skulls as trophies.

The Mongol Dyaks inhabit northeastern Borneo. They have been greatly
influenced by contact with the Chinese, with whom they have intermarried.
In appearance they resemble the other Dyaks.

The Land Dyaks inhabit the country lying between the Sadong River and
the headwaters of the Sambas, extending southward to the Kapurce, and an
unknown distance beyond. They live inland, and differ in certain customs
from their neighbors, the Sea Dyaks. The Land Dyaks are the only people
in Borneo who burn their dead. The warriors, though brave, are not fond
of war for its own sake, nor are they possessed with an insatiable desire
for plunder, as are the Kyans, and formerly the Sea Dyaks also. Their
social customs closely resemble those of the Sea Dyaks.

The Sea Dyaks consist of seven clans, and occupy all the territory
between the Rejang and Sadong rivers, from the sea-coast southward to the
Kapurce. The Sarawak government estimates their number at 90,000, and the
Land Dyaks at 35,000. The color of a typical Sea Dyak is dark brown, with
a strong tinge of yellow. His hair is long and of a glossy black, and
falls on his shoulders in graceful locks.

The Dyaks are happy and contented. Their wants are few, their diseases
fewer, and their crimes fewer still. In hospitality, human sympathy and
charity, they are not outranked by any people living, as far as I know,
and their morals are as much superior to ours as our intelligence is
beyond theirs. If happiness is the goal of human existence, the Dyak
is much nearer to it than we. In this instance, at least, the highest
civilization has not evolved the most perfect state of society. Is it
possible that man reaches his highest moral development in a state
of savagery? Is it then really true that as we increase in civilized
intelligence, our capacities and propensities for wickedness increase
likewise, and if so, will this always be the case with mankind?

[K] For elaborate discussions of these tribes the reader must consult Mr.
Hornaday’s book, “Ten Years in the Jungle, with Rifle and Knife,” which
has been announced by its publishers, Messrs. Charles Scribner’s Sons, as
nearly ready for circulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am here because God has sent me to do a work that no other being could
do but myself. Had there not been room for me, God had not made me. Had I
not been needed in America, God had not placed me in America. Had I not
work in the nineteenth century, I had not been born.… I have a place—am
sent of God on a mission, and if I perform it God shall acknowledge that
I have done His will.—_From Sermons by Bishop Simpson._




THE WHAT-TO-DO CLUB.[L]


The ordinary village fails to get the best out of life. A candid
examination of average boys or girls of the town or country, brought
up without the influence of outside advantages, too often reveals the
fact that they are not, in refinement, in resources or in thought, the
equal of city young people. There is a painful feeling that they are
narrow. Indeed, they feel this themselves, and complain that they have
“no opportunities.” At the same time the narrow life does not shield them
from temptation, and there are almost as many young men in America going
to ruin under the narrowing influences of country and town life as in the
whirl of cities.

Among women the influence is evident. They are, it is true, largely free
from the temptations of frivolity, extravagance and dissipation, but they
are subject to temptations of no light weight. Their few interests lead
them to gossiping, prying and criticising. Lines of class distinction are
drawn so painfully tight that their lives become narrow in sympathies
and associations. Very largely they lack independence of spirit to help
them dare untried lines of conduct. Many of our American villages and
“corners” are the most trying places in the land in which to live. Few
dare to try improvements, enthusiasm meets little or no response, ideas
travel slowly. Village life _looks_ ideal to one wearied by the rush and
wickedness of a city, but there is in it a peculiarly benumbing influence
which is all the more difficult to contend against because so silent in
its action. Yet there are two of the best conditions for high living
in the surroundings of town and country. There are leisure and quiet.
Anything which will impregnate this rare life with enthusiasm and energy
will furnish the happiest conditions for noble action and steady growth.

It is not an easy problem for a reformer in such a locality, but we
believe Mrs. Campbell in her “What-to-do Club” offers a solution which
will rarely fail among girls and women. “The What-to-do Club” is an
unpretending story, but it has a practical grip on this question. It
introduces us to a dozen or more village girls of varying ranks. One
has had superior opportunities; another exceptional training; two or
three have been “away to school;” some are farmers’ daughters; there
is a teacher, two or three poor self-supporters—in fact, about such an
assemblage as any town between New York and Chicago might give us. But
while there is a large enough company to furnish a delightful coterie,
there is absolutely no social life among them. The differences in
their opportunities they have exaggerated until they feel that their
interests are as unlike as those of Fijis and Bostonians. They look
at each other with curiosity merely, and all of them are bored by the
dullness of their lives. Mrs. Campbell puts a wise woman into their
midst. This woman’s experience has taught her that the barrier between
women of different sets is largely their ignorance of each other, their
belief that they have nothing in common. She finds something in common
for these girls. By a little tact, exerted at a village gathering, she
interests them in herself. A second stroke of policy finds them gathered
in her parlor and she clinches her work by giving them an insight into
practical employments—not pleasures, mind you—but work, for women at
home. The interest excited quickens them all. They become alert, capable,
quick-witted, and suddenly see in each other much of which they had
never before dreamed. The false barriers between women invariably fall
before a common interest. Show them how strangely their minds and lives
are alike and the sympathy of similarity makes friends of them. So the
girls of the “What-to-do Club” found, at any rate. Their meetings became
voyages of discovery. Their discoveries were El Dorados to many a one
of their number perplexed by the want of pin-money, or worse still, of
bread-money. Simple, practical, at-home occupations for leisure hours
was the first study, and it is marvelous what a number they found.
One young lady undertakes strawberry culture, and in a single season
clears, off a quarter of an acre, $154.65. Better still, her vigorous
out-of-door life transforms a pair of pale, hollow cheeks until they are
rosy and plump, and awakens healthful interest which soon makes a happy
heart out of a very discontented one. A half acre put into small fruits,
currants, raspberries and blackberries, opens the way for an active young
philanthropist to start a fund for a future kindergarten for her father’s
employés. It does more. It opens the young lady’s eyes to the dignity of
work, puts a bond of sympathy between her and the people who work for
her, and strengthens the common sense of her whole family. Our strawberry
girl tries poultry and finds it the most delightful of employments. It
pays her, too, one season’s work yielding a clear profit of $86.56 on
an expenditure of $73.40. Bees, with their fascinating history, their
exciting family affairs, their industrious honey making, and their clear,
unfailing profit came in for one young Busybody’s attention, and in a
single season this young merchant clears $113.94. One girl tries silk
worms and sends to the club this report of her summer’s work:

    One ounce of eggs                          $5 00
    Fixtures for cocoonery                      5 00
                                              ------
                                              $10 00

    36 pounds stifled cocoons at $1 per pound       $36 00
                                                    ------
        Profit                                      $26 00

One of the best discoveries which the club makes is of the possibilities
in fruit canning, jelly making, and, best of all, fruit evaporating.
Like “Dorothy” of the “club,” when we read of the wonders of the latter
we burned to “live in an orchard and evaporate everything that grows.”
How wonderful it seemed to these girls to whom fruit preserving had been
bounded by the limits of the fruit closet and the demands of the table,
to put up jelly for market, to “take in” canning for people too busy to
do their own, to dry fruit in that wonderful evaporator, which would sell
in any market in the country.

It is not strange that these new ideas put into their lives new
possibilities. It showed them that there was something to do at home,
something which was more than a paying employment. For these out-of-door
interests are more. They are health-giving, awakening pursuits. The
girl that engages in such enterprises wins more than a few dollars; she
cultivates the business faculty and arouses a dormant independence which
makes a new creature out of her. This new interest in the lives of Mrs.
Campbell’s girls gave them an interest, at first in purely money making
enterprises, but it soon knit them into friends. Their friendship spread
until they found themselves reading, studying, planning, as one body. The
influence in the story energizes the community. It is, perhaps, quite
possible that in a real club we might meet with more discouragements, but
it is impossible that we fail entirely.

Town and country need more improving, enthusiastic work to redeem them
from barrenness and indolence. Our girls need a chance to do independent
work, to study practical business, to fill their minds with other
thoughts than the petty doings of neighbors. A What-to-do Club is one
step toward higher village life. It is one step toward disinfecting a
neighborhood of the poisonous gossip which floats like a pestilence
around localities which ought to furnish the most desirable homes in our
country.

[L] The What-to-do Club. A Story for Girls. By Helen Campbell. Boston:
Roberts Brothers. 1885.




CRITICISMS.

BY CHANCELLOR J. H. VINCENT, D.D.


The “Chautauqua Literary and Scientific Circle,” with the general
Chautauqua movement, has had its share of criticism. Its advantages have
been pointed out, and sometimes magnified. Its managers have had their
attention called to the dangers and defects of the system. Personally, I
enjoy adverse criticism and the practical counsel which it has brought
quite as much as words of praise, for praise may paralyze effort,
while the goad of the critic is likely to stimulate both ingenuity and
resolution.

The members of the C. L. S. C. have from the beginning been encouraged to
express freely to the Superintendent of Instruction their dissatisfaction
with either text-books or methods. As a result of this freedom, vigilance
has been promoted, and many improvements have been from time to time
introduced.

The aims of the C. L. S. C. are unique. The provision of text-books
precisely adapted to these unique aims has been one of the ever-present
problems. If our readers were children in the school room, and daily
recitations were practicable, it would be easy to find suitable
text-books on every subject in the curriculum. If these readers were
chiefly high school or college graduates desiring advanced courses of
reading, it would be comparatively easy to provide standard works written
by specialists for specialists, and assuming on every page a large
measure of knowledge already possessed by the reader. If it were the aim
of the C. L. S. C. to study one subject at a time, and that for a long
time, exhaustively, from its alphabet to its “last word,” it would not be
difficult to find numerous text-books on that subject adapted to every
variety of capacity and attainment.

The C. L. S. C. is not, however, designed for school children, nor for
advanced readers, nor for specialists. It has enrolled but few names of
members under eighteen years of age. Its members are “out of school.”
It rejoices in thousands of college graduates, but these take up its
readings not for advanced study as post-graduates, but to review under
favorable conditions the scholastic studies of former years, and in some
cases, perchance, to make amends for carelessness and superficiality
during those years of unappreciated opportunity.

The C. L. S. C. is therefore a “school of reading at home” for college
graduates who desire, whatever the motive, to review the college
course, and for people who, having been deprived of early educational
opportunity, desire by a general course of reading to place themselves
in sympathy with the school and college world; to know something of the
educational courses now being pursued by their children; to test their
own powers by a survey of the varied field of letters, and thus by our
four years’ superficial course of reading prepare for special studies
further on. The C. L. S. C. aims to provide, therefore, first for the
four years’ general course, and afterward for the special studies.

The scope of the four years’ course is the usual college curriculum.
With this aim we began. To this aim we adhere. The success of the scheme
in promoting intellectual quickening and activity has been attested by
thousands who have tried it for several years.

Here lies the chief cause of our embarrassment. It is difficult
to provide books precisely adapted to the needs of our peculiar
constituency. The Superintendent of Instruction and the Counselors have
felt this from the beginning. Heavy and elaborate books discourage a
class which we are anxious to lure into the love of literature. Books
too much abridged fail to satisfy more mature minds. Old books may be
behind the times, or, although acknowledged to be standards, may not
for the reasons above given be fully adapted to our readers. As for new
books—every one knows how hard it is to secure them, and how easily a
flippant criticism may destroy the confidence of the uninitiated in
them. Notwithstanding these embarrassments we have tried to do our best,
providing old books where the council could agree upon them, and new
books where they seemed to be absolutely necessary.

It is not to be expected that any book, especially any new book, will
meet with universal approval. As for criticism—well, who knoweth the
ways of critics with the new books! Did not Samuel Taylor Coleridge say
of Burke’s essay on “The Sublime and the Beautiful,” “It seems to me a
poor thing?” Did not Horace Walpole call Goldsmith “an inspired idiot?”
Did not Dr. Johnson pronounce Fielding a “blockhead?” Does not Hume
affirm that “no page of Shakspere is without glaring faults?” Was not the
manuscript of Thackeray’s “Vanity Fair” rejected because the critic to
whom it was submitted pronounced it “without interest?”

Some books of the C. L. S. C. have excited unfavorable
criticism—religious books by those who do not care to read religious
books at all, and think it an impertinence to obtrude them upon the
general reader; certain scientific books because “not up to the times,”
or the critic being himself a scientific specialist is certain that the
views of our specialist are “unsound.”

Concerning one of the books on the list, a correspondent says:

    “It is useless—worse than useless; it is harmful. Its style is
    involved, obscure, bombastic, florid, ‘highfalutin’,’ diffuse,
    disfigured by straining after effect, by the effort for fine
    writing, and by many evil features carefully to be avoided.”

I do not quote the above as a specimen of classic English, but as
indicating the temper of the writer, whose letter is accompanied by
nineteen manuscript pages of closely written criticisms upon the
condemned volume.

Concerning this same book, a high authority in English to whom it was
submitted, has said: “It is a clear, compact, and readable statement of
the laws and principles of speech.” A Boston writer of ability had said:
“This little volume is the very best text-book for any one desiring to
perfect himself in the laws and principles of speech. It is grammar,
rhetoric and composition combined, and is doubly worth its price.” A
Philadelphia critic had said: “A better treatise could not be placed in
the hands of a student who has not been initiated into the intricacies
which make prose composition an intolerable bore to the young.”

Other and equally strong commendations of this book might be quoted,
commendations which were received from trustworthy authorities before
it was placed on our list. I submitted the volume to one of the best
literary critics in the country, who called attention to some errors
which needed correction. Owing to the illness of the author, or for
some other reason, his attention was not called to the corrections
required, and therefore numerous minor defects, which would have been
carefully remedied by its competent and scholarly author, appeared in
the new edition. Dr. Johnson made six thousand alterations in the second
edition of “The Rambler.” But for the oversight, for which I fear I must
acknowledge myself responsible, the volume under consideration would have
been thoroughly revised.

Many local circles have as leaders men of literary ability and
scholarship who, prepared for such wise service by the humility which
comes from years of educational experience, have pointed out these
defects, at the same time fairly representing the true value of the
book, and putting emphasis upon its admirable instructions which, by
hyper-criticism, may have been lost sight of.

Concerning another book on the course, a critic says:

    “As a close student of the classics for years past, I must say
    that I think there is very little scholarship displayed or
    employed in Prof. Wilkinson’s work on Greek literature.… Further,
    the arrangement is senseless, even harmful. Literature is a
    growth, and largely the reflex of the people’s life and thought.
    It must then be treated historically, and not in the topsy-turvy
    fashion of Prof. Wilkinson.”

The same writer proposed another series of works on ancient Greek
literature, as a substitute for the two volumes of Prof. Wilkinson. The
series he proposed, however, contained an amount of matter which would
prove utterly discouraging to our readers and which would cost ten times
as much as the more condensed work of Dr. Wilkinson. Besides all this,
the work of Dr. Wilkinson meets the object of the C. L. S. C.

When one gets into the world of criticism, he finds himself among
“doctors” who “disagree.” I have quoted one view of Dr. Wilkinson’s
text-books, presented by our unknown critic. Now for another. Dr. Howard
Crosby, of New York, a most finished scholar and close critic, and a
judge of both English and Greek literature, says: “Dr. Wilkinson’s Greek
course is clear, attractive, judicious in its treatment of the subject,
and fills a valuable place in literature.” Of the second volume, the same
scholar says: “The new volume is thoroughly attractive. It is fully up to
the high standard of the other.” Such commendation as this sustained our
earliest judgment of the works in question. Prof. Frieze, of the Latin
Department of the University of Michigan, says: “I have not yet seen the
‘Preparatory Latin Course in English,’ though I was favored with a copy
of the Greek. I have only to say that if the Latin equals the Greek it
can not fail to be a contribution to classical culture both for classical
and English scholars, of very great value. I have been delighted with
a perusal of Prof. Wilkinson’s critical notices, his own translations,
and his selections of the translations of others, and I sincerely
congratulate him on the admirable style in which he has presented the
matter, as well as the character of the matter itself, and the plan of
the whole work.”

Prof. A. C. Kendrick, D.D., head of the Department of Greek in the
University of Rochester, says:

    “The plan of the work is quite unique, yet certainly adapted to
    the wants of a large and increasing class of young persons in our
    country. Its execution seems to me very felicitous; it is marked
    by the taste and scholarship which were to be expected from its
    accomplished author.”

Dr. Alvah Hovey, President of the Theological Institution, writes to Dr.
Wilkinson:

    “In these latter days I do not often read a volume through from
    beginning to end without omitting a chapter, paragraph, or
    sentence. But I have read in this way your ‘Preparatory Greek
    Course,’ simply because it is so instructive and captivating a
    volume that I could not persuade myself to pass over any word of
    it unread.”

The Rev. A. P. Peabody, D.D., LL.D., late of Harvard University, writes:

    “I have looked through Mr. Wilkinson’s ‘Preparatory Greek Course
    in English,’ and am prepared to give it my warmest commendation.
    It supplies a need which is more and more felt from year to
    year, for two reasons, one for which I rejoice, the higher
    standard of culture that prevails in society at large; the
    other, inevitable, yet to me a subject of regret, the diminishing
    disposition on the part of well-educated people to study the
    classical languages.”

The Boston _Watchman_ adds to such commendations as the above the
following testimony:

    “The plan is an ingenious one, and is carried out with spirit. It
    need not be said that the fine literary taste and critical acumen
    of Prof. Wilkinson are shown to much advantage. Only by a fair
    trial can the practical worth of such a series be proved. We have
    found pleasure in reading the volume.”

In suggesting to Dr. Wilkinson the idea of this “After-school Series,” I
requested him:

1. To give in two volumes the substance of what the college boy in his
preparatory and college course would learn of Greek literature—not the
language, but the literature;

2. To put into his books as far as possible the method and spirit of
the college recitation room, discussing collateral topics, introducing
biographical and classical incidents, and employing illustrations from
modern life and literature; to put his individuality into the work, so
that teacher and pupils might be brought into friendly relations, and
thus something of the animation and enthusiasm of the recitation room be
enjoyed by solitary students.

It is Dr. Wilkinson’s attempt to realize this idea that produces the
impression upon one critic of the “uninstructive chattiness” of the
author. To a man who has just spent eight years in the study of the
classics, and who makes them a specialty, there may be some things in Dr.
Wilkinson’s book which are not instructive; to people for whom the book
was written, there is not an uninstructive page in the book. Perfection
in the recitation room may not be possible. Qualities in the _viva voce_
teacher which attract and delight and benefit one student may not so
favorably impress, and may sometimes almost annoy, another. A member of
the Circle writes (in reference, no doubt, to Dr. Wilkinson’s book): “One
author frequently converses, as it were, with the reader, telling him in
a friendly way of the many things he will relate after a while.… The book
has caused the Circle to be ridiculed, and I could not think it was not
without cause.”

I can readily see how a college graduate, just released from the
recitation room, with lofty ideals of scholarship, and with really a vast
amount of knowledge, might depreciate with a tone of contempt such a work
as that of Dr. Wilkinson. I can see, too, how that smile of contempt from
a scholar with local reputation might annoy and afflict less cultivated
people belonging to a local circle who, devoted to an institution, are
anxious that it and its text-books should receive the commendation
of cultivated men. Just such commendation Dr. Wilkinson’s books have
received. There may be now and then a slight tone of “chattiness.” There
may be too frequent “forecasting of plan and purpose,” but on the whole
the Professor’s work is admirably done, and has received the unqualified
approval of our best students, men and women of the highest culture,
eminent professors of Greek and Latin who fully understand and appreciate
the aim of the author. I can assure my correspondent that there is
nothing in Dr. Wilkinson’s books to cause the Circle or the books to be
“ridiculed” by any true scholar.

A recent university graduate, and I have no doubt a brilliant scholar,
writes:

    “I wonder if it is safe to hint that, while the Chautauqua Idea
    is a noble and praiseworthy one, it is possible that the working
    out of the Idea may be defective?… When the members of the Circle
    read so faithfully the works prescribed, giving in many cases
    time that can ill be spared, it is but just that the very best
    should be given them to study, that alone will be of profit to
    the members, and help them to grow.”

The same writer pleads for “vigorous supervision by scholars and
authorities on the respective subjects as the only thing that will enable
the Chautauqua Idea to be carried out in a way that will help, and make
them better and stronger in thought and life.”

This sentiment meets my heartiest approval. Indefatigably and
conscientiously have the Superintendent of Instruction and the Counselors
sought to do this very work for the readers who seek their direction.

It would surprise our friends to examine our budget of criticisms _pro_
and _con_, from all classes of people; from public school teachers,
college professors, ministers, post-graduates, classicists, scientists,
so called “self-made men,” and people who, professing to know almost
nothing, seek advice and offer counsel. We have diligently sought to
profit by the things which have been said.

Our readers must see the difficulties which encompass us; the wide
diversity of opinion concerning certain books, and the impossibility of
securing works which will receive universal approval.

There are persons who do not believe in popular education at all. A
recent correspondent, a man of immense wealth, wrote: “Mechanics and
sewing women should confine themselves to industrial education, and not
aspire to the knowledge of literature and art.” Would it be possible to
produce works on literature and art for the people which a man of that
type could approve?

An author of some pretensions, without much reputation in literary lines,
tried to place a work of his own on the list of the C. L. S. C. _in lieu_
of one on the same subject already adopted. Failing to win a place for
his own, he proceeded in another book savagely to criticise the preferred
volume. Would it be possible for this disappointed author to approve any
book on his specialty that might be placed upon our course?

A certain youthful professor in an American college sneered at the idea
of anybody enjoying the poetry of Homer or of Virgil unless he could
read it in the original. Would it be possible for this literary fop to
appreciate the books which seek to present the best thoughts of the old
authors in classic English?

Dear fellow-student: Feel free to offer criticisms which may be helpful
to the Board of Counsel. We do not modify our policy for every criticism
received. But we weigh conscientiously and carefully all that is said in
favor of or against the prescribed books. From year to year our course
has been modified. I stand ready at all times to accept the best books;
to abandon the best we have for anything better that may be placed within
our reach. And as our experience broadens, helpful criticisms multiply,
and authors understand our peculiar needs, we shall approach more and
more nearly to the ideals which now shine above us.

Do not, I beseech you, fail to protest against false, querulous and
impertinent criticisms, and against that hyper-criticism which delights
in nothing so much as in pointing out faults and defects, losing sight of
the great things in excessive eagerness to detect slight inaccuracies.

Remember that no book is placed upon the course that does not have the
personal approval of the best critics, and remember, moreover, that it
will never be possible to provide a book which is above criticism. As one
of our Counselors writes:

    “Good books have always been criticised upon some points
    adversely. Plato freely criticises Homer. Quintilian criticises
    Cicero. Cicero criticises Demosthenes. Addison criticises Milton.
    And in each instance no doubt real faults were pointed out. The
    most enlightened French critics used to pooh-pooh Shakspere. They
    did likewise with Dante.”

College students, with all their admiration for the professors under whom
they moved through four years of study, have some foibles and defects to
report and laugh at; but on the whole they honor the men who made them
and led them. The authors of our text-books are our professors. On the
whole they have done their work well. It is proper to note their faults
and avoid them, but in defending them, and in being proud of them, and in
rejoicing in the course of reading which they have provided, we have the
endorsement of wise, scholarly and experienced educators.

Finally, let us learn the characteristics of the true critic, and
according to the measure of our ability let us seek to possess them:

“A critic must have breadth, accuracy, sympathy, reverence, and love. He
must have no partialities, and no aversions. He must not be captious, but
just.”




OUTLINE AND PROGRAMS.


OUTLINE OF REQUIRED READINGS FOR JUNE.

_First Week_ (ending June 8).—1. “The Mechanism of English,” in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN.

2. Sunday Readings for June 7, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Second Week_ (ending June 15).—1. “Easy Lessons in Animal Biology,” in
THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

2. Sunday Readings for June 14, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Third Week_ (ending June 22).—1. “Home Studies in Chemistry,” in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN.

2. Sunday Readings for June 21, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fourth Week_ (ending June 30).—1. “The Heart Busy with Things About Us,”
in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

2. Sunday Readings for June 28, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.


PROGRAMS FOR LOCAL CIRCLE WORK.


FIRST WEEK IN JUNE.

1. A Review Lesson—The History of Alexander.

2. Selection—“The Prayer of Agassiz.” By Whittier.

3. Reading—Story of “Perseus.” From “The Heroes.” By Charles Kingsley.
[See “Talk About Books,” in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for May, 1885; also poem in
present number.]

Music.

4. _Conversazione_—The Cause of the Trouble between England and Russia.

5. Selection—“Davie; an Epistle to a Brother Poet.” By Burns.

6. Critic’s Report.


SECOND WEEK IN JUNE.

1. Selection—Alcibiades. From “Plutarch’s Lives,” or from “The Young
Folks’ Plutarch.”

2. A Paper on Our Local Birds.

3. Recitation—“Pegasus in Pound.” By Longfellow.

Music.

4. Essay—Alchemy. [Beside giving definition and history, allusion
might be made to its introduction into fiction. See Goethe’s “Faust,”
Scott’s “Kenilworth” and “Antiquary,” Bulwer’s “Last Days of Pompeii,”
Hawthorne’s “Birth Mark,” Hoffman’s “Sand Man” in “Weird Tales,” and many
other works which these will suggest.]

5. A General Talk on the Rebellion in the Canadian Provinces.

6. A Paper on Richard Grant White.


THIRD WEEK IN JUNE.—MONTHLY PARLOR MEETING.

Music.

1. A Paper on the Practical Education of American Girls.

2. A Character Sketch—Louis Agassiz.

Music.

3. Selection—“The Tragedy of the Night Moth.” By Carlyle.

4. A Sketch of “Edie Ochiltre,” the Beggar in Scott’s “Antiquary.”

Music.

5. Essay—The Parthenon; its History, Description, and Scattered Remains.

6. A Talk on Alaska.

Music.


FOURTH WEEK IN JUNE.—CLOSING EVENING.

1. A Report Presenting a Summary of the Year’s Work.

2. Selection—“Song of the Greeks.” By Thomas Campbell.

Music.

3. Essay—Science and Art in Housekeeping.

4. Recitation—The Dinner Hour. From “Lucille,” Part I., Canto II., 23d
and 24th stanzas.

Music.

5. A Paper on Schliemann’s Researches in Troy.

6. A Half-hour Good-by Social.

The following suggestions are also offered for the closing exercises:

A C. L. S. C. banquet followed by toasts.

A luncheon party and charades.

Readings connected with any part of the year’s work, illustrated by
tableaux.

An evening of games, such as “Characters” or “Twenty Questions,” in which
one of the company selects a character or an object, and is then to be
questioned by all the rest until they find out what he has in mind. The
questions must be asked in such a way that the reply can be “yes,” “no,”
or “I don’t know.” The company who can not guess rightly before the
twentieth question is to be considered dull.

“Throwing Light” is also interesting. One of the party begins to tell
a story, concealing all names. When any one thinks he knows what it is
about he raises his hand, takes up the story, and goes on with it until a
third is enlightened and proceeds with the narrative, and so on until it
is evident to all in the room.




LOCAL CIRCLES.


C. L. S. C. MOTTOES.

“_We Study the Word and the Works of God._”—“_Let us keep our Heavenly
Father in the Midst._”—“_Never be Discouraged._”


C. L. S. C. MEMORIAL DAYS.

1. OPENING DAY—October 1.

2. BRYANT DAY—November 3.

3. SPECIAL SUNDAY—November, second Sunday.

4. MILTON DAY—December 9.

5. COLLEGE DAY—January, last Thursday.

6. SPECIAL SUNDAY—February, second Sunday.

7. FOUNDER’S DAY—February 23.

8. LONGFELLOW DAY—February 27.

9. SHAKSPERE DAY—April 23.

10. ADDISON DAY—May 1.

11. SPECIAL SUNDAY—May, second Sunday.

12. SPECIAL SUNDAY—July, second Sunday.

13. INAUGURATION DAY—August, first Saturday after first Tuesday;
anniversary of C. L. S. C. at Chautauqua.

14. ST. PAUL’S DAY—August, second Saturday after first Tuesday;
anniversary of the dedication of St. Paul’s Grove at Chautauqua.

15. COMMENCEMENT DAY—August, third Tuesday.

16. GARFIELD DAY—September 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great value in doing solid reading is that it enhances the value of
all other experience. A member of the class of ’87, writing from ROME,
ITALY, says: “I think the course for this year particularly interesting,
especially for our party, which is to spend the spring months among the
ruins of that noble capital, Athens.” The reading our friend has been
doing has recommended itself to her foreign friends, who have made many
inquiries about the course of reading, even wishing to be enrolled as
members of our great Circle. The teacher over seas, like the tourist,
finds benefit in the work. A member of the class of ’83, writing from
BULGARIA, says: “The time from six to seven in the morning is all that
I can spare from my other work, but it makes the day brighter to begin
it in this way, and so I read and study and think, and get charming
glimpses of home circles. _Next year_ I mean to have a circle here, and
hope to know enough of the language to put some of the best things into
Bulgarian.”

On the home side of the Atlantic, circle life seems to be vigorous and
growing. The organizations of past years hold to the work, and many new
fields are opened monthly. At BROCKVILLE, ONTARIO, the “Island City”
branch of thirteen members was organized last October. A simple but very
effective method of work has been followed, that of appointing examiners
on each subject, different members being appointed from time to time, so
that all may be kept interested. They have had for president a college
graduate to help them over tough places in their classics, and a
practical chemist is proving the marvels of chemistry to them.

LIVERPOOL, NOVA SCOTIA, sends an encouraging word of the progress of
their circle, formed in 1883, and now boasting twelve active members. The
plan for the evening’s work in this circle is very good. Introductory
exercises of prayer, minutes of last meeting, roll call, responded to
by quotations, and a select reading, precede the evening drill, which
is an informal conversation on one or more of the C. L. S. C. studies,
conducted by a leader.——We quite agree with our friend at NIAGARA, who
thinks that Chautauquans ought to know that there are other places in
ONTARIO beside Toronto where circles are doing good work, and that their
town is one of them. If all the Ontario towns have as bright and brave
circles as Niagara, we most certainly hope we shall hear from them.
“In December, 1882,” so their history runs, “we formed a triangle,
with angles of various degrees of acuteness or obtuseness, but did not
commence work till January, and being three months behind time we found
the work rather heavy, but in proof of our zeal can report that not one
of us that year ever missed any of our fortnightly meetings. In October,
1883, we were joined by another member, not less acute, and ‘stood
four-square to all the winds that blow.’ We expected to form a real
circle, with all our angularities smoothed off, but find ourselves this
year with the original three, but from sickness and other reasons have
had our meetings sadly broken in upon, so that we need to use our motto,
‘Never be discouraged.’ So far we have all enjoyed the work. We all lead
busy lives, without our Chautauqua studies, but we hope that they will
give to our lives sweetness and strength, and breadth and power. Many
of us have done more reading each year than the course, but then such
reading is apt to be desultory, and the fact of studying with others
gives greater interest. We have generally kept the memorial days, and we
all hope to visit Chautauqua some time.”

A step has been taken in western MAINE to form a Chautauqua association.
AUBURN, LEWISTOWN and adjoining towns have many members of the C. L. S.
C. In March a meeting was held in Auburn, and after a banquet a motion
was passed providing for an associated circle of all the C. L. S. C.s of
Western Maine. True to the Chautauqua instinct, they are going to have
a summer meeting. MARANOCOOK is the chosen place, and June is the time.
Western Maine Chautauquans have the hearty good wishes of us all for a
delightful summer session. At their March meeting, these friends passed a
just and appreciative resolution of gratitude to Chancellor Vincent for
the happy thought that conceived the Chautauqua Idea, and the untiring
and well directed zeal that has made it so efficient.——At WOODFORDS,
MAINE, the “Arlington” circle of fourteen members held twenty-five
meetings during the winter. Such zealous work justifies their claim that
they possess the “enchanted number” for a circle. The Arlington proposes
a parlor entertainment for a near day.

GREENLAND N. H. has two very strong Chautauqua organizations, the
“Baketel” circle and the “Spare Minute Class.” Founder’s Day was
celebrated with great _éclat_ by these warm admirers of Chancellor
Vincent. A public meeting was held in the town hall, with exercises
of song, recitation, reading and tableaux. The last tableau was so
characteristic it deserves a description. It was “The Chautauquans at
Home,” and represented the entire local circle and spare minute class at
work. One was rocking the cradle and reading, another was at the ironing
table with an open book, and several were sewing and studying at the same
time. A happy close to the evening was a presentation to the honored
president of the circle, the Rev. O. S. Baketel, of an elegant easy chair.

Among the senior circles it is pleasant to be able to count in that of
NORTH GROTON, N. H. The secretary says: “The ‘Angle’ has kept silent
since 1882, thinking that only two was a small number to report as a
local circle, yet all this time we have met at every opportunity, for
reading and questioning. We had long wished for guidance in home study,
and the ‘course’ was eagerly taken as soon as heard of. This year two
earnest ’88s have joined us. With us ‘Chautauqua has come to stay.’
‘For,’ as Dr. Vincent said at Framingham, ‘goals yet grander wait our
winning on the mountains by and by.’”

And now we have a nautical circle. The first mate, so we imagine, has
sent us notes from the log-book, running over their whole course. Perhaps
their sailing may guide another crew: “We have read in THE CHAUTAUQUAN,
from month to month, many interesting reports from local circles, which
have been like fresh breezes to our own sails. One would judge from
reading that _success_ was stamped upon _all_ methods of circle work.
We have thought sometimes that a part of the unwritten history of such
work might be helpful. We suspect that—way back in the annals—some things
were undertaken that did not turn out just right, and a few chapters from
out that experience might save many a small boat from going to pieces in
dangerous waters. In general, the ‘Vincent’ circle, of WEST BRATTLEBORO,
VERMONT, has had fair sailing from port to port, set down on the C. L. S.
C. line of travel. Four years ago a few of us began floating, not knowing
enough ourselves of whither we were bound, to give a general invitation
for ‘all aboard.’ At last, reinforced, we tried to go in two separate
boats, which kept just near enough together, and just far enough apart,
to render such a division of the crew unnecessary, to say the least.
One year we failed to set sail soon enough, and came in late at every
port. This year we make one crew, under one efficient captain, a few
only compelled by circumstances, or preferring to go in their own little
skiffs. October 1, 1884, we set sail, and made directly for the shores
of Greece. Landing under the direction of two well chosen generals, we
scattered to spy out the land, bringing in such reports as we were able,
at the time appointed. On the evening of November 3d we gathered to do
reverence to the memory of one who had wished us ‘Godspeed.’ About that
time experiments in chemistry furnished us with illumination. Since the
observance of that memorial day, we have known that we were still landed
upon the shores of Greece, but reports concerning the country and its
people, past and present, have been few, for finding ourselves in danger
of forgetting, rather never having known, our ‘mother tongue,’ we have
spent some time in practice of the ‘art of speech,’ and, loyal to our
native land, we have observed some of its festivals, and repeated to each
other words from those we all delight to honor.”

For faithful work few circles can exceed that in FRANKLIN, MASS. The
circle numbers sixty-six members, nineteen of them being of the class
of ’88. Meetings are held fortnightly. Not one regular meeting has
been omitted since October 1, 1883. The president, although pastor
of a large church, has been absent but five times since the circle
was formed—November, 1882. The work done at these meetings is solid
review of past readings. “Founder’s Day” was observed by accepting an
invitation from the “Star” circle, FOXBORO, MASS., to visit them and
engage in a “Question Match” on Greek History, after which a bountiful
collation was served, and a social time enjoyed by all. Each heart felt
grateful to Chancellor Vincent for the C. L. S. C.——At ROCKPORT, MASS.,
the circle has fallen from fifteen to five, but the five faithful seem
to enjoy their work too well to need any commiserating. They are so
interested in their studies they actually don’t realize they have grown
smaller—a method of taking things which removes the stings from all
falls in fortune. The “Granite” circle turns each alternate meeting into
a Round-Table, and finds that the plan works capitally. The circle is
anticipating the pleasure of going in a body to Framingham Assembly this
summer.

MASSACHUSETTS is the banner State again. At COCHESETT twenty-four members
form a circle of “Plymouth Rocks.” The Longfellow memorial was their
first experience with special days; a successful experiment, too, we
judge, for they have decided to continue the plan for the remainder of
the year. Cochesett is an Assembly offspring—a child of Framingham, which
gave the first interest to its zealous founder.——The “Philomaths,” of NEW
BEDFORD, send greetings to all our fraternity. Since their reorganization
in October the circle has resolved itself into groups of six or seven,
which hold weekly round-tables for thorough study.——It is wonderful what
enormous interest some circles get on their investments. Here is the
“Bryant,” of WORCESTER, MASS., actually making 100 per cent. in less
than two years. In the fall of 1883 they began with twenty members,
to-day they number forty. Is it far-fetched to attribute something of
their success to the “question basket,” which forms an important part
of their program?——The “Alphas,” thirty-two in number, of ATTLEBOROUGH,
send us some capital hints for our programs. At a Greek evening recently,
ten of their number were selected to give brief descriptions of Greek
heroes—the rest of the company guessed the hero described. A half hour
was also spent at the Mardigras, and a friend, fresh from the carnival
scenes, described his experiences among the merry masqueraders. At an
hour of electrical experiments a very happy device was exhibited recently
before the circle. The electricity played over tin-foil, with grooves
an eighth of an inch apart, and through a stencil-like arrangement
showed to the surprise of the circle the illuminated letters, “C. L.
S. C.”——_The Saturday Union_, of LYNN, MASS., is doing most effective
work for the Chautauquans of its vicinity, and a strong body of workers
it has to serve. By a late issue we notice that there are in the
city six circles, and the list of Chautauquans, which appears with
their residences in the same paper, includes 114 names. This “goodly
companie” has given a course of lectures this winter; the seventh in
the course was on “Electricity”—and by a lady who, we are happy to say,
illustrated her talk by apparatus of her own making. Our Chautauqua
women! How proud we are growing of their ability, their pluck, their
womanliness!——NORTH BROOKFIELD’S circle has recently been favored by a
poem on “The Chautauqua Idea,” also by a woman.——It would be unjust to
allow a mistake, which found its way into last month’s “Local Circles,”
to go uncorrected. At the Longfellow celebration held by the Chautauquans
of Boston and vicinity, there were five hundred instead of fifty persons
present.

The treasurer of the “Hall on the Hill” to be erected at Framingham
this year, paid a well deserved compliment to the “Clio” circle, of
PROVIDENCE, R. I., when he said that he wished there were more circles
like the “Clio.” These energetic friends took Chancellor Vincent at his
word last summer, when he promised to lecture for any circle which would
pledge $200 to the “Hall on the Hill.” They raised the money, had their
lecture, and are satisfied. Their hard work seems to have only whetted
their intellectual appetites, for they have had a long list of brilliant
talks by distinguished men in addition to regular circle work. By the
way, the New England branch of the class of ’87 was to hold a meeting
in Providence in April, and the “Clio” was to act as hostess. What was
done? A Providence neighbor of the “Clio” is the “Channing” circle of
twenty-five members. We notice that these Providence friends use a very
pretty and appropriate heading on their letter paper. At the top of the
sheet, in the corners, appear the names of president, vice president and
secretary, and below “Headquarters of the Channing Circle of the C. L. S.
C.”

A party of DANBURY, CONN., Chautauquans went abroad one night not long
ago to see “Athens in the Golden Age.” A delightful time these tourists
had. They made the passage of the Mediterranean Sea, and at Athens
visited the Acropolis, went to the Areopagus to listen to Pericles,
called on Xantippe, and did a hundred more interesting things, at last
coming home via “Plymouth Rock.” The “Nestors,” however, do much beside
travel. They have an excellent method of working the question box, which
is an inevitable part of their program. The questions are gathered just
before adjournment, and shuffled, each member drawing one. The first
exercise after roll call at the next meeting is the answering of these
queries. The imaginary trips which our Danbury friends like so well,
the “Alpha” circle, of NORWICH, makes a part of each evening’s work.
When they journeyed from Boston to New York they went with Howells in a
“Sleeping Car.” They have lived over, on paper, all the preparations for
the trip abroad, the life on the steamer, and have done the sight-seeing
of the British Isles. These tourists have enlivened their travels by many
a happy device. Once it was a _conversazione_, and again, in preparation,
perhaps, for their visit to Athens, a pronouncing match on Greek proper
names. What wonder they have had a phenomenal growth! Last year there was
not a circle in Norwich, now there are six. When the “Alpha” organized
last fall, it was with eleven members, to-day they have fifty. Nothing to
be surprised at, perhaps. It seems to have been “good growing weather”
for the C. L. S. C., throughout New England.——MERIDEN, CONN., has had
the common experience, the circle having increased to sixty-six members.
They have found the key to the mastery of the Greek names and chemical
terms. The pronouncing matches have unlocked the doors and the fortunate
Meridenites are able to talk glibly on their Grecian rambles. A second
circle, “Hanging Hills Class,” was organized last fall in Meriden. It has
grown to twenty members, who are doing superior work. This class observed
Longfellow’s Day appropriately. The ’89 outlook must be very promising in
Meriden.——“A small twig of the great New England branch,” the “Endeavor,”
of STRATFORD, calls itself, and a healthy fruit-bearing twig, if small,
we should call any circle that can double its membership, as it has done,
in less than a year.

A splendid move has been made by the Chautauquans of NEW YORK CITY. The
circles had never united there for public work until, April 9th, after
a deal of planning and much labor the various local circles in the
city, with one from JERSEY CITY, held a public meeting at the Broadway
Tabernacle. Chancellor Vincent was secured to deliver the address. A
large and enthusiastic audience, numbering about 1,200 persons, was
present. “School after School, or the Every-day College” was the theme
of the address. The friends who had prepared the meeting were more
than jubilant over the way the interesting lecture “took” among their
guests, and declared that though some of them had long been members
of the C. L. S. C. all of them received new vistas of the work. After
the lecture the Chancellor held a reception, at which the members of
the following New York circles were received by him: The “Garfield,”
“Irving,” “Unique,” “Spare Moment,” “Central,” “Park Avenue,” and the
“Round-Table,” of Jersey City.——BROOKLYN has a “Pierian” spring, at
which twenty-five devotees of the muses “drink deep” and joyously.
Essays, debates, recitations, quizzes, poems, and chemical experiments
are the draughts these friends draw from their well. So happy are
they in their festivities that another year they hope to see a sister
welling up by their side.——At RANDALL’S ISLAND, NEW YORK CITY, there
is one of those steady, hard-working circles, which by their fruits so
favorably impress the people who watch them. The “Excelsior” has been in
existence for two years and has a roll of seventeen persons. A program
full of good points is carried out at their regular sessions, which are
interrupted only by Memorial services. The secretary finds, he writes,
that the influence and example in regard to Chautauqua work is shown
by an increased attendance and membership.——When circles increase in
geometrical ratio—and a little over—year after year, it is not strange
that a time should come when the leader inquires “What _shall_ we do?”
At GLENS FALLS four graduates, eleven ’86s, twenty-three Pansies, and
fifty-nine Plymouth Rocks—ninety-seven in all—form the circle. It is
an unwieldy number to study together, but, writes the secretary, “We
are fearful that division into smaller circles will greatly lessen the
membership. We are considering for next year this plan: We shall have our
general meetings as at present and encourage the formation of sections
for special meetings, making the leaders of the sections, together with
the officers of the general circle, an executive committee.” The plan is
good, and if the monthly joint meetings are made “state occasions,” there
will be but little danger of the sections losing ground.——At TROY the
monthly meetings are conducted in an admirable way—not one of the least
of the secrets of their success is their habit of sending out cards with
the program, and some such stirring word as this:

    “We hope every member will be prepared with some facts on No. 6
    [“No. 6” was a _conversazione_ on “Our Territories”]. Let us make
    it a success. Our whole course is highly remunerative to one who
    reads. Make your hours count for profit. We have all the time
    there is. Not everything that comes to us and asks a little of
    our time should be granted audience or gratification.”

A similar plan is followed by the “Mettowee” circle, of GRANVILLE, N. Y.
A “Round-Table” on a recent program was, “What we have seen (mentally or
otherwise) during the past week.” If the Glens Falls people will make
their monthly meetings big enough to arouse the pride of the members
of the section, the result will not be doubtful.——SHUSHAN, N. Y., has
two circles. The younger of the two is reported as “fast becoming one
of the fixed and instructive institutions of the village,” a state that
the three-year-old circle of DEANSVILLE is already in, we surmise,
from the report of the work of its membership. The Deansville circle
holds an annual public meeting, at which an entertainment is provided
and refreshments served. Preparations are being made for this year’s
meeting.——A “Crescent” has appeared in KNOXBORO since the year 1885
began. Though so late in beginning that they are obliged to devote almost
all their time to the readings, and are too busy to prepare elaborate
programs, the interest has not flagged since the start. The “Crescent”
has ten members.——SYRACUSE has always been one of the most interesting
of the local centers of the C. L. S. C. Their graduates, of whom one is
the genial Secretary of Chautauqua, Mr. W. A. Duncan, have organized a
chapter of the “S. H. G.” They propose to hold monthly meetings, and to
pursue one of the special courses of study. The membership of this new
class is eleven now, and there will be yearly “more to follow.”——The
“Philomathean,” of LANCASTER, N. Y., opening with 10 members, has
grown to fifteen beside honorary and local members. Constant variety
in programs, no “set way,” and hard work have been the maxims of their
success.

The “Broadway” circle, of CAMDEN, N. J., puts in after a program of
remarkably good timber, and the outline of their thorough organization,
this healthy testimony: “‘Broadway’ circle is busily engaged in promoting
this home study, and the older we grow the more we are able to discern
the many blessings derived from it; the more we read and study the books
the more does it stimulate our interest and thirst for knowledge.”——At
PHILLIPSBURG, N. J., the circle has met this year with a sad loss in
the death of Mrs. F. B. Holbert. Mrs. Holbert was a member of the class
of ’84, the president of the circle in Phillipsburg at the time of her
death, and a most zealous friend of the C. L. S. C. To her the circle
at Phillipsburg owes its existence.——At BRIDGEPORT a circle of eight
was organized in October, 1884. A faithful leader has helped to keep
them interested and alive, and already they write that a taste for solid
reading has been acquired by the members.——A local circle has been
organized at EAST ORANGE, with eighteen members. The favorite name,
“Alpha,” has been given the class. One of their late meetings of unusual
interest was the celebration of Longfellow’s birthday, at which, among
other exercises, we notice what must have been a particularly pleasing
number, “The Better Land,” illustrated by tableaux.

The genial, kindly associations of circles are one of their greatest
charms. How the kindly attention, the pleasant surprises kindle the
hearts and knit the affections! CARLISLE, PA., circle has recently
experienced all the delight of doing one of these pleasant deeds. The
birthday of their president, Dr. Whitney, was celebrated by a genuine
surprise. A game of chess at a neighbor’s was the bait which enticed
him from home, where, on his return, the Chautauquans of his circle,
thirty-one strong, greeted him with good cheer and good wishes. It
pays to slip into our Chautauqua life many of these pleasant little
affairs.——Several notices of Longfellow celebrations held by PENNSYLVANIA
circles reached us too late for the May issue of THE CHAUTAUQUAN. At
BETHLEHEM, where there is a “thoroughly congenial” circle of ten, the day
was appropriately observed. This circle has found a scheme of study which
it reports works very well for them. The time from 7:30 to 10:00 p. m. on
the evening of meeting is divided into half-hour periods. These periods
are all but one devoted to quizzes on the subjects laid down in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN outline, the extra period being given to a discussion of the
works of some well known author.——At PITTSBURGH the “Hiawatha” observed
the day with an excellent program, carried out before many friends. This
circle—fifteen in number—is one of last fall’s harvest. Their motto,
“Bound to Win,” tells the stuff they’re made of.——The wide-awake circle
at NEW WILMINGTON, PA., prepared a program covering Founder’s day, and
Longfellow’s, and reported a “royal good time” for their trouble. There
are twenty-four members in the circle; their unanimous verdict is: “The
C. L. S. C. has been a source of intellectual growth to us. And we have
been led by it to take a wider view of the possibilities of life.”——A
very good program of a Longfellow service comes from PLYMOUTH. We notice
an analytical study among the numbers, and would commend such services to
the circles as particularly profitable.——The LOCK HAVEN circle, at its
Longfellow evening, paid a high compliment to the circle at RENOVO, by
reading the program carried out by the latter on a previous evening, and
sending their greetings and congratulations to the Renovo Chautauquans,
that they have grown so strong and enthusiastic in but one year’s
readings.——We are always sorry to miss in geography, but we will “own
up;” we did in the April issue. The “Golden Flower” is not a Tennessee,
but a Pennsylvania blossom, and HATBORO is a Keystone town. The “Golden
Flower” has sent a series of really model programs recently.——From a
friend at GILMORE, PA., we learn of the “Foster Brook” circle. This
class was organized in October, 1882, with twenty-one members, but in
a few months its course was rudely broken by the death of one of their
young but zealous members, Mr. Henry Howe, of the class of ’86. The work
was again taken up, but February, ’84, Mr. H. F. Howe, father of the
former, and a member of the same class, was laid away by the side of his
son. Though so tried by sorrow our friends have bravely followed their
work, saddened, yet rejoicing.——It is an experience that many circles
have, we imagine, this of the TUNKHANNOCK circle, of finding that their
second year’s reading goes much more easily than the first, and that
they have time for many things in their circle which once they did not
have. One good thing that the “Tunkhannock” occasionally slips in is
important items of news from the secular press.——The “Mountaineers,” of
CLEARFIELD, is one of the many, many circles brought into the field by
Chancellor Vincent’s kindling fervor. It is an ’88 circle, and numbers
fifteen members. Reviews, readings, and conversation supplement the
programs of THE CHAUTAUQUAN. The reviews, particularly, they have found
valuable. Each book is taken up after being read, questions made out
on it, and answers given by the circle. Outlines of the books are also
sometimes prepared. This latter plan we do not remember to have noticed
in the reports before, but we know it to be a very effective method for
reviewing the facts or arguments in a book.——We rarely open our monthly
budget of letters without finding a WASHINGTON, D. C., representative.
This month we have a program from the “Wesley Chapel” circle, a good
one, of course, like all the Chautauqua work done in Washington. An
interesting item on it is “The Public Buildings of Athens,” illustrated
by photographs.

A MIDDLETOWN, MD., letter suggests a new way of managing a local circle.
“We are the ‘Mayflower’ circle, numbering five,” our friend writes, “As
we are active members of a literary society, which meets weekly, we
have no circle meetings, but talk over our readings, and Chautauqua in
general, when opportunities offer. We are earnest and interested, and
expect to enter upon next year’s work with increased knowledge, zeal, and
numbers.”

A bed of KENTUCKY Pansies is filling all the air of HARDINSBURG with
sweetest fragrance. “Of all the red letter days in our circle calendar,”
writes one of them, “Longfellow’s day is the brightest. We send you a
program of our last celebration, and a delightful evening we had carrying
it out. A year ago we thought we could not have another Longfellow’s
evening as pleasant as was that. We feel assured that the evening just
passed was more nearly what such an evening should be. In looking back
from this standpoint upon the past year, we are inspired for renewed
energies and work for the years to come.”——Another Pansy of Kentucky,
from BEWLEYVILLE, writes: “The C. L. S. C. has been of immense benefit
to me. My irregular habits of study and desultory reading, instead of
strengthening, had enervated my mind.… My CHAUTAUQUAN and books are a
great source of pleasure to some of my acquaintances who are not pursuing
the course.”

CHILLICOTHE, OHIO, has, in the Walnut Street M. E. Church, an
enthusiastic band of twenty-two workers, who report themselves as
“progressing finely.” At a recent meeting a lecture on the “Art of
Speech,” by the able Episcopalian rector of the city, was greatly enjoyed
by the class.

It must be that a millennium has reached the circle of ERIE, MICHIGAN. If
there is another circle in the country that can say as much, we should
like to know where they are and how they do it. The Eries are forty-five
in number, and though some of the members live six miles apart, and the
meetings are held at the houses, yet through all the past long and dreary
winter there was an average attendance of more than three fourths of
the membership. “And,” thus writes our correspondent, “each member is
expected to do whatever the committee may assign him. We never have a
failure. The program is always carried out to the letter.”——At CASNOVIA,
a circle of nine was organized in October last. Like nearly all our
students, they are extremely busy people, but yet thorough in their
work. They hold informal meetings for discussions and conversation on
the readings of the month.——The first of January a circle was organized
at MILFORD, Michigan, composed of twelve ladies, not all of them ’88s,
there being a sprinkling of graduates and seniors to give direction to
“Plymouth Rock” enthusiasm.——“One more Michigan circle” is heard of at
JONESVILLE. The circle started out with twelve members, and is keeping
up a working membership of nine. The meetings are very enjoyable, every
one taking part in the most interesting and informal way.——Last October a
wave of Chautauqua enthusiasm passed DUNDEE, Michigan, which resulted in
organizing a C. L. S. C. of six members. They call the new organization
“Longfellow’s” circle, and hope with the next year the numbers will
increase. The circle has observed all memorial days, which have proved of
great benefit and interest.——Evidently the “wave” has not left Michigan
yet, for we have just received a card telling of the organization and
election of officers of a new circle at GREENVILLE. Success to their
efforts.——A sample of the work which the C. L. S. C. helps the student
to do, the GRAND RAPIDS, Michigan, circle furnishes in a recent program.
The exercises included, in brief, papers which took “broad, quick views.”
Articles upon Thucydides, Socrates, Plato, Herodotus, Sappho, Greek
Mythology, British Association for the Advancement of Science, American
Soil, Life of Longfellow, and a review of Longfellow’s novel, “Hyperion.”
This circle has made a big stride since last year, its membership having
increased from twenty-three to thirty-seven.——The new pronoun which
troubled some of our students has been employed by a correspondent from
the circle at JACKSON, MICH. Perhaps his zeal to fill up this “long
felt want” in language will make more clear to our readers the use of
“thon.” These circle notes are very suggestive: “We meet weekly at the
home of one of the members, a system we have found to be an improvement
on that of meeting in a public hall. Chautauqua’s special sphere of
influence is in the home; it is here ‘thon’ expects to do work which
will be lasting, and eventually permeate every department of life. It
will then be easily understood why ‘thon’ should find home and its
associations a more congenial place of meeting than a public hall. Our
meetings are conducted much in the usual manner, except, perhaps, our
mode of managing a ‘discussion.’ To this feature we make special claim
as being the originators. The leader of these talks, whose duty it is to
‘keep the ball rolling,’ is, with the subject, chosen a week beforehand.
Each of the members is expected to inform ‘thonself’ on the topic thus
allotted, and to be prepared to give an opinion or ask questions. Richard
Grant White’s language articles, ‘The Art of Speech,’ and ‘The Temperance
Teachings of Science,’ have already been dealt with in this profitable
and interesting way.”

We are glad to be able to introduce INDIANA this month with a clipping
from a private letter to the lady here so honored:

                                                        “WABASH, IND.

    “I want to tell you how our local circle of the C. L. S. C.
    honored itself last night in deciding to be called the ‘Frances
    Willard’ circle, and, furthermore, to observe your birthday as
    a memorial day.… We have in our circle, as you may suppose, a
    number of ladies active in the work of the W. C. T. U. Our circle
    numbers thirty-two. It was organized in ’79, but never christened
    until last night. The vote on the name was unanimous.”

From ALBION, INDIANA a friend writes: “We have organized a circle here
consisting of twenty-four members. Prof. E. C. White, superintendent
of schools, is our leader; and is greatly interested in our circle and
its work. We meet each week, at the residences of the members, taking
them alphabetically. The majority of the teachers in our public schools
belong to the circle, and all the members are much interested in their
work.”——And still another from the same state, from FOWLER, says: “We
organized in October, 1884, with nine members; the circle now numbers
fourteen members, of four different classes. One item of each program
is a question drawer, questions to be taken from suggestions of the
weekly readings. If any question is not answered by the circle, it is
assigned to some member to be answered at the next meeting. I find this
stimulates all to read carefully, as no one can know just what part of
the week’s reading is to be investigated. This is a most interesting
feature, and we can get those to engage in this who will do nothing
else. We have two members living at a distance who are only present in
person occasionally, but always present in manuscript when on program,
so we call them our ‘paper members.’”——A Chautauqua circle was organized
at LIGONIER, Indiana, in October, 1884, with a membership of seventeen,
and named the “Ligonier Chautauqua Literary and Scientific Circle.” In
it are represented three denominations. The programs are so varied as
to avoid monotony in the exercises. One night the committee gave topics
for brief essays, on another, questions to be answered at next meeting.
The members of the circle pronounce the prescribed course of study
excellent and interesting in its details, and feel grateful for a plan so
far-reaching and so beneficent in its results. Bryant’s, Milton’s, and
Longfellow’s days were observed by devoting to them and their works the
entire evening. A knot of cardinal and old gold ribbon constitutes the
circle’s badge. The circle is highly pleased with the motto “Let us be
seen by our deeds,” and many of the members express themselves satisfied
with their name, “Plymouth Rocks.”——We have received the list of names of
the members, fifteen in all, which form the circle of BROOKVILLE, Ind. We
are hoping to receive some of the Brookville circle’s experiences soon.

The “Peripatetics” of CHICAGO, ILL., is an organization formed last
fall. There are twelve members. The circle, we fear, is not using the
local circles’ reports right, if, when they read them, they feel almost
discouraged at the little they have accomplished. The whole spirit of
Chautauqua is, “what has been done can be done,” and our work is mainly
to show by actual example what has been done. The “Peripatetics” have
too many opportunities for doing superior work, living as they do, in
such a city as Chicago, to grow discouraged.——The death of Richard Grant
White has been a great loss to Chautauquans. His admirable “Studies in
English” had met the warmest reception, and when they were cut short
by his death all our readers felt they had met a personal loss. It was
this feeling that led a Chicago circle to add to their resolutions of
respect passed upon Mr. White’s death, a clause stating that as a feeble
expression of their regard and, as a token of respect to his memory,
their local circle be hereafter known as the “Richard Grant White.”——For
novel diversions, commend us to the “Alpha,” of QUINCY. This circle has
sandwiched a great amount of fun in with its solid work this winter,
nor has it been to the injury of the work. On College day they had a
sleigh ride, not long after a mock trial; they have introduced a paper,
the _Symposium_, which gives an opportunity for numberless hits, and on
Valentine’s day the _Symposium_ furnished the entertainment, each member
having sent to the editor an anonymous piece of poetry.——A circle was
organized in STERLING last October, and has now nine members. They have
no officers, and each meeting is conducted by the lady at whose house
it is held. Their informal way of doing things has some advantages. An
invalid member is mentioned, who, like many others, finds relief in
affliction by having something to do, and doing it religiously.

On one of the last evenings of September, a few Morrisonians met and
organized the “Alpha Society,” of MORRISON, ILLINOIS. They number
fifteen, and have accomplished much by the winter’s work. The plan
has been to take the outline of required reading, as laid down in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN, and prepare the lesson as thoroughly as possible by the use
of books and encyclopædias. At the meetings the class recites the lessons
learned the week before. Occasionally they have an essay, or select
reading.——A circle of twenty members was organized in JACKSONVILLE,
Ill., last October, with the Rev. H. E. Butler, pastor of Congregational
Church, as president. They have given special attention thus far to the
Greek course, enlarging the reading, and bringing in other authors as far
as possible. Now that the Greek is nearly finished the circle is bringing
chemistry into prominence.——The “Oakland” circle, of CHICAGO, Illinois,
was organized in February, 1884, and belongs to the “Pansy” class. It
has a good _constitution_, and hopes to survive till the graduation of
its members. This circle is composed entirely of ladies, among whom are
representatives of six churches in the South Division of the city. The
meetings, which are held semi-monthly at the houses of the members, are
well attended. Absent members are informed by postal cards of the place
of the next meeting, the parts assigned them on the program, and the
author from whom quotations are to be given. Those who are absent three
times in succession are expected to present a suitable excuse to the
society. At the close of the year a reception was given, to which each
member invited a gentleman friend. A fine literary and musical program
was rendered, and refreshments were served. The guests, among whom were
ministers, lawyers, army officers, and members of the Chicago Board of
Trade, were called upon to express their opinions of the C. L. S. C. A
most enjoyable evening was spent.

A flourishing circle has existed at PORTAGE, WISCONSIN, for three
years. It is only one of three, however, for last year the pastor of
the M. E. Church organized a circle which is still active, and this
year the Presbyterian pastor started a third. The _mother_ circle is
undenominational, as best becomes her position. One feature of this
circle’s year is its annual reception. Let the secretary tell how it
is managed: “We have heretofore held a reception at the close of each
year, to which were invited the people of the place presumed to be most
interested in education. The exercises have always been highly commended,
and our work well appreciated by those in attendance—indeed, we consider
our best missionary work has been done by this means—and many members
added through the instrumentality of a sugar-coated dose of hard work
(or its results, rather). Many people would attend a party, to whom a
literary meeting of any kind is a ‘delusion and a snare.’”




THE C. L. S. C. CLASSES.


CLASS OF 1885.—“THE INVINCIBLES.”

“_Press on, reaching after those things which are before._”


OFFICERS.

    _President_—J. B. Underwood, Meriden, Conn.

    _Vice President_—C. M. Nichols, Springfield, Ohio.

    _Treasurer_—Miss Carrie Hart, Aurora, Ind.

    _Secretary_—Miss M. M. Canfield, Washington, D. C.

    _Executive Committee_—Officers of the class.

       *       *       *       *       *

After Commencement, what? More of the same sort, undoubtedly—of a better
sort, if possible. The members of the class of ’85 are now near enough
to the “finish” to arrive at some more or less mature conclusions as to
the future. They find that the word “commencement” is to be no misnomer,
and is not even to be criticised. For after four years of reading and
study the students find that they have not come to the end, but only
to the beginning. The matter selected for them has been so good, so
substantial, and really so inspiring, as a whole, that an immortal, if
not divine, sort of hunger for the best in literature, science, art,
philosophy, has been created in their minds, and they could hardly
stop if they desired. The aggregate amount of literary and scientific
information which has been acquired is really large, and much of it has
been retained as a permanent fund of knowledge, but this has proved to
be but a small part of the benefit that has been derived. Thousands of
people have just begun to find out how little they really know, and how
much they ought yet to learn, to satisfy their own ideas and notions as
to what is required to make one, not learned, indeed, but reasonably well
informed! And what they think they need to know, they feel sure that they
have now discovered how to learn, and have acquired habits of reading
and thinking which will make the processes easy and enjoyable, instead
of laborious and tiresome. They have already looked beyond bounds into
the green fields and pastures new of that which is best, most beautiful,
and grandest in the domain of thought, and suggestion, and philosophical
research and discovery, as brought out by poets, philosophers, statesmen
and philanthropists, and they are likely to pass through the Golden Gate
and out from the Temple on the hill into a still broader fraternity of
thought and action, whose limits will correspond with those of the world
itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

A breezy letter from the plains of Dakota contains the following: “I
have been studying entirely alone, and have found the course a blessing
that can not be valued. Here, quite removed from society, while winter
winds howl round my cabin home, I find help, companionship and pleasure
in the studies of the dear ‘Home College.’ The most attractive corner of
my little room is the one where my beloved books lie on the home-made
shelves. My little ones love them too, and there is scarcely a time when
I need help but what I can find it in my books.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One young lady from Massachusetts, who hopes to hear the “Chautauqua
Chimes,” writes: “I have a class of girls in Sunday-school, and want so
much the help I think I shall be able to find at Chautauqua. The course
has been just what I needed, and I know I have grown, mentally and
morally, since joining the C. L. S. C.”

       *       *       *       *       *

This from a gentleman in Kansas: “If health will permit I hope to be one
to enter in under the Arches among the ‘Invincibles.’ I must be one of
the oldest of the ’85s. I was fifteen days old at the battle of Waterloo,
and, if I am spared till my next birthday, I shall have arrived at the
bounds allotted to man in the Bible.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One ’85 writes: “I hope to receive my diploma at Chautauqua, but, I am a
busy mother with six children, and can not always plan so long ahead. I
have had the greatest pleasure and satisfaction in the course, for, with
a family of wide-awake boys and girls about me, I have found it is very
necessary to refresh myself and keep well informed on all subjects.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One enthusiastic lady from Texas writes: “I have gathered through four
years of delightful reading an intellectual bouquet, whose fragrance
I hope to wear about me when I pass, not only through the Arches at
Chautauqua, but when I pass through the ‘Beautiful Gates’ to the
Celestial City.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Another testifies: “I am one of the busy mothers and housekeepers who
pursue the C. L. S. C. course under numerous and varied difficulties, but
find my enthusiasm increasing as the four years draw to a close.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From Massachusetts: “I intend to still ‘press on’ after I graduate—in
fact, I hope always to be a Chautauquan.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Wisconsin contributes: “I like our motto and our name, and I love the C.
L. S. C. Though reading alone, it has always been an inspiring thought
that many thousands are reading the same course.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Another: “I regret that the course is so nearly finished, but the spirit
it has awakened within me has enabled me to ‘Press on, reaching after
those things which are before.’”


CLASS OF 1886.—“THE PROGRESSIVES.”

“_We study for light, to bless with light._”


CLASS ORGANIZATION.

    _President_—The Rev. B. P. Snow, Biddeford, Maine.

    _Vice Presidents_—The Rev. J. T. Whitley, Salisbury, Maryland;
    Mr. L. F. Houghton, Peoria, Illinois; Mr. Walter Y. Morgan,
    Cleveland, Ohio; Mrs. Delia Browne, Louisville, Kentucky; Miss
    Florence Finch, Palestine, Texas.

    _Secretary_—The Rev. W. L. Austin, New Albany, Ind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The “Progressives” of New England are true to their name, and most
encouraging reports are received from circles and those who are studying
alone. A young man teaching school in a remote village in Connecticut
writes: “I feel far below the standard of our class, but am determined to
do the best I can, God helping me. Leisure moments are delightfully spent
in reading or meditation. Hope to complete the course in 1886, and then
go on with extra readings.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The class of 1886 is deeply bereaved by the removal to higher duties and
joys of a most worthy member, Mrs. Emma Webster Darling, wife of the Rev.
J. K. Darling, of Chelsea, Vermont. She died on the morning of Easter
Sunday.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our busy workers, A. M. T., of Ontario, Canada, has made an
attractive little devotional book, “My Work, or Conditional Promises,”
for every day in the month.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young lady from Boston writes: “I have devoted to C. L. S. C. work
at least forty minutes every day since I have been a member, and would
gladly do more if time would allow.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From the snow hills of Maine comes this cheerful testimony: “I sometimes
envy people their riches, but am thankful for the C. L. S. C. every day
of my life, for I am a farmer’s daughter, and so situated that I am
debarred from the enjoyments of most young people, and would often be
very lonely were it not for the books of the C. L. S. C.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hopkinton tent, at Framingham, has been secured for headquarters, and
will be made comfortable. If the ladies of ’86 who contemplate visiting
Framingham next summer will remember that they are a “committee of
the whole” on decorations, the tent can doubtless be made homelike and
attractive at little expense. Bring something to brighten it, if only a
penny Japanese fan.


CLASS OF 1887.—“THE PANSIES.”

“_Neglect not the gift that is in thee._”


OFFICERS.

    _President_—The Rev. Frank Russell, Mansfield, Ohio.

    _Western Secretary_—K. A. Burnell, Esq., 150 Madison Street,
    Chicago, Ill.

    _Eastern Secretary_—J. A. Steven, M.D., 164 High Street,
    Hartford, Conn.

    _Treasurer_—Either Secretary, from either of whom badges may be
    obtained.

    _Executive Committee_—The officers of the class.

       *       *       *       *       *

The New England Pansies seem to be more active of late than their fellow
blossoms farther west. The following report of their reunion represents
something of their enthusiasm: The New England branch of the class
of 1887 C. L. S. C. held its spring meeting in the chapel of Union
Congregational Church, Providence, April 3d, 1885. About one hundred
members were present. After a short time spent in social intercourse, the
meeting was called to order by the president, the Rev. F. M. Gardner, for
Rhode Island. The C. L. S. C. study song was sung, which was followed by
the secretary’s report of the meeting in Boston; the minutes were duly
approved. It was voted that the committee on headquarters be increased by
the addition of Mr. Jeffers, of Pawtucket, and Mrs. Morrill, of Allston.
Mr. Gardner, in his own bright manner, gave some account of the efforts
of the committee in preparing for class headquarters at Lakeview, and
stated reasons why the plan suggested at the Boston meeting should be
postponed, though not abandoned. Inasmuch as several members of our
class have been afflicted by the loss of loved ones from their homes,
it was voted that a committee be appointed to present resolutions at
this meeting expressing the sympathy of the class with them in their
bereavement. The musical and literary exercises were opened with a fine
piano solo, which was followed by a pleasing quartette. Then an address
on “The C. L. S. C. _vs._ Social Pastimes,” by the Rev. N. T. Dyer, of
Middleboro, was delivered. Mr. Dyer being unable to be present because
of illness, Mrs. Dyer most creditably took his place. The address was a
convincing statement of the advantages of the C. L. S. C., and could it
be circulated among those not interested in the course, would undoubtedly
influence many to enroll in the Circle. Mrs. Emily C. Fletcher, of
Pawtucket, read a poem written for the occasion, from which we extract
the following, referring to the influence of the C. L. S. C.:

    “It has cleared the brow of discontent,
       Made happy the lowly one,
     Cheering the home and its social hall,
       Enliv’ning the tasks begun.

    “It takes from age the mournful thoughts,
       That often the heart will shroud,
     It lifts the life to a higher sphere,
       Silvering ev’ry dark cloud.”

After music, and an address on Lakeview, resolutions of sympathy to those
of the circle who had met with bereavements were adopted. The association
then adjourned, after which a delightful reunion was enjoyed by the
members.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two members of the class of ’87 have recently left us for the “better
life:” Miss Grace F. Cook, who died March 22, at Vilas, Wisconsin, after
a protracted illness, and Mrs. Rev. E. S. Osborne, of Kingston, New York,
who died at her home, March 16th.


CLASS OF 1888.—“THE PLYMOUTH ROCKS.”

“_Let us be seen by our deeds._”


CLASS ORGANIZATION.

    _President_—The Rev. A. E. Dunning, D.D., Boston, Mass.

    _Vice Presidents_—Prof. W. N. Ellis, 108 Gates Avenue, Brooklyn,
    N. Y.; the Rev. Wm. G. Roberts, Bellevue, Ohio.

    _Secretary_—Miss M. E. Taylor, Cleveland, Ohio.

    _Treasurer_—Miss M. E. Taylor, Cleveland, Ohio.

    All items for this column should be sent, in condensed form, to
    the Rev. C. C. McLean, St. Augustine, Florida.

    Class badges may be procured of either President or Treasurer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our circle in Ouray, Colorado, in the midst of the Rocky Mountains,
numbers ten. The picturesque spot where live these ’88s is about a day’s
journey from the railroad. They name themselves after the Indians,
“Uncompahgee,” who once wigwamed there. They have their “round-table,”
and keep up their weekly meetings.—Another circle, of three, has been
organized among the “Rockies,” at Gunnison, Colorado, and meets weekly.
Our ’88s have reached the Indian Territory. At Chouteau we have one hard
worker, who, having commenced in February, has nearly caught up with the
class.—At the confluence of the Missouri and Vermillion Rivers we have
an enthusiastic class of ten. Lawyers, teachers, journalists, milliners,
and busy wives, with a “Pansy” for the president, compose the class.
They conduct their class weekly, on the “conversational plan,” which
they claim affords grand opportunity for interchange of opinions and
sentiments.—A circle of five ladies and one lone gentleman compose the
“Clio,” of Clark, Dakota. So delighted are they that they never adjourn
for any other engagements.—The “Kankakee,” of Illinois, thirty-eight
regular and four honorary members, meets fortnightly. Their Shakspere
program was so full that a portion was postponed until the next meeting.
An honorary member has delighted them with an address upon “Water.”—The
twelve members of “Calumet,” Carthage, Ill., were favored with a visit
and instructive talk from Chancellor Vincent.—We were greatly surprised
to receive a letter from our old friend, the Rev. W. H. Hyatt, president
of our circle in Whiteland, Ind.—Ten young persons of Dubuque, Iowa,
compose the “Circle of Athens.” An excellent motto have they selected:
_Sapientiam petimus_. That their search for wisdom is eager is evinced by
the fact that they have in a most interesting manner pursued the studies
in spite of all allurements. The memorial days have been appropriately
observed, and Longfellow’s day celebrated by a banquet.—Seven constitute
“Alpha,” of Barnesville, Ohio. They began January 1, and have nearly
completed their studies. They expect to begin on time next year.—The
“Athena,” of Wanskuck, Providence, R. I., is composed of fifteen busy
people, who are delighted with the studies.—From the programs of the
“Hamilton,” of Lowell, Mass., we are satisfied that the forty members
are truly among our liveliest coming Chautauquans. They have largely
experimented in chemistry and electricity. This circle mourns the loss
of one of its best members in Mrs. Benjamin Robinson, who endeavored to
brave a New England storm, in order to attend one of the meetings, and
lost her life.—Seventeen regular and three honorary members represent
a circle in Joplin, Mo. Nothing but illness has caused an absence at
“roll call.” Once a week they follow Chautauqua program. Success has
marked their public as well as private meetings.—One from Maine has
taken fresh courage since reading Chancellor Vincent’s article in the
April CHAUTAUQUAN, “How to Work Alone.”—The “Riversides,” of Milford,
N. H. (eight members), have finished the year’s studies.—“Zeta Phi,” of
Buffalo, N. Y., are seven “zealous learners.” They observe all special
days, having essays upon given subjects.—A zealous lady of ’87 class
organized seven earnest and hopefuls into the “I. X. L.,” of Newport,
Ky.—Clamida (state not named) boasts of two enthusiastic circles. The
secretary of one strongly objects to our name, repudiating the idea that
we have anything in common with the “Pilgrim Fathers.” She is even tired
of a reference to their trials, and believes, with another, that the
“Pilgrim Mothers” are more worthy of “toasting,” closing with “Seriously,
why were we thus afflicted?”




THE CHAUTAUQUA UNIVERSITY.

A TEACHING METHOD.

BY PROF. RICHARD S. HOLMES, A.M.


I desire in this paper to make some very plain answers in a very plain
way to a question which has come to me in varying forms, from various
sources. It is a practical question, and concerns the possibilities of
that department of Chautauqua work which aims to bring the advantages
of the higher education within the reach of those large classes of our
population which have been hitherto debarred from them. Naturally, the
question originates with the very people whom the enterprise seeks to
aid, and strangely enough is shared by those whose culture and education
should have been a barrier to such a doubt.

Men who would gladly avail themselves of any real advantages for
education brought within their reach, and within their means, yet
unwilling to make the pecuniary outlay which the effort might involve,
until convinced that the correspondence system offers real advantages,
hesitate, and say: “We are favorably impressed with the idea as given in
your announcements, but are not sure that it can be put into practical
operation; before attempting the work it may demand, we are compelled to
ask, how is the work to be done? how can teaching by correspondence be
made practically successful? Show us the method, that we may understand.”
Still others, men of advanced education, of approved excellence of
judgment, men engaged in professional life, have said, “We concede that
education by the means you propose is possible under certain favorable
conditions, but we doubt the practicability of attempting by such a
means to cover the wide field of general education.” Straightway they
fall to instancing particular subjects as illustrations of the truth
of their statement. Now the proof of the pudding is in the eating; and
if this paper succeed in furnishing tastes of this particular pudding
which shall be palatable and shall create a favorable opinion as to the
worth of the whole, the service rendered to the cause will be valuable.
I propose, therefore, without invading the province of any of the gifted
teachers who act as Directors of the different Departments and Schools in
the Chautauqua School of Liberal Arts, as we shall hereafter call what
has been known as the University, to show, if possible, how a person
of good natural endowment, at the maximum of his mental strength, and
with earnest devotion to his work can acquire a knowledge of a language,
literature, or science by correspondence alone.

I will make three preliminary remarks. First, the student must bring
to this work the same earnestness that he gives to that pursuit of his
daily life upon which he has been or may be dependent for his livelihood.
Second, in the study of language by correspondence, the path marked out
by the experience of the ages is the path in which the correspondence
student must go. The gateway of that path is the grammar of the language;
and no student can pass through it till he possess the key which shall
unlock its bars. To own a grammar is therefore a necessity. I am ready
to believe that in oral teaching of a language, actual study of grammar,
as grammar, may be put over into the final years of the course, giving
the early years to the undisputed control of synthetic methods; but for
the correspondence student, a grammar is an essential. Third, the student
must be willing to follow the most minute directions of his teacher,
without question, no matter how simple or how difficult a matter their
performances may seem to be. To obey is the first essential to success.

Let us now look at a _method_ for learning a language or science. It is
not given as _the method_ in use in the schools, but only as a means of
showing that the thing proposed is possible. There should be for the
beginner four papers for every lesson; or four kinds of work to be done.

_First_—There should be a paper _stating principles to be learned_, and
adding complete references to the text-book upon which they are based,
that the student may add to his teacher’s dictum, the confirmation of
his own research. Let it be distinctly noted that this paper is _to
contain statements of principles to be learned_, and is not to be a mere
budget of directions to paragraphs and sections of a text-book. The
advantages to be gained by such a method of study are too obvious to need
elaboration here.

_Second_—There should be a paper giving abundant and apt illustrations of
those principles, derived from the best sources, adapted to the pupil’s
knowledge, and different from any which have been otherwise brought to
his notice. These illustrations of principles should be memorized by the
student and should form the basis of the paper containing the test of the
student’s work.

_Third_—There should be a paper giving examples for practice in these
same principles; examples for transliteration, phonic representation, or
translation in case of a foreign language, examples for experimentation,
classification, or analysis in case of a science or literature.

_Fourth_—There should be a paper of examination or question, for the
purpose of testing the student and revealing the character of the work he
has done. These questions should be framed with the utmost care and skill
of which the teacher is master, and should act as a quickening impulse
to the student. This paper should be in a sealed envelope, and should
not be opened till all the work of the other three papers has been done,
and the student feels that his lesson is learned. In addition to what
has been suggested, there should be required in the study of language,
as soon as the student can correctly pronounce, a regular exercise in
memorizing from some standard author, and daily repetitions aloud of
what is thus given to the memory. In the case of English, Latin, and
Greek, this seems to me indispensable. This last suggestion, it will be
noticed, contains a hint that the pronunciation of a language can be
taught by correspondence. It is a hint which I am prepared to assert as
a proposition, and to defend as far as the Latin and Greek languages are
concerned. The amount of matter given in the lesson should be enough to
require one week for its preparation by a student able to devote from
one to two hours daily to study.

When the papers of a lesson have been fully mastered, and the student
feels that all he can do upon it is done, the whole work should be at
once sent back to the teacher. Now, to guard against loss of time, such
as would occur were the student compelled to wait without work after he
has forwarded his lesson recitation to the teacher until the necessary
exchange by post has been made, two lessons should be sent out by the
teacher at the first assignment. This plan would wholly avoid what might
be costly delay where student and teacher were separated by the width of
the continent or the ocean.

As soon as the first recitation paper reaches the teacher’s hand, his
immediate duty is to forward the next lesson of the series, and so
regularly through the whole course of instruction. He will now at his
leisure examine the paper which has come into his possession, while the
student is engaged upon the second of his lessons. What shall be the
teacher’s work with this returned paper? Certainly not one of correction.
Now begins his real work of teaching. First, there must be a careful
and painstaking inspection of each line of the student’s work. Second,
every error must be plainly marked, so that the eye of the student
will not fail to observe it. Third, plain reference should be made to
those sections and paragraphs of the grammar or text-book which have
been violated. Fourth, a word of encouragement, advice, suggestion, or
warning should be added to each paper, drawn from the teacher’s wide and
varied experience, and which will be practically helpful to the pupil. It
must be carefully noted that in this treatment of the recitation paper,
the teacher has made no correction, has told nothing, but has simply
indicated errors, and thrown the student back upon his own resources to
correct his own work. This is one of the elements of true teaching.

The return of this critically marked paper to the student brings us to
consider another important process in this work, and that is the review
by the student of his first lesson work, or his second period of study
upon it. There has enough time elapsed since it was last in his hands
to have it come now with all the force of a new lesson, and to enable
him to look at it judicially. The critical investigation which follows
has a three-fold value. First, it is a review. Second, it is a means
for accurate self-test. Third, it is a monitor, under whose warning all
future lesson work is subjected to the careful scrutiny which the former
criticism suggests. Two things still remain to be done with the returned
lesson paper. One to make a separate classified list of the errors it
contained; the other to date it, file it, and lay it carefully away for
reference. The classified list of errors will serve as a check against
the commission of like errors, or an aid in detecting any that may have
been carelessly made. At first the list will be large, but after a little
it will grow less and less rapidly, till finally its utter lack of growth
will be the surest mark of the pupil’s excellence of attainment. Such
is an outline for a possible method of conducting educational work by
correspondence. It presents a method which I believe is practical, which
is drawn from an experience of years in the class room, and which is in
harmony with established principles of educational philosophy.

       *       *       *       *       *

A touching bit of experience has been sent us by a member of the class
of ’88. The writer had persuaded his son to join a circle, but, as he
writes, “He attended one meeting of the circle and came home very much
discouraged, declaring that he would not attend another meeting, urging
as his reasons that he compared unfavorably with others, and that he
would never be able to pronounce those horrid Greek names, etc. I tried
to encourage him and advanced several arguments trying to show him what a
great advantage this course of reading would be to him, but finally gave
it up, fearing if I urged him so strongly he would become disgusted. I
determined then to take the four years’ course of study myself, thinking
that by having the books in our home, and sometimes relating anecdotes,
incidents and historical facts gathered from these readings, that my boys
might become interested for themselves. It is impossible for me to give
my children the advantages of a liberal education, as my heart longs to
do, and by getting them interested in the C. L. S. C., I hope to make up
to them in some degree their loss of a college education.”




EDITOR’S OUTLOOK.


AN AMERICAN DIPLOMAT.

There is very general regret, at home and abroad, that the new
administration has removed Professor James Russell Lowell from the
office of American minister at the court of St. James. There is no
disposition to complain; but there is some natural wonderment. Mr. Lowell
was an ideal American diplomat; he represented worthily the people as
well as the government of the United States. It is no disparagement to
his successor to say that no other American can quite fill the place
Mr. Lowell has made for himself. It should be remembered that we,
fortunately, have very little proper diplomatic business anywhere in the
world; and whenever any serious negotiation is to be undertaken, it can
be done at Washington. Our important treaties are made in the national
capital; and our gravest foreign affairs are always directly administered
by the Secretary of State. Since Franklin it has seldom happened that a
minister has been entrusted with any grave duties or burdened with any
serious responsibilities. Even during the civil war Mr. Seward managed at
Washington the more serious business of the foreign department.

In this generation, we have had some successful foreign ministers;
but their success has in every case been in non-official or
extra-official lines. Mr. E. B. Washburne, our minister in Paris
during the Franco-German war, won a high reputation, not as a diplomat
of his country, but as an American minister entrusted, by an act of
international courtesy, with the rights and welfare of Prussians in
Paris. As the agent of the Berlin government during the war and siege,
Mr. Washburne endeared himself to the large German population of Paris by
his kindness, common sense, and energy in caring for a body of subjects
of a hostile country. No one but a typical American could have done this
work at all well. A man trained to diplomacy would have failed. It needed
a man who could put his character and American office into a breach made
by war, and devise means of providing for an extemporaneous necessity.
Most men would have failed; Washburne succeeded because he was a typical
American of the largest pattern—able, frank, tireless, resourceful.

In England, Mr. Lowell has, under different circumstances, developed a
new line of diplomatic representation. He has represented the character
and culture of the American people. The average politician supposes
himself to be the typical American; the fact that we are ashamed of
him is the sufficient proof that he is thoroughly mistaken. In what do
Americans broadly differ from most other, if not all other, peoples? Is
it not in this, that we are the great reading nation of the world? Our
culture goes down to the bottom and reaches out to the extremities of
our life. We have no class distinctions, no titled magnates, no rights
of birth-privilege; and in the school rooms of the land the rich and the
poor meet together, and our great newspapers go into the hands of both
rich and poor. We are not so distinctly a nation of commercial people
as we are a nation of people under an unexampled influence of general
culture. A Professor who was much more than a professor; a man of the
world who was also a man of books; an alert and quick, practical man who
was also a poet; a gentleman who was, first of all, manly; a diplomat
who was at home in a school room, could lecture on any literary theme,
could instruct the educated Englishman in the history of his own men of
letters; an American who knew Shakspere, Milton, Bunyan, the English
Bible, and every shred of English art and song and event by heart—such a
man has Mr. Lowell been in England. He was at home there on those levels
of life and heights of achievement which are common to us and Englishmen;
and his leadership there in literature and learning conferred honor
on us in the precisely most honorable things in our character as a
people. We simply are not philistines—hard dogmatists of dollars and
precedents—we are a thoughtful, informed, studious and brainy people who
despise wealth which is not held for the service of truth, well-being
and progress. No man could represent us so well as a poet, teacher,
essayist and scholar like Mr. Lowell. He could represent us at the level
of those ideals and achievements of which we are not ashamed. We despise
nothing so heartily as illiterate wealth; no other people on earth equal
us in contempt for the commerce which has only sordid aims and results.
The American merchant builds schools, museums, churches, asylums,
hospitals—if he does not we despise him.

The problem in selecting the best foreign representatives is to secure
men who will represent our national character. Our diplomacy is
unimportant. Such as we have to do can be carried on at Washington. We
want ministers abroad who will be typical Americans, whose conspicuous
position will display in them the best and truest results of our unique
social and political system. If they are honored abroad, as Mr. Lowell
has been in unusual ways and measure, the honor is given to us and
glorifies us. There is always a fool to say that our minister is more
English than American—simply because Englishmen respect him. It is a
poor kind of criticism, and fortunately there is less and less of it in
the press. We all stand better abroad, command more honest respect, are
better understood in our best characteristics, because James Russell
Lowell has represented us in London. May his successor succeed to the
full measure of this representative office.

The most distinguished honor ever conferred upon an American has come
to Mr. Lowell. The English press, representing the best public opinion
of that nation, invites him to remain., in England “as the unofficial
representative of American literature, learning, manners, and knowledge
of the world.” Nothing like that can be found in the long history of
diplomacy. “He has been,” says one great journal, “a sort of guest-friend
of England,” and it then describes him as “the most eminent American
of this generation,” and adds, “Englishmen of all ranks and stations
recognize in Mr. Lowell a faithful and jealous guardian of the interests
of his country, and a type of all that is best in its intellectual and
moral character.” There is not a word in all these encomiums which is not
a eulogy of the American people.


THE CHOLERA.

The disease called Asiatic Cholera is at home in India. It travels, at
long intervals, into Europe. There have been eight: or nine of these
visitations during the century. The disease travels with man and his
belongings; and since intercourse between Asia and Europe has become
more swift and abundant, there is a tendency to more frequent visits of
the dreaded scourge. In fact, however, this tendency has been overcome
by sanitary science. Until last year, cholera had not been in Europe for
sixteen years. It arrived the last previous time in 1866 and tarried into
the next year. During all the intervening years, there was cholera on the
Ganges, and an increasing flow of humanity between the two continents;
yet sixteen years elapsed between the visits. Last year cholera landed
from ships at Toulon and Marseilles in southern France, and produced
general alarm in Europe. It swept around all the European coasts of
the Mediterranean, and in the especially filthy towns caused a large
mortality. It has doubtless wintered in Europe, and its second year is
usually the worst. It can begin early and use the long summer for its
desolating work. This is the second summer. It is probable that cholera
will be a large feature of the health and mortuary reports of the year.
European travel will be restricted by the caution which the prevalence of
this disease inspires. American resorts for Americans will be unusually
popular.

Will cholera visit us? In previous European visits it has always looked
in upon us, sometimes the first, sometimes the second year. In 1866, it
did not come, but did come in 1867. But the visit of that year was less
baneful than any other we have had. In 1884, we escaped; can we escape in
1885? No doubt exists that we _can_. It is only a question of effective
quarantine. The faithful discharge of their duties by all health officers
at ports would exclude the unwelcome guest. And, at our principal port,
where the danger is greatest, there is good reason to believe that the
fidelity, wisdom and vigilance are equal to the emergency. Cholera is
more likely to penetrate to us by some little-used door; the front
gate will be securely guarded. At the smaller doors, there ought to be
no danger. But there _is_ danger, and it is probably too much to hope
that there will be adequate watchfulness. There is, even at New York, a
long line of accidents to be reckoned with. It would not be surprising,
however, if cholera got a foothold among us from the West Indies, landing
in some southern port.

If it comes, what then? It should not be very successful in its work of
death. It could be stamped out in any city with a well organized health
force. In New York, a few cases would not be cause for any alarm—not half
so much as if the cases were in some small and careless community. Still
it is most probable that if it effects a landing it will travel over the
country. We have had warning enough. It is a filth disease which can be
cornered and killed by cleanliness, if the cleanliness foreruns it. If we
wait to clean up filthy quarters in our towns until the disease arrives,
it will then be too late to clean. We shall have a good measure of the
sanitary condition of our cities, if the cholera visits them. It will do
its terrible work in the unclean quarters of unclean towns. It will not
stop there. Once established in a filthy quarter, cholera easily thrusts
its arms into adjacent clean places. If the long and loud warning has
been heeded, there will be little to fear from cholera. The cleanliness
of our towns will discourage and expel the intruder.

What can individuals do? Keep cool and in good health. All epidemic
diseases fix upon the infirm, the debilitated, and the fearful. The
mortality from cholera is only about one death for four cases. In some
epidemics of it, the rate is one in three cases; but among people who
are well fed and in fair conditions of comfort, and have proper care,
there are five chances of recovery to one of death. The high rate of
mortality in some towns results from want of care and medicine. Popular
rumor exaggerates the danger of death from cholera. It is a case of _ogne
ignotum pro magnifico_—we know so little about it that we magnify the
danger beyond all warrant of the actual facts. Some of our danger—perhaps
most of it—will come from the enthusiasm of the reporters. Last January
these enthusiasts discovered genuine Asiatic cholera in St. Louis. They
were sure of it. The evidence was perfect, they said. Of course there
never was, and never will be, a case of Asiatic cholera in St. Louis in
January. But after summer begins, the “Lo here” will begin to alarm the
timid. There are sure to be many false reports; the true one may be in
the bundle. Let us hope it will not be—and keep cool.

We hope that inland quarantines will not be resorted to if the disease
appears among us. They are useless as well as inhuman. They shut the
intruder out of the gate, and he crawls under the fence. If cholera
gets upon this continent, safety will be secured only by cleanliness of
streets and houses. Clean people may die in clean streets, but it will be
because there are unclean people in neighboring streets to receive and
breed the disease. Nor should the well fly from the sick. The nurses and
priests are safest in Italian cities. Those who fly, do so when it is
too late, and carry the disease with them. And, after all, cholera may
not visit us in 1885.


A REVIEW OF THE CHAUTAUQUA YEAR.

A very marked indication of the success of the Chautauqua Idea is the
increase of imitations of our work; and this runs parallel with an
increase of efforts to promote systematic culture among grown people. Dr.
Samuel Johnson used to say that he did all his hard study when he was a
boy, and he very properly lamented it. It is one of the strangest things
in modern civilization that, except among a small body of professors and
specialists, the world does its studying entirely in early life. If the
chance to study, or the compulsion to study, be wanting in the first
twenty years, the door is supposed to be shut forever. The Chautauqua
movement tried to expose the folly of this method, and to show that
persons whose education was neglected in youth may secure culture in
middle life, or even in old age. History gave us examples enough; but
Chautauqua has made thousands of new examples to illustrate the perfect
practicalness of adult study. The success of Chautauqua has drawn general
attention to the subject. A variety of plans for promoting the education
of adults are coming before the public. We do not regard any of them as
rivals; they will enlarge our public as well as make smaller centers of
such culture.

The members of the C. L. S. C. who have gone with us over the subjects
of this year will do well to look back over the road and see precisely
what they have gone over. They will probably notice that their study
and reading has not interfered with their regular pursuits and duties.
They have been able to add these studies to their customary tasks and
interests. It is a kind of gratuity, therefore, which they have received.
It is so much in addition to other results of annual effort. They will
further see that the amount of this study and reading is considerable.
Good method has made odd minutes yield a bulk which would require weeks
of consecutive and unbroken effort. The effect on the mind is better
and more permanent because the study has been continued through a year.
A college man of our acquaintance says that Professor Time does better
work than any of his colleagues. Our C. L. S. C. members have had the
instruction of Professor Time. Those who are finishing the course will
do well to remember that they have learned how to learn without a living
teacher. This is the best thing the C. L. S. C. has done for you—this
helping you to study alone. A power of this sort ought to be cultivated
and kept. The contents of any course of education should be small in
comparison with the attainments which it renders possible. This large,
broad, life-long self-education lies in the power to study alone without
the fear of a master or the ordeal of an examination before one. This
power colleges fail to give, and it is one of their weaknesses that they
can not give it. When the taskmaster stopped, Samuel Johnson said that
he stopped learning. We may doubt it, but in a sense Johnson was right.
If any reader has acquired the power to _go on alone_ by pursuing the
course, he has a rare piece of wealth, a capital which may produce the
widest and best culture.


“LIBERTY ENLIGHTENING THE WORLD.”

The New York _World_ has done wondrously well to raise $30,000 by a
popular subscription for the setting up of the Bartholdi statue in New
York harbor. Our readers know that this colossal statue of “Liberty
Enlightening the World” is a present from the French people, but that
there has been no provision made for the cost of setting up the great
work of French art. Various attempts to raise the necessary $100,000 have
yielded but small results, and when the _World_ took hold of the matter
the failure had become a very disagreeable joke for the press. Other
newspapers have engaged in public enterprises. The New York _Herald_
sent a ship into the Arctic Ocean in search of the Pole. The New York
_Tribune_ maintains by the subscriptions of its readers a “Fresh-Air
Fund” which gives thousands of children an outing in the country during
the hot months. The enterprise of the _World_ is, if possible, more
praiseworthy, and its success in rescuing a lost cause is as honorable
as it is unexpected. The subscriptions have been made by people of all
conditions and fortunes, by boys and girls, by merchants, artists and
laborers. A popular interest in the subject has been created, a great
deal of information imparted, many mistakes corrected, and a popular
support secured for a work of art. The work is in the line of large and
healthy philanthropy, and the _World_ deserves unstinted credit. Let us
all hope that it will carry the cause through to entire success.

We are, as a nation, still poor in public statuary. We have some good
pieces and not a few failures. Perhaps many persons have feared that
the Bartholdi statue is another monstrosity. Let them take courage; the
_World_ has presented excellent evidence that the work is equal to its
mission. The French people are to have a small edition of it set up in
Paris, and eminent French critics are unsparing in their praise of it. Of
course we can not be too confident of the effect of a statue higher than
Trinity steeple or the pillars of the East River bridge, set up so as to
face the sea and meet the eyes of the world entering the harbor of New
York. On that point there is excellent artistic judgment in favor of the
success of the audacious conception of the artist. We may now regard the
plan as certain to be carried out at no distant day, and if it succeeds
it will be one of the wonders of the world. A statue rising to the
height of three hundred and seventeen feet above the waves—the familiar
figure of Liberty confronting the world in our chief American city—will
be a unique and impressive piece of art, if it be not an utter failure.
The _if_ is not a large doubt; only the small doubt which attends the
most perfect human work which is as yet untried. The _World’s_ popular
subscription had passed $35,000 when these lines were sent to press, on
the 28th of April.




EDITOR’S NOTE-BOOK.


A highly successful “Chautauqua Day” has been carried out at the New
Orleans Exposition, under the leadership of Prof. E. A. Spring, Prof. W.
F. Sherwin and the Rev. A. H. Gillet. An audience of over 5,000 people
met in Music Hall to hear Bishop Mallalieu on “The Relation of Chautauqua
to the Home and Society,” Prof. Sherwin on “The Story of Chautauqua,”
talks from Wallace Bruce and the Rev. Mr. Gillet, and music from the
Mexican Band. The great crowd was given Chautauqua badges and C. L. S.
C. circulars, and taught the Chautauqua salute—the latter in compliment
to Señor Payen, the leader of the Mexican Band, and the pet of the
Exposition. One of the audience remarked on leaving the hall: “I have
been at every day entertainment here since the beginning, and this has
been the most successful, the best managed, the most interesting occasion
there has been.”

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been an almost breathless attention given throughout the world
during the past month to the attitude of England and Russia. Words have
been weighed and steps measured with the nicest exactness. Affairs which
in other times would take up columns are given corners. The prevalent
opinion has been that war must come, though peace negotiations are being
vigorously pushed. Could war be held off twenty years it might be that we
should be so much wiser that arbitration might be made to prevail.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most active business which the United States Navy has had for
years was caused by the Isthmus troubles. Our treaty with New Granada
guarantees free and uninterrupted passage across the Isthmus. To secure
this a force of 500 men and four ships was placed at Aspinwall after the
insurgents had burned the city. They thence proceeded to Panama, which
they succeeded in restoring to order. Not an easy thing to do, with the
natives sympathizing generally with the rebels, and very suspicious of
the “Gringoes,” as they call us, and with the French determined to have
the credit of whatever restoration could be made.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. de Lesseps is firmly convinced of the advantages to America of the
Panama Canal, prophesying in a recent letter that it will reanimate our
merchant marine, will greatly enlarge our internal business, and make us,
in short, commercial kings. It can hardly be doubted that were any one
of the great schemes for interoceanic communication in operation, our
whole system of exchange would be modified and our business multiplied.
The chief question seems to be now, is the Panama Canal, Mr. Eads’s
Tehuantepec Ship Railway, or the Nicaragua Canal likely to be the best
for the United States?

       *       *       *       *       *

The recent conviction of two “saints” charged with polygamy is having a
wholesome effect. The law which makes such a decision possible in Utah
is the Edmunds bill, by which a man believing it right to have more than
one living or undivorced wife at a time maybe challenged as a juryman.
Under this law it is extremely difficult for a Mormon brought to trial
to escape sentence, and the sentence is such that the fear of it will
more than probably take a great deal of charm out of the doctrine of
“spiritual wives.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The biographical department of the scrap-book compiler has had great
opportunities to grow rich in anecdotes of General Grant this past month.
His prolonged illness and the wonderfully sustained interest and sympathy
of the public have led to many letters and stories getting into print
which otherwise might never have been known. All of this matter but shows
more and more clearly how just is our love and reverence for “our hero.”

       *       *       *       *       *

For the benefit of the international copyright there were held in New
York recently, on two afternoons, Authors’ Readings. A notable galaxy of
literary characters gathered on the stage. Among them were George William
Curtis, Professor Charles Carroll, Julian Hawthorne, Will Carleton,
W. D. Howells, the Rev. Robert Collyer, Prof. H. H. Boyesen, Bishop
Potter, Mark Twain, Edward Eggleston, Henry Ward Beecher, and others. The
audience which greeted the readers was large and appreciative.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the most horrible accidents of the month of April was the
collapse of eight nearly completed tenement houses in New York City.
Twelve persons were injured in the fall. The investigation discloses a
deliberate intention on the part of the contractor to use the poorest
material obtainable, and a criminal—whether intentional or not—neglect on
the part of building authorities to prevent his plan. Indeed, contractors
who are honest in their work, state the commission cares more for
the fee which puts a contract through than for the material put into
the building. A vigorous public sentiment which would put a few such
criminals into State prison might prove beneficial.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Arbor Day” is extending its conquests. Its latest subject is none other
than the Province of Ontario, whose Minister of Education sends out a
communication to all teachers asking that in the interest of sanitation
and æsthetics the 8th of May be set apart as a holiday in every rural and
village school, for grading school grounds, laying out walks, and setting
out trees.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hon. B. G. Northrop, in a letter dated April 4th, writes: “Sixteen
states have adopted ‘Arbor Day,’ and to that result the article in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN, and extracts quoted from it, have greatly contributed.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Bureau of Education sends out a pamphlet on “Arbor Day.” It will help
many a teacher to an interest in the scheme, and will tell him what trees
to select, how to plant them, and how to arrange a program suitable for
the holiday.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trouble which we have with foreign tongues sometimes enables us to
heartily appreciate the blunders of the foreigner who tries our English
tongue. We can not possibly make worse blunders with French than a late
number of the aristocratic _Révue des deux Mondes_, when in its attempts
to express in English the idea of a candidate favoring a railway it said,
“_My politic is railway_.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One might almost call Lord Tennyson’s verses on “The Fleet” the literary
sensation of the month. It is rather difficult to see just why the verses
deserve the unstinted ridicule American papers have given them. Certainly
they are tame, but Lord Tennyson is an old man—a man whom this generation
ought to honor for the noble pleasure he has left to it and to its
posterity. Were his lines much worse, courtesy demands that we remember
that with age comes decay.

       *       *       *       *       *

The new Minister of Education in Greece, where the four Gospels are used
as a reading book by the advanced classes in the primary department of
the public schools, proposes to introduce them into the higher schools.
The purity of the diction of the four Gospels makes them, regardless of
other considerations, most desirable reading for children who are just
forming their literary style.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a sort of fashion which common sense people will be glad to
adopt—the run on plain food which London society is said to be having.
The Prince of Wales began it by cutting down every _ménu_ over which he
presided, and he has had a larger following than usual—both the people
who always follow and those whose good sense decides what they do, taking
up the custom. It would be a wise lesson for both dinner givers and hotel
keepers to learn that the quality of a dinner can not possibly depend
upon the number of dishes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bringing out a successful novelty in flowers or vegetables, is to a
nurseryman what a bonanza mine is to a westerner, or a flowing well to
an oil producer. The present season has several: There is a new lettuce
with leaves like the oak, a red celery, a celery which blanches naturally
and bears leaves like an ostrich plume; a pansy with blossoms two and one
fourth inches in diameter; a zinnia round as a ball, and a mignonette
with spikes twelve to fifteen inches in length, and of pure white.
Perhaps the greatest novelty about the business this spring is the fact
that in the cities the safe deposit vaults are receiving thousands of
pounds of invaluable seeds for keeping—treasures quite as priceless to
the seedsmen as the jewels which repose beside them are to their owners.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another compliment to America! When M. de Lesseps, the new member of the
French Academy, was installed, in April, he delivered, it is said, the
shortest speech ever delivered by an incoming Academician. Thereupon
M. de Rénan complimented him on adopting the pithy, pointed style of
_l’Amerique_.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are very glad to introduce the Chautauqua Town and Country Club, a new
branch of the C. L. S. C., for the study of agriculture. Everybody is
expected to do something in this novel society of practical out-of-door
work. Everybody must raise a plant, or cultivate a bed, or care for
an animal. A well known Orange Co., N. Y., farm is to be the working
headquarters of the new organization, and its course of reading and
experiment is under the control of Mr. Charles Barnard. Chancellor
Vincent honors the organization with his supervision, a guarantee of
success, and the headquarters of the C. L. S. C. have been extended to
take in the business of the C. T. C. C. In July we hope to give our
readers a broader look at this charming club.

       *       *       *       *       *

We called attention recently to Dr. Warren’s entertaining theory of the
whereabouts of the garden of Eden. And now we have another explorer for
this land-one Moritz Engel, of Dresden, who locates it about seventy
miles southwest of Damascus. Herr Engel makes his theory almost as
entertaining and plausible as does Dr. Warren his.

       *       *       *       *       *

The article on the “Natural History and People of Borneo,” which
appears in this issue of THE CHAUTAUQUAN, is in reality an outline of
a book, “Ten Years in a Jungle,” written by Mr. Hornaday, and soon
to be published by Messrs. Scribner’s Sons. This work is to be fully
illustrated and furnished with maps, and will give much desirable
information on many of the points but lightly touched in the article.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the most magnificent pieces of architecture in the world is about
to be erected in St. Petersburg as a votive chapel commemorating the
murder of the Emperor Alexander II., of Russia. It stands over the spot
where he fell, is to be erected by donations from the entire nation, will
cost $10,000,000, and will be completed, it is expected, in 1891.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. James Anthony Froude says in a recent article that the best histories
are those which are written by men who hate “moral evil” and love “moral
good,” and who are “afraid to tell lies” to defend their theories; as
examples, he mentions, Herodotus, Thucydides, Tacitus, and Carlyle.

       *       *       *       *       *

The readers of THE CHAUTAUQUAN are familiar with the _Chautauqua Assembly
Daily Herald_, the organ of the Chautauqua meetings. The forthcoming
volume will contain all the best things said on the Chautauqua platform
and in all the meetings during the coming session, with comments on the
great men who frequent Chautauqua during the months of July and August.
In short, it will depict in all its interesting details the unique life
of the great Assembly. This paper, with its nineteen issues, is the
necessary supplement to the THE CHAUTAUQUAN, just as the Assembly is the
supplement to the work of the year. Every reader of the C. L. S. C.,
every reader of THE CHAUTAUQUAN, every lover of Chautauqua should have
the _Assembly Daily Herald_. For rates and address see advertisement in
this impression.

       *       *       *       *       *

Evening High Schools are becoming a permanent feature in the school
system of a number of our large cities. They deserve the heartiest
support of educators and municipal authorities. In Cincinnati there is an
evening high school similar in requirements to the upper grade grammar
school; in St. Louis one which prepares students for the Polytechnic
school of Washington University; one in New York which, in 1883, had an
average attendance of 951 pupils; another in Boston which, in October
1884, enrolled 1,592 pupils. The character and the patronage are proofs
sufficient that such institutions are in demand. A late circular from the
Bureau of Education declares that “it is an institution which has come to
stay, and that it has a more important future than can now be understood.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A hopeful sign to temperance workers is the favor with which the
scientific temperance education bill has been meeting in the legislatures
of various states. During the winter of 1884-5 this bill became a law
in Nevada, Alabama, Wisconsin, Missouri, Maine, New Jersey, Oregon,
Nebraska, Pennsylvania, and Kansas, making in all fourteen states which
require instruction in public schools concerning the physiological
effects of stimulants and narcotics.




C. L. S. C. NOTES ON REQUIRED READINGS FOR JUNE.


Inoculation for cholera is the latest preventive. A number of people have
tried it in Valencia, Spain, and with perfect success, the authorities
contend. Cholera virus is used. The patient becomes prostrated with a
tumor in about twenty-four hours, but usually recovers in a couple of
days. Certainly, if as sure as speedy, humanity has found a boon. It will
be wiser, however, to wait until the cholera attacks Valencia before
trusting too implicitly to inoculation for cholera.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unbounded curiosity has been displayed at the New Orleans Exposition,
over the “Woman’s Department.” In spite of fate Mrs. Julia Ward Howe and
her co-workers have succeeded in making it a success, and in getting a
fair representation of what women can do. They have a literary department
filled with scores of volumes written by women, a woman’s exchange,
samples of ten thousand kinds of fancy work, of course, and, better than
that, of engraving, wood-carving, drawing, silk culture and weaving; a
novel niche is made by a display of patents taken out by women, and by
blacksmith work and forging done by women. Could they transport a cottage
with its inmates and let the work of home-making go on day after day,
they would add the crown to their department.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Elizabeth Cady Stanton in the _North American_ makes the remarkable
statement that women have never been benefited by Christianity, but that
their elevation is altogether due to the spread of Teutonic respect
for noble women. One must naturally conclude that Mrs. Stanton has not
studied her history thoroughly. Her statements sound very much like an
attempt to build up a theory without respect to the facts in the case.
Certainly no fact is better established than that with the spread of the
doctrines of Christ came the elevation of women.


CHEMISTRY.

1. “De Saussure,” sō-sür, Horace Benedict. (1740-1799.) A Swiss
naturalist who traveled extensively and made valuable contributions
to science. Much of his time and attention were given to mountain
researches. He constructed the best hygroscope, the instrument which
indicates a change in the degree of moisture in the atmosphere. The
cyanometer, an instrument for measuring the degrees of blueness in the
sky, was also invented by him.

2. “Osmose.” The tendency of fluids, when placed in contact, to mix.

3. “Cotyledons.” The seed lobes which surround and nourish young plants.
Endogenous plants, or inside growers, such as Indian corn, have only
one cotyledon, while exogens, or plants that grow by making external
additions, have two, as seen in the young pea.

4. “Hales,” Stephen. (1677-1761.) An English clergyman who gave much time
to scientific study. He was the author of several works, among which was
a book on the physiology of vegetables, entitled “Statical Essays,” which
has been translated into several languages.

5. “Dean Trench,” Richard Chevenix. (1807-⸺.) A British clergyman.
In 1856 he was made Dean of Westminster, and in 1864 Archbishop of
Dublin. His publications are numerous, including poetical, theological,
philological, and historical works.

6. “Venus fly-trap,” or dionæa. This curious plant is a native of the
sandy bogs of North Carolina. It is a perennial plant, whose leaves grow
from its roots. In the midst of them there grows a leafless stem, about
six inches high, which terminates in a cluster of white flowers. The
long, slender leaves bear at their extremities a second leaf, which has
been compared to two eyelids joined at their bases; this leaf is fringed
with stiff, bristly hairs, and on the upper surface there are three very
delicate bristles on each side, so placed that a fly can not walk over
the leaf without touching one of them. As soon as touched the two parts
of the leaf instantly close over the victim and hold it in their embrace
until death follows, and the insect is partly absorbed. The sensitiveness
of the plant resides entirely in these bristles on the surface of the
leaves. The juice from the glands attracts the insects, and the plant
receives nourishment from their bodies, which are partly dissolved in a
liquid which exudes from the leaves.

7. “Nepenthes,” or pitcher plants. A genus of plants whose leaves form
receptacles for water. The plants are natives of the swamps in the
East Indies and Australia. The linear-lanceolate leaves have at their
extremities a long, spiral stem, at the end of which is attached an urn,
or pitcher, of narrow cylindrical form, from six to twelve inches long,
in the different species, which are of the same color as the leaves, in
some varieties, in others spotted with red, and still others are of a
blood red color. The pitcher is terminated by a lid which is sometimes
closed. The pitcher is always partly filled with watery liquid. Honey is
secreted around the mouth of the pitcher, and insects are found within
it, which have been lured by the honey. These are supposed to contribute
to the nourishment of the plant. For further description, see the
article on “Borneo,” in the present number of THE CHAUTAUQUAN. There are
some varieties of the pitcher plant found in the United States.

8. “Diatoms,” A species of microscopic plants belonging to the Algæ or
sea weeds, growing in both salt and fresh water. For a long time they
were thought to belong to the animal kingdom, and were classed among the
animalcules, as they had the strange power of secreting from the water
silicious shells. They grew in some places in such abundance as to form
large beds of their shelly remains, the material of which is used for
the polishing powders known under the name of tripoli. The species found
now are exactly like the fossils. Ehrenberg says: “Species are to be
found, in a living state, in situations where they have been propagated
from times far anterior to the existence of man.” They may be obtained
by allowing the water in which they grow to stand for a time, and then
pouring off all but the slimy part at the bottom. The diatoms may often
be seen to move a little in the water, from which it was supposed they
belonged to the animal kingdom. Professor Bailey describes one very
interesting species, as follows: “At one moment the needle-shaped
frustules lie side by side, forming a rectangular plate; suddenly one
of the frustules slides forward a little way, the next slides a little
also, and so on through the whole number. These motions are constantly
going on, and with such rapidity that the eye can scarcely follow them.
The cause of the motion is wholly unknown, but it is probably mechanical
and not vital.” One species in its growth takes on a fanlike appearance
and is exceedingly beautiful. Fossil diatoms have been found in all the
strata of rock formations. These with some of the minute creatures of the
animal kingdom have left greater records of themselves than most of the
higher forms of life. Extensive deposits of their silicious shells are
found in various parts of the world. The city of Richmond, Va., stands on
a layer of them which is eighteen feet in thickness.

ERRATA.—The first line of the second experiment, page 441 of THE
CHAUTAUQUAN for May, should read: “A body is buoyed up in water by a
force equal to the weight of the water it displaces.”


SUNDAY READINGS.

1. “Summerfield,” John. (1798-1825.) An American divine. He was born in
England, and moved to New York in 1821. He visited many of the large
cities, where his eloquence drew crowds to listen to his sermons. He
founded the American Tract Society.

2. “Krumacher,” Friedrich Adolph. (1768-1845.) An eminent German
theologian, pastor of the Reformed Church at Crefeld, and later pastor at
Bremen. He was the author of many works, both in prose and poetry.


ANIMAL BIOLOGY.

1. “Batrachia,” bā-trāˈkĭ-ä.

2. “Ophidia,” ō-fidˈĭ-ä.

3. “Lacertilia,” lā-ser-tilˈĭ-ä.

4. “Iguanodon,” i-guāˈnō-don. This gigantic fossil reptile was discovered
in the year 1882, in the Wealden beds of Kent and Sussex, also in the
Isle of Wight, by Dr. Mantell. The enormous bones were very abundant,
and from a close study of them, it has been estimated that the extreme
length of the reptile must have been twenty-eight or thirty feet, of
which the head was three, and the tail thirteen feet. It stood higher
above the ground than any reptile now in existence. The teeth, which
bear a remarkable resemblance to the teeth of the American lizard, the
iguana, from which it was named, show that the animal was herbivorous.
It probably fed on the trees growing along the borders of swamps and
streams, and was able to lift its body for this purpose on its hind legs.

5. “Megˌa-lo-sauˈrus.” The word comes from the Greek, as do nearly all
the words in this list, and means great lizard. The bones found in the
rocks of the Oolite formation, the one next below the Wealden, show the
animal to have been terrestrial and carnivorous. It fed upon smaller
reptiles and the young of the larger orders. Its huge body was supported
on four large, strong legs, the hind ones being estimated to have had a
length of nearly six feet. The length of the animal must have been thirty
or forty feet. In the first estimates made of all these saurians, their
size was overestimated, the body of the iguanodon having been given as
seventy feet in length, and the megalosaurus as sixty or seventy feet.

6. “Pleˌsi-o-sauˈrus.” The word means like a lizard. It is a remarkable
fossil sea-reptile, which shows a long, snake-like neck, in which there
are thirty-three vertebræ, ten more than in the longest neck of any
bird. The body and head are comparatively short. Its whole length, when
living, was probably twenty-five or thirty feet. Buckland describes it
as follows: “To the head of a lizard it united the teeth of a crocodile,
a neck of enormous length, resembling the body of a serpent, a trunk
and tail having the proportions of an ordinary quadruped; the ribs of
a chameleon, and the paddles of a whale.” There were fifty teeth in
each jaw. Conybeare says of it: “That it was marine is evident from its
paddles; that it may have occasionally visited the shore, the resemblance
of its extremities to those of the turtle may lead us to conjecture;
its motion must have been, however, very awkward on land; its neck must
have impeded its progress through the water. May it not therefore be
concluded—since, in addition to these circumstances, its respiration must
have required frequent access to the air—that it swam upon or near the
surface, arching back its neck like the swan, and occasionally darting
it down at the fish which happened to float within its reach? It may,
perhaps, have lurked in shoal water along the coast, concealed among the
sea weed, and, raising its nostrils to the surface from a considerable
depth, may have found a sure retreat from the assaults of dangerous
enemies, while the flexibility of its neck may have compensated for the
want of strength in its jaws and its incapacity for swift motion through
the water, by the suddenness and agility of the attack which it enabled
it to make on every animal fitted for its prey which came within its
reach.”

7. “Ichˈthy-o-sauˈrus” (fish-lizard). This animal, which also is known
only by its fossil remains, must have been about thirty feet long. It had
enormous eyes, a long and large head, a mouth armed with powerful teeth,
and a short neck. The body was fish-like in form, and the four paddles,
resembling those of a whale, were comparatively small. The tail was long
and gradually flattened toward the end; it was the principal organ of
locomotion. They were very active in their movements, and consequently
were dangerous enemies to all other animals living in the sea. Their food
consisted chiefly of fishes.

8. “Chelonia,” kē-loˈnĭ-ä.

9. “Loricata,” lŏrˌi-cāˈtä.

10. “Aves,” āˈvēs.

11. “Anchylosed,” angˈkī-losed. United; made fast; stiffened.

12. “Esophagus,” e-sofˈa-gus. The passage leading to the stomach, through
which the food and drink pass.

13. “Raptores,” rap-tōˈres.

14. “Insessores,” in-ses-sōˈres.

15. “Cursores,” cur-sōˈres.

16. “Grallatores,” gralˌ-lā-toˈres.

17. “Natatores,” natˈ-a-tōˈres.

18. “Monotremata,” monˈo-tremˈa-tä.

19. “Edentata,” ē-denˈta-tä.

20. “Armadillos,” ar-ma-dilˈlōs.

21. “Sirenia,” sī-rēˈni-ä.

22. “Cetacea,” sē-tāˈsē-ä.

23. “Cheiroptera,” kī-ropˈte-rä.

24. “Rodentia,” rō-denˈshĭ-a.

25. “Ungulates,” unˈgū-lates.

26. “Pinnigrades,” pinˈni-grades.

27. “Plantigrades,” plantˈĭ-grades.

28. “Digitigrades,” digˈi-ti-grades.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who wish to carry on further the study of Animal Biology will find
a wide range of reading on the subject awaiting them. We append a list,
but are unable to give publishers and prices: “Comparative Zoölogy,”
by James Orton; “Methods of Study in Natural History,” by Agassiz;
“Principles of Zoölogy,” by Agassiz and Gould; “Elementary Biology,”
by Huxley and Martin; Wood’s “Illustrated Natural History;” Jones’s
“Animal Creation;” “Elements of Zoölogy,” by Holder; Packard’s “Zoölogy;”
Nicholson’s “Manual of Zoölogy;” “Winners in Life’s Race: or, The Great
Backboned Family,” by Arabella B. Buckley; “Life and her Children: or,
Glimpses of Animal Life from the Amœba to the Insects,” by Miss Buckley.

For special studies: Lyell’s “Antiquity of Man;” Blumenbach’s “Natural
History of Man;” Huxley’s “Elementary Lessons in Physiology;” “Sea-side
Studies in Natural History,” by Agassiz; Taylor’s “Half-hours at the
Seaside;” Dana’s “Corals and Coral Islands;” Duncan’s “Transformation
of Insects;” Packard’s “Guide to the Study of Insects;” Coues’s “Key to
North American Birds;” Jordan’s “Popular Key to the Birds, etc., of the
Northern United States;” “Birds of North America,” by Baird, Brewer and
Ridgeway; Baird’s “Mammals of North America;” Scammon’s “Marine Mammals
of North Pacific;” Coues’s “Fur-bearing Animals of North America;”
Huxley’s “Manual of Vertebrates;” “Tropical Nature,” by Wallace (a work
on reptiles); “Check List of North American Reptiles and Batrachians,” by
E. D. Cope; “Game Fishes of the United States,” by G. Brown Goode; “Blind
Fishes of the Mammoth Cave,” in “American Naturalist,” vol. vi., p. 6;
Holder’s “American Fauna;” Agassiz’s “Development of Osseous Fishes;”
Gunther’s “Introduction to the Study of Fishes;” Packard’s “Guide to the
Study of Insects,” also his “Half Hours with Insects;” Wood’s “Strange
Dwellings,” “Natural History,” and “Homes Without Hands;” Burmeister’s
“Entomology;” Lubbock’s “Ants, Bees, and Wasps;” McCook’s “Agricultural
Ants of Texas;” “Crustacea of the United States Exploring Expedition,”
by J. D. Dana; “The Lobster and Lobster Fishing,” by W. W. Wheildon;
“Barnacles,” by J. S. Kingsley; “The Cray Fish,” by Huxley; “Terrestrial
Air-breathing Mollusks of the United States,” by W. G. Binney; “Our Sea
Anemones,” by A. E. Verrill; “The Atlantic and Depths of the Sea,” by
Thompson; Leidy’s “Fresh Water Rhizopods;” Pritchard’s “Infusoria.”

Serial publications containing much matter in regard to these subjects
are _Popular Science Monthly_, _American Journal of Science_, _American
Naturalist_, _Smithsonian Contributions_, _Annals and Magazine of Natural
History_, and _Nature_.




COURSE OF READING FOR 1885-6.


Roman History and Latin Literature.

Studies in Italian History, Biography, and Art.

Political Economy.

Studies in Human Nature.

Studies in Robert Browning.

Electricity.

Philosophy, International Law, etc., etc.

The books for the course will soon be announced.

                                                        J. H. VINCENT.

NEW HAVEN, CT., April 27, 1885.




PARAGRAPHS FROM NEW BOOKS.


“Look there, my dearies!” and she pointed to a little blue and white
tea-pot on the high mantel-shelf above the hearth, on which they were
sitting. “Last night, when they’d taken Ben away, and I couldn’t finish
t’ psalm, and I couldn’t do much more praying than a little bairn thet’s
flayed and troubled in t’ dark night, I lifted my eyes to thet tea-pot,
and I knew t’ words thet was on it, and they wer’ like an order and a
promise—a’ in one; and I said, ‘There! thet’s enough, Lord!’ and I went
to my bed and slept, for I knew there ’ud be a deal to do to-day, and
nothing weakens me like missing my sleep.”

“And did you sleep, Martha?”

“Ay, I slept. It wasn’t hard wi’ t’ promise I’d got.”

Then Phyllis took a chair and stood upon it and carefully lifted down the
tea-pot. It was of coarse blue and white pottery, and had been made in
Staffordshire when the art was emerging from its rudeness, and when the
people were half barbarous and wholly irreligious—one of half a dozen
that are now worth more than if made of the rarest china, the “Blue
Wesley Tea-pot;” rude little objects, yet formed by loving, reverential
hands to commemorate the apostolic labors of John Wesley in that almost
savage district. His likeness was on one side, and on the other the
words, so often in his mouth, “In God we trust.”—_From “The Hallam
Succession,” by Amelia E. Barr._

       *       *       *       *       *

Discriminate in the use of AND and TO. Instead of saying “Go _and_ see
them before you leave;” “Try _and_ help him obtain a place;” “Come _and_
meet our friends at my house;” say “Go _to_,” “Try _to_,” and “Come _to_.”

Discriminate in the use of the word ARTIST. Keep _artist_ to designate
the higher order of workmen; as painters, sculptors, musicians,
architects, and the like. Don’t use it to designate barbers, laundrymen,
tailors, etc.

Discriminate in the use of BAD. Don’t say “I have a _bad_ cold;” say “a
_severe_ cold.” As colds are never _good_, we should not say they are
_bad_. We can have _slight_ colds, or _severe_ colds, but not _bad_ colds.

Discriminate between BAD and BADLY. Don’t make the mistake, so frequently
made, of saying “I feel very _badly_.” Use _bad_. _Badly_ is an adverb,
and should not be employed. One might as well say “I feel _happily_,”
instead of _happy_.

Discriminate between BALANCE and REMAINDER or REST. Don’t say “The
_balance_ of the library remained unsold;” “He spent the _balance_ of
the evening at home;” “The _balance_ of the money he left in their
keeping;” “We will now have the _balance_ of the toasts.” Use _rest_ or
_remainder_. Balance denotes the excess of one thing over another.

Discriminate in the use of DEPOT. The best critics contend that we should
not call a _railway-station_ a _depot_. A _depot_ is a place where goods
or stores of any kind are kept.

Discriminate between HAD RATHER and WOULD RATHER. Don’t say I _had
rather_ not do it; say I _would rather_ not do it.

Discriminate in the use of POLITE and KIND. Don’t say “your _polite_
invitation was received;” “You are very _polite_ in being so obliging;”
“They gave us a _polite_ reception.” Use _kind_.

Discriminate in the use of SUCH and SO. Don’t say, “_Such_ a handsome
bonnet;” “_Such_ a lovely girl;” “_Such_ a rough road.” Use _so_
handsome, _so_ lovely, etc.—_From “Discriminate.”_[M]

       *       *       *       *       *

ONE MEANS OF HELPING RUSSIA.—But there is no obstacle which can not
be overcome by energy, spirit of sacrifice, and courage. The Russian
despotism must and will be destroyed; for it is not permitted to the
stupid obstinacy of one, nor to the infamous egotism of a few, to
arrest the progress and light of a nation of a hundred million souls.
We can only wish the mode of execution of the unavoidable may be the
least disastrous, least sanguinary, and most humane. And there is a
force which can strongly contribute to this—it is the public opinion of
European countries. It is strange, but quite true; Russian governmental
circles are much more impressed by what is said about them in Europe than
by the wailing of all Russia from the White Sea down to the Euxine.—_From
“Russia Under the Tzars,” by Stepniak._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GOLDEN PRIME OF ’49.—A knowledge of the characteristic features of
the mining days of 1849 is essential to a full appreciation of the good
sense and political wisdom shown by the miners as a class. Merchants,
mechanics, farmers existed but to supply the miners; and the gold of
the mines was the chief resource of California. Four fifths of the
able-bodied male population were living in the mineral belt, or were on
their way thither, when the working season of 1849 opened. Only four
years before there had been but five hundred Americans in California;
in February, 1848, but two thousand; by December, 1848, this number
had grown to six thousand; by July, 1849, to fifteen thousand; and by
December, 1849, to fifty-three thousand. Chiefly owing to the gold rush
of 1848-53 the center of population of the United States moved eighty-one
miles farther west. Within four years after the spring of 1849 the
population of the new state was 300,000, and more than $260,000,000 had
been dug from the gold fields.—_From Charles Howard Shinn’s “Mining
Camps.”_

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WISE MAN’S VIEW OF LIFE.

      “Look on the Spirit as the rider! take
    The Body for the chariot, and the Will
    As charioteer! regard the Mind as reins,
    The Senses the steeds, and the things of sense
    The ways they trample on. So is the Soul
    The Lord that owneth spirit, body, will,
    Mind, senses, all; itself unowned. Thus think
    The wise!

      “He who is unwise drives with reins
    Slack on the neck o’ the senses; then they romp,
    Like restive horses of a charioteer.

      “He that is wise, with watchful mind and firm,
    Calms those wild Fire, so they go fair and straight,
    Like well trained horses of a charioteer.”

                                 —_Edwin Arnold’s “The Secret of Death.”_

       *       *       *       *       *

AMY ALLSTON’S REPORT OF STRAWBERRY CULTURE.—On the 27th of May Janet and
I picked our first berries for market, and from that time on we were
truly busybodies. We worked early and late, being careful to have dresses
short enough not to injure the vines. It was hard work for our bent,
weary backs, as it grew warm, but we knew it must be done. Mother, Janet,
Will and Pete did good service, and little Cecy cheered us from her wagon
under a neighboring tree.

In about five weeks the harvest was over, and after taking breath, we
counted our gains.

                             DR.

    Cost of plants (3,630)            $11 80
    Cost of picking                    10 25
                                      ------
        Total                         $22 05

                             CR.

    By 1,178 quarts of berries, at an average
      of 15c. per qt.                          $176 70
                                               -------
        Net profit on one quarter acre         $154 65

If we had to pay expenses of plowing, weeding, manure, etc., it would
have greatly lessened the profits. On the other hand the season was
backward, and the yield was not large, they tell me, in consideration of
the fine condition of the plants and the cultivation they received, which
was better than we could give a larger plot. At all events we set out
half an acre more the August after.—_From Helen Campbell’s “What-to-do
Club.”_

[M] Discriminate. A Companion to “Don’t.” A Manual for Guidance in the
Use of Correct Words and Phrases in Ordinary Speech. By Critic. New York:
D. Appleton & Co. 1885. Price, 30 cents.




TALK ABOUT BOOKS.


A happy thought was carried into successful execution in the publication
of “The Hundred Greatest Men.”[N] The editor conceived the idea that a
“natural history of civilization ought to be, not so much a narration of
events, as a description of men and things,” and hence for many years
busied himself in making a collection of portraits and antiquities as a
preparation for his work. The great men of all ages have been grouped
into eight classes, and treated under the following divisions of the
book: Poetry, art, religion, philosophy, history, science, politics, and
industry. Introductions have been written for these different departments
by Matthew Arnold, Taine, Max Müller, Rénan, Noah Porter, Dean Stanley,
Prof. Helmholtz, J. A. Froude, and John Fiske. The general introduction
is by Emerson. Only those characters have been selected who have stood
the test of time without diminution of fame. A portrait accompanies each
sketch, and many of these have been obtained at great expense of time and
trouble. The sketches themselves are word-paintings of the character,
the life, and the times of the men, and the wonder is that in such brief
space so much information can be given. The volume is a veritable art
gallery.

A story of much delicacy of touch, and with some strong delineation
of character, is “The Hallam Succession”[O] of Amelia C. Barr. The
placing of the story could hardly be more picturesque. Mrs. Barr opens
with English life of the first of the present century, carries us to a
plantation near New Orleans, through “Sam” Houston’s Texan struggles,
and finally to the long, low, verandahed house of a Texas plantation.
The varied setting gives the variety to a story of faithful love and
devotion. The many pleasing touches given in the descriptions of the
characters are the finest features of the book. A fair example is the
paragraph quoted on another page of this impression, which in its true
and delicate pathos is rarely equaled.

One or two selections taken from “The Harnt that Walks the Chilhowee,”
one of the eight stories that make up the volume, “In The Tennessee
Mountains,”[P] will show the style and aim of these unique writings,
which are just now attracting so much attention. This “harnt,” or ghost,
was supposed to be that of a poor, deformed little creature, who some
time before had been shot, and, as every one thought, killed. He himself
had been falsely accused of taking a man’s life. His death, however, had
been a mistake, and it was the real man who walked the mountain in search
of food. Simon Burney, an “uncouth and densely ignorant” mountaineer,
sought out the helpless, forlorn little specter, for whose capture
$200 reward had been offered, and said: “I ain’t a-goin’ ter help no
man break the law an’ hender jestice; but ef ye will go an’ stand yer
trial I’ll take keer of ye. An’ arter the jury hev done let ye off, ye
are welcome ter live along o’ me at my house till ye die.” And after
the trial and the clearance, this rough friend was as good as his word,
and “ungrudgingly gave of his best … and worked early and late that
there might be enough to divide.” “A prince could not have dispensed
hospitality with a more royal hand.” The author closes by saying: “The
grace of culture is, in its way, a fine thing, but the best that art can
do—the polish of a gentleman—is hardly equal to the best that nature can
do in her highest moods.” All of the stories are full of interest, and
show great love for humanity. The author, in a bright, cheery way, true
to the life which she represents, portrays the strong and noble natures
found in the lowest walks of life.

“A Book of Sermons,”[Q] by Bishop Simpson, will meet with a warm welcome
everywhere. To those who have heard him preach, who have listened to
his eager, impassioned words, and have been borne onward by the tide
of his eloquence, it may seem that to merely read the words—to have
them without the powerful influence, the magnetic personality, behind
them—is to possess the letter without the spirit. But such will be
happily surprised. The book bears witness that Bishop Simpson was a
great sermonizer, as well as a great speaker. By the aid of a little
imagination as one reads, he can see again the spare form, and the face
lighted up with enthusiasm and love; can hear the voice rapidly and
earnestly uttering the words which point out plainly and simply the way
of life. While, without this help, those who never heard him will find
great pleasure and profit in reading the book.

No one who knows Dr. Buckley but expects good things from his pen, and
he has given to young men a particularly useful volume in “Oats or
Wild-Oats?”[R] Advice is as difficult a thing to prescribe judiciously
as it is to take pleasantly. It is very liable to be insipid, preachy,
to lack _verve_ qualities, which young men particularly abominate; it is
very little of it readable. But these talks of Dr. Buckley’s abound in
readable qualities. They are directly to the point, and full of clear-cut
common sense. They advise young men in the practical matter of choosing
a profession, and in making a success of it. The talks come from a man
who, even if he “never worked a half day on a farm in his life,” has
observed and conversed with hundreds of farmers; who knows from what he
has heard and learned from their confessions to him just where they make
their business, social, intellectual, and religious mistakes; and who is
not afraid to express what he believes to be their dangers, and their
strong points. As with farming, so with all the trades and professions.
He knows his ground, and treats it in a tone a trifle blunt, perhaps, but
nevertheless full of force and conviction.

Mr. Marvin, an Englishman who for several years has lived in Russia,
and is thoroughly acquainted with the character, the policy, and the
wishes of that government, has, in writing “The Russians at the Gates
of Herat,”[S] tried to impress more deeply upon the English people the
necessity of immediate effort in order to secure themselves in the
possession of the entrance to India. The steady advance of Russia for
years past toward this empire has been carefully traced, and all the
treacherous devices by which she has gained ground are exposed. The
popular opinion that colossal mountain ranges lie between the Russian
possessions and India has been shown to be an error; the new route
over which they are passing is such that one could “drive all the way
four-in-hand.” “No surrender,” must be the motto of every Englishman
as regards Penjdeh, and “Hands off,” in respect to all places leading
directly to Herat, says the author. A careful study of this book will
give one a clear idea of this complicated movement.

The “Old Farm”[T] was one that had been for years without a tenant, for
its owner feared to lease it lest its old fashioned house and belongings
might not suit the new comer, and he would want it changed. At last one
was found willing, glad to take it just as it was. One bright October
day a business man from the great city, broken down in health, took
possession of it with his family. “A year of retirement and rest will
restore his vigor and save him for the future,” said the doctor. Very
soon the early tastes of the naturalist, for such he had been, awoke,
and the days were spent in seeking, gathering and studying specimens of
minute animal life, or “the other tenants of the farm,” as he called
them. The conversations held regarding them make up the main part of the
work. Spiders, moths, bees, wasps, and ants are among those described at
length; their history and habits are very accurately given. The blending
of the story with the natural history makes an exceedingly interesting
book.

[N] The Hundred Greatest Men. With Portraits, reproduced from Fine and
Rare Steel Engravings. Edited by Wallace Wood, M.D. New York: D. Appleton
& Co. 1885. Price, $6.00.

[O] The Hallam Succession. A Tale of Methodist Life in Two Countries. By
Amelia E. Barr. New York: Phillips & Hunt. 1885.

[P] In the Tennessee Mountains. By Charles Egbert Craddock. Boston:
Houghton, Mifflin & Co. Price, $1.25.

[Q] Sermons by Bishop Matthew Simpson. New York: Harper & Brothers,
Franklin Square. 1885.

[R] Oats or Wild-Oats? Common Sense for Young Men. By J. M. Buckley,
LL.D. New York: Phillips & Hunt. 1885. Price, $1.50.

[S] The Russians at the Gates of Herat. By Charles Marvin. With Maps and
Portraits. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. 1885. Price, 50 cents.

[T] Tenants of an Old Farm. By Henry C. McCook, D.D. Illustrated from
Nature. New York: Fords, Howard & Hulbert. 1885. Price, $2.50.




BOOKS RECEIVED.


The Women of the Reformation. By Mrs. Annie Wittenmyer. New York:
Phillips & Hunt. Cincinnati: Cranston & Stowe. 1885. Price, $2.00.

Preparation for Reading Xenophon. By James M. Whiton, Ph.D., and Mary B.
Whiton, A.B. New York: D. Appleton and Company. 1885.

Assyriology; Its Use and Abuse. By Francis Brown. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons. 1885.

Elias Power, of Ease-in-Zion. By John M. Bamford. New York: Phillips &
Hunt. Cincinnati: Cranston & Stowe. 1885. Price, 85c.

Wondrous Love. A Collection of Songs and Services for Sunday-schools. By
Geo. F. Root and C. C. Case. Cincinnati: The John Church Publishing Co.,
74 West Fourth Street.

The _Century Magazine_, Vol. XXIX. New Series, Vol. VIII. New York: The
Century Co.

Composition and Rhetoric. By G. P. Quackenbos, LL.D. New York: D.
Appleton and Company. 1885.

The Spinning Wheel of Tamworth. By the Rev. W. A. Smith. New York:
National Temperance Society and Publishing House, 58 Reade Street. 1884.

The Secret of Death and Other Poems. By Edwin Arnold. Boston: Roberts
Brothers. 1885. Price, $1.00.

Delivered from Afar. By Ralph Roberts. New York: Phillips & Hunt.
Cincinnati: Cranston & Stowe. 1885. Price, $1.50.

A Child’s Garden of Verses. By Robert Louis Stevenson. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons. 1885.

Harriet Martineau. By Mrs. F. Fenwick Miller. Boston: Roberts Brothers.
1885.

Grammar of Old English. By Edward Sievers, Ph.D. Boston: Ginn, Heath &
Co. 1885.

Hygiene for Young People. By A. B. Palmer, M.D., LL.D. New York: A. S.
Barnes & Co. 1885.

Krusi’s Drawing Tablets. New York: D. Appleton & Co. 1885.

Select Spelling and Pronouncing Lessons. New York; D. Appleton & Co.

Hygiene and Physiology. By J. D. Steele, Ph.D. New York: A. S. Barnes &
Co. 1885.

One of the Duanes. By Alice King Hamilton. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott
& Co. 1885. Price, $1.25.

Harriet Martineau’s Autobiography. Edited by Maria Weston Chapman.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. 1885.

Russia Under the Tzars. By Stepniak. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
1885.

Twenty-eight Breakfasts. By Emily Raymond. Toledo: Blade Printing and
Paper Co. 1885. Price, 10 cents.

Graded Review Questions. By W. M. Giffin and David Maclure. New York: A.
Lovell & Co., 16 Astor Place. 1885.

Leonard and Gertrude. By Pestalozzi. Translated and abridged by Eva
Channing. Boston: Ginn, Heath & Co. 1885.

Herbert Spencer’s Philosophy. Examined by James McCosh, D.D., LL.D. New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Redemption in Prophecy. By John G. Wilson. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott
& Co. 1885. Price, $1.25.

The Handy Companion. J. R. Holcombe & Co., Publishers. Cleveland, O.

Personal Traits of British Authors. By E. T. Mason. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons. 1885. Price, $1.50.

A Hand-Book of the United Brethren in Christ. By E. L. Shuey, A.M.
Dayton, O.: United Brethren Publishing House. 1885.

Anthè. By Mrs. G. W. Chandler. New York: Phillips & Hunt. Cincinnati:
Cranston & Stowe. 1885. Price, $1.00.

At the Sign of the Blue Boar. A Story of the Reign of Charles II. By Emma
Leslie. New York: Phillips & Hunt. 1885.

Life of Edward Thompson, D.D., LL.D., late a Bishop of the Methodist
Episcopal Church. By his son, Edward Thompson, M.A. Cincinnati: Cranston
& Stowe. 1885.




SPECIAL NOTES.


C. L. S. C. STATIONERY.—An entirely new design in stationery will be sold
at Chautauqua and other Assemblies this season. It is the only authorized
C. L. S. C. stationery. A new and uniform Chautauqua badge has also been
devised, and will be on sale at the various Assemblies. This badge bears
different emblematic designs, suitable for the different orders in the C.
L. S. C. It will take the place of all other badges, except the garnet
badge of the graduates, worn on Commencement day.—R. S. HOLMES.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the April issue of THE CHAUTAUQUAN we gave the credit of the
management of the School of Cookery at Lake de Funiak to Mrs. Emma P.
Ewing. We were wrong. Mrs. Ewing was not at the Florida Chautauqua,
but Mrs. Sophie W. Knight, of Grand Rapids, Michigan, was, and a very
delightful series of lessons in the art of cookery she gave.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chautauqua never fails to provide something new for its devotees. This
summer the novelty is a mineral spring. The waters have been in the
laboratory of an eminent chemist, and are pronounced rich in healthful
qualities.

       *       *       *       *       *

ERRATA.—The name of L. W. Sabin appeared among the graduates in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN for February under Missouri; it should have appeared under
Iowa.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE CLASS OF ’88.—So much having been written _pro_ and _con_,
respecting our class name, it is proposed to have the entire class vote
for or against the name. The circles will send their vote, giving the
number in favor and against present name. Those who are not in circles
can send their votes as individuals. In order to insure insertion the
vote must be sent to the Rev. C. C. McLean, St. Augustine, Fla., before
the 1st of June.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAUTAUQUA DAY AT OCEAN GROVE.—At Ocean Grove, N. J., arrangements have
been made to graduate all Chautauquans who have completed the course
of study and prefer to receive their diploma there; and the 29th of
July next has been set apart as a “Chautauqua day,” for the graduation
ceremonies and other exercises appropriate to the occasion. Chancellor
Vincent, Superintendent of Instruction, and other officers of the C. L.
S. C. will be present, and a large number of the pupils of the young
and vigorous “People’s College,” representing all parts of the country,
from the ocean to the Rocky Mountains, are expected to witness and
take part in the interesting exercises while enjoying the amenities of
that charming seaside town. There is, at Ocean Grove, a local circle
comprising a membership of nearly sixty. Many of the members are as full
of enthusiasm as our honored superintendent, with all his deep devotion
to the institution he has conducted to such a high degree of prosperity
and usefulness, can desire, and the necessary preparations for the
“Chautauqua day” will be made under its direction. The president of the
Ocean Grove Association, the Rev. Dr. E. H. Stokes, is also president of
the local circle. He is a zealous Chautauquan, and to his influence and
example must be attributed much of the zeal, industry and enthusiasm that
have made the local circle so interesting and profitable to members and
visitors. All members of the class of ’85 who can not go to Chautauqua
to receive their diplomas within the sacred shades of our beloved _alma
mater_, but may be able to make a visit for the purpose to Ocean Grove,
will be cordially welcomed, and it is suggested that they will do well to
give as early notice as practicable of their intentions in that regard.
Communications on the subject should be addressed to the Secretary of the
Ocean Grove Local Circle, Mrs. Lulu Pile Little.




IMPORTANT TO MEMBERS OF THE C. L. S. C.


The _Chautauqua Assembly Daily Herald_ will be printed in the grove at
Chautauqua, and issued as a morning paper in August, 1885. It will begin
Saturday, August 1, and continue every day for nineteen days. Nobody
can keep well informed on the Chautauqua movement without the _Assembly
Herald_. It will tell you nearly everything that is done. It will cost
$1.00 for the season, and it will contain stenographic reports of all the
scientific, philosophical, and other lectures delivered at the Chautauqua
meetings, together with elaborate reports of all meetings held there the
coming season. The price is very low. The _Assembly Daily Herald_ and
THE CHAUTAUQUAN at one time, $2.25. This offer is good only till August
1st. Members of the C. L. S. C. will find a great many valuable hints and
suggestions in the reports of meetings published in the _Assembly Daily
Herald_, also more than seventy splendid lectures. Some “local circles”
use the _Herald_ to assist them in conducting their work during the
winter months. Send in your names early, before the press of business is
upon us at Chautauqua.




CHAUTAUQUA SCHOOL OF LANGUAGES, 1885.

LEWIS MILLER, _Pres’t._ J. H. VINCENT, D.D., _Sup’t of Instruction_.


CHAUTAUQUA SCHOOL OF HEBREW.


INSTRUCTORS AND LECTURERS.

WILLIAM M. HARPER, Ph.D., Principal. Professor in Baptist Union
Theological Seminary, Morgan Park, Illinois.

CHARLES R. BROWN, Professor in Newton Theological Institution, Newton
Center, Massachusetts.

DAVID A. M’CLENAHAN, M.A., Pastor of United Presbyterian Church, New York
City.

J. J. ANDERSON, M.A., Professor in Theological Institute, Tuscaloosa,
Alabama.


REGULAR COURSES OF INSTRUCTION.

1. _The Elementary Class_ will be made up of those who have no knowledge
of the language. It will make about sixty recitations, three each day
(one on Saturday).

2. _The Intermediate Class_ will be made up of those who have once
studied Hebrew, but desire to renew this study from the beginning. The
class will begin with the first principles, and the work will differ from
that of the Elementary Class rather in amount than in character.

3. _The Progressive Class_ is intended for those who have had training in
the elementary principles of Hebrew, but who wish to become familiar with
the details of the language.

4. _The Advanced Class_ will do work of an advanced character. It is
intended for those who are thoroughly familiar with the grammar of the
language, who have at command a large vocabulary, and who have read large
portions of the Hebrew Bible.

The members of the Intermediate, Progressive and Advanced Classes will be
divided into four Extempore sections, each of which will read, during the
four weeks, forty hours under the care of an instructor.


_I. Special Courses._

In the Chautauqua School of Hebrew, instruction will be given, if
desired, in the following special courses:

1. _Aramaic._—One hour a day with Professor William R. Harper, Ph.D.,
Morgan Park, Ill.

2. _Advanced Hebrew Grammar._—One hour a day with Professor William R.
Harper, Ph.D.

3. _Hebrew New Testament._—One hour a day with Professor J. J. Anderson,
of Tuscaloosa, Ala.


_II. Lectures._

In the various courses of lectures given at Chautauqua, during the
session of the Summer School, there will be a number bearing upon topics
relating to Old Testament study.

The principal of the school will, in addition, give a series of ten
studies on “Modern Criticism of the Hexateuch.”


_III. General Information._

Attention is invited to the following items:

_Time._—The Chautauqua School of Hebrew will open August 4th, at 2 p.
m., and continue until August 31st, at 12 m.

_Tuition Fee._—The tuition fee will be $10.00, payable to the Secretary
of the Chautauqua Assembly. This sum includes admission to the grounds.
Boarding can be obtained at from $4 to $6 per week.

_Books._—The books needed for the several classes will be furnished
at the opening of the school, or may be obtained in advance from the
American Publication Society of Hebrew, Morgan Park, Ill. Books for the
Special Courses must be ordered in advance.

_Correspondence._—Those who desire further information, are requested to
correspond with the _Principal_,

                                     WILLIAM R. HARPER, Morgan Park, Ill.


COLLEGE OF ENGLISH.

W. D. M’CLINTOCK, A.M., Director.

_Summer Term, 1885._

I. ENGLISH LANGUAGE.

    1. Anglo-Saxon.

        (_a_) Beginners.—Sweet’s “Anglo-Saxon Primer.”

        (_b_) Advanced.—Sweet’s “Anglo-Saxon Reader,” and Lounsbury’s
        “English Language.”

    2. Essentials of English. Introduction of the Scientific Study of
    English Grammar.

        Ten lectures during Teachers’ Retreat.

II. ENGLISH LITERATURE.

    1. Shakspere, Hamlet. Four weeks.

    2. English Lyric Poetry. Studies in the Analysis and Criticism of
    Poetry. Two weeks.


THE CHAUTAUQUA COLLEGE OF MODERN LANGUAGES.

    PROF. J. H. WORMAN, PH.D., Director.
    PROF. A. LALANDE, Associate, School of French.

The College of Modern Languages, under the direction of the distinguished
teacher and author, Dr. J. H. Worman, will open July 11th, and continue
in session for six weeks.

For full information concerning the COLLEGE OF MODERN LANGUAGES for the
coming season, address as follows: German, Italian, and Spanish, Dr. J.
H. Worman, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn., for French, Prof. A.
Lalande, Bridgeport, Conn.


ACADEMIA OF LATIN AND GREEK.

EDGAR L. SHUMWAY—Principal.

For information concerning the “Academia of Latin and Greek,” see the
announcements in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for April and May, or address

                                                     EDGAR L. SHUMWAY,
                                                   Rutgers College, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 513 (illustration caption), “paletta” changed to “patella” (S,
femur; T, patella; U, tibia;)

Page 519, “nterspaces” changed to “interspaces” (cavernous interspaces
where trickling springs)

Page 521, “be” added (from which it will be seen)

Page 524, “Picadilly” changed to “Piccadilly” (Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly,
London)

Page 528, “Calvanism” changed to “Calvinism” (Calvinism was revolutionary)

Page 534, “durion” changed to “durian” (we can only refer to the durian)

Page 541, repeated word “of” removed (a method of taking things)

Page 545, “gradest” changed to “grandest” (best, most beautiful, and
grandest)

Page 548, “unfaverably” changed to “unfavorably” (he compared unfavorably
with others)

Page 558, “Chautauquo” changed to “Chautauqua” (printed in the grove at
Chautauqua)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chautauquan, Vol. 05, June 1885,
No. 9, by The Chautauquan Literary and Scientific Circle

