
THE HATED SON


By Honore De Balzac



Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley




                             DEDICATION

               To Madame la Baronne James Rothschild.





THE HATED SON





PART I. HOW THE MOTHER LIVED




CHAPTER I. A BEDROOM OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY


On a winter’s night, about two in the morning, the Comtesse Jeanne
d’Herouville felt such violent pains that in spite of her inexperience,
she was conscious of an approaching confinement; and the instinct which
makes us hope for ease in a change of posture induced her to sit up
in her bed, either to study the nature of these new sufferings, or to
reflect on her situation. She was a prey to cruel fears,--caused less
by the dread of a first lying-in, which terrifies most women, than by
certain dangers which awaited her child.

In order not to awaken her husband who was sleeping beside her, the poor
woman moved with precautions which her intense terror made as minute as
those of a prisoner endeavoring to escape. Though the pains became
more and more severe, she ceased to feel them, so completely did she
concentrate her own strength on the painful effort of resting her two
moist hands on the pillow and so turning her suffering body from a
posture in which she could find no ease. At the slightest rustling of
the huge green silk coverlet, under which she had slept but little since
her marriage, she stopped as though she had rung a bell. Forced to watch
the count, she divided her attention between the folds of the rustling
stuff and a large swarthy face, the moustache of which was brushing her
shoulder. When some noisier breath than usual left her husband’s lips,
she was filled with a sudden terror that revived the color driven from
her cheeks by her double anguish.

The prisoner reached the prison door in the dead of night and trying
to noiselessly turn the key in a pitiless lock, was never more timidly
bold.

When the countess had succeeded in rising to her seat without awakening
her keeper, she made a gesture of childlike joy which revealed the
touching naivete of her nature. But the half-formed smile on her burning
lips was quickly suppressed; a thought came to darken that pure brow,
and her long blue eyes resumed their sad expression. She gave a sigh
and again laid her hands, not without precaution, on the fatal conjugal
pillow. Then--as if for the first time since her marriage she found
herself free in thought and action--she looked at the things around her,
stretching out her neck with little darting motions like those of a bird
in its cage. Seeing her thus, it was easy to divine that she had once
been all gaiety and light-heartedness, but that fate had suddenly mown
down her hopes, and changed her ingenuous gaiety to sadness.

The chamber was one of those which, to this day octogenarian porters
of old chateaus point out to visitors as “the state bedroom where Louis
XIII. once slept.” Fine pictures, mostly brown in tone, were framed
in walnut, the delicate carvings of which were blackened by time. The
rafters of the ceiling formed compartments adorned with arabesques in
the style of the preceding century, which preserved the colors of the
chestnut wood. These decorations, severe in tone, reflected the light
so little that it was difficult to see their designs, even when the sun
shone full into that long and wide and lofty chamber. The silver lamp,
placed upon the mantel of the vast fireplace, lighted the room so feebly
that its quivering gleam could be compared only to the nebulous stars
which appear at moments through the dun gray clouds of an autumn night.
The fantastic figures crowded on the marble of the fireplace, which was
opposite to the bed, were so grotesquely hideous that she dared not fix
her eyes upon them, fearing to see them move, or to hear a startling
laugh from their gaping and twisted mouths.

At this moment a tempest was growling in the chimney, giving to every
puff of wind a lugubrious meaning,--the vast size of the flute putting
the hearth into such close communication with the skies above that the
embers upon it had a sort of respiration; they sparkled and went out at
the will of the wind. The arms of the family of Herouville, carved in
white marble with their mantle and supporters, gave the appearance of
a tomb to this species of edifice, which formed a pendant to the bed,
another erection raised to the glory of Hymen. Modern architects would
have been puzzled to decide whether the room had been built for the bed
or the bed for the room. Two cupids playing on the walnut headboard,
wreathed with garlands, might have passed for angels; and columns of
the same wood, supporting the tester were carved with mythological
allegories, the explanation of which could have been found either in the
Bible or Ovid’s Metamorphoses. Take away the bed, and the same tester
would have served in a church for the canopy of the pulpit or the
seats of the wardens. The married pair mounted by three steps to this
sumptuous couch, which stood upon a platform and was hung with curtains
of green silk covered with brilliant designs called “ramages”--possibly
because the birds of gay plumage there depicted were supposed to
sing. The folds of these immense curtains were so stiff that in the
semi-darkness they might have been taken for some metal fabric. On the
green velvet hanging, adorned with gold fringes, which covered the foot
of this lordly couch the superstition of the Comtes d’Herouville had
affixed a large crucifix, on which their chaplain placed a fresh branch
of sacred box when he renewed at Easter the holy water in the basin at
the foot of the cross.

On one side of the fireplace stood a large box or wardrobe of choice
woods magnificently carved, such as brides receive even now in the
provinces on their wedding day. These old chests, now so much in request
by antiquaries, were the arsenals from which women drew the rich and
elegant treasures of their personal adornment,--laces, bodices,
high collars and ruffs, gowns of price, alms-purses, masks, gloves,
veils,--in fact all the inventions of coquetry in the sixteenth century.

On the other side, by way of symmetry, was another piece of furniture,
somewhat similar in shape, where the countess kept her books, papers,
and jewels. Antique chairs covered with damask, a large and greenish
mirror, made in Venice, and richly framed in a sort of rolling
toilet-table, completed the furnishings of the room. The floor was
covered with a Persian carpet, the richness of which proved the
gallantry of the count; on the upper step of the bed stood a little
table, on which the waiting-woman served every night in a gold or silver
cup a drink prepared with spices.

After we have gone some way in life we know the secret influence exerted
by places on the condition of the soul. Who has not had his darksome
moments, when fresh hope has come into his heart from things that
surrounded him? The fortunate, or the unfortunate man, attributes an
intelligent countenance to the things among which he lives; he listens
to them, he consults them--so naturally superstitious is he. At
this moment the countess turned her eyes upon all these articles of
furniture, as if they were living beings whose help and protection she
implored; but the answer of that sombre luxury seemed to her inexorable.

Suddenly the tempest redoubled. The poor young woman could augur nothing
favorable as she listened to the threatening heavens, the changes of
which were interpreted in those credulous days according to the ideas
or the habits of individuals. Suddenly she turned her eyes to the two
arched windows at the end of the room; but the smallness of their panes
and the multiplicity of the leaden lines did not allow her to see the
sky and judge if the world were coming to an end, as certain monks,
eager for donations, affirmed. She might easily have believed in such
predictions, for the noise of the angry sea, the waves of which beat
against the castle wall, combined with the mighty voice of the tempest,
so that even the rocks appeared to shake. Though her sufferings were now
becoming keener and less endurable, the countess dared not awaken her
husband; but she turned and examined his features, as if despair
were urging her to find a consolation there against so many sinister
forebodings.

If matters were sad around the poor young woman, that face,
notwithstanding the tranquillity of sleep, seemed sadder still. The
light from the lamp, flickering in the draught, scarcely reached beyond
the foot of the bed and illumined the count’s head capriciously; so that
the fitful movements of its flash upon those features in repose produced
the effect of a struggle with angry thought. The countess was scarcely
reassured by perceiving the cause of that phenomenon. Each time that a
gust of wind projected the light upon the count’s large face, casting
shadows among its bony outlines, she fancied that her husband was about
to fix upon her his two insupportably stern eyes.

Implacable as the war then going on between the Church and Calvinism,
the count’s forehead was threatening even while he slept. Many furrows,
produced by the emotions of a warrior life, gave it a vague resemblance
to the vermiculated stone which we see in the buildings of that period;
his hair, like the whitish lichen of old oaks, gray before its time,
surrounded without grace a cruel brow, where religious intolerance
showed its passionate brutality. The shape of the aquiline nose, which
resembled the beak of a bird of prey, the black and crinkled lids of the
yellow eyes, the prominent bones of a hollow face, the rigidity of the
wrinkles, the disdain expressed in the lower lip, were all expressive
of ambition, despotism, and power, the more to be feared because
the narrowness of the skull betrayed an almost total absence of
intelligence, and a mere brute courage devoid of generosity. The face
was horribly disfigured by a large transversal scar which had the
appearance of a second mouth on the right cheek.

At the age of thirty-three the count, anxious to distinguish himself
in that unhappy religious war the signal for which was given on
Saint-Bartholomew’s day, had been grievously wounded at the siege of
Rochelle. The misfortune of this wound increased his hatred against the
partisans of what the language of that day called “the Religion,” but,
by a not unnatural turn of mind, he included in that antipathy all
handsome men. Before the catastrophe, however, he was so repulsively
ugly that no lady had ever been willing to receive him as a suitor. The
only passion of his youth was for a celebrated woman called La Belle
Romaine. The distrust resulting from this new misfortune made him
suspicious to the point of not believing himself capable of inspiring a
true passion; and his character became so savage that when he did have
some successes in gallantry he owed them to the terror inspired by
his cruelty. The left hand of this terrible Catholic, which lay on
the outside of the bed, will complete this sketch of his character.
Stretched out as if to guard the countess, as a miser guards his hoard,
that enormous hand was covered with hair so thick, it presented such
a network of veins and projecting muscles, that it gave the idea of a
branch of birch clasped with a growth of yellowing ivy.

Children looking at the count’s face would have thought him an ogre,
terrible tales of whom they knew by heart. It was enough to see the
width and length of the space occupied by the count in the bed, to
imagine his gigantic proportions. When awake, his gray eyebrows hid his
eyelids in a way to heighten the light of his eye, which glittered with
the luminous ferocity of a wolf skulking on the watch in a forest. Under
his lion nose, with its flaring nostrils, a large and ill-kept moustache
(for he despised all toilet niceties) completely concealed the upper
lip. Happily for the countess, her husband’s wide mouth was silent
at this moment, for the softest sounds of that harsh voice made her
tremble. Though the Comte d’Herouville was barely fifty years of age,
he appeared at first sight to be sixty, so much had the toils of war,
without injuring his robust constitution, dilapidated him physically.

The countess, who was now in her nineteenth year, made a painful
contrast to that large, repulsive figure. She was fair and slim. Her
chestnut locks, threaded with gold, played upon her neck like russet
shadows, and defined a face such as Carlo Dolce has painted for his
ivory-toned madonnas,--a face which now seemed ready to expire under
the increasing attacks of physical pain. You might have thought her the
apparition of an angel sent from heaven to soften the iron will of the
terrible count.

“No, he will not kill us!” she cried to herself mentally, after
contemplating her husband for a long time. “He is frank, courageous,
faithful to his word--faithful to his word!”

Repeating that last sentence in her thoughts, she trembled violently,
and remained as if stupefied.

To understand the horror of her present situation, we must add that
this nocturnal scene took place in 1591, a period when civil war raged
throughout France, and the laws had no vigor. The excesses of the
League, opposed to the accession of Henri IV., surpassed the calamities
of the religious wars. License was so universal that no one was
surprised to see a great lord kill his enemy in open day. When a
military expedition, having a private object, was led in the name of the
King or of the League, one or other of these parties applauded it. It
was thus that Blagny, a soldier, came near becoming a sovereign prince
at the gates of France. Sometime before Henri III.’s death, a court lady
murdered a nobleman who made offensive remarks about her. One of the
king’s minions remarked to him:--

“Hey! vive Dieu! sire, she daggered him finely!”

The Comte d’Herouville, one of the most rabid royalists in Normandy,
kept the part of that province which adjoins Brittany under subjection
to Henri IV. by the rigor of his executions. The head of one of the
richest families in France, he had considerably increased the revenues
of his great estates by marrying seven months before the night on which
this history begins, Jeanne de Saint-Savin, a young lady who, by a not
uncommon chance in days when people were killed off like flies, had
suddenly become the representative of both branches of the Saint-Savin
family. Necessity and terror were the causes which led to this union.
At a banquet given, two months after the marriage, to the Comte and
Comtesse d’Herouville, a discussion arose on a topic which in those days
of ignorance was thought amusing: namely, the legitimacy of children
coming into the world ten months after the death of their fathers, or
seven months after the wedding day.

“Madame,” said the count brutally, turning to his wife, “if you give me
a child ten months after my death, I cannot help it; but be careful that
you are not brought to bed in seven months!”

“What would you do then, old bear?” asked the young Marquis de Verneuil,
thinking that the count was joking.

“I should wring the necks of mother and child!”

An answer so peremptory closed the discussion, imprudently started by
a seigneur from Lower Normandy. The guests were silent, looking with a
sort of terror at the pretty Comtesse d’Herouville. All were convinced
that if such an event occurred, her savage lord would execute his
threat.

The words of the count echoed in the bosom of the young wife, then
pregnant; one of those presentiments which furrow a track like lightning
through the soul, told her that her child would be born at seven months.
An inward heat overflowed her from head to foot, sending the life’s
blood to her heart with such violence that the surface of her body felt
bathed in ice. From that hour not a day had passed that the sense of
secret terror did not check every impulse of her innocent gaiety. The
memory of the look, of the inflections of voice with which the
count accompanied his words, still froze her blood, and silenced her
sufferings, as she leaned over that sleeping head, and strove to see
some sign of a pity she had vainly sought there when awake.

The child, threatened with death before its life began, made so vigorous
a movement that she cried aloud, in a voice that seemed like a sigh,
“Poor babe!”

She said no more; there are ideas that a mother cannot bear. Incapable
of reasoning at this moment, the countess was almost choked with the
intensity of a suffering as yet unknown to her. Two tears, escaping from
her eyes, rolled slowly down her cheeks, and traced two shining lines,
remaining suspended at the bottom of that white face, like dewdrops on
a lily. What learned man would take upon himself to say that the child
unborn is on some neutral ground, where the emotions of its mother do
not penetrate during those hours when soul clasps body and communicates
its impressions, when thought permeates blood with healing balm or
poisonous fluids? The terror that shakes the tree, will it not hurt the
fruit? Those words, “Poor babe!” were they dictated by a vision of the
future? The shuddering of this mother was violent; her look piercing.

The bloody answer given by the count at the banquet was a link
mysteriously connecting the past with this premature confinement. That
odious suspicion, thus publicly expressed, had cast into the memories of
the countess a dread which echoed to the future. Since that fatal gala,
she had driven from her mind, with as much fear as another woman would
have found pleasure in evoking them, a thousand scattered scenes of her
past existence. She refused even to think of the happy days when her
heart was free to love. Like as the melodies of their native land make
exiles weep, so these memories revived sensations so delightful that
her young conscience thought them crimes, and sued them to enforce still
further the savage threat of the count. There lay the secret of the
horror which was now oppressing her soul.

Sleeping figures possess a sort of suavity, due to the absolute repose
of both body and mind; but though that species of calmness softened
but slightly the harsh expression of the count’s features, all illusion
granted to the unhappy is so persuasive that the poor wife ended
by finding hope in that tranquillity. The roar of the tempest, now
descending in torrents of rain, seemed to her no more than a melancholy
moan; her fears and her pains both yielded her a momentary respite.
Contemplating the man to whom her life was bound, the countess
allowed herself to float into a reverie, the sweetness of which was so
intoxicating that she had no strength to break its charm. For a moment,
by one of those visions which in some way share the divine power, there
passed before her rapid images of a happiness lost beyond recall.

Jeanne in her vision saw faintly, and as if in a distant gleam of dawn,
the modest castle where her careless childhood had glided on; there were
the verdant lawns, the rippling brook, the little chamber, the scenes
of her happy play. She saw herself gathering flowers and planting them,
unknowing why they wilted and would not grow, despite her constancy in
watering them. Next, she saw confusedly the vast town and the vast house
blackened by age, to which her mother took her when she was seven years
old. Her lively memory showed her the old gray heads of the masters who
taught and tormented her. She remembered the person of her father; she
saw him getting off his mule at the door of the manor-house, and taking
her by the hand to lead her up the stairs; she recalled how her prattle
drove from his brow the judicial cares he did not always lay aside
with his black or his red robes, the white fur of which fell one day by
chance under the snipping of her mischievous scissors. She cast but one
glance at the confessor of her aunt, the mother-superior of a convent
of Poor Clares, a rigid and fanatical old man, whose duty it was to
initiate her into the mysteries of religion. Hardened by the severities
necessary against heretics, the old priest never ceased to jangle the
chains of hell; he told her of nothing but the vengeance of Heaven, and
made her tremble with the assurance that God’s eye was on her. Rendered
timid, she dared not raise her eyes in the priest’s presence, and ceased
to have any feeling but respect for her mother, whom up to that time she
had made a sharer in all her frolics. When she saw that beloved mother
turning her blue eyes towards her with an appearance of anger, a
religious terror took possession of the girl’s heart.

Then suddenly the vision took her to the second period of her childhood,
when as yet she understood nothing of the things of life. She thought
with an almost mocking regret of the days when all her happiness was to
work beside her mother in the tapestried salon, to pray in the church,
to sing her ballads to a lute, to read in secret a romance of chivalry,
to pluck the petals of a flower, discover what gift her father would
make her on the feast of the Blessed Saint-John, and find out the
meaning of speeches repressed before her. Passing thus from her childish
joys through the sixteen years of her girlhood, the grace of those
softly flowing years when she knew no pain was eclipsed by the
brightness of a memory precious though ill-fated. The joyous peace
of her childhood was far less sweet to her than a single one of the
troubles scattered upon the last two years of her childhood,--years that
were rich in treasures now buried forever in her heart.

The vision brought her suddenly to that morning, that ravishing morning,
when in the grand old parlor panelled and carved in oak, which served
the family as a dining-room, she saw her handsome cousin for the first
time. Alarmed by the seditions in Paris, her mother’s family had sent
the young courtier to Rouen, hoping that he could there be trained to
the duties of the magistracy by his uncle, whose office might some day
devolve upon him. The countess smiled involuntarily as she remembered
the haste with which she retired on seeing this relation whom she did
not know. But, in spite of the rapidity with which she opened and
shut the door, a single glance had put into her soul so vigorous an
impression of the scene that even at this moment she seemed to see it
still occurring. Her eye again wandered from the violet velvet mantle
embroidered with gold and lined with satin to the spurs on the boots,
the pretty lozenges slashed into the doublet, the trunk-hose, and the
rich collaret which gave to view a throat as white as the lace around
it. She stroked with her hand the handsome face with its tiny pointed
moustache, and “royale” as small as the ermine tips upon her father’s
hood.

In the silence of the night, with her eyes fixed on the green silk
curtains which she no longer saw, the countess, forgetting the storm,
her husband, and her fears, recalled the days which seemed to her
longer than years, so full were they,--days when she loved, and was
beloved!--and the moment when, fearing her mother’s sternness, she
had slipped one morning into her father’s study to whisper her girlish
confidences on his knee, waiting for his smile at her caresses to say
in his ear, “Will you scold me if I tell you something?” Once more she
heard her father say, after a few questions in reply to which she spoke
for the first time of her love, “Well, well, my child, we will think
of it. If he studies well, if he fits himself to succeed me, if he
continues to please you, I will be on your side.”

After that she had listened no longer; she had kissed her father, and,
knocking over his papers as she ran from the room, she flew to the great
linden-tree where, daily, before her formidable mother rose, she met
that charming cousin, Georges de Chaverny.

Faithfully the youth promised to study law and customs. He laid aside
the splendid trappings of the nobility of the sword to wear the sterner
costume of the magistracy.

“I like you better in black,” she said.

It was a falsehood, but by that falsehood she comforted her lover for
having thrown his dagger to the winds. The memory of the little schemes
employed to deceive her mother, whose severity seemed great, brought
back to her the soulful joys of that innocent and mutual and sanctioned
love; sometimes a rendezvous beneath the linden, where speech could
be freer than before witnesses; sometimes a furtive clasp, or a stolen
kiss,--in short, all the naive instalments of a passion that did not
pass the bounds of modesty. Reliving in her vision those delightful days
when she seemed to have too much happiness, she fancied that she kissed,
in the void, that fine young face with the glowing eyes, that rosy
mouth that spoke so well of love. Yes, she had loved Chaverny, poor
apparently; but what treasures had she not discovered in that soul as
tender as it was strong!

Suddenly her father died. Chaverny did not succeed him. The flames
of civil war burst forth. By Chaverny’s care she and her mother found
refuge in a little town of Lower Normandy. Soon the deaths of other
relatives made her one of the richest heiresses in France. Happiness
disappeared as wealth came to her. The savage and terrible face of Comte
d’Herouville, who asked her hand, rose before her like a thunder-cloud,
spreading its gloom over the smiling meadows so lately gilded by the
sun. The poor countess strove to cast from her memory the scenes of
weeping and despair brought about by her long resistance.

At last came an awful night when her mother, pale and dying, threw
herself at her daughter’s feet. Jeanne could save Chaverny’s life by
yielding; she yielded. It was night. The count, arriving bloody from
the battlefield was there; all was ready, the priest, the altar, the
torches! Jeanne belonged henceforth to misery. Scarcely had she time to
say to her young cousin who was set at liberty:--

“Georges, if you love me, never see me again!”

She heard the departing steps of her lover, whom, in truth, she never
saw again; but in the depths of her heart she still kept sacred his last
look which returned perpetually in her dreams and illumined them. Living
like a cat shut into a lion’s cage, the young wife dreaded at all hours
the claws of the master which ever threatened her. She knew that in
order to be happy she must forget the past and think only of the future;
but there were days, consecrated to the memory of some vanished joy,
when she deliberately made it a crime to put on the gown she had worn on
the day she had seen her lover for the first time.

“I am not guilty,” she said, “but if I seem guilty to the count it is as
if I were so. Perhaps I am! The Holy Virgin conceived without--”

She stopped. During this moment when her thoughts were misty and her
soul floated in a region of fantasy her naivete made her attribute to
that last look with which her lover transfixed her the occult power of
the visitation of the angel to the Mother of her Lord. This supposition,
worthy of the days of innocence to which her reverie had carried her
back, vanished before the memory of a conjugal scene more odious than
death. The poor countess could have no real doubt as to the legitimacy
of the child that stirred in her womb. The night of her marriage
reappeared to her in all the horror if its agony, bringing in its train
other such nights and sadder days.

“Ah! my poor Chaverny!” she cried, weeping, “you so respectful, so
gracious, YOU were always kind to me.”

She turned her eyes to her husband as if to persuade herself that that
harsh face contained a promise of mercy, dearly brought. The count was
awake. His yellow eyes, clear as those of a tiger, glittered beneath
their tufted eyebrows and never had his glance been so incisive. The
countess, terrified at having encountered it, slid back under the great
counterpane and was motionless.

“Why are you weeping?” said the count, pulling away the covering which
hid his wife.

That voice, always a terror to her, had a specious softness at this
moment which seemed to her of good augury.

“I suffer much,” she answered.

“Well, my pretty one, it is no crime to suffer; why did you tremble when
I looked at you? Alas! what must I do to be loved?” The wrinkles of his
forehead between the eyebrows deepened. “I see plainly you are afraid of
me,” he added, sighing.

Prompted by the instinct of feeble natures the countess interrupted the
count by moans, exclaiming:--

“I fear a miscarriage! I clambered over the rocks last evening and tired
myself.”

Hearing those words, the count cast so horribly suspicious a look upon
his wife, that she reddened and shuddered. He mistook the fear of the
innocent creature for remorse.

“Perhaps it is the beginning of a regular childbirth,” he said.

“What then?” she said.

“In any case, I must have a proper man here,” he said. “I will fetch
one.”

The gloomy look which accompanied these words overcame the countess,
who fell back in the bed with a moan, caused more by a sense of her fate
than by the agony of the coming crisis; that moan convinced the count of
the justice of the suspicions that were rising in his mind. Affecting
a calmness which the tones of his voice, his gestures, and looks
contradicted, he rose hastily, wrapped himself in a dressing-gown which
lay on a chair, and began by locking a door near the chimney through
which the state bedroom was entered from the reception rooms which
communicated with the great staircase.

Seeing her husband pocket that key, the countess had a presentiment of
danger. She next heard him open the door opposite to that which he had
just locked and enter a room where the counts of Herouville slept when
they did not honor their wives with their noble company. The countess
knew of that room only by hearsay. Jealousy kept her husband always with
her. If occasionally some military expedition forced him to leave her,
the count left more than one Argus, whose incessant spying proved his
shameful distrust.

In spite of the attention the countess now gave to the slightest noise,
she heard nothing more. The count had, in fact, entered a long gallery
leading from his room which continued down the western wing of the
castle. Cardinal d’Herouville, his great-uncle, a passionate lover of
the works of printing, had there collected a library as interesting for
the number as for the beauty of its volumes, and prudence had caused
him to build into the walls one of those curious inventions suggested by
solitude or by monastic fears. A silver chain set in motion, by means of
invisible wires, a bell placed at the bed’s head of a faithful servitor.
The count now pulled the chain, and the boots and spurs of the man on
duty sounded on the stone steps of a spiral staircase, placed in the
tall tower which flanked the western corner of the chateau on the ocean
side.

When the count heard the steps of his retainer he pulled back the rusty
bolts which protected the door leading from the gallery to the tower,
admitting into the sanctuary of learning a man of arms whose stalwart
appearance was in keeping with that of his master. This man, scarcely
awakened, seemed to have walked there by instinct; the horn lantern
which he held in his hand threw so feeble a gleam down the long library
that his master and he appeared in that visible darkness like two
phantoms.

“Saddle my war-horse instantly, and come with me yourself.”

This order was given in a deep tone which roused the man’s intelligence.
He raised his eyes to those of his master and encountered so piercing a
look that the effect was that of an electric shock.

“Bertrand,” added the count laying his right hand on the servant’s
arm, “take off your cuirass, and wear the uniform of a captain of
guerrillas.”

“Heavens and earth, monseigneur! What? disguise myself as a Leaguer!
Excuse me, I will obey you; but I would rather be hanged.”

The count smiled; then to efface that smile, which contrasted with the
expression of his face, he answered roughly:--

“Choose the strongest horse there is in the stable and follow me. We
shall ride like balls shot from an arquebuse. Be ready when I am ready.
I will ring to let you know.”

Bertrand bowed in silence and went away; but when he had gone a few
steps he said to himself, as he listened to the howling of the storm:--

“All the devils are abroad, jarnidieu! I’d have been surprised to
see this one stay quietly in his bed. We took Saint-Lo in just such a
tempest as this.”

The count kept in his room a disguise which often served him in his
campaign stratagems. Putting on the shabby buff-coat that looked as
thought it might belong to one of the poor horse-soldiers whose pittance
was so seldom paid by Henri IV., he returned to the room where his wife
was moaning.

“Try to suffer patiently,” he said to her. “I will founder my horse if
necessary to bring you speedy relief.”

These words were certainly not alarming, and the countess, emboldened by
them, was about to make a request when the count asked her suddenly:--

“Tell me where you keep your masks?”

“My masks!” she replied. “Good God! what do you want to do with them?”

“Where are they?” he repeated, with his usual violence.

“In the chest,” she said.

She shuddered when she saw her husband select from among her masks a
“touret de nez,” the wearing of which was as common among the ladies of
that time as the wearing of gloves in our day. The count became entirely
unrecognizable after he had put on an old gray felt hat with a broken
cock’s feather on his head. He girded round his loins a broad leathern
belt, in which he stuck a dagger, which he did not wear habitually.
These miserable garments gave him so terrifying an air and he approached
the bed with so strange a motion that the countess thought her last hour
had come.

“Ah! don’t kill us!” she cried, “leave me my child, and I will love you
well.”

“You must feel yourself very guilty to offer as the ransom of your
faults the love you owe me.”

The count’s voice was lugubrious and the bitter words were enforced by a
look which fell like lead upon the countess.

“My God!” she cried sorrowfully, “can innocence be fatal?”

“Your death is not in question,” said her master, coming out of a sort
of reverie into which he had fallen. “You are to do exactly, and for
love of me, what I shall now tell you.”

He flung upon the bed one of the two masks he had taken from the chest,
and smiled with derision as he saw the gesture of involuntary fear which
the slight shock of the black velvet wrung from his wife.

“You will give me a puny child!” he cried. “Wear that mask on your face
when I return. I’ll have no barber-surgeon boast that he has seen the
Comtesse d’Herouville.”

“A man!--why choose a man for the purpose?” she said in a feeble voice.

“Ho! ho! my lady, am I not master here?” replied the count.

“What matters one horror the more!” murmured the countess; but her
master had disappeared, and the exclamation did her no injury.

Presently, in a brief lull of the storm, the countess heard the gallop
of two horses which seemed to fly across the sandy dunes by which the
castle was surrounded. The sound was quickly lost in that of the waves.
Soon she felt herself a prisoner in the vast apartment, alone in the
midst of a night both silent and threatening, and without succor against
an evil she saw approaching her with rapid strides. In vain she sought
for some stratagem by which to save that child conceived in tears,
already her consolation, the spring of all her thoughts, the future of
her affections, her one frail hope.

Sustained by maternal courage, she took the horn with which her husband
summoned his men, and, opening a window, blew through the brass tube
feeble notes that died away upon the vast expanse of water, like a
bubble blown into the air by a child. She felt the uselessness of that
moan unheard of men, and turned to hasten through the apartments, hoping
that all the issues were not closed upon her. Reaching the library she
sought in vain for some secret passage; then, passing between the long
rows of books, she reached a window which looked upon the courtyard.
Again she sounded the horn, but without success against the voice of the
hurricane.

In her helplessness she thought of trusting herself to one of the
women,--all creatures of her husband,--when, passing into her oratory,
she found that the count had locked the only door that led to their
apartments. This was a horrible discovery. Such precautions taken
to isolate her showed a desire to proceed without witnesses to some
horrible execution. As moment after moment she lost hope, the pangs of
childbirth grew stronger and keener. A presentiment of murder, joined
to the fatigue of her efforts, overcame her last remaining strength. She
was like a shipwrecked man who sinks, borne under by one last wave less
furious than others he has vanquished. The bewildering pangs of her
condition kept her from knowing the lapse of time. At the moment when
she felt that, alone, without help, she was about to give birth to her
child, and to all her other terrors was added that of the accidents to
which her ignorance exposed her, the count appeared, without a sound
that let her know of his arrival. The man was there, like a demon
claiming at the close of a compact the soul that was sold to him.
He muttered angrily at finding his wife’s face uncovered; then after
masking her carefully, he took her in his arms and laid her on the bed
in her chamber.




