CHAPTER II. THE BONESETTER


The terror of that apparition and hasty removal stopped for a moment
the physical sufferings of the countess, and so enabled her to cast
a furtive glance at the actors in this mysterious scene. She did not
recognize Bertrand, who was there disguised and masked as carefully as
his master. After lighting in haste some candles, the light of which
mingled with the first rays of the sun which were reddening the window
panes, the old servitor had gone to the embrasure of a window and stood
leaning against a corner of it. There, with his face towards the wall,
he seemed to be estimating its thickness, keeping his body in such
absolute immobility that he might have been taken for a statue. In the
middle of the room the countess beheld a short, stout man, apparently
out of breath and stupefied, whose eyes were blindfolded and his
features so distorted with terror that it was impossible to guess at
their natural expression.

“God’s death! you scamp,” said the count, giving him back his eyesight
by a rough movement which threw upon the man’s neck the bandage that had
been upon his eyes. “I warn you not to look at anything but the wretched
woman on whom you are now to exercise your skill; if you do, I’ll fling
you into the river that flows beneath those windows, with a collar round
your neck weighing a hundred pounds!”

With that, he pulled down upon the breast of his stupefied hearer the
cravat with which his eyes had been bandaged.

“Examine first if this can be a miscarriage,” he continued; “in which
case your life will answer to me for the mother’s; but, if the child is
living, you are to bring it to me.”

So saying, the count seized the poor operator by the body and placed him
before the countess, then he went himself to the depths of a bay-window
and began to drum with his fingers upon the panes, casting glances
alternately on his serving-man, on the bed, and at the ocean, as if he
were pledging to the expected child a cradle in the waves.

The man whom, with outrageous violence, the count and Bertrand had
snatched from his bed and fastened to the crupper of the latter’s
horse, was a personage whose individuality may serve to characterize the
period,--a man, moreover, whose influence was destined to make itself
felt in the house of Herouville.

Never in any age were the nobles so little informed as to natural
science, and never was judicial astrology held in greater honor; for
at no period in history was there a greater general desire to know
the future. This ignorance and this curiosity had led to the utmost
confusion in human knowledge; all things were still mere personal
experience; the nomenclatures of theory did not exist; printing was done
at enormous cost; scientific communication had little or no facility;
the Church persecuted science and all research which was based on the
analysis of natural phenomena. Persecution begat mystery. So, to the
people as well as to the nobles, physician and alchemist, mathematician
and astronomer, astrologer and necromancer were six attributes, all
meeting in the single person of the physician. In those days a superior
physician was supposed to be cultivating magic; while curing his patient
he was drawing their horoscopes. Princes protected the men of genius who
were willing to reveal the future; they lodged them in their palaces
and pensioned them. The famous Cornelius Agrippa, who came to France
to become the physician of Henri II., would not consent, as Nostradamus
did, to predict the future, and for this reason he was dismissed by
Catherine de’ Medici, who replaced him with Cosmo Ruggiero. The men
of science, who were superior to their times, were therefore seldom
appreciated; they simply inspired an ignorant fear of occult sciences
and their results.

Without being precisely one of the famous mathematicians, the man whom
the count had brought enjoyed in Normandy the equivocal reputation
which attached to a physician who was known to do mysterious works.
He belonged to the class of sorcerers who are still called in parts of
France “bonesetters.” This name belonged to certain untutored geniuses
who, without apparent study, but by means of hereditary knowledge and
the effect of long practice, the observations of which accumulated in
the family, were bonesetters; that is, they mended broken limbs and
cured both men and beasts of certain maladies, possessing secrets said
to be marvellous for the treatment of serious cases. But not only had
Maitre Antoine Beauvouloir (the name of the present bonesetter) a father
and grandfather who were famous practitioners, from whom he inherited
important traditions, he was also learned in medicine, and was given to
the study of natural science. The country people saw his study full of
books and other strange things which gave to his successes a coloring
of magic. Without passing strictly for a sorcerer, Antoine Beauvouloir
impressed the populace through a circumference of a hundred miles with
respect akin to terror, and (what was far more really dangerous for
himself) he held in his power many secrets of life and death which
concerned the noble families of that region. Like his father and
grandfather before him, he was celebrated for his skill in confinements
and miscarriages. In those days of unbridled disorder, crimes were so
frequent and passions so violent that the higher nobility often found
itself compelled to initiate Maitre Antoine Beauvouloir into secrets
both shameful and terrible. His discretion, so essential to his safety,
was absolute; consequently his clients paid him well, and his hereditary
practice greatly increased. Always on the road, sometimes roused in the
dead of night, as on this occasion by the count, sometimes obliged to
spend several days with certain great ladies, he had never married; in
fact, his reputation had hindered certain young women from accepting
him. Incapable of finding consolation in the practice of his profession,
which gave him such power over feminine weakness, the poor bonesetter
felt himself born for the joys of family and yet was unable to obtain
them.

The good man’s excellent heart was concealed by a misleading appearance
of joviality in keeping with his puffy cheeks and rotund figure, the
vivacity of his fat little body, and the frankness of his speech. He was
anxious to marry that he might have a daughter who should transfer his
property to some poor noble; he did not like his station as bonesetter
and wished to rescue his family name from the position in which the
prejudices of the times had placed it. He himself took willingly enough
to the feasts and jovialities which usually followed his principal
operations. The habit of being on such occasions the most important
personage in the company, had added to his natural gaiety a sufficient
dose of serious vanity. His impertinences were usually well received in
crucial moments when it often pleased him to perform his operations with
a certain slow majesty. He was, in other respects, as inquisitive as a
nightingale, as greedy as a hound, and as garrulous as all diplomatists
who talk incessantly and betray no secrets. In spite of these defects
developed in him by the endless adventures into which his profession led
him, Antoine Beauvouloir was held to be the least bad man in Normandy.
Though he belonged to the small number of minds who are superior to
their epoch, the strong good sense of a Norman countryman warned him
to conceal the ideas he acquired and the truths he from time to time
discovered.

As soon as he found himself placed by the count in presence of a woman
in childbirth, the bonesetter recovered his presence of mind. He felt
the pulse of the masked lady; not that he gave it a single thought, but
under cover of that medical action he could reflect, and he did reflect
on his own situation. In none of the shameful and criminal intrigues in
which superior force had compelled him to act as a blind instrument,
had precautions been taken with such mystery as in this case. Though his
death had often been threatened as a means of assuring the secrecy of
enterprises in which he had taken part against his will, his life had
never been so endangered as at that moment. He resolved, before all
things, to find out who it was who now employed him, and to discover
the actual extent of his danger, in order to save, if possible, his own
little person.

“What is the trouble?” he said to the countess in a low voice, as he
placed her in a manner to receive his help.

“Do not give him the child--”

“Speak loud!” cried the count in thundering tones which prevented
Beauvouloir from hearing the last word uttered by the countess. “If
not,” added the count who was careful to disguise his voice, “say your
‘In manus.’”

“Complain aloud,” said the leech to the lady; “cry! scream! Jarnidieu!
that man has a necklace that won’t fit you any better than me. Courage,
my little lady!”

“Touch her lightly!” cried the count.

“Monsieur is jealous,” said the operator in a shrill voice, fortunately
drowned by the countess’s cries.

For Maitre Beauvouloir’s safety Nature was merciful. It was more a
miscarriage than a regular birth, and the child was so puny that it
caused little suffering to the mother.

“Holy Virgin!” cried the bonesetter, “it isn’t a miscarriage, after
all!”

The count made the floor shake as he stamped with rage. The countess
pinched Beauvouloir.

“Ah! I see!” he said to himself. “It ought to be a premature birth,
ought it?” he whispered to the countess, who replied with an affirmative
sign, as if that gesture were the only language in which to express her
thoughts.

“It is not all clear to me yet,” thought the bonesetter.

Like all men in constant practice, he recognized at once a woman in her
first trouble as he called it. Though the modest inexperience of
certain gestures showed him the virgin ignorance of the countess, the
mischievous operator exclaimed:--

“Madame is delivered as if she knew all about it!”

The count then said, with a calmness more terrifying than his anger:--

“Give me the child.”

“Don’t give it him, for the love of God!” cried the mother, whose almost
savage cry awoke in the heart of the little man a courageous pity which
attached him, more than he knew himself, to the helpless infant rejected
by his father.

“The child is not yet born; you are counting your chicken before it is
hatched,” he said, coldly, hiding the infant.

Surprised to hear no cries, he examined the child, thinking it dead. The
count, seeing the deception, sprang upon him with one bound.

“God of heaven! will you give it to me?” he cried, snatching the hapless
victim which uttered feeble cries.

“Take care; the child is deformed and almost lifeless; it is a seven
months’ child,” said Beauvouloir clinging to the count’s arm. Then, with
a strength given to him by the excitement of his pity, he clung to the
father’s fingers, whispering in a broken voice: “Spare yourself a crime,
the child cannot live.”

“Wretch!” replied the count, from whose hands the bonesetter had
wrenched the child, “who told you that I wished to kill my son? Could I
not caress it?”

“Wait till he is eighteen years old to caress him in that way,” replied
Beauvouloir, recovering the sense of his importance. “But,” he
added, thinking of his own safety, for he had recognized the Comte
d’Herouville, who in his rage had forgotten to disguise his voice, “have
him baptized at once and do not speak of his danger to the mother, or
you will kill her.”

The gesture of satisfaction which escaped the count when the child’s
death was prophesied, suggested this speech to the bonesetter as the
best means of saving the child at the moment. Beauvouloir now hastened
to carry the infant back to its mother who had fainted, and he pointed
to her condition reprovingly, to warn the count of the results of his
violence. The countess had heard all; for in many of the great crises
of life the human organs acquire an otherwise unknown delicacy. But the
cries of the child, laid beside her on the bed, restored her to life
as if by magic; she fancied she heard the voices of angels, when, under
cover of the whimperings of the babe, the bonesetter said in her ear:--

“Take care of him, and he’ll live a hundred years. Beauvouloir knows
what he is talking about.”

A celestial sigh, a silent pressure of the hand were the reward of the
leech, who had looked to see, before yielding the frail little creature
to its mother’s embrace, whether that of the father had done no harm to
its puny organization. The half-crazed motion with which the mother hid
her son beside her and the threatening glance she cast upon the count
through the eye-holes of her mask, made Beauvouloir shudder.

“She will die if she loses that child too soon,” he said to the count.

During the latter part of this scene the lord of Herouville seemed to
hear and see nothing. Rigid, and as if absorbed in meditation, he stood
by the window drumming on its panes. But he turned at the last words
uttered by the bonesetter, with an almost frenzied motion, and came to
him with uplifted dagger.

“Miserable clown!” he cried, giving him the opprobrious name by which
the Royalists insulted the Leaguers. “Impudent scoundrel! your science
which makes you the accomplice of men who steal inheritances is all that
prevents me from depriving Normandy of her sorcerer.”

So saying, and to Beauvouloir’s great satisfaction, the count replaced
the dagger in its sheath.

“Could you not,” continued the count, “find yourself for once in
your life in the honorable company of a noble and his wife, without
suspecting them of the base crimes and trickery of your own kind? Kill
my son! take him from his mother! Where did you get such crazy ideas?
Am I a madman? Why do you attempt to frighten me about the life of that
vigorous child? Fool! I defy your silly talk--but remember this, since
you are here, your miserable life shall answer for that of the mother
and the child.”

The bonesetter was puzzled by this sudden change in the count’s
intentions. This show of tenderness for the infant alarmed him far more
than the impatient cruelty and savage indifference hitherto manifested
by the count, whose tone in pronouncing the last words seemed to
Beauvouloir to point to some better scheme for reaching his infernal
ends. The shrewd practitioner turned this idea over in his mind until a
light struck him.

“I have it!” he said to himself. “This great and good noble does not
want to make himself odious to his wife; he’ll trust to the vials of the
apothecary. I must warn the lady to see to the food and medicine of her
babe.”

As he turned toward the bed, the count who had opened a closet, stopped
him with an imperious gesture, holding out a purse. Beauvouloir saw
within its red silk meshes a quantity of gold, which the count now flung
to him contemptuously.

“Though you make me out a villain I am not released from the obligation
of paying you like a lord. I shall not ask you to be discreet. This man
here,” (pointing to Bertrand) “will explain to you that there are rivers
and trees everywhere for miserable wretches who chatter of me.”

So saying the count advanced slowly to the bonesetter, pushed a chair
noisily toward him, as if to invite him to sit down, as he did himself
by the bedside; then he said to his wife in a specious voice:--

“Well, my pretty one, so we have a son; this is a joyful thing for us.
Do you suffer much?”

“No,” murmured the countess.

The evident surprise of the mother, and the tardy demonstrations of
pleasure on the part of the father, convinced Beauvouloir that there
was some incident behind all this which escaped his penetration. He
persisted in his suspicion, and rested his hand on that of the young
wife, less to watch her condition than to convey to her some advice.

“The skin is good, I fear nothing for madame. The milk fever will come,
of course; but you need not be alarmed; that is nothing.”

At this point the wily bonesetter paused, and pressed the hand of the
countess to make her attentive to his words.

“If you wish to avoid all anxiety about your son, madame,” he continued,
“never leave him; suckle him yourself, and beware of the drugs of
apothecaries. The mother’s breast is the remedy for all the ills of
infancy. I have seen many births of seven months’ children, but I never
saw any so little painful as this. But that is not surprising; the child
is so small. You could put him in a wooden shoe! I am certain he doesn’t
weight more than sixteen ounces. Milk, milk, milk. Keep him always on
your breast and you will save him.”

These last words were accompanied by a significant pressure of the
fingers. Disregarding the yellow flames flashing from the eyeholes
of the count’s mask, Beauvouloir uttered these words with the serious
imperturbability of a man who intends to earn his money.

“Ho! ho! bonesetter, you are leaving your old felt hat behind you,” said
Bertrand, as the two left the bedroom together.

The reasons of the sudden mercy which the count had shown to his son
were to be found in a notary’s office. At the moment when Beauvouloir
arrested his murderous hand avarice and the Legal Custom of Normandy
rose up before him. Those mighty powers stiffened his fingers and
silenced the passion of his hatred. One cried out to him, “The property
of your wife cannot belong to the house of Herouville except through
a male child.” The other pointed to a dying countess and her fortune
claimed by the collateral heirs of the Saint-Savins. Both advised him
to leave to nature the extinction of that hated child, and to wait the
birth of a second son who might be healthy and vigorous before getting
rid of his wife and first-born. He saw neither wife nor child; he saw
the estates only, and hatred was softened by ambition. The mother, who
knew his nature, was even more surprised than the bonesetter, and she
still retained her instinctive fears, showing them at times openly, for
the courage of mothers seemed suddenly to have doubled her strength.




