WHY I AM A FATALITY



1


I know my destiny. There will come a day when my name will recall
the memory of something formidable--a crisis the like of which has
never been known on earth, the memory of the most profound clash
of consciences, and the passing of a sentence upon all that which
theretofore had been believed, exacted, and hallowed. I am not a
man, I am dynamite. And with it all there is nought of the founder
of a religion in me. Religions are matters for the mob; after coming
in contact with a religious man, I always feel that I must wash my
hands.... I require no "believers," it is my opinion that I am too
full of malice to believe even in myself; I never address myself to
masses. I am horribly frightened that one day I shall be pronounced
"holy." You will understand why I publish this book beforehand--it is
to prevent people from wronging me. I refuse to be a saint; I would
rather be a clown. Maybe I am a clown. And I am notwithstanding, or
rather not _not_withstanding, the mouthpiece of truth; for nothing
more blown-out with falsehood has ever existed, than a saint. But
my truth is terrible: for hitherto _lies_ have been called truth.
_The Transvaluation of all Values,_ this is my formula for mankind's
greatest step towards coming to its senses--a step which in me became
flesh and genius. My destiny ordained that I should be the first decent
human being, and that I should feel myself opposed to the falsehood
of millenniums. I was the first to discover truth, and for the simple
reason that I was the first who became conscious of falsehood as
falsehood--that is to say, I smelt it as such. My genius resides in
my nostrils. I contradict as no one has contradicted hitherto, and am
nevertheless the reverse of a negative spirit. I am the harbinger of
joy, the like of which has never existed before; I have discovered
tasks of such lofty greatness that, until my time, no one had any idea
of such things. Mankind can begin to have fresh hopes, only now that I
have lived. Thus, I am necessarily a man of Fate. For when Truth enters
the lists against the falsehood of ages, shocks are bound to ensue,
and a spell of earthquakes, followed by the transposition of hills and
valleys, such as the world has never yet imagined even in its dreams.
The concept "politics" then becomes elevated entirely to the sphere
of spiritual warfare. All the mighty realms of the ancient order of
society are blown into space--for they are all based on falsehood:
there will be wars, the like of which have never been seen on earth
before. Only from my time and after me will politics on a large scale
exist on earth.



2


If you should require a formula for a destiny of this kind that has
taken human form, you will find it in my _Zarathustra_.

"And he who would be a creator in good and evil--verily, he must first
be a destroyer, and break values into pieces.

"Thus the greatest evil belongeth unto the greatest good: but this is
the creative good."

I am by far the most terrible man that has ever existed; but this does
not alter the fact that I shall become the most beneficent. I know the
joy of _annihilation_ to a degree which is commensurate with my power
to annihilate. In both cases I obey my Dionysian nature, which knows
not how to separate the negative deed from the saying of yea. I am the
first immoralist, and in this sense I am essentially the annihilator.



3


People have never asked me as they should have done, what the name
of Zarathustra precisely meant in my mouth, in the mouth of the
first immoralist; for that which distinguishes this Persian from all
others in the past is the very fact that he was the exact reverse
of an immoralist. Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle
between good and evil the essential wheel in the working of things.
The translation of morality into the realm of metaphysics, as force,
cause, end-in-itself, is his work. But the very question suggests
its own answer. Zarathustra created this most portentous of all
errors,--morality; therefore he must be the first to expose it. Not
only because he has had longer and greater experience of the subject
than any other thinker,--all history is indeed the experimental
refutation of the theory of the so-called moral order of things,--but
because of the more important fact that Zarathustra was the most
truthful of thinkers. In his teaching alone is truthfulness upheld as
the highest virtue--that is to say, as the reverse of the cowardice
of the "idealist" who takes to his heels at the sight of reality.
Zarathustra has more pluck in his body than all other thinkers put
together. To tell the truth and to aim straight: that is the first
Persian virtue. Have I made myself clear? ... The overcoming of
morality by itself, through truthfulness, the moralist's overcoming of
himself in his opposite--in me--that is what the name Zarathustra means
in my mouth.



4


In reality two negations are involved in my title Immoralist. I first
of all deny the type of man that has hitherto been regarded as the
highest--the _good,_ the _kind,_ and the _charitable_; and I also
deny that kind of morality which has become recognised and paramount
as morality-in-itself--I speak of the morality of decadence, or, to
use a still cruder term, Christian morality. I would agree to the
second of the two negations being regarded as the more decisive, for,
reckoned as a whole, the overestimation of goodness and kindness seems
to me already a consequence of decadence, a symptom of weakness, and
incompatible with any ascending and yea-saying life. Negation and
annihilation are inseparable from a yea-saying attitude towards life.
Let me halt for a moment at the question of the psychology of the
good man. In order to appraise the value of a certain type of man, the
cost of his maintenance must be calculated,--and the conditions of his
existence must be known. The condition of the existence of the _good_
is falsehood: or, otherwise expressed, the refusal at any price to
see how reality is actually constituted. The refusal to see that this
reality is not so constituted as always to be stimulating beneficent
instincts, and still less, so as to suffer at all moments the intrusion
of ignorant and good-natured hands. To consider distress of all kinds
as an objection, as something which must be done away with, is the
greatest nonsense on earth; generally speaking, it is nonsense of the
most disastrous sort, fatal in its stupidity--almost as mad as the will
to abolish bad weather, out of pity for the poor, so to speak. In the
great economy of the whole universe, the terrors of reality (in the
passions, in the desires, in the will to power) are incalculably more
necessary than that form of petty happiness which is called "goodness";
it is even needful to practise leniency in order so much as to allow
the latter a place at all, seeing that it is based upon a falsification
of the instincts. I shall have an excellent opportunity of showing the
incalculably calamitous consequences to the whole of history, of the
credo of optimism, this monstrous offspring of the _homines optimi._
Zarathustra,[1] the first who recognised that the optimist is just as
degenerate as the pessimist, though perhaps more detrimental, says:
"_Good men never speak the truth. False shores and false harbours
were ye taught by the good. In the lies of the good were ye born and
bred. Through the good everything hath become false and crooked from
the roots._" Fortunately the world is not built merely upon those
instincts which would secure to the good-natured herd animal his paltry
happiness. To desire everybody to become a "good man," "a gregarious
animal," "a blue-eyed, benevolent, beautiful soul," or--as Herbert
Spencer wished--a creature of altruism, would mean robbing existence of
its greatest character, castrating man, and reducing humanity to a sort
of wretched Chinadom. _And this some have tried to do! It is precisely
this that men called morality._ In this sense Zarathustra calls "the
good," now "the last men," and anon "the beginning of the end"; and
above all, he considers them as _the most detrimental kind of men,_
because they secure their existence at the cost of Truth and at the
cost of the Future.

"The good--they cannot create; they are ever the beginning of the end.

"They crucify him who writeth new values on new tables; they sacrifice
_unto themselves_ the future; they crucify the whole future of humanity!

"The good--they are ever the beginning of the end.

"And whatever harm the slanderers of the world may do, _the harm of the
good is the most calamitous of all harm._"



5


Zarathustra, as the first psychologist of the good man, is perforce the
friend of the evil man. When a degenerate kind of man has succeeded
to the highest rank among the human species, his position must have
been gained at the cost of the reverse type--at the cost of the strong
man who is certain of life. When the gregarious animal stands in
the glorious rays of the purest virtue, the exceptional man must be
degraded to the rank of the evil. If falsehood insists at all costs on
claiming the word "truth" for its own particular standpoint, the really
truthful man must be sought out among the despised. Zarathustra allows
of no doubt here; he says that it was precisely the knowledge of the
good, of the "best," which inspired his absolute horror of men. And
it was out of this feeling of repulsion that he grew the wings which
allowed him to soar into remote futures. He does not conceal the fact
that his type of man is one which is relatively superhuman--especially
as opposed to the "good" man, and that the good and the just would
regard his superman as the _devil._

"Ye higher men, on whom my gaze now falls, this is the doubt that ye
wake in my breast, and this is my secret laughter: methinks ye would
call my Superman--the devil! So strange are ye in your souls to all
that is great, that the Superman would be terrible in your eyes for his
goodness."

It is from this passage, and from no other, that you must set out to
understand the goal to which Zarathustra aspires--the kind of man that
he conceives sees reality _as it is;_ he is strong enough for this--he
is not estranged or far removed from it, he is that reality himself, in
his own nature can be found all the terrible and questionable character
of reality: _only thus can man have greatness._



6


But I have chosen the title of Immoralist as a surname and as a badge
of honour in yet another sense; I am very proud to possess this name
which distinguishes me from all the rest of mankind. No one hitherto
has felt Christian morality beneath him; to that end there were needed
height, a remoteness of vision, and an abysmal psychological depth, not
believed to be possible hitherto. Up to the present Christian morality
has been the Circe of all thinkers--they stood at her service. What
man, before my time, had descended into the underground caverns from
out of which the poisonous fumes of this ideal--of this slandering
of the world--burst forth? What man had even dared to suppose that
they were underground caverns? Was a single one of the philosophers
who preceded me a psychologist at all, and not the very reverse of a
psychologist--that is to say, a "superior swindler," an "Idealist"?
Before my time there was no psychology. To be the first in this new
realm may amount to a curse; at all events, it is a fatality: _for one
is also the first to despise._ My danger is the loathing of mankind.



7


Have you understood me? That which defines me, that which makes me
stand apart from the whole of the rest of humanity, is the fact that
I _unmasked_ Christian morality. For this reason I was in need of a
word which conveyed the idea of a challenge to everybody. Not to have
awakened to these discoveries before, struck me as being the sign
of the greatest uncleanliness that mankind has on its conscience,
as self-deception become instinctive, as the fundamental will to
be blind to every phenomenon, all causality and all reality; in
fact, as an almost criminal fraud _in psychologicis._ Blindness in
regard to Christianity is the essence of criminality--for it is the
crime _against_ life. Ages and peoples, the first as well as the
last, philosophers and old women, with the exception of five or six
moments in history (and of myself, the seventh), are all alike in
this. Hitherto the Christian has been _the_ "moral being," a peerless
oddity, and, _as_ "a moral being," he was more absurd, more vain, more
thoughtless, and a greater disadvantage to himself, than the greatest
despiser of humanity could have deemed possible. Christian morality
is the most malignant form of all false too the actual Circe of
humanity: that which has corrupted mankind. It is not error as error
which infuriates me at the sight of this spectacle; it is not the
millenniums of absence of "goodwill," of discipline, of decency, and
of bravery in spiritual things, which betrays itself in the triumph of
Christianity; it is rather the absence of nature, it is the perfectly
ghastly fact that _anti-nature_ itself received the highest honours as
morality and as law, and remained suspended over man as the Categorical
Imperative. Fancy blundering in this way, _not_ as an individual,
_not_ as a people, but as a whole species! as _humanity_! To teach the
contempt of all the principal instincts of life; to posit falsely the
existence of a "soul," of a "spirit," in order to be able to defy the
body; to spread the feeling that there is something impure in the very
first prerequisite of life--in sex; to seek the principle of evil in
the profound need of growth and expansion--that is to say, in severe
self-love (the term itself is slanderous); and conversely to see a
higher moral value--but what am I talking about?--I mean the _moral
value per se,_ in the typical signs of decline, in the antagonism of
the instincts, in "selflessness," in the loss of ballast, in "the
suppression of the personal element," and in "love of one's neighbour"
(neighbouritis!). What! is humanity itself in a state of degeneration?
Has it always been in this state? One thing is certain, that ye are
taught only the values of decadence as the highest values. The morality
of self-renunciation is essentially the morality of degeneration; the
fact, "I am going to the dogs," is translated into the imperative,"
Ye shall all go to the dogs"--and not only into the imperative. This
morality of self-renunciation, which is the only kind of morality that
has been taught hitherto, betrays the will to nonentity--it denies life
to the very roots. There still remains the possibility that it is not
mankind that is in a state of degeneration, but only that parasitical
kind of man--the priest, who, by means of morality and lies, has
climbed up to his position of determinator of values, who divined in
Christian morality his road to power. And, to tell the truth, this
is my opinion. The teachers and I leaders of mankind--including the
theologians--have been, every one of them, decadents: hence their)
transvaluation of all values into a hostility towards; life; hence
morality. _The definition of morality;_ Morality is the idiosyncrasy of
decadents, actuated by a desire _to avenge themselves with success upon
life._ I attach great value to this definition.



8


Have you understood me? I have not uttered a single word which I had
not already said five years ago through my mouthpiece Zarathustra.
The unmasking of Christian morality is an event which unequalled in
history, it is a real catastrophe. The man who throws light upon it
is a _force majeure,_ a fatality; he breaks the history of man into
two. Time is reckoned up before him and after him. The lightning
flash of truth struck precisely that which theretofore had stood
highest: he who understands what was destroyed by that flash should
look to see whether he still holds anything in his hands. Everything
which until then was called truth, has been revealed as the most
detrimental, most spiteful, and most subterranean form of life; the
holy pretext, which was the "improvement" of man, has been recognised
as a ruse for draining life of its energy and of its blood. Morality
conceived as _Vampirism_.... The man who unmasks morality has also
unmasked the worthlessness of the values in which men either believe
or have believed; he no longer sees anything to be revered in the most
venerable man--even in the types of men that have been pronounced
holy; all he can see in them is the most fatal kind of abortions,
fatal, _because they fascinate._ The concept "God" was invented as
the opposite of the concept life--everything detrimental, poisonous,
and slanderous, and all deadly hostility to life, wad bound together
in one horrible unit in Him. The concepts "beyond" and "true world"
were invented in order to depreciate the only world that exists--in
order that no goal or aim, no sense or task, might be left to earthly
reality. The concepts "soul," "spirit," and last of all the concept
"immortal soul," were invented in order to throw contempt on the body,
in order to make it sick and "holy," in order to cultivate an attitude
of appalling levity towards all things in life which deserve to be
treated seriously, _i.e._ the questions of nutrition and habitation,
of intellectual diet, the treatment of the sick, cleanliness, and
weather. Instead of health, we find the "salvation of the soul"--that
is to say, a _folie circulate_ fluctuating between convulsions and
penitence and the hysteria of redemption. The concept "sin," together
with the torture instrument appertaining to it, which is the concept
"free will," was invented in order to confuse and muddle our instincts,
and to render the mistrust of them man's second nature! In the concepts
"disinterestedness" and "self-denial," the actual signs of decadence
are to be found. The allurement of that which is detrimental, the
inability to discover one's own advantage and self-destruction, are
made into absolute qualities, into the "duty," the "holiness," and
the "divinity" of man. Finally--to keep the worst to the last--by the
notion of the _good_ man, all that is favoured which is weak, ill,
botched, and sick-in-itself, which _ought to be wiped out._ The law
of selection is thwarted, an ideal is made out of opposition to the
proud, well-constituted man, to him who says yea to life, to him who
is certain of the future, and who guarantees the future--this man is
henceforth called the _evil_ one. And all this was believed in as
_morality!--Ecrasez l'infâme!_



9


Have you understood me? _Dionysus_ versus _Christ._


[Footnote 1: Needless to say this is Nietzsche, and no longer the
Persian.--TR.]




EDITORIAL NOTE TO POETRY


The editor begs to state that, contrary to his announcement in
the Editorial Note to _The Joyful Wisdom,_ in which he declared
his intention of publishing all of Nietzsche's poetry, he has
nevertheless withheld certain less important verses from publication.
This alteration in his plans is due to his belief that it is an
injustice and an indiscretion on the part of posterity to surprise an
author, as it were, in his _négligé,_ or, in plain English, "in his
shirt-sleeves." Authors generally are very sensitive on this point, and
rightly so: a visit behind the scenes is not precisely to the advantage
of the theatre, and even finished pictures not yet framed are not
readily shown by the careful artist. As the German edition, however,
contains nearly all that Nietzsche left behind, either in small
notebooks or on scraps of paper, the editor could not well suppress
everything that was not prepared for publication by Nietzsche himself,
more particularly as some of the verses are really very remarkable.
He has, therefore, made a very plentiful selection from the _Songs
and Epigrams,_ nearly all of which are to be found translated here,
and from the Fragments of the Dionysus Dithyrambs, of which over half
have been given. All the complete Dionysus Dithyrambs appear in this
volume, save those which are duplicates of verses already translated
in the Fourth Part of _Zarathustra._ These Dionysus Dithyrambs were
prepared ready for press by Nietzsche himself. He wrote the final
manuscript during the summer of 1888 in Sils Maria; their actual
composition, however, belongs to an earlier date.

All the verses, unless otherwise stated, have been translated by Mr.
Paul Victor Cohn.




SONGS, EPIGRAMS, ETC.


SONGS



    TO MELANCHOLY[1]


    O Melancholy, be not wroth with me
      That I this pen should point to praise thee only,
    And in thy praise, with head bowed to the knee,
      Squat like a hermit on a tree-stump lonely.
    Thus oft thou saw'st me,--yesterday, at least,--
      Full in the morning sun and its hot beaming,
    While, visioning the carrion of his feast,
      The hungry vulture valleyward flew screaming.

    Yet didst thou err, foul bird, albeit I,
      So like a mummy 'gainst my log lay leaning!
    Thou couldst not see these eyes whose ecstasy
      Rolled hither, thither, proud and overweening.
    What though they did not soar unto thine height,
      or reached those far-off, cloud-reared precipices,
    For _that_ they sank the deeper so they might
      Within themselves light Destiny's abysses.

    Thus oft in sullenness perverse and free,
      Bent hideous like a savage at his altar,
    There, Melancholy, held I thought of thee,
      A penitent, though youthful, with his psalter.

    So crouched did I enjoy the vulture's span,
      The thunder of the avalanche's paces,
    Thou spakest to me--nor wast false like man,
      Thou spakest, but with stern and dreadful faces.

    Harsh goddess thou of Nature wild and stark,
      Mistress, that com'st with threats to daunt and quell me,
    To point me out the vulture's airy are
      And laughing avalanches, to repel me.
    Around us gnashing pants the lust to kill,
      The torment to win life in all its changes;
    Alluring on some cliff, abrupt and chill,
      Some flower craves the butterfly that ranges.

    All this am I--shuddering I feel it all--
      O butterfly beguiled, O lonely flower,
    The vulture and the ice-pent waterfall,
      The moaning storm--all symbols of thy power,--
    Thou goddess grim before whom deeply bowed,
      With head on knee, my lips with pæans bursting,
    I lift a dreadful song and cry aloud
      For Life, for Life, for Life--forever thirsting!

    O vengeful goddess, be not wroth, I ask,
      That I to mesh thee in my rhymes have striven.
    He trembles who beholds thine awful mask;
      He quails to whom thy dread right hand is given.
    Song upon trembling song by starts and fits
      I chant, in rhythm all my thought unfolding,
    The black ink flows, the pointed goose-quill spits,
      O goddess, goddess--leave me to my scolding!




    AFTER A NIGHT STORM[2]


    To-day in misty veils thou hangest dimly,
      Gloomy goddess, o'er my window-pane.
    Grimly whirl the pallid snow-flakes, grimly
      Roars the swollen brook unto the plain.

    Ah, by light of haggard levins glaring,
      'Neath the untamed thunder's roar and roll,
    'Midst the valley's murk wast thou preparing--
      Sorceress! thy dank and poisoned bowl.

    Shuddering, I heard through midnight breaking
      Raptures of thy voice--and howls of pain.
    Saw thy bright orbs gleam, thy right hand shaking
      With the mace of thunder hurled amain.

    Near my dreary couch I heard the crashes
      Of thine armoured steps, heard weapons slam,
    Heard thy brazen chain strike 'gainst the sashes,
      And thy voice: "Come! hearken who I am!

    The immortal Amazon they call me;
      All things weak and womanish I shun;
    Manly scorn and hate in war enthral me;
      Victress I and tigress all in one!

    Where I tread there corpses fall before me;
      From mine eyes the furious torches fly,
    And my brain thinks poisons. Bend, adore me!
      Worm of Earth and Will o' Wisp--or die!"




    HYMNS TO FRIENDSHIP


    (_Two Fragments_)


    1

    Goddess Friendship, deign to hear the song
      That we sing in friendship's honour!
    Where the eye of friendship glances,
      Filled with all the joy of friendship
      Come thou nigh to aid me,
    Rosy dawn in thy gaze and
    In holy hand the faithful pledge of youth eternal.


    2

    Morning's past: the sun of noonday
      Scorches with hot ray our heads.
    Let us sit beneath the arbour
    Singing songs in praise of friendship.
    Friendship was our life's red dawning,
      And its sunset red shall be.




    THE WANDERER[3]


    All through the night a wanderer walks
      Sturdy of stride,
    With winding vale and sloping height
      E'er at his side.
      Fair is the night:
    On, on he strides, nor slackens speed,
    And knows not where his path will lead.

    A bird's song in the night is heard,
    "Ah me, what hast thou done, O bird,
      How dost thou grip my sense and feet
      And pourest heart-vexation sweet
    Into mine ear--I must remain,
      To hearken fain:
    Why lure me with inviting strain?"

    The good bird speaks, staying his song:
    "I lure not thee,--no, thou art wrong--
      With these my trills
    I lure my mate from off the hills--
      Nor heed thy plight.
    To me alone the night's not fair.
    What's that to thee? Forth must thou fare,
    On, onward ever, resting ne'er.

      Why stand'st thou now?
    What has my piping done to thee,
      Thou roaming wight?"
    The good bird pondered, silent quite,
    "Why doth my piping change his plight?
      Why stands he now,
    That luckless, luckless, roaming wight?"




    TO THE GLACIER


    At noontide hour, when first,
    Into the mountains Summer treads,
    Summer, the boy with eyes so hot and weary,
    Then too he speaks,
    Yet we can only see his speech.

    His breath is panting, like the sick man's breath
    On fevered couch.
    The glacier and the fir tree and the spring
    Answer his call
    --Yet we their answer only see.
    For faster from the rock leaps down
    The torrent stream, as though to greet,
    And stands, like a white column trembling,
    All yearning there.
    And darker yet and truer looks the fir-tree
    Than e'er before.
    And 'twixt the ice-mass and the cold grey stone
    A sudden light breaks forth--
    Such light I once beheld, and marked the sign.

    Even the dead man's eye
    Surely once more grows light,
    When, sorrowful, his child
    Gives him embrace and kiss:
    Surely once more the flame of light
    Wells out, and glowing into life
    The dead eye speaks: "My child!
    Ah child, you know I love you true!"

    So all things glow and speak--the glacier speaks,
    The brook, the fir,
    Speak with their glance the selfsame words:
    We love you true,
    Ah, child, you know we love you, love you true!

    And he,
    Summer, the boy with eyes so hot and weary,
    Woe-worn, gives kisses
    More ardent ever,
    And will not go:
    But like to veils he blows his words
    From out his lips,
    His cruel words:
    "My greeting's parting,
    My coming going,
    In youth I die."

    All round they hearken
    And scarcely breathe
    (No songster sings),
    And shuddering run
    Like gleaming ray
    Over the mountain;
    All round they ponder,--
    Nor speak--

    Twas at the noon,
    At noontide hour, when first
    Into the mountains Summer treads,
    Summer, the boy with eyes so hot and weary.




    AUTUMN[4]


    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!--
    The sun creeps 'gainst the hill
    And climbs and climbs
    And rests at every step.

    How faded grew the world!
    On weary, slackened strings the wind
    Playeth his tune.
    Fair Hope fled far--
    He waileth after.

    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!
    O fruit of the tree,
    Thou tremblest, fallest?
    What secret whispered unto thee
    The Night,
    That icy shudders deck thy cheek,
    Thy cheek of purple hue?

    Silent art thou, nor dost reply--
    Who speaketh still?--

    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!--
    "I am not fair,"--
    So speaks the lone star-flower,--
    "Yet men I love
    And comfort men--
    Many flowers shall they behold,
    And stoop to me,
    And break me, ah!--
    So that within their eyes shall gleam
    Remembrance swift,
    _Remembrance of far fairer things than I_:--
    I see it--see it--and I perish so."

    'Tis Autumn:--Autumn yet shall break thy heart!
    Fly away! fly away!




    CAMPO SANTO DI STAGLIENO[5]


    Maiden, in gentle wise
    You stroke your lamb's soft fleece,
    Yet flashing from your eyes
    Both light and flame ne'er cease.
    Creature of merry jest
    And favourite near and far,
    Pious with kindness blest,
          Amorosissima!

    What broke so soon the chain,
    What does your heart deplore?
    And who, pray, would not fain,
    If you loved him, adore?--
    You're mute, but from your eye,
    The tear-drop is not far,
    You're mute: you'll yearn and die,
          Amorosissima?




    THE LITTLE BRIG NAMED "LITTLE ANGEL"[6]


    "Little Angel" call they me!--
    Now a ship, but once a girl,
    Ah, and still too much a girl!
    My steering-wheel, so bright to see,
    But for sake of love doth whirl.

    "Little Angel" call they me,
    With hundred flags to ornament,
    A captain smart, on glory bent,
    Steers me, puffed with vanity
    (He himself's an ornament).

    "Little Angel" call they me,
    And where'er a little flame
    Gleams for me, I, like a lamb,
    Go my journey eagerly
    (I was always such a lamb!).

    "Little Angel" call they me--
    Think you I can bark and whine
    Like a dog, this mouth of mine
    Throwing smoke and flame full free?
    Ah, a devil's mouth is mine.

    "Little Angel" call they me--
    Once I spoke a bitter word,
    That my lover, when he heard,
    Fast and far away did flee:
    Yes, I killed him with that word!

    "Little Angel" call they me:
    Hardly heard, I sprang so glib
    From the cliff and broke a rib:
    From my frame my soul went free,
    Yes, escaped me through that rib.

    "Little Angel" call they me--
    Then my soul, like cat in flight
    Straight did on this ship alight
    Swiftly bounding--one, two, three!
    Yes, its claws are swift to smite.

    "Little Angel" call they me!--
    Now a ship, but once a girl,
    Ah, and still too much a girl!
    My steering-wheel, so bright to see,
    For sake of love alone doth whirl.




    MAIDEN'S SONG


    Yesterday with seventeen years
    Wisdom reached I, a maiden fair,
    I am grey-haired, it appears,
    Now in all things--save my hair.

    Yesterday, I had a thought,
    Was't a thought?--you laugh and scorn!
    Did you ever have a thought?
    Rather was a feeling born.

    Dare a woman think? This screed
    Wisdom long ago begot:
    "Follow woman must, not lead;
    If she thinks, she follows not."

    Wisdom speaks--I credit naught:
    Rather hops and stings like flea:
    "Woman seldom harbours thought;
    If she thinks, no good is she!"

    To this wisdom, old, renowned,
    Bow I in deep reverence:
    Now my wisdom I'll expound
    In its very quintessence.

    A voice spoke in me yesterday
    As ever--listen if you can:
    "Woman is more beauteous aye,
    But more interesting--man!"




    "PIA, CARITATEVOLE, AMOROSISSIMA"[7]


    Cave where the dead ones rest,
    O marble falsehood, thee
    I love: for easy jest
    My soul thou settest free.

    To-day, to-day alone,
    My soul to tears is stirred,
    At thee, the pictured stone,
    At thee, the graven word.

    This picture (none need wis)
    I kissed the other day.
    When there's so much to kiss
    Why did I kiss the--clay?

    Who knows the reason why?
    "A tombstone fool!" you laugh:
    I kissed--I'll not deny--
    E'en the long epitaph.




    TO FRIENDSHIP


    Hail to thee, Friendship!
    My hope consummate,
    My first red daybreak!
    Alas, so endless
    Oft path and night seemed,
    And life's long road
    Aimless and hateful!
    Now life I'd double
    In thine eyes seeing
    Dawn-glory, triumph,
    Most gracious goddess!




    PINE TREE AND LIGHTNING


    O'er man and beast I grew so high,
    And speak--but none will give reply.

    Too lone and tall my crest did soar:
    I wait: what am I waiting for?

    The clouds are grown too nigh of late,
    'Tis the first lightning I await.




    TREE IN AUTUMN


    Why did ye, blockheads, me awaken
      While I in blissful blindness stood?
    Ne'er I by fear more fell was shaken--
      Vanished my golden dreaming mood.

    Bear-elephants, with trunks all greedy,
      Knock first! Where have your manners fled?
    I threw--and fear has made me speedy--
      Dishes of ripe fruit--at your head.




    AMONG FOES (OR AGAINST CRITICS)


    (_After a Gipsy Proverb_)


    Here the gallows, there the cord,
      And the hangman's ruddy beard.
    Round, the venom-glancing horde:--
      Nothing new to me's appeared.
    Many times I've seen the sight,
      Now laughing in your face I cry,
    "Hanging me is useless quite:
      Die? Nay, nay, I cannot die!"

    Beggars all! Ye envy me
      Winning what ye never won!
    True, I suffer agony,
      But for you--your life is done.
    Many times I've faced death's plight,
      Yet steam and light and breath am I.
    Hanging me is useless quite:
      Die? Nay, nay, I cannot die!




    THE NEW COLUMBUS[8]


    "Dearest," said Columbus, "never
      Trust a Genoese again.
    At the blue he gazes ever,
      Distance doth his soul enchain.

    Strangeness is to me too dear--
      Genoa has sunk and passed--
    Heart, be cool! Hand, firmly steer!
      Sea before me: land--at last?

    Firmly let us plant our feet,
      Ne'er can we give up this game--
    From the distance what doth greet?
      One death, one happiness, one fame.




    IN LONESOMENESS[9]


    The cawing crows
    Townwards on whirring pinions roam;
    Soon come the snows--
    Thrice happy now who hath a home!

    Fast-rooted there,
    Thou gazest backwards--oh, how long!
    Thou fool, why dare
    Ere winter come, this world of wrong?

    This world--a gate
    To myriad deserts dumb and hoar!
    Who lost through fate
    What thou hast lost, shall rest no more.

    Now stand'st thou pale,
    A frozen pilgrimage thy doom,
    Like smoke whose trail
    Cold and still colder skies consume.

    Fly, bird, and screech,
    Like desert-fowl, thy song apart!
    Hide out of reach,
    Fool! in grim ice thy bleeding heart.

    Firmly let us plant our feet,
      Ne'er can we give up this game--
    From the distance what doth greet?
      One death, one happiness, one fame.

    The cawing crows
      Townwards on whirring pinions roam:
    Soon come the snows--
      Woe unto him who hath no home!

    _My Answer_

    The man presumes--
      Good Lord!--to think that I'd return
    To those warm rooms
      Where snug the German ovens burn

    My friend, you see
      'Tis but thy folly drives me far,--
    Pity for _thee_
      And all that German blockheads are!




    VENICE


    ON the bridge I stood,
    Mellow was the night,
    Music came from far--
    Drops of gold outpoured
    On the shimmering waves.
    Song, gondolas, light,
    Floated a-twinkling out into the dusk.

    The chords of my soul, moved
    By unseen impulse, throbbed
    Secretly into a gondola song,
    With thrills of bright-hued ecstasy.
    Had I a listener there?


[Footnote 1: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]

[Footnote 2: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]

[Footnote 3: This poem was written on the betrothal of one of
Nietzsche's Bâle friends.--TR.]

[Footnote 4: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]

[Footnote 5: Campo Santo di Staglieno is the cemetery of Staglieno,
near Genoa. The poem was inspired by the sight of a girl
with a lamb on the tombstone, with the words underneath--
"Pia, caritatevole, amorosissima."]

[Footnote 6: Published by Nietzsche himself. The poem was inspired
by a ship that was christened _Angiolina,_ in memory of a
love-sick girl who leapt into the sea.--TR.]

[Footnote 7: See above, p. 157. Both poems were inspired by the same
tombstone.--TR.]

[Footnote 8: The Genoese is Nietzsche himself, who lived a great
part of his life at Genoa.--TR.]

[Footnote 9: Translated by Herman Scheffauer.]





EPIGRAMS



    CAUTION: POISON![1]


    He who cannot laugh at this had better not start reading;

    For if he read and do not laugh, physic he'll be needing!




    HOW TO FIND ONE'S COMPANY


    With jesters it is good to jest:
    Who likes to tickle, is tickled best.




    THE WORD


    I dearly love the living word,
    That flies to you like a merry bird,
    Ready with pleasant nod to greet,
    E'en in misfortune welcome, sweet,
    Yet it has blood, can pant you deep:
    Then to the dove's ear it will creep:
    And curl itself, or start for flight--
    Whate'er it does, it brings delight.

    Yet tender doth the word remain,
    Soon it is ill, soon well again:
    So if its little life you'd spare,
    O grasp it lightly and with care,
    Nor heavy hand upon it lay,
    For e'en a cruel glance would slay!
    There it would lie, unsouled, poor thing!
    All stark, all formless, and all cold,
    Its little body changed and battered,
    By death and dying rudely shattered.

    A dead word is a hateful thing,
    A barren, rattling, ting-ting-ting.
    A curse on ugly trades I cry
    That doom all little words to die!




    THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW


    _A Book_


    You'll ne'er go on nor yet go back?
    Is e'en for chamois here no track?

    So here I wait and firmly clasp
    What eye and hand will let me grasp!

    Five-foot-broad ledge, red morning's breath,
    And under me--world, man, and death!




    JOYFUL WISDOM


    This is no book--for such, who looks?
    Coffins and shrouds, naught else, are books!
    What's dead and gone they make their prey,
    Yet in my book lives fresh To-day.

    This is no book--for such, who looks?
    Who cares for coffins, shrouds, and spooks?
    This is a promise, an act of will,
    A last bridge-breaking, for good or ill;
    A wind from sea, an anchor light,
    A whirr of wheels, a steering right.
    The cannon roars, white smokes its flame,
    The sea--the monster--laughs and scents its game.




    DEDICATION[2]


    He who has much to tell, keeps much
      Silent and unavowed.
    He who with lightning-flash would touch
      Must long remain a cloud!




    THE NEW TESTAMENT[3]


    Is this your Book of Sacred Lore,
    For blessing, cursing, and such uses?--
    Come, come now: at the very door
    God some one else's wife seduces?




    THE "TRUE GERMAN"


    "O Peuple des meillures Tartuffes,
    To you I'm true, I wis."
    He spoke, but in the swiftest skiff
    Went to Cosmopolis.




    TO THE DARWINIANS[4]


    A fool this honest Britisher
    Was not ... But a Philosopher!
      As _that_ you really rate him?
    Set Darwin up by Goethe's side?
    But majesty you thus deride--
      _Genii majestatem_!




    To HAFIZ


    (_Toast Question of a Water-Drinker_)


    What you have builded, yonder inn,
      O'ertops all houses high:
    The posset you have brewed therein
      The world will ne'er drink dry.
    The bird that once appeared on earth
      As phœnix, is your, guest.
    The mouse that gave a mountain birth
      Is you yourself confessed!
    You're all and naught, you're inn and wine,
      You're phœnix, mountain, mouse.
    Back to yourself to come you pine
      Or fly from out your house.
    Downward from every height you've sunk,
      And in the depths still shine:
    The drunkenness of all the drunk,
      Why do you ask for--wine?




    TO SPINOZA


    Of "All in One" a fervent devotee
    _Amore Dei,_ of reasoned piety,
    Doff shoes! A land thrice holy this must be!--
    Yet underneath this love there sate
    A torch of vengeance, burning secretly
    The Hebrew God was gnawed by Hebrew hate.
    Hermit! Do I aright interpret thee?




    ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER


    That which he taught, has had its day,
    That which he lived, shall live for aye:
    Look at the man! No bondsman he!
    Nor e'er to mortal bowed his knee!




    TO RICHARD WAGNER


    O You who chafe at every fetter's link,
    A restless spirit, never free:
    Who, though victorious aye, in bonds still cowered,
    Disgusted more and more, and flayed and scoured,
    Till from each cup of balm you poison drink,
    Alas! and by the Cross all helpless sink,
    You too, you too, among the overpowered!

    For long I watched this play so weirdly shaped,
    Breathing an air of prison, vault, and dread,
    With churchly fragrance, clouds of incense spread,
    And yet I found all strange/in terror gaped.
    But now I throw my fool's cap o'er my head,
    For I escaped!




    MUSIC OF THE SOUTH[5]


    All that my eagle e'er saw clear,
    I see and feel in heart to-day
    (Although my hope was wan and gray)
    Thy song like arrow pierced mine ear,
    A balm to touch, a balm to hear,
    As down from heaven it winged its way.

    So now for lands of southern fire
    To happy isles where Grecian nymphs hold sport!
    Thither now turn the ship's desire--
    No ship e'er sped to fairer port.




    A RIDDLE


    A riddle here--can you the answer scent?
    "When man discovers, woman must invent."----




    TO FALSE FRIENDS


    You stole, your eye's not clear to-day.
    You only stole a thought, sir? nay,
    Why be so rudely modest, pray?
    Here, take another handful--stay,
    Take all I have, you swine--you may
    Eat till your filth is purged away.




    FRIEND YORICK


    Be of good cheer,
    Friend Yorick! If this thought gives pain,
    As now it does, I fear,
    Is it not "God"? And though in error lain,
    'Tis but your own dear child,
    Your flesh and blood,
    That tortures you and gives you pain,
    Your little rogue and do-no-good,
    See if the rod will change its mood!

    In brief, friend Yorick, leave that drear
    Philosophy--and let me now
    Whisper one word as medicine,
    My own prescription, in your ear,
    My remedy against such spleen--
    "Who loves his God, chastises him, I ween,"




    RESOLUTION


    I should be wise to suit my mood,
    Not at the beck of other men:
    God made as stupid as he could
    The world--well, let me praise him then.

    And if I make not straight my track,
    But, far as may be, wind and bend,
    That's how the sage begins his tack,
    And that is how the fool will--end.

         *     *     *     *     *

    The world stands never still,
    Night loves the glowing day--
    Sweet sounds to ear "I will!"
    And sweeter still "I may!"




    THE HALCYONIAN[6]


    Addressing me most bashfully,
      A woman to-day said this:
    "What would you be like in ecstasy,
      If sober you feel such bliss?"




    FINALE[6]


    Laughter is a serious art.
    I would do it better daily.
    Did I well to-day or no?
    Came the spark right from the heart?
    Little use though head wag gaily,
    If the heart contain no glow.



[Footnote 1: Translated by Francis Bickley.]

[Footnote 2: On the title-page of a copy of _Joyful Wisdom,_ dedicated
to Herr August Bungal.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: Translated by Francis Bickley.]

[Footnote 4: Translated by Francis Bickley.]

[Footnote 5: Probably written for Peter Gast, Nietzsche's faithful
friend, and a musician whose "Southern" music Nietzsche
admired.--TR.]

[Footnote 6: Translated by Francis Bickley.]




DIONYSUS-DITHYRAMBS


(1888)


These are the songs of Zarathustra which he sang to
himself so as to endure his last solitude.



    OF THE POVERTY OF THE RICHEST


    Ten years passed by--
    Not a drop reached me,
    No rain-fraught wind, no dew of love
    --A rainless land....
    Now entreat I my wisdom
    Not to become stingy in this drought;
    Overflow thyself, trickle thy dew,
    Be thyself the rain of the parched wilderness!

    I once bade the clouds
    Depart from my mountains;
    Once I said to them,
    "More light, ye dark ones!"
    To-day I entice them to come:
    Make me dark with your udders:
    --I would milk you,
    Ye cows of the heights!
    Milk-warm wisdom, sweet dew of love
    I pour over the land.

    Away, away, ye truths
    That look so gloomy!
    I will not have on my mountains
    Bitter, impatient truths.
    May truth approach me to-day
    Gilded by smiles,
    Sweetened by the sun, browned by love,--
    A ripe truth I would fain break off from the tree.

    To-day I stretch my hands
    Toward the tresses of chance,
    Wise enough to lead,
    To outwit chance like a child.
    To-day I will be hospitable
    'Gainst the unwelcome,
    'Gainst destiny itself I will not be prickly....
    --Zarathustra is no hedgehog.

    My soul,
    Insatiable with its tongue,
    Has already tasted of all things good and evil,
    And has dived into all depths.
    But ever, like the cork,
    It swims to the surface again,
    And floats like oil upon brown seas:
    Because of this soul men call me fortunate.

    Who are my father and mother?
    Is not my father Prince Plenty?
    And my mother Silent Laughter?
    Did not the union of these two
    Beget me, the enigmatic beast--
    Me, the monster of light--
    Me, Zarathustra, the squanderer of all wisdom?

    Sick to-day from tenderness,
    A dewy wind,
    Zarathustra sits waiting, waiting on his mountains--
    Sweet and stewing
    In his own juice,
    Beneath his own summit,
    Beneath his ice,
    Weary and happy,
    A Creator on his seventh day.

    --Silence!
    A truth passes over me
    Like a cloud,--
    With invisible lightnings it strikes me,
    On broad, slow stairs,
    Its happiness climbs to me:
    Come, come, beloved truth!

    --Silence!
    'Tis _my_ truth!
    From timid eyes,
    From velvet shudders,
    Her glance meets mine,
    Sweet and wicked, a maiden's glance.
    She has guessed the reason of my happiness,
    She has guessed me--ha! what is she thinking?
    A purple dragon
    Lurks in the abyss of her maiden's glance.

    --Silence! My truth is speaking!--

    "Woe to thee, Zarathustra!
    Thou lookest like one
    That hath swallowed gold:
    They will slit up thy belly yet!

    Thou art too rich,
    Thou corrupter of many!
    Thou makest too many jealous,
    Too many poor....
    Even on me thy light casts a shadow--
    I feel chill: go away, thou rich one
    Go away, Zarathustra, from the path of thy sun




    BETWEEN BIRDS OF PREY


    Who would here descend,
    How soon
    Is he swallowed up by the depths!
    But thou, Zarathustra,
    Still lovest the abysses,
    Lovest them as doth the fir tree!

    The fir flings its roots
    Where the rock itself gazes
    Shuddering at the depths,--
    The fir pauses before the abysses
    Where all around
    Would fain descend:
    Amid the impatience
    Of wild, rolling, leaping torrents
    It waits so patient, stern and silent,
    Lonely....

    Lonely!
    Who would venture
    Here to be guest--
    To be thy guest?

    A bird of prey, perchance
    Joyous at others' misfortune,
    Will cling persistent
    To the hair of the steadfast watcher,
    With frenzied laughter,
    A vulture's laughter....

    Wherefore so steadfast?
    --Mocks he so cruel:
    He must have wings, who loves the abyss,
    He must not stay on the cliff,
    As thou who hangest there!--

    O Zarathustra,
    Cruellest Nimrod!
    Of late still a hunter of God,
    A spider's web to capture virtue,
    An arrow of evil!
    Now
    Hunted by thyself,
    Thine own prey
    Caught in the grip of thine own soul.

    Now
    Lonely to me and thee,
    Twofold in thine own knowledge,
    Mid a hundred mirrors
    False to thyself,
    Mid a hundred memories
    Uncertain,
    Weary at every wound,
    Shivering at every frost,
    Throttled in thine own noose,
    Self-knower!
    Self-hangman!

    Why didst bind thyself
    With the noose of thy wisdom?
    Why luredst thyself
    Into the old serpent's paradise?
    Why stolest into
    Thyself, thyself?...

    A sick man now,
    Sick of serpent's poison,
    A captive now
    Who hast drawn the hardest lot:
    In thine own shaft
    Bowed as thou workest,
    In thine own cavern
    Digging at thyself,
    Helpless quite,
    Stiff,
    A cold corse
    Overwhelmed with a hundred burdens,
    Overburdened by thyself,
    A knower!
    A self-knower!
    The wise Zarathustra!...

    Thou soughtest the heaviest burden,
    So foundest thou thyself,
    And canst not shake thyself off....

    Watching,
    Chewing,
    One that stands upright no more!
    Thou wilt grow deformed even in thy grave,
    Deformed spirit!

    And of late still so proud
    On all the stilts of thy pride!
    Of late still the godless hermit,
    The hermit with one comrade--the devil,
    The scarlet prince of every devilment!...

    Now--
    Between two nothings
    Huddled up,
    A question-mark,
    A weary riddle,
    A riddle for vultures....
    They will "solve" thee,
    They hunger already for thy "solution,"
    They flutter already about their "riddle,"
    About thee, the doomed one!
    O Zarathustra,
    Self-knower!
    Self-hangman!




    THE SUN SINKS


    I

    Not much longer thirstest thou,
    O burnt-up heart!
    Promise is in the air,
    From unknown mouths I feel a breath,
    --The great coolness comes....
    My sun stood hot above me at noonday:
    A greeting to you that are coming,
    Ye sudden winds,
    Ye cool spirits of afternoon!

    The air is strange and pure.
    See how the night
    Leers at me with eyes askance,
    Like a seducer!...
    Be strong, my brave heart,
    And ask not "Why?"


    2

    The day of my life!
    The sun sinks,
    And the calm flood
    Already is gilded.
    Warm breathes the rock:
    Did happiness at noonday
    Take its siesta well upon it?
    In green light
    Happiness still glimmers up from the brown abyss

    Day of my life!
    Eventide's nigh,
    Thy eye already
    Glows half-broken,
    Thy dew already
    Pours out its tear-drops,
    Already over the white seas
    Walks the purple of thy love,
    Thy last hesitating holiness....


    3

    Golden gaiety, come!
    Thou, the sweetest foretaste--
    Foretaste of death!
    --Went I my way too swiftly?
    Now that the foot grows weary,
    Thine eye still catches me,
    Thy happiness still catches me.

    Around but waves and play.
    Whatever was hard
    --Sank into blue oblivion.
    My boat now stands idle.
    Storm and motion--how did it forget them!
    Desire and Hope are drowned,
    Sea and soul are becalmed.

    Seventh Solitude!
    Never felt!
    Sweet certainty nearer,
    Or warmer the sun's ray.
    --Glows not the ice of my summit yet?
    Silvery, light, a fish
    Now my vessel swims out....




    THE LAST DESIRE[1]


    So would I die
    As then I saw him die,
    The friend, who like a god
    Into my darkling youth
    Threw lightning's light and fire:
    Buoyant yet deep was he,
    Yea, in the battle's strife
    With the gay dancer's heart.

    Amid the warriors
    His was the lightest heart,
    Amid the conquerors
    His brow was dark with thought--
    He was a fate poised on his destiny:
    Unbending, casting thought into the past
    And future, such was he.

    Fearful beneath the weight of victory,
    Yet chanting, as both victory and death
    Came hand and hand to him.

    Commanding even as he lay in death,
    And his command that man annihilate.

    So would I die
    As then I saw him die,
    Victorious and destroying.




    THE BEACON


    Here, where the island grew amid the seas,
    A sacrificial rock high-towering,
    Here under darkling heavens,
    Zarathustra lights his mountain-fires,
    A beacon for ships that have strayed,
    A beacon for them that have an answer!...

    These flames with grey-white belly,
    In cold distances sparkle their desire,
    Stretches its neck towards ever purer heights--
    A snake upreared in impatience:
    This signal I set up there before me.
    This flame is mine own soul,
    Insatiable for new distances,
    Speeding upward, upward its silent heat.

    Why flew Zarathustra from beasts and men?
    Why fled he swift from all continents?
    Six solitudes he knows already--
    But even the sea was not lonely enough for him,
    On the island he could climb, on the mount he
        became flame,
    At the seventh solitude
    He casts a fishing-rod far o'er his head.

    Storm-tossed seamen! Wreckage of ancient stars
    Ye seas of the future! Uncompassed heavens!
    At all lonely ones I now throw my fishing-rod.
    Give answer to the flame's impatience,
    Let me, the fisher on high mountains,
    Catch my seventh, last solitude!----




    FAME AND ETERNITY[2]


    I

    Speak, tell me, how long wilt thou brood
    Upon this adverse fate of thine?
    Beware, lest from thy doleful mood
    A countenance _90_ dark is brewed
    That men in seeing thee divine
    A hate more bitter than the brine.
        *     *     *     *
    Speak, why does Zarathustra roam
    Upon the towering mountain-height?
    Distrustful, cankered, dour, his home
    Is shut so long from human sight?
        *     *     *     *
    See, suddenly flames forth a lightning-flash,
    The pit profound with thunderous challenge fights
    Against the heavens, midst clamorous crack and crash
    Of the great mountain! Cradled in the heights,
    Born as the fruit of hate and lightning's love,
    The wrath of Zarathustra dwells above
    And looms with menace of a thundercloud.
        *     *     *     *
    Ye, who have roofs, go quickly, creep and hide!
    To bed, ye tenderlings! For thunders loud
    Upon the blasts of storm triumphant ride,
    And bastions and ramparts sway and rock,

    The lightning sears the dusky face of night,
    And eerie truths like gleams of Hades mock
    The sense familiar. So in storm breaks forth
    The flaming curse of Zarathustra's wrath.


    2

    This fame, which all the wide world loves,
    I touch with gloves,
    And scorning beat
    Beneath my feet.
        *     *     *     *
    Who hanker after the pay of it?
    Who cast themselves in the way of it?
    These prostitutes to gold,
    These merchant folk. They fold
    Their unctuous palms over the jingling fame,
    Whose ringing chink wins all the world's acclaim.
        *     *     *     *
    Hast thou the lust to buy? It needs no skill.
    They are all venal. Let thy purse be deep,
    And let their greedy paws unhindered creep
    Into its depths. So let them take their fill,
    For if thou dost not offer them enough,
    Their "virtue" they'll parade, to hide their huff.
        *     *     *     *
    They are all virtuous, yea every one.
    Virtue and fame are ever in accord
    So long as time doth run,

    The tongues that prate of virtue as reward
    Earn fame. For virtue is fame's clever bawd.
        *     *     *     *
    Amongst these virtuous, I prefer to be
    One guilty of all vile and horrid sin!
    And when I see fame's importunity
    So advertise her shameless harlotry,
    Ambition turns to gall. Amidst such kin
    One place alone, the lowest, would I win.
        *     *     *     *
    This fame, which all the wide world loves,
    I touch with gloves,
    And scorning beat
    Beneath my feet.


    3

    Hush! I see vastness!--and of vasty things
    Shall man be dumb, unless he can enshrine
    Them with his words? Then take the might which brings
    The heart upon thy tongue, charmed wisdom mine!
        *     *     *     *
    I look above, there rolls the star-strown sea.
    O night, mute silence, voiceless cry of stars!
    And lo! A sign! The heaven its verge unbars--
    A shining constellation falls towards me.


    4

    O loftiest, star-clustered crown of Being!
    O carved tablets of Eternity!
    And dost thou truly bend thy way to me?
    Thy loveliness, to all--obscurity,
    What? Fear'st not to unveil before _my_ seeing?
        *     *     *     *
    O shield of Destiny!
    O carven tablets of Eternity!
    Yea, verily, thou knowest--what mankind doth hate,
    What I alone do love: thou art inviolate
    To strokes of change and time, of fates the fate!
    'Tis only thou, O dire Necessity,
    Canst kindle everlasting love in me!
        *     *     *     *
    O loftiest crown of Life! O shield of Fate!
    That no desire can reach to invocate,
    That ne'er defiled or sullied is by Nay,
    Eternal Yea of life, for e'er am I thy Yea:
    For I love thee, Eternity!


[Footnote 1: Translated by Dr. G. T. Wrench.]

[Footnote 2: Translated by Dr. G. T. Wrench.]




FRAGMENTS OF DIONYSUS-DITHYRAMBS

(1882-88)


SPEECHES, PARABLES, AND SIMILES


    3

    My home's in the highlands,
    For the highlands I yearn not,
    I raise not mine eyes aloft:
    I am one that looks downward,
    One that must bless,--All
    blessers look downward.


    11

    Thus I began,
    I unlearned all self-pity!


    13

    Not in shattering idols,
    But in shattering the idol-worshipper in thee,
    Consisted thy valour.


    14

    See, there stand
    Those heavy cats of granite,
    Those old, old Values.
    Woe is me! How overthrow them?
       *   *   *   *
    Scratching cats,
    With paws that are fettered,
    There they sit
    And their glance is poison.


    17

    A lightning-flash became my wisdom:
    With sword of adamant it clove me every
        darkness!


    19

    A thought that still
    Flows hot, like lava:
    But all streams of lava
    Build a fortress around them,
    And every thought finally
    Oppresses itself with laws.


    20

    Such is my will:
    And since 'tis my will,
    All goes as I wish--
    That was my final wisdom:
    I willed what I must,
    And thus I forced every "must,"--
    Since then has been for me no "must."


    23

    Deceit
    Is war's whole art
    The fox's skin
    Is my secret shirt of mail


    25

    We of the new underworld
    Grub for new treasures.
    Godless it seemed to the ancients
    To disturb the earth's bowels for treasures
    And once more this godlessness revives,
    Hear ye not earth's bowels thunder?


    28

    Looking for love and finding masks,
    Finding accursed masks and having to break them!


    29

    Do I love you?
    Yes, as the rider loves his steed,
    That carryeth him to his goal.


    30

    His pity is cruel,
    His loving hand-clasp bruises,
    Give not a giant your hand!


    31

    Ye fear me?
    Ye fear the taut-strung bow?
    Ye fear a man might set his arrow to the bow?


    33

    I am naught but a word-maker.
    What matter words?
    What matter I?


    34

    Ah, my friends,
    Whither has flown all that is called "good"?
    Whither all good people?
    Whither the innocence of all these falsehoods?
    I call all good,
    Leaves and grass, happiness, blessing, and rain.


    35

    Not through his sins and greatest follies.
    Through his perfection I suffered,
    As I suffered most from men.[1]


    36

    "Man is evil."
    So spake the wisest
    For my consolement.


    37

    And only when I to myself am a burden
    Do ye fall heavy upon me!


    38

    Too soon, already
    I laugh again:
    For a foe 'tis easy
    To make me amends.


    39

    Gentle am I towards man and chance;
    Gentle with all men, and even with grasses:
    A spot of sunshine on winter curtains,
    Moist with tenderness,
    A thawing wind to snow-bound souls:
        *    *    *    *
    Proud-minded towards trifling
    Gains, where I see the huckster's long finger,
    'Tis aye my pleasure
    To be bamboozled:
    Such is the bidding of my fastidious taste.


    40

    A strange breath breathes and spits at me,
    Am I a mirror, that straightway is clouded?


    41

    Little people,
    Confiding, open-hearted,
    But low-built portals,
    Where only the low of stature can enter.
        *    *    *    *
    How can I get through the city-gate
    Who had forgotten to live among dwarfs?


    42

    My wisdom was like to the sun,
    I longed to give them light,
    But I only deceived them.
    The sun of my wisdom
    Blinded the eyes
    Of these poor bats....


    43

    Blacker and eviller things didst thou see than ever
        a seer did:
    Through the revels of Hell no sage had ever
        journeyed.


    44

    Back! on my heels too closely ye follow!
    Back! lest my wisdom should tread on you, crush
       you!


    45

    "He goes to hell who goes thy ways!"
    So be it I to my hell
    I'll pave the way myself with well-made maxims.


    46

    Your God, you tell me,
    Is a God of love?
    The sting of conscience
    A sting from God?
    A sting of love?


    48

    They chew gravel,
    They lie on their bellies
    Before little round things,
    They adore all that falleth not down--
    These last servants of God
    Believers (in reality)!


    50

    They made their God out of nothing,
    What wonder if now he is naught?


    51

    Ye loftier men! There have once been
    More thoughtful times, more reflective,
    Than is our to-day and to-morrow.


    52
    Our time is like a sick woman--
    Let her but shriek, rave, scold,
    And break the tables and dishes!


    54

    Ye mount?
    Is it true that ye mount,
    Ye loftier men?

    Are ye not, pray,
    Like to a ball
    Sped to the heights
    By the lowest that's in you?
    Do ye not flee from yourselves, O ye climbers?


    55

    All that you thought
    You had to despise,
    Where you only renounced!


    56

    All men repeat the refrain!
    No, no, and thrice say No!
    What's all this yap-yap talk of heaven?
    We would not enter the kingdom of heaven,
    The kingdom of earth shall be ours?


    57

    The will redeemeth,
    He that has nothing to do
    In a Nothing finds food for trouble.


    58

    You cannot endure it more,
    Your tyrannous destiny,
    Love it--you're given no choice!


    59

    These alone free us from woes
    (Choose now I)
    Sudden death
    Or long-drawn-out love.


    60

    Of death we are sure,
    So why not be merry?


    61

    The worst of pleas
    I have hidden from you--that life grew tedious!
    Throw it away, that ye find it again to your taste!


    62

    Lonely days,
    Ye must walk on valorous feet!


    63

    Loneliness
    Plants naught, it ripens....
    And even then you must have the sun for your
    friend.


    64

    Once more must ye plunge in the throng--In
    the throng ye grow hard and smooth.
    Solitude withers
    And lastly destroys.--


    65

    When on the hermit comes the great fear;
    When he runs and runs
    And knows not whither;
    When the storms roar behind
    And the lightning bears witness against him,
    And his cavern breeds spectres
    And fills him with dread.


    67

    Throw thy pain in the depths,
    Man, forget! Man, forget!
    Divine is the art of forgetting!
    Wouldst fly?
    Wouldst feel at home in the heights?
    Throw thy heaviest load in the sea!
    Here is the sea, hurl thyself in the sea!
    Divine is the art of forgetting!


    69

    Look forward, never look back!
    We sink to the depths
    If we peer ever into the depths.


    70

    Beware, beware
    Of warning the reckless!
    Thy warning will drive them
    To leap into every abyss!

    71

    Why hurled he himself from the heights?
    What led him astray?
    His pity for all that is lowly led him astray,
    And now he lies there, broken, useless, and cold.

    72

    Whither went he? Who knows?
    We only know that he sank.
    A star went out in the desolate void,
    And lone was the void.


    73

    What we have not
    But need,
    We must take.
    And so a good conscience I took.


    74

    Who is there that could bestow right upon thee?
    So take thy right!


    75

    O ye waves,
    Wondrous waves, are ye wroth with me?
    Do ye raise me your crests in wrath?
    With my rudder I smite
    Your folly full square.
    This bark ye yourselves
    To immortal life will carry along.


    77

    When no new voice was heard,
    Ye made from old words
    A law:
    When life grows stark, there shoots up the law.


    78

    What none can refute
    Ye say must be true?
    Oh, ye innocents!


    79

    Art thou strong?
    Strong as an ass? Strong as God?
    Art thou proud?
    So proud as to flaunt
    Unashamed thy conceit?


    80

    Beware,
    And ne'er beat the drum
    Of thy destiny I
    Go out of the way
    From all pom-pom of fame!
        *    *    *    *
    Be not known too soon!
    Be one that has hoarded renown!


    81

    Wilt thou grasp at the thorns?
    Thy fingers must pay.
    Grasp at a poniard.


    85

    Be a tablet of gold,
    They will grave upon thee
    In golden script.


    86

    Upright he stands
    With more sense of "justice"
    In his outermost toe
    Than I have in all my head.
    A virtue-monster
    Mantled in white.


    87

    Already he mimics himself,
    Already weary he grows,
    Already he seeks the paths he has trod--
    Who of late still loved all tracks untrodden!

    Secretly burnt--
    Not for his faith,
    Rather because he had lost the heart
    To find new faith.


    88

    Too long he sat in the cage,
    That runaway!
    Too long he dreaded
    A gaoler!

    Timorous now he goeth his ways,
    All things make him to stumble--
    The shadow e'en of a stick makes him to stumble.


    89

    Ye chambers smoky and musty,
    Ye cages and narrow hearts,
    How could your spirit be free?


    90

    Narrow souls!
    Huckster-souls!
    When money leaps into the box
    The soul leaps into it too![2]


    92

    Are ye women,
    That ye wish to suffer
    From that which ye love?


    99

    They are cold, these men of learning!
    Would that a lightning-flash might strike their food,
    And their mouths could learn to eat fire!


    101

    Your false love
    For the past,
    A love for the graves of the dead,
    Is a theft from life
    That steals all the future.
        *    *    *    *
    An antiquary
    Is a craftsman of dead things,
    Who lives among coffins and skeletons.


    103

    Only the poet who can lie
    Wilfully, skilfully,
    Can tell the truth.


    104

    Our chase after truth,
    Is't a chase after happiness?


    105

    Truth
    Is a woman, no better,
    Cunning in her shame:
    Of what she likes best
    She will know naught,
    And covers her face....
    To what doth she yield
    But to violence?
    Violence she needs.
    Be hard, ye sages!
    Ye must compel her,
    That shamefaced Truth....
    For her happiness
    She needs constraint--She
    is a woman, no better.


    106

    We thought evil of each other?
    We were too distant,
    But now in this tiny hut,
    Pinned to one destiny,
    How could we still be foes?
    We must needs love those
    Whom we cannot escape.


    107

    Love thy foe,
    Let the robber rob thee:
    The woman hears and--does it.


    110

    A proud eye
    With silken curtains,
    Seldom clear,
    Honours him that may see it unveiled.


    111

    Sluggard eyes
    That seldom love--
    But when they love, the levin flashes
    As from shafts of gold
    Where a dagger keeps guard at the treasure of love.


    117

    They are crabs, for whom I have no fellow-feeling.
    Grasp them, they pinch you;
    Leave them alone, and they walk backward.


    119

    Crooked go great rivers and men,
    Crooked, but turned to their goal;
    That is their highest courage,
    They dreaded not crooked paths.


    121

    Wouldst catch them?
    Then speak to them
    As to stray sheep:
    "Your path, your path
    You have lost!"
    They follow all
    That flatter them so:
    "What? had we a path?"
    Each whispers the other:
    "It really seems that we have a path."


[The numbering given corresponds to that of the original,
several fragments having been omitted.--TR.]


[Footnote 1: Nietzsche here alludes to Christian perfection, which he
considers equivalent to harmlessness.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: Alluding to the saying of the Dominican monk Tetzel,
who sold indulgences in the time of Luther: "When money
leaps into the box, the soul leaps from hell to heaven!"--TR.]




HYMN TO LIFE.

_For Chorus and Orchestra._
WORDS BY LOU SALOMÉ. MUSIC BY FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.
Trans. BY HERMAN SCHEFFAUER. Arr. for Piano BY ADRIAN COLLINS. M.A.

[Illustration: score and lyrics]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ECCE HOMO ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

