VI.

TYPES.


In picturing Roosevelt as an extravert and Nietzsche as an introvert,
I did not mean to imply, of course, that either lacked the opposite
mechanism. All of us are born with both the sexual-instinct and the
ego-instinct, the gift of love and the will-to-power. However, because
we are loaded more one way than the other, the one tendency tends to
suppress the other, and the other remains therefore, not erased, but
relatively undeveloped, and shows itself in inadequate and perhaps
twisted expression.

There was, of course, an extravert in Nietzsche. But that extravert
lived a shadowy life beside the great introvert, and showed himself in
a clumsy relationship with others, an inadequate response to the world,
an inability to get along. So too was there an introvert in Roosevelt,
but he was a poor one, with doubtless strange ideas sometimes breaking
forth into impulsive and wrong-headed action.

All that we can say is that life forces us to accept one side more than
the other, until we become, as it were, specialists along the side of
extraversion or of introversion.

This specialization, of course, makes us one-sided, and this
one-sidedness reaches an even greater narrowness through a still
further specialization, which is that of _function_.

According to Jung, the human psyche is composed of four functions.
These are _thinking_, _feeling_, _intuition_ and _sensation_.

I do not intend to burden the reader with explanations of these terms,
for we would go far afield in a maze of technicalities. I will merely
try to give a hint of their meaning.

_Thinking_ is readily recognizable. It is, in its pure form, an act of
will, and it may begin with an idea, which it proceeds to illustrate
and to prove, or it may begin with many separated facts and proceeds to
bind them together into a theory or idea.

_Feeling_ is a reaction of like or dislike to an object. It must not
be confused with _emotion_. Both thinking and feeling, according to
Jung, are adapted functions; that is, functions which have developed
through the discipline of life, and which did not exist in their pure
forms when we were born. _Emotion_, however, is something allied to
our instinctive life and something we share with the animals. It is
psychologically what Jung calls a feeling-sensation; that is to say,
it is partly physical and partly mental. We see this clearly when we
find an emotion of shame bringing a blush to the cheek, or one of fear
setting the heart pounding, or one of joy making the pulses leap. In
each case we were aware of something mental, sense of joy, fear, etc.,
and something physical, heart pounding, cheeks blushing, etc.

Feeling is separated from sensation and developed into something by
itself. The feeling person is one who has a highly developed sense of
the values of things registered through reactions of like and dislike.
His immediate liking is not accidental, but due to a high sensitiveness
to the really good qualities of the object; his disliking is equally a
deep and a true thing.

If thinking and feeling are conscious functions, that is, more or less
under the direction of the will (one makes oneself think, one learns to
like and dislike), intuition and sensation are unconscious functions.
There is no control of them. They simply happen.

_Intuition_ is a sort of instant insight. It has something of the
lightning flash in it. It is a seeing-into. And this seeing-into may
be of something near or of something far. A man may have a hunch
that a certain horse is going to win a race; a woman may have an
intuition that her husband, in spite of his protests, has been untrue
to her. Intuitions may also be of a deeper sort. The intuition of the
painter leads him to paint the soul, the inner life of the sitter. The
intuition of the inventor by a blinding flash reveals the solution of
the problem.

_Sensation_, according to Jung, is sensing, a function which transmits
a physical stimulus to perception. We see, hear, feel (contact), etc.
It is our conscious sensing of the world about us through images,
sounds, etc., just as intuition is an unconscious sensing of the world
about us. Hence, sensation relates more closely to the physical life,
the body, than any of the other functions.

Now what Jung maintains, and amply proves in his great work on
Psychological Types, is that each of us is not only either an introvert
or an extravert, but also that each of us _develops one of these four
functions at the expense of the others_. There are therefore thinking
types, feeling types, intuitive types and sensational types, and since
any of these types is also either extraverted or introverted we have
eight types.

I will merely give a few examples to show what the types are like:

_Extraverted thinking type._ A good example is Darwin. He was a slow,
patient thinker; thinking was most obviously his most highly developed
function; but this function was extraverted. That is to say, like all
extraverts his attention and interest was in outer things and the ideas
of others. Hence he was one who built up a theory on observed data,
whether this was a direct study of plants and animals or in reading the
works of others. His thoughts proceeded from the outside in.

_Introverted thinking type._ Kant is a good example. He was a great
philosopher. Instead of proceeding from facts to theory, he proceeded
from ideas to facts. That is to say, through his introversion, he
received ideas from the unconscious, great ideas of a timeless nature,
conceptions of time, space, etc., and these he proceeded to elaborate
and prove.

_Extraverted feeling type._ A good example of this type is Mary
Pickford. It is obvious that she is not a thinker; neither is she one
of those intuitive persons who see into others and know life deeply.
She feels others. She responds by like and dislike; and by the fitness
of things. She is well extraverted and well adapted.

_Introverted feeling type._ Eleanore Duse is an example. She was a
great actress; but one felt her to be one of those silent women whose
feelings are all within, who nurse deep moods, who cannot express their
personal selves, who have great difficulty in their relationships and
tend, as a rule, to shun the world and live in seclusion.

According to Jung thinking is more a masculine function; both
extraverted and introverted it is found more in men than in women;
feeling is more feminine, and is usually found in women.

_Extraverted intuitive type._ Lloyd George, of England, is of this
type. A friend of mine who met him during the war said that as soon as
Lloyd George looked at him, he felt he was completely understood, that
the statesman saw through him. His gift has been to see the tide even
before it turned, to see the possibilities in the people about them,
to leap to his conclusions with a sure agility. If the thinking and
feeling types are more or less steady, pursuing a definite and logical
course, the intuitive type (and sensational) is changeable, erratic,
swift, fickle. This is due to the fact that wherever they see a new
possibility, they leap to it, forgetting what they hitherto pursued.

_Introverted intuitive type._ An excellent example is that given
in the last chapter, that of Nietzsche. His intuitions were of the
introverted kind. He saw inwardly, into the unconscious. This type
is usually very badly adapted to the world. It is close to the
unconscious, and its great intuitions of change, disaster and the new
order of the future put it at variance with society to such an extent
as to make life very difficult. Undoubtedly such men have always been
the great mystics, the great prophets, as Jung quotes, “the voice of
one crying in the wilderness.”

_Extraverted sensation type._ We see examples of this type very often
among actors, dancers, circus people. They are people of a very
sensuous nature, depending more on the sharp stimulus of sensation than
on any other function. We also see examples among men who are epicures
at eating, spend much of their time on fine dressing, and who seek
sensation for its own sake, sensuous surroundings, the more sybaritic
forms of sexuality, etc. Among women we see an inordinate love of
luxury, a theatrical exhibitionism, and self-indulgence in many forms.
Since this type is the least noble (as the intuitive is the most noble)
examples need not be given.

_Introverted sensation type._ This is a type extremely hard to
define. I will merely suggest it. It is probable that the poet Poe
was of this type. He was certainly introverted, but his work is not
marked specifically by deep thought, by feeling or by intuition.
If we consider his poetry we see that he gives us strange pictures
of a No Man’s Land of the imagination; and that he senses these
imaginative realms of the dead and the ghostly. We feel a reality in
these dark pictures. But they have no meaning in the way of giving us
to understand life more deeply or leading us to great ideas or high
flights of feeling. What they do give us is a sense of “out of space,
out of time,” as he himself put it. Introverted sensation gives us just
that. It is a sensing of the eternal images of the unconscious.

Such, by a series of swift strokes, are the eight types. I cannot, of
course, in this space, do full justice to them. They are included in
this survey because they represent an important element in Jung’s work
and serve to show how dark and deep are the psychological problems of
the race. With eight types (possibly more) living in the world about
us, there is indeed much room for misunderstanding and for human
conflict.

It is also obvious that Nietzsche was psychologically correct when
he said that he saw only fragments of human beings about him, and
nowhere a man. Here he saw an arm, there a leg, there an eye and here
an ear, there a mouth and here a breast. In short, he saw a world of
specialization, where one man becomes, like Darwin, a good thinker, but
also is callous to art and to the beauty and joy of life; and where
another develops neither his thinking nor his insight, but spends his
existence in a vain round of the senses.

It is no wonder, then, that there is so much mental sickness. Too
great a one-sidedness is a violation of man’s nature, which is full of
various needs and must, if it develops freely, live a rounded life.
Hence, according to Jung, the basis of the neurosis is not merely a
sexual problem or a problem of power; it is due to the conflict between
the developed and the undeveloped functions. There comes a time for the
thinker, for instance, when his outraged feeling life must manifest
itself. It is at such a moment that the neurosis begins.




