II.

THE SEXUAL THEORY.


Freud sees life as a great and never-ending conflict between
civilization, or organized society, and the individual. The individual
is born with certain instincts, desires, wishes. Many of these are
in conflict with the law and moral code of society. Hence, they are
suppressed.

This suppression works, however, in a curious way. Not only are the
unlawful and “sinful” impulses shut out of the mind; they are also
forgotten. And because they are forgotten, we actually have the
spectacle of pious men and women who can solemnly swear that they are
quite free of murderous, lustful, lecherous, dangerous thoughts and
wishes; that they are “good” people; that they have nothing in common
with the criminal and the debased.

As a matter of fact, however, no instinct, no function in man can be
abolished by cutting it off from consciousness. It is merely repressed,
and forms what Dr. Jung later denoted as a _complex_; that is to say, a
group of ideas, emotions, wishes that all go together and become a sort
of mental family living off by itself, in exile.

It is, in reality, a part of consciousness of which we are
unconscious: a part of the mind shut out by the barrier of our will and
our forgetfulness. And since there are many things that we repress,
a goodly area of the mind is so cut off. Hence, all that part of the
mind which is repressed, and of whose existence we are not aware, Freud
calls _the unconscious mind_.

But since the unconscious is living, not dead; since every impulse in
man seeks constantly for expression; the unconscious is continually
active, like a volcano. Only, instead of sending up its fire and lava
and steam in their native state, it is sending them up in a camouflaged
form. The bottled up energy seeking ever an outlet, loads itself into
some part of the body, and becomes a symptom. It may appear as a
paralysis of some muscle, as deafness or blindness, heart trouble or
stomach trouble, etc. Naturally, these symptoms are not organic; it is
not a real blindness, a real paralysis. Which explains why there can
be miracles when believers touch saint’s bones or repeat the dogmas of
the Christian Scientists. The reason is, that being mental in origin,
these symptoms can also be cured in a mental way. But since faith
healing does not probe to the secret source of the symptom, which is
in the unconscious, such healing is usually followed by the outbreak
of another symptom, in a different place, perhaps, and of a different
nature.

However, the repressed complex does not only express itself in bodily
symptoms. It may appear in the conscious mind. But since the conscious
mind resists the invasion, it appears in a masked form. It may become
apparent as a fixed idea, for instance, the idea that one must go to
some street corner and preach the Gospel, an idea which, in spite of
its absurdity and irrationality, the patient cannot dislodge, and which
is therefore fixed. Or it may appear as a fear, a fear of dogs, or of
the dark, of closed places, going outdoors, etc.

Nor is this all. Where there is a marked repression of a large part of
oneself, the repressed material may become what is called a secondary
personality, and every so often preempt the conscious mind, so that
at one time the personality may be timid, pious, good, and at another
bold, wicked and evil. It is, in a way, the story of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde.

Finally, the unconscious appears in consciousness in the form of
dreams. It is really this great discovery which led to the development
of the technic of psycho-analysis, and opened up the path which has led
to all the other discoveries.

A dream takes place when we are asleep; that is to say, when the
conscious mind is completely relaxed, when all the bars are let down.
What more natural than that the repressed portion of the mind may now
flare up, just as the stars become visible when the sun is withdrawn
from the sky? But dreams usually have something absurd about them. We
walk in seven league boots, we cut off a hand and sew it on again,
animals talk; we are in the land of make-believe and of the fairies and
the bad spirits.

Why does the unconscious speak such a fantastic language? Why doesn’t
it express itself in simple English? According to Freud, this is
because the conscious mind has refused to face the evil which it
has repressed, and the unconscious therefore ever seeks a masked or
camouflaged expression, whether in the form of a physical symptom, a
fixed idea, a phobia, or a dream.

Dreams, in short, are symbolic. Everything in a dream stands for
something else. But these symbols are not haphazard; what they stand
for are definitely expressed by the symbol. It is not haphazard for
instance that a dove has always symbolized the holy spirit, or that a
spear has stood for the masculine organ, or that a vessel has stood for
the womb. There is a certain likeness between symbol and fact.

It is nothing new to invest dreams with meaning. The human race has
always done so. Man has always intuitively known that these strange
manifestations of the night held a hidden meaning for him, a meaning
that must be searched out by interpretation and analysis. So we
read in the Bible of Joseph interpreting the dreams of Pharaoh; in
Euripides’ play, Iphigenia, the action begins with a dream of the
heroine, which she herself interprets, though somewhat mistakenly. So
too we have the well-authenticated dream of Lincoln (ten days before
he was assassinated) that he heard a noise of lamentation and sobbing
downstairs in the White House and took a candle and went down. Around a
catafalque moved a crowd of weeping people. He asked who was dead, and
was informed that it was the President, who had been killed.

Such dreams are of the prophetic order, and will be dealt with later
on. The last dream, also, was straightforward. It was not symbolic. But
such dreams are outside the usual run; they are the exceptions to the
rule.

The way then to find out the meaning of a dream is to treat the images
in it as symbols and try to discover what the symbols stand for. And
the quickest way to do this is to ask the dreamer himself.

You dream, for instance, to use a simple illustration, that you are
involved in a fight between a cat and a dog. Well, what do you think of
cats and dogs? What are your associations?

You begin to tell all the thoughts that come into your mind when you
think of these two animals. You may drag in personal stories of a pet
cat you once had, of a dog it fought with, etc. When all you have said
is boiled down it may amount to this: that cats and dogs appear to be
opposites, that cats are aloof, “selfish,” withdrawn, asking much and
giving little, whereas dogs are loving, affectionate, very sociable,
and may even give their lives for their masters. Symbolically then, the
cat stands for the ego-impulses, the dog for the social impulses. It
is natural that they should fight each other every so often; there are
times when we are in great conflict between our wish to serve others
and our desire to gratify or satisfy ourselves.

What Freud discovered was that the repression came to light through
the dream; that the dream material, if analyzed, showed exactly why
the patient was ill, why he had his phobia or his physical symptom.
For instance, the man might have a strain of sexual perversion in him.
He himself is not aware of it. But the dream immediately brings it to
light and he is forced to recognize it.

Naturally it is difficult to get a patient to accept the repressed
material. If he repressed it because of a great moral revulsion, he can
only be led by a process of re-education to accept it. When he first
comes for treatment, therefore, he merely tells the analyst all that
he remembers about his past, his family and personal history, etc.
Gradually he acquires confidence in the analyst. This unburdening is
like a confession. The analyst hears things that the patient has never
before mentioned to anyone else. The analyst, because of his knowledge
of psychology, also shows an understanding of the patient that quite
startles the latter. The analyst, in short, becomes more than a father
to him, more than a mother. There is a feeling of gratitude, of trust,
which approaches the border of love. This feeling, this attitude,
is called the _transference_. The patient has transferred himself,
his burden, to the analyst. And no cure can take place until this is
achieved.

For when the transference is made, the patient is now ready to go
along with the analyst in his re-education. He gains a new standpoint.
He discovers that the ugly and evil things which he suppressed are not
his personal property, his private depravity, but are public property,
that every one who is a human being has the same impulses, the same
shameful lusts, the same wicked wishes; and that there can be no
genuine health until one allows these impulses in consciousness and
accepts them in their nakedest aspect.

The patient then is ready to face squarely and truthfully the
divulgences of his dreams.

And what is the cure? Sometimes, happily, it is a simple matter. The
man who has suppressed his sexuality altogether, for instance, may now
marry and gain a good direct expression for his need. But what of those
who find strong perverted wishes, what shall we do with them?

At this point Freud erects the theory of _sublimation_. It is not a new
theory. The youth in college is admonished to go into athletics that
he may channel off and use up the energy which otherwise would provide
him with a sexual problem. It is the substitution of a “higher” thing
for a “lower.” Only, of course, the higher thing must stand in some
natural relation to the lower, that the instinctive craving may have
some genuine satisfaction.

The classic example is that of surgery. A man is sadistic. That is,
he desires to practice cruelty on the object of his love. Turn this
upside-down from something destructive to something creative, and you
let him dig his knife into the human body, but now it is to help and
heal another, not to hurt him. Hence, the surgeon is sublimating his
sadistic tendencies.

Another example, according to Freud, is the artist. His wicked and
criminal impulses, we will say, would indicate a long list of murders
if he lived them out. He does not live them out, he writes them out. He
becomes known as a writer of crime and detective stories, and in this
form he releases his evil energy and spends it utterly.

Or take the actor. As a child he wanted constantly to exhibit himself,
to go naked before others. This strong strain of exhibitionism can be
satisfied finally by acting, by showing himself off before audiences.

Hence, the Freudian cure for those impulses we cannot live, is, first,
to recognize and accept them, and secondly, to sublimate them.

The Freudian psychology, however, does not rest at this point. It has a
theory which underlies all the others; it is the theory connected with
the Oedipus complex.

Oedipus was the man, celebrated in Greek drama, who, by a fluke of
fate, married his own mother, had children by her, and later had to
expiate his crime by blinding himself and wandering poor and helpless
about the world. For his crime is the one crime which mankind has
usually found absolutely taboo. In practically all the savage tribes,
and in every civilized code, incest, or intermarriage between child and
parent, brother and sister, has been strictly forbidden.

Why is this so? Freud believes that there is a natural sexual
attraction within the family group itself, that the child begins its
sexual life very early, that the boy gains satisfactions through his
mother’s caresses; and that hence the whole beginnings of sexuality
are wrapped up in the incestuous wish. Naturally, however, for the son
there is a great rival. It is his father. His father would fight him
off just as he would any other male rival. This is one of the reasons
for the universal taboo.

But if the origins and beginnings of sexuality are entwined in the
incestuous wish, and incest is taboo, we have an immediate cause of
trouble in human nature. We are all bound to repress. And indeed if we
look upon man, we see that he is afflicted with much sickness, that he
is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward.

If, however, this is the nuclear complex, this Oedipus complex, how
can we account for the other sexual difficulties, the perversions?
They originate, according to Freud, in the Oedipus complex itself. The
child’s first act is suckling, this involves the mouth; he then learns
to suck his finger when he cannot get at the nipple, this involves
mouth and hand; he then begins to use his hand rubbing himself and this
leads to rubbing the sexual organ (auto-erotism); he now takes pleasure
in his own body and in bodies like his own (homosexual interest), and
finally he becomes interested in bodies unlike his own (normal sexual
wish). He may find, however, that he cannot cross the last bridge and
get to normal sexuality. The repressed incest wish stands in the way
and makes him fear the woman who would, unconsciously, be used as a
substitute for the mother. Hence, he remains fixed at some infantile
stage; mouth-erotism, auto-erotism, homosexuality, etc. Often in
analysis, when he discovers this, according to Freud, he can learn
to renounce the infantile fixation, or perversion, and learn to take
pleasure in normal sexuality.

Such, in brief, and with, alas, much omitted, is an outline of the
Freudian theory. It is a sexual theory. The psychological troubles
of mankind, with all their symptoms, either physical or mental, are
traced back to a disturbance in sexuality, to taboos which bring the
individual into conflict with society and so cause these unnatural
repressions. Freud, however, does not use the word sexuality in a
narrow sense; he makes it synonymous with love-life, though the purely
sexual element is, on close examination, always present.

However, recently, Freud, now an old man, has advanced a new theory to
supplement the sexual theory. He believes, though he is very cautious
in his statement, that beside the sexual impulse, the will-to-live, to
create and procreate, there is an opposite impulse, a will-to-death, a
wish to have done. In this, he pays an unconscious tribute to some of
the theories of Jung, which will be discussed later on.




