VII.

THE CONFLICT AND ITS SOLUTION.


If we want to put the matter in its broadest sense, we can say that
the great conflict of this age is between the extraverted attitude and
the introverted, between Christ and Anti-Christ, between Christianity
with its democracy, its insistence on good works, its life of activity
and service, its concentration, actually, on business, machinery and
getting on, and on the other hand, the claims of the individual and the
demands of the inner life for an enhancement of art, of research, of
philosophy, of spiritual development, of freedom.

It is a conflict between the principle of love and the principle of
power, and naturally, it is not only an external thing, but something
that takes place in every individual who has made any sort of high
development. For it is a psychic law that if we carry anything to an
extreme, we meet the opposite.

This is clearly illustrated in Goethe’s Faust. The hero, Faust, has
carried his introverted side to a very high development; indeed, so
far, that everything he studied and all that he knows now appears
lifeless and uninteresting. He is sick of himself, sick of life. It
is all nothing. His search for knowledge has led nowhere. In the end
all that we know is--that we cannot know. What a pity then that he has
squandered his youth on study and meditation and medicine. A kind of
death comes over him; which means, psychologically, that he has reached
the end of one line of development, and is preparing himself to change
over to another and new line.

This soon appears, in the form of a poodle dog who soon shows himself
as the Devil. Both these symbols are inevitable. A dog, as shown
before, relates to our more extraverted side, and it is this side for
which Faust now longs. He has reached the end of his development (for
the time being) as an introvert; the longing that now is awakened is
for _life_--that is, for youth, activity, sexuality, love, ardent
adventure, etc. Hence, the symbol of the dog as representing the side
of himself he has not developed. But this really is also the Devil.
That is to say that which is undeveloped is still in a primitive state,
and through its long repression, bears the aspect of something ugly
and evil. In order, therefore, to reach the “other side,” in order to
begin to live out the unlived possibilities of his nature, he must sell
himself to the Devil.

That is to say, that when the undeveloped side shows itself and takes
command, it cannot be lived unless one is willing to go a path which
may often appear evil and which is in direct defiance to what one has
previously lived and thought good.

This selling out to the Devil appears as a great danger. It means
that he will never be “saved,” never go to heaven. But actually in
the prologue of the play, God allows the Devil to make this compact
with Faust because the Devil is “a part of that power which wills the
bad, but somehow works the good.” That is to say, if one is willing to
step over into the undeveloped side, and live it in spite of its evil
beginnings, one can only develop oneself and finally come to a higher
good.

Such the drama shows. By magic Faust gains wealth and power. He seduces
Gretchen, and her end is insanity, infanticide and a death that
narrowly escapes the gallows. But Faust goes on, and the whole play
shows how, by following the Devil, he brings the neglected side up to
the developed side of himself, so that in the end the Devil is defeated
and Faust gains that heaven where the two sides of his nature may now
be united in harmony.

If Faust outlines the problem, another great work, the “Prometheus and
Epimetheus” of Spitteler, shows its solution. Jung is at great pains to
analyze this long poem in his book on Psychological Types. Prometheus
and Epimetheus stand respectively for introvert and extravert.
Prometheus is the idealist who withdraws from the world into himself to
love and serve his soul; but Epimetheus is the man of the world, who
has common sense, who obeys the conventions and who becomes a king.
Epimetheus cannot wean his foolish brother from his obviously perverted
way of living. A conflict arises between them, which drives Prometheus
all the deeper in himself. Thus a great sickness falls not only upon
him, but upon his God (the collective unconscious). His soul then
brings him a jewel, a thing of magic, a wonder-child, which will save
the world. But this jewel is rejected by the king and by the world, and
as a result there is destruction, the king losing his throne.

“The final extinction of Good is prevented by the intervention of
Prometheus. He rescues Messias, the last of the sons of God, out
of the power of his enemy. Messias becomes the heir to the Divine
Kingdom, while Prometheus and Epimetheus, the personifications of the
severed opposites, become united in the seclusion of their native
valley.... Which means, extraversion and introversion cease to dominate
as one-sided lines of direction.... In their stead, a new function
appears, symbolically represented by a child named Messias. He is the
mediator, the symbol of the new attitude that shall reconcile the
opposites.”

What is the exact meaning of this? To begin with, Prometheus and
Epimetheus must be thought of, not as two men, but as the two sides of
one man, the conflict, in short, between introversion and extraversion.
In the normal course of development, like Faust, one develops first one
side, then the other. Naturally the time must come when the conflict
breaks out in full force: shall one follow the principle of power,
of introversion, or that of love, of extraversion? This conflict
produces a deadlock, and in this deadlock, a solution is offered by the
unconscious in the form of a symbol (the jewel, the wonder-child.) But
this is not understood, and there is a breakdown and collapse. However,
now a new path is found which leads out.

This path Jung calls the _transcendent function_; this indeed is the
Messias of the poem. It is part of the analytic process, and emerges
only at the end of a deep analysis. What it amounts to is an _inner
guidance_.

I have already shown that the collective unconscious is creative, that
it is ahead of the race, and projects at times, through geniuses, a
vision of what is to be, what is becoming. Just as it does this for the
race, it also to a certain extent, and at certain times, is prospective
for the individual, laying out the next step he is to take, and
forecasting the next phase of his development.

This prospective quality is rarely found in the dream, though sometimes
it appears there. It is usually found in the _phantasy_. The phantasy
is a product analogous to the dream, but whereas when we dream we are
fully asleep, and hence, unconscious, the phantasy appears between
waking and sleeping, when we are really half-asleep. It appears as a
sort of dream, sometimes as a clear plastic image, and we know, when we
apprehend it, that we are not asleep.

As Jung works out in great detail, the phantasy has a greater
value than the dream, for the dream is merely the product of the
unconscious, whereas the phantasy is the product of both the conscious
and unconscious minds working simultaneously at that moment when we
are half-conscious, or between the two. Hence, it contains in symbolic
form, our deepest insight, our deepest wish, our clearest foreknowledge
of what to do, being in this respect also superior to our conscious
working out of the problem.

It is by following the insight gained from our phantasies that we
work out the problem of the deep conflict; for if we follow these
phantasies, we take the next necessary step and so learn gradually to
reconcile the claims of extraversion with those of introversion.

In the great religion of the Hindoos, and in fact, in a religion of
the Chinese, we hear much of a Middle Path. The problem as set forth
by those religions is that life consists of a pair of opposites; such
for instance as spirituality vs. materialism, feminine vs. masculine,
love vs. power, divine vs. demonic, etc., and they see clearly that
neither extreme can bring peace. If we live one extreme then soon we
thirst and hunger for the other, and this brings discord and conflict.
The true wisdom of life then is to find a Middle Path, a way between
the opposites. This way is not something that can be thought out
and entered by violence. It is something found gradually through
development in religious ritual.

It is this great thought, this truth which emerges again in modern
psychology. But it comes now with a difference. Psycho-analysis is a
highly specialized scientific technic. It does not deal with ritual
and dogma, it does not lay down general laws to the individual. It
recognizes that his problem is different from that of all other
individuals, and seeks to guide him, not from without, but from within.
From the material which rises naturally from his own psyche, from dream
and phantasy and intuition, he gains the insight which he must follow.

Hence, religion ceases to be a mass-matter, but becomes an individual
matter. As Jung puts it, every creed attempts to make us all live the
phantasies of the founder of the religion. His phantasies may have been
very great and very deep; but they were, in the main, his own. Every
human being is constantly producing phantasies, and in these lies his
own path, and not in those of someone’s else.

What is the goal then of this immense struggle in the human being,
this psychic conflict which sometimes goes on to a point of shattering
the individual, this inner division that cries out for healing, and
which goads us forward to our development? The word that Jung gives
us is _individuation_. We aim, he says, to be individuals in the true
sense of the word. Certainly, however, the fragments that Nietzsche
saw are not individuals, for an individual is one who contains the
many-sidedness of human nature in a state of inner harmony. If then
this one-sidedness precludes individuality, the psyche must be
constantly urging us on to develop that which has been neglected in
order that the undeveloped side may rise level to the developed side,
and so that in the end one may be a complete, rounded, harmonious human
being.

This is the light which the new psychology offers to the race at
a moment of its greatest darkness. It has just fought the bloodiest
and most devastating war of all history; it has fought that war
in the twilight of the Gods. Its old Gods are disintegrating and
vanishing. Everywhere we see the harsh conflict going on, and at the
very moment when man has reached his highest point of extraversion,
with his machines, his radios and phonographs and aeroplanes, his
automobiles and newspapers and movies, his triumph over nature, we see
everywhere the sadness and suffering of humanity, the breakdown of
white civilization in Europe, the restless stirrings of the East, and
an immense increase in neurosis and insanity. A great change is due;
a new light has come. This new light however, is not a religion, it
is nothing to broadcast and apply _en masse_. It is a technic which
must reach individual by individual, making him known to himself,
discovering for him his type with its needs and limitation, showing him
his possibilities, directing him to the path of his own development.
Naturally such development will be different for each individual.
There are not many, as Jung shows, who must go to the painful lengths
depicted in the story of Prometheus and Epimetheus, or even in the
story of Faust. For the majority, a deeper self-understanding,
a knowledge of the types, an ability to understand some of the
products of the unconscious, a lifting off of the repressions, a full
recognition of one’s own needs and desires, will be enough to bring
about a more harmonious, a more fruitful life. But for the few, a
higher, deeper suffering is necessary, possibly because of their gifts,
which may thus be developed and become a heritage for the race.




