IV.

THE BREAK BETWEEN FREUD AND JUNG.


At the time that Dr. Freud was making his discoveries in Vienna, Dr.
Carl Jung, a young psychiatrist, was conducting certain experiments
in Zurich, Switzerland. These were of a dry technical nature which
need not be given here, but they led to a tentative theory of an
unconscious mind. It was while he was engaged on these experiments that
Jung first read the work of Freud. He knew at once that he had found
his master and hastened to become Freud’s pupil and colleague. He did
more than that. At that period Freud was the laughing stock of Vienna,
and wherever his work penetrated. He was jeered and ridiculed for his
fantastic notions, and was suffering the bitter fate of all pioneers.
Jung was in a powerful position at Zurich, and at once proceeded to
enlarge and deepen the fight for Freud. He became the most powerful
exponent of the Freudian psychology, and helped to bring the new
knowledge and new technic into its first acceptance by the world.

Freud looked upon Jung as upon a favorite son. They fought
shoulder-to-shoulder, the work spread, and they were invited to
this country to give lectures. In Switzerland, Austria, England and
America the psycho-analyst made his appearance, and the world of the
intelligentsia awoke with a shock to the sexual theory. Among the
cultured everywhere there was discussion of the Oedipus complex, the
repressions, the sexual perversions, the idea that much that we had
thought purely spiritual, like art and religion, were merely masks for
sexual complexes. The psycho-analytic movement, held firmly together by
two great men, was forging ahead.

However, Jung, from his continued analysis of patients, and from his
own experiences, was beginning to form doubts in his own mind. There
was something, he began to think, inadequate in Freud’s theory. He
hardly dared, at this time, to make any formal criticism; but finally,
after a great conflict, he was moved, even inspired, to write his first
great book. This book is entitled “The Psychology of the Unconscious.”

He has said of it that it was a voyage of discovery. He himself, when
he started it, hardly knew to what depths it would lead him, to what
conclusions it would force him. But when he was finished, he knew that
he could no longer withhold his own point of view and that this would
inevitably lead to a break with Freud.

It proved to be so. Freud was shocked and appalled. He sent the
manuscript back with a letter in which their relationship was ended. He
said that Jung had betrayed the psycho-analytic movement, that he had
ventured out beyond the bounds of science, and that he was seeking to
destroy the greatest values in the new psychology.

Of course such a break was inevitable, and in the end it proved
fortunate. It set Jung free. He could now go on, without hindrance, in
his great task, which led finally to the greatest contributions thus
far made.

The break itself may be traced to a divergence between two theories of
the unconscious. As will be remembered, Freud’s theory would define the
unconscious as something which is produced after we are born, and when
the repressions begin. All that is anti-social, that flies in the face
of conventional morality and the law of the land, everything that is
taboo, gets walled off from the conscious mind, and is henceforth the
unconscious mind. The unconscious then is a storehouse of the evil, the
thwarted, the unconventional, the instinctive.

Jung does not deny that a _part_ of the unconscious is exactly of this
nature. But in “The Psychology of the Unconscious” he proceeds to
prove, by a wealth of material and a sureness of analysis, that the
unconscious is something far deeper and greater than merely a personal
bag of discards.

He finds in numerous typical dreams and phantasies of his patients
that they reproduce symbols and stories as old as the human race. He
shows that the human mind everywhere, among the most widely scattered
peoples, and in different ages, produces the same typical myths, the
same figures of deities and demons; and that the patient of today gives
forth, in analysis, a similar mythology; and very often something which
he, the patient, has been utterly ignorant of and which is beyond his
understanding.

He finds further that man has always had what might be called a typical
psychological fate; that the story of man’s inner life and development
has always taken a certain form, embodied in the figure of the hero.
The hero, in the myth, is always he who goes forth to conquer greatly,
who overcomes dragons and supernatural powers, but who finally loses
his power, is subjugated and dies an inner death. But out of this death
he is reborn and appears with a new life, often magical, by which he
goes on to his greater achievements.

Such a death and rebirth is pictured in the story of the crucifixion
of Jesus. It appears in a modern work, in “Jean-Christophe,” where
the hero suffers a spiritual disintegration and can no longer compose
music, but with the first breath of Spring, feels the new tides of life
pouring into him and rises to the greatest heights of his creative
power. Such, too, is doubtless the inner story of our greatest American
poet, Walt Whitman. When he was about 35, and after suffering some deep
personal reverse, he secluded himself on Long Island beside the sea for
some weeks, and had a spiritual experience which led to his awakening
as a poet and the beginning of “Leaves of Grass.”

What is this typical myth? It is known as the sun-myth, for the savage
doubtless based it on the strange fact that the sun, after setting in
the west, rose again the following morning in the east. This sun-myth,
boiled down to its essentials, is somewhat as follows: The sun is the
hero. He is born of the mother, the sea, in the east. He rises in his
splendor and reaches the zenith. But now his strange descent begins,
and when he reaches the west, he must re-descend into the waters of the
sea, die again and re-enter the mother’s womb. Actually he is pictured
as being devoured by a sea monster. In the belly of this monster he
rides in the sea under the earth back toward the east. At first he lies
supine; but finally, plucking up courage he begins to battle with the
monster. Finally he kills him, and the body of the great fish floats to
shore, where the hero, the sun, steps out reborn, and rises again in
the east.

This story, based on something seen in nature, is found to be typical
of man’s soul. And Jung discovered that wherever an analysis was
carried far enough, this typical myth appeared in various forms in
the dreams of the patient, and the patient went through an experience
analogous to the myth.

What is this experience? A man has reached a high point of development
and achievements. There comes upon him now a sense of deadness and
futility, a period of disillusionment and turning away from the world,
the experience which is described in the beginning of Goethe’s “Faust.”
This inner death proceeds until he is lost in himself, until he is,
in the language of the myth, devoured by the monster; and now he goes
through a long period of inner suffering and groping until the time
comes when a new life awakens and he goes back to the world of men with
a greater energy, a new vision, and perhaps a new life-task. So, in the
beginning of Nietzsche’s “Thus Spake Zarathustra,” we see the hero step
forth after his years of preparation in the wilderness to bring his
message to the world of men.

This then is the typical experience of those who carry their
development to any height. What is its meaning psychologically?

There is no understanding of it, says Jung, unless we broaden the
conception of the unconscious. And with this he introduces his theory
of the _collective unconscious_.

The human body is the product of millions of years of evolution, and in
it is written the history of life. It is not a sudden creation. If this
is true of the body, how can it be anything but true of the mind, which
is a function of the body? The mind, too, is a product of millions of
years of evolution, and just as the history of life is written in the
flesh, so too the history of man’s spirit, his adventure, is summed
up in the mind. In other words, the new born babe does not present a
mind like a blank sheet of paper on which his personal experience will
begin to write; he is born with the great inheritance of the race, the
collective unconscious, in which is stored the wisdom of the ages as
well as the great instincts, and what Jung calls “the residues of our
animal ancestry.”

How do we know this? Because the mind of a man today, a man even
ignorant and unread, will, on certain occasions, produce the same
myths, the same supernatural figures, the same psychic phenomena as
those produced thousands of years ago, and the same in every part of
the earth among the most widely separated nations and races.

In short, the unconscious contains typical _images_ and typical
_stories_. And whence did these arise? It is quite natural that the
presence in our own unconscious of a wisdom greater than ours and at
the same time of animal instincts sometimes overwhelming in their
destructiveness, should give the savage, for instance, a sense of the
nearness of supernatural powers of good and evil, of some supernatural
wisdom that helped him (in the form of revelation or inspiration) and
of some demonic lust or passion, which, if it swept over him, led
to the orgy, the murder or insanity. Hence, these experiences would
be pictured as the work of beings like those he knew, only greater.
Wisdom was a Great Mother or a Great Father, a God, in short; evil was
a Devil, a Demon, like a bad man, only greater and worse. And certain
experiences would be pictured in the form of monsters, great strange
animals, sometimes animals part human and part beast.

Thus we see an explanation for the origin of the many religions on
earth, all of which have certain things in common. Some sensitive
man experienced his own unconscious in the form of dreams and
hallucinations. Moses for instance heard the voice of God and saw
the burning bush. Psychologically, this would mean that what Moses
thought was outside himself, came from within himself, came from the
unconscious and was, in the technical language, _projected_, the
vision of fire upon the bush, the voice into the air. He heard and saw
something out of his own depths.

Every religion makes this projection. Heaven is up in the sky, hell
under the earth; the Gods are on high, the Devils below. It has
remained for modern psychology not only to locate these phenomena
as in the brain itself, but also to divest them of their miraculous
coating, and to explain them as something having a direct meaning in
the patient’s life.

According to Jung, the collective unconscious is more or less dormant
in all of us, except under certain circumstances or after certain
experiences. The average man goes on unaware of his own demonic and
divine attributes. But in a lynching-bee or in battle the devil will
suddenly awake and transform him from something human into something
monstrous. On the other hand, the youth falling headlong in love,
the man who sustains the death of his loved one and similar great
experiences of life, will encounter the presence of ineffable wisdom
and power, so that he feels he is visited by something beyond the human.

But the process of analysis also leads to the experience of the
collective unconscious. Psycho-analysis is self-discovery. One goes
deeper and deeper into oneself. One goes back on the track of the
years to one’s childhood. One exhausts in the process one’s personal
memories. One goes down, as it were, beyond the personal layers of the
unconscious, to the impersonal. At this point the manifestations of
the collective unconscious begin, and the dreams are now loaded with
mythological conceptions, and images of the supernatural.

This deep entering into oneself Jung defines as _introversion_, a self
descent, and a means of development, a discipline not only in the
wisdom of all time, but in overcoming the undeveloped tendencies in
oneself. It is at this point that the hero is devoured by the monster,
the unconscious, and makes that voyage that leads to his rebirth.

Dante depicts this in his Divine Comedy. The hero, Dante, is led
by Virgil, down through the depth of Inferno (the evil side of the
unconscious), up the mount of Purgatory (the overcoming) and finally
reaches Paradise, where he finds Beatrice, an image of his soul, and a
new wisdom, a new life are his.

Naturally one cannot do justice to so deep a conception within
the space allotted. But we can see at a glance that much that is
otherwise inexplicable, save on the ground of something miraculous
and supernatural, is now given a more natural explanation. We
can understand the genius as one who has the gift of tapping his
unconscious and bringing forth works which are impossible to the run
of men. We can understand why man has always needed a religion. We can
understand those intuitions which lead to new discoveries in science.
Man has a storehouse of wisdom in himself.

We can also understand the strange aberrations of insanity, of those
unfortunates who are caught, as it were, in the collective unconscious,
and live only in a world of demons and divinities and uncanny myths.
We can understand too the demonic outbreaks in war, and the cause of
many crimes. I know of the case of a man who was a clergyman, and who,
each time he had finished an impassioned sermon which passed through
the audience like a rousing electricity, immediately went to a brothel
and indulged in an orgy of drink and sexuality. He was a man under the
complete dominance of the collective unconscious. First the divine side
appeared, with its marvelous inspirations; then the demonic, dragging
him in the mud.

It must not be thought, from the foregoing, that Jung rejected
the sexual theory of Freud. What he did was to modify this theory,
holding that not all cases of neurosis registered sexual repression
or maladjustment. He fully agreed however, that the Oedipus complex
appears as one of the great problems, but instead of interpreting
dreams of this nature to mean that the son actually had incestuous
longings for the mother, he took such dreams, like all others, to be
symbolic. If a man dreams that a monster devours him, it does not mean
that he is literally eaten by a large animal. It means that he has
made a deep introversion. So too a dream of incest means that the son
has reunited himself with the mother. But what does the mother mean?
She may symbolize that period of his life when he actually was united
with her spiritually, the time of early childhood, a time when he was
irresponsible, taken care of, sheltered, helped. His dream may mean
then that he longs to be like a child again; he longs to escape from
the hardships of adaptation and his present problems.

On the other hand the mother may have a deeper meaning. She may appear
with a supernatural air about her, and stand for the collective
unconscious itself, which is the source (or mother) of our conscious
life. The longing of the son for the mother, from this standpoint,
is the longing for descent into self, for deep introversion. It has
the meaning of the sun-myth where the setting sun is devoured by the
monster and starts on his journey toward rebirth.

Since there is great danger in the withdrawal from life, in an
introversion that in a way shuts one in oneself, whether one
does this as an escape from responsibility or from a longing for
self-development, it is natural that the myth should represent this
incest-longing as taboo, as forbidden, just as real incest is, and that
it is only the hero who can overcome this taboo and make that great
descent which Dante pictures in his Inferno, and which in Faust is
shown as the perilous descent to the Mothers.




