III.

WILL-TO-POWER.


Alfred Adler was a pupil of Freud. In the course of his psycho-analytic
practice he stumbled across a discovery which led to a break with Freud
and the enunciation of a new theory. In contradistinction to the sexual
theory it may be called the power-theory.

What Adler noticed in every neurotic was a marked feeling of
inferiority, a feeling, as he put it, of being _under_, and a
consequent incessant striving to be _over_ or on top. To use a simple,
concrete case: If a man felt inferior to the woman he loved, and this
was a symptom of inferiority he had always had toward the women he
loved, he would strive by every means to put the woman down and himself
up. He might put her down by economic pressure, by intellectual attack;
or he might put her down in the sexual way, for instance through
cruelty (sadism).

In the latter case, Freud would say that the problem was sexual.
But Adler would say, what the man is striving for is not sexual
satisfaction, but power. If he could put the woman down through
money-pressure, that would satisfy him, or if he could put her down
sexually, that would be satisfactory. What he was seeking was mastery.

Take the well-known case of the Don Juan who has one love-affair
after another, who wins a woman only to tire of her and pass on to the
next. Such men will admit, as a rule, that the greatest pleasure is in
conquest, and that when a woman has been conquered she is no longer
interesting. They look upon love-affairs as a series of battles, and
the aim is not love or sexuality, so much as triumph.

What becomes then of the Oedipus complex, the incestuous longing of
the son for the mother? According to Adler this, too, is a problem of
power. The father is the head of the house, the master, the king in the
realm of the family, and possesses the mother. The son is under the
father, but would depose this king and take his place. In short, he
would be the head and possess the mother. But actually, what the child
is seeking, is not really to possess the mother, but to have power in
the manner of his father.

The cause, then, of mental disorders and spiritual maladies, Adler
traces to an excessive feeling of inferiority which leads to a marked
will-to-power. But whence arises this feeling of inferiority? Adler at
this point is sure that the origin is to be sought not in something
psychic but in something physical. His theory is that the feeling of
inferiority is due to some _actual organic inferiority_.

In other words, he believes that a child who has a club foot, like
Byron, or one subject to epileptic fits, like Dostoyevski, or one with
an impediment which causes stammering, like Demosthenes, or one with
a chronic tendency to constipation like Lincoln (the cases of great
men could be multiplied endlessly), that such a child feels himself
inferior to normal children; he feels that there is something the
matter with him, that he has less chance of success, etc. This is the
feeling of inferiority, the feeling of being under. And the deeper this
feeling, the greater the reaction to it, the greater the striving to
change the position about, so that instead of being under his fellows
he is over them. Out of such defects, then, arise the great ambitions,
or as Adler puts it, the “guiding fiction.” By this he means a phantasy
of some great goal which the child dreams about and sets out to reach.

A classical case is that of Demosthenes. Because he stammered, because
he was inferior in speech to other children, an ambition awoke not
merely to be able to talk in the normal manner, but something far
greater: namely, to be the greatest of orators, an ambition he actually
achieved. But suppose he could not have achieved such a victory,
suppose conditions had been such that it was impossible for him to
be an orator? Then his incessant striving would prove futile, the
feeling of inferiority would increase, and there would be a breakdown.
The breakdown would be a neurosis, and he would be ready for a
psycho-analyst.

Why did Napoleon set out to conquer Europe? His inordinate
will-to-power could be traced back to a painful feeling of inferiority
in his youth, which showed itself in the military school, where he was
put to shame by his fellows. They, he must have felt, would become in
time great generals and leaders in the army; hence, he must be even
more than they, the general of generals.

As to the feeling of inferiority itself, Adler denotes it as the
feeling of being _feminine_. Woman, he believes, has the psychology of
being under, man that of being over, as shown in the sexual act itself.
Besides, man is physically stronger than woman. Hence, if a man has an
organic inferiority, he feels that he is not a man, and hence, that he
is in some way feminine. All his striving therefore is to be masculine,
and indeed, super-masculine. This striving Adler calls _the masculine
protest_. One finds it in women also; a marked feeling of inferiority
in a woman leading her to strive to be like a man, and a refusal to
accept her own psychology.

Such, in brief, is the Adler theory. It owes many things to Nietzsche,
who, in his “Thus Spake Zarathustra” teaches will-to-power as the
guiding principle of life, who relegates woman to a lesser, man to a
greater sphere, and who finds in the striving of the ego the dominant
impulse of life.




