The Project Gutenberg eBook of The psychology of Jung
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The psychology of Jung

Author: James Oppenheim

Release date: February 5, 2026 [eBook #77864]
Flow Updated date: February 6, 2026 

Language: English

Original publication: Girard: Haldeman-Julius Company, 1925

Credits: Tim Miller, toy9683 and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PSYCHOLOGY OF JUNG ***




LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 978 Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

The Psychology of Jung

James Oppenheim


HALDEMAN-JULIUS COMPANY GIRARD, KANSAS




Copyright, 1925, Haldeman-Julius Company

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




THE PSYCHOLOGY OF JUNG.




CONTENTS.


 Chapter                                Page
    I. The Psychology of the Future        5
   II. The Sexual Theory                   8
  III. Will-To-Power                      18
   IV. The Break Between Freud and Jung   22
    V. The Introvert vs. the Extravert    33
   VI. Types                              45
  VII. The Conflict and Its Solution      53
 VIII. Note                               61




THE PSYCHOLOGY OF JUNG.




I.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE FUTURE.


The origin of the new psychology, with its technic universally known as
psycho-analysis, lies in the effort which man has always made to cure
those ills “not of the body.” When we speak of the ills of the “soul,”
we do not, however, mean that the mind is not a part of the body. We
merely mean that there is a difference, for instance, between the
illness that might arise from receiving bad news, and that which was
caused, say, by being knocked down by a motor car. The first we call a
mental ill, a spiritual malady, the second a physical.

The old shaman of the savage tribe did not only attempt to cure
gangrene and malaria and sore throat; he also treated people who were
“possessed by demons” or had “lost their souls”; he treated people who
had lost hope, who were despairing, who wanted a charm to conquer the
object of love or hate, who desired success, who heard voices, saw
visions and were afraid to live.

From the beginning, therefore, man has attempted to bring a healing to
the mind. Every religion has been such an attempt.

The trouble with this, however, from our modern standpoint, is that a
religion demands faith, not only in the natural, but the supernatural;
and not only, let it be added, in the supernatural, but a very definite
and dogmatic supernatural, some set of stories and brand of divinities.
There are Gods, Devils and ghosts to which we must submit. But modern
science, which has steadfastly discredited mythology and sought to
explain life and its phenomena by natural causes, or laws of nature,
has seriously undermined the old religions, and we see them beginning
to topple in all places of the earth.

However, the science of medicine, which sought to discover the causes
of sickness, reached a limit beyond which it could not pass. If there
is no medicine for a broken heart, there is also none for a man with a
fixed idea or one with a sense of utter inferiority. The insane cannot
be cured by drugs or by operations, except in those rare curable cases
which have an indubitable physical origin. The thousands creeping and
stumbling around the world, victims of neurosis, cannot be reached by
serums or diets.

It was therefore necessary for medicine to go beyond itself, to invade
the wide and dark realm of religion and preempt the creeds, by applying
the technic of science to what had hitherto been understood darkly
through intuition, guess-work and “revelation.”

It is not my intention to give a history of the origin and rise of
psycho-analysis. That, in itself, is a book. It is merely necessary
to say that the first genius in this field was Sigmund Freud, that
Freud made the first great discoveries, that he traced the first chart
of the unconscious mind, and that he originated the first technic of
psycho-analysis.

If Freud, however, was the pioneer, it remained for two of his pupils
to carry the work forward to the point where it has become one of the
vital contributions to the race. The work of Adler, the first of these,
came as a revolt against Freud and gave rise to a rival theory. The
work of Jung, however, not only brought a synthesis of the work of
Adler and Freud, but went beyond both. It is for this reason, then,
that I call his work “the psychology of the future.”

In order to come to a clear understanding of Jung, it will be
necessary first to summarize the theories of both Freud and Adler. We
can then see how Jung, accepting both, has transcended both, and laid
out the first tracings of a complete psychology.




