PART II

SYSTEMATICS AND HISTORY

*A.* THE PRINCIPLES OF SYSTEMATICS


RATIONAL SYSTEMATICS

All systematics which deserves the predicate “rational” is founded
upon a concept or upon a proposition, by the aid of which a totality
of specific diversities may be understood. That is to say: every
system claiming to be rational gives us a clue by which we are able to
apprehend either that there cannot exist more than a certain number of
diversities of a certain nature, or that there can be an indefinite
number of them which follow a certain law with regard to the character
of their differences.

Solid geometry, which states that only five regular bodies are possible,
and points out the geometrical nature of these bodies, is a model
of what a rational system should be. The theory of conic sections
is another. Take the general equation of the second degree with two
unknowns, and study all the possible forms it can assume by a variation
of its constants, and you will understand that only four different types
of conic sections are possible--the circle, the ellipse, the hyperbola,
and the parabola.

In physics and chemistry no perfect rational systems have been
established hitherto, but there are many systems approaching the ideal
type in different departments of these sciences. The chemical type of
the monohydric saturated alcohols, for instance, is given by the formula
C_nH_{2n+1}OH, and in this formula we not only have an expression of
the law of composition which all possible alcohols are to follow,--but,
since we know empirically the law of quantitative relation between
*n* and various physical properties, we also possess in our formula a
general statement with respect to the totality of the properties of any
primary alcohol that may be discovered or prepared in the future. But
chemistry has still higher aims with regard to its systematics: all of
you know that the so-called “periodic law of the elements” was the first
step towards a principle that may some day give account of the relation
of all the physical and chemical properties of any so-called element
with its most important constant, the atomic weight, and it seems to be
reserved for the present time to form a real fundamental system of the
“elements” on the basis of the periodic law by the aid of the theory
of electrons. Such a fundamental system of the elements would teach us
that there can only be so many elements and no more, and only of such a
kind. In crystallography a similar end has been reached already by means
of certain hypothetic assumptions, and systematics has here accounted
for the limited number and fixed character of the possible forms of
crystalline symmetry.

It is not difficult to understand the general logical type of all
rational systems, and logic indeed can discover it without appealing
to concrete sciences or to geometry. Rational systematics is always
possible whenever there exists any fundamental concept or proposition
which carries with it a principle of division; or to express it somewhat
differently, which would lead to contradictions, if division were to
be tried in any but one particular manner. The so-called “genus,” as
will easily be perceived, then embraces all its “species” in such a
manner that all peculiarities of the species are represented already in
properties of the genus, only in a more general form, in a form which
is still unspecified. The genus is both richer in content and richer in
extent than are the species, though it must be added that its richness
in content is, as it were, only latent: but it may come into actuality
by itself and without any help from without.

We are dealing here with some of the most remarkable properties of the
so-called synthetic judgments *a priori* in the sense of Kant, and,
indeed, it seems that rational systematics will only be possible where
some concept of the categorical class or some proposition based upon
such concept lies at the root of the matter or at least is connected
with it in some way. In fact, all rational systems with regard to the
relations of symmetry in natural bodies deal ultimately with space; or
better, all systems in such fields are able to become rational only if
they happen to turn into questions of spatial symmetry.

All other genera and species, whether of natural bodies or of facts,
can be related only on the basis of empirical abstraction, *i.e.* can
never attain rationality: here, indeed, the genus is richer in extent
and poorer in content than are the species. The genus is transformed
into the species, not by any inherent development of latent properties,
but by a mere process of addition of characteristic points. It is
impossible to deduce the number or law or specifications of the species
from the genus. Mere “classification,” if we may reserve the honorable
name of systematics for the rational type, is possible here, a mere
statement in the form of a catalogue, useful for orientation but for
nothing more. We may classify all varieties of hats or of tables in the
same way.


BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMATICS

At this point we return from our logical excursion to our proper subject
of biology; for I am sorry to say biological systematics is at present
of our second type of systematics throughout: it is classification pure
and simple. We have a catalogue in our hands, but nothing more.

Such a statement of fact conveys not a particle of censure, casts not
the least reflection on the gifted men who created the classification of
animals or plants. It is absolutely necessary to have such a catalogue,
and indeed the catalogue of the organisms can be said to have been
improved enormously during the advance of empirical and descriptive
biological science. Any classification improves as it becomes more
“natural,” as the different possible schemes of arrangement, the
different reasons of division, agree better and better in their results;
and, in fact, there has been a great advance of organic classification
in this direction. The “natural” system has reached such perfection,
that what is related from one point of view seems nearly related also
from almost all points of view which are applicable, at least from those
which touch the most important characteristics. There has been a real
weighing of all the possible reasons of division, and that has led to a
result which seems to be to some extent final.

But, nevertheless, we do not understand the *raison d’être* of the
system of organisms; we are not at all able to say that there must be
these classes or orders or families and no others, and that they must be
such as they are.

Shall we ever be able to understand that? Or will organic systematics
always remain empirical classification? We cannot answer this question.
If we could, indeed, we should have what we desire! As simple relations
of space are certainly not the central point of any problematic rational
organic systematics even of the future, the question arises, whether
there could be found any principle of another type in the realm of
synthetic *a priori* judgments which could allow an inherent sort of
evolution of latent diversities, as do all judgments about spatial
symmetry. At the end of the second course of these lectures, which is to
be delivered next summer, we shall be able to say a few more words about
this important point.

The concept of what is called “a type,” due almost wholly to Cuvier and
Goethe, is the most important of all that classification has given to
us. Hardly second in importance is the discovery of the “correlation of
parts,” as a sort of connection which has the character of necessity
without being immediately based upon causality. Rádl seems to be
the only modern author who has laid some stress on this topic. The
harmony which we have discovered in development is also part of this
correlation. When, later on, we come to discuss analytically our well
established entelechy as the ultimate basis of individual organisation,
we shall be able to gain more satisfactory ideas with respect to the
meaning of the non-causal but necessary connection, embraced in the
concepts of type and of correlation of parts.

The type is a sort of irreducible arrangement of different parts; the
correlation deals with the degree and the quality of what may be called
the actual make of the parts, in relation to one another: all ruminants,
for instance, are cloven-footed, the so-called dental formulae are
characteristic of whole groups of mammals. Of course all such statements
are empirical and have their limits: but it is important that they are
possible.[142]

[142] Recent years have created the beginnings of a systematics based on
chemical differences of metabolism and its products: such differences in
fact have been found to go hand in hand with diversities of the type in
some cases (v. Bunge, Przibram, etc.).

It has been the chief result of comparative embryology to show that the
type as such is more clearly expressed in developmental stages than
it is in the adults, and that therefore the embryological stages of
different groups may be very much more similar to each other than are
the adults: that is the truth contained in the so-called “biogenetisches
Grundgesetz.” But the specific differences of the species are not
wanting in any case of ontogeny, in spite of such similarities in
different groups during development.

We have applied the name “systematics” or, if rationality is excluded,
“classification” to all that part of a science which deals with
diversities instead of generalities: in such a wide meaning systematics,
of course, is not to be confused with that which is commonly called so
in biology, and which describes only the exterior differences of form.
Our systematics is one of the two chief parts of biology; what are
called comparative anatomy and comparative embryology are its methods.
For it must be well understood that these branches of research are only
methods and are not sciences by themselves.




*B.* THE THEORY OF DESCENT


1. GENERALITIES

It is most generally conceded at the present time that the actually
existing state of all organisms whatsoever is the result of their
history. What does that mean? What are the foundations upon which the
assumption rests? What is the relation of systematics to history? In
raising such questions and considerations we are treading the ground
sacred to the theory of descent.

I well know that you prefer the name “theory of evolution” for what
I am speaking of: but it may be misleading in various respects. We
already know that quite a determinate meaning has been given to the word
“evolutio” as applied to individual morphogenesis, “evolutio” being
here opposed to “epigenesis.” Now there would be nothing against the
use of the word evolution in a wider sense--indeed it is often applied
nowadays to denote the fact that a something is actually “evolved” in
embryology--if only our entelechy had taken the place of the machine
of the mechanists. But that is the very point: there must be a real
“evolving” of a something, in order that the word evolution may be
justified verbally: and that is not the case in so-called phylogeny. At
least we know nothing of an evolutionary character in the problematic
pedigree of the organisms, as we shall see more fully hereafter. The
term “theory of descent” is therefore less open to objection than is the
usual English term. The word transformism, as used by the French, would
also be a very good title.

The theory of descent is the hypothetic statement that the organisms
are really allied by blood among each other, in spite of their
diversities.[143] The question about their so-called monophyletic
or polyphyletic origin is of secondary importance compared with the
statement of relationship in general.

[143] We prefer this unpretending definition of the theory of descent
to every other. As soon as one introduces into the definition the
concept of the “transmutability of species,” the term “species” would
require a special definition, and that would lead to difficulties which
it is unnecessary to deal with for our main purposes. It has been
remarked by Krašan, (*Ausichten und Gespräche über die individuelle und
specifische Gestaltung in der Natur*) and by several other writers,
that the problem of mutability or immutability of course relates to the
individuals in the first place. I should like to add to this remark that
the possibility must be admitted of the individuals being transmutable,
whilst the “species” are not transmutable at the same time, the line
of the “species” being a fixed order, through which the “individuals”
have to pass in the course of their generations. What is meant here
will become clearer, when we study the different possible aspects of
“phylogeny.”

There are two different groups of facts which have suggested the idea
of transformism: none of these facts can be said to be conclusive, but
there certainly is a great amount of probability in the whole if taken
together.

The first group of evidences which lead to the hypothesis of the real
relationship of organisms consists of facts relating to the geographical
distribution of animals and plants and to palæontology. As to geography,
it seems to me that the results of the floral and faunal study of groups
of islands are to be mentioned in the first place. If, indeed, on
each of the different islands, *A* *B* *C* and *D*, forming a group,
the species of a certain genus of animals or plants are different in a
certain respect, and show differences also compared with the species
living on the neighbouring continent, of which there is geological
evidence that the islands once formed a part, whilst there is no change
in the species on the continent itself for very wide areas, then, no
doubt, the hypothesis that all these differing species once had a common
origin, the hypothesis that there is a certain community among them all,
will serve to elucidate in some way what would seem to be very abstruse
without it. And the same is true of the facts of palaeontology. In
the geological strata, forming a continuous series, you find a set of
animals, always typical and specific for every single stratigraphical
horizon, but forming a series just as do those horizons. Would not the
whole aspect of these facts lose very much of its peculiarity if you
were to introduce the hypothesis that the animals changed with the
strata? The continuity of life, at least, would be guaranteed by such an
assumption.

The geographical and geological evidences in favour of the theory of
descent are facts taken from sciences which are not biology proper; they
are not facts of the living but only facts about the living. That is not
quite without logical importance, for it shows that not biology alone
has led to the transformism hypothesis. Were it otherwise, transformism
might be said to be a mere hypothesis *ad hoc*; but now this proves to
be not the case, though we are far from pretending that transformism
might be regarded as resting upon a real *causa vera*.

But let us study the second group of facts which support the theory of
descent. It is a group of evidences supplied by biology itself that we
meet here, there being indeed some features in biology which can be
said to gain some light, some sort of elucidation, if the theory of
descent is accepted. Of course, these facts can only be such as relate
to specific diversities, and indeed are facts of systematics; in other
words, there exists something in the very nature of the system of
organisms that renders transformism probable. The system of animals and
plants is based upon a principle which might be called the principle
of *similarities and diversities by gradation*; its categories are not
uniform but different in degree and importance, and there are different
kinds of such differences. No doubt, some light would be shed upon this
character of the system, if we were allowed to assume that the relation
between similarities and diversities, which is gradual, corresponded to
a blood-relationship, which is gradual also.


THE COVERT PRESUMPTION OF ALL THEORIES OF DESCENT

We have used very neutral and somewhat figurative words, in order to
show what might be called the logical value of the theory of descent,
in order to signify its value with respect to so-called “explanation.”
We have spoken of the “light” or the “elucidation” which it brings, of
the “peculiarity of aspect” which is destroyed by it. We have used this
terminology intentionally, for it is very important to understand that
a specific though hidden addition is made almost unconsciously to the
mere statement of the hypothesis of descent as such, whenever this
hypothesis is advocated in order to bring light or elucidation into any
field of systematic facts. And this additional hypothesis indeed must be
made from the very beginning, quite irrespective of the more detailed
problems of the law of transformism, in order that *any* sort of
so-called explanation by means of the theory of descent may be possible
at all. Whenever the theory that, in spite of their diversities, the
organisms are related by blood, is to be really useful for explanation,
it must necessarily be assumed in every case that the steps of change,
which have led the specific form *A* to become the specific form *B*,
have been such as only to change *in part* that original form *A*. That
is to say: the similarities between *A* and *B* must never have become
overshadowed by their diversities.

Only on this assumption, which indeed is a newly formed additional
subsidiary hypothesis, joined to the original hypothesis of descent in
general--a hypothesis regarding the very nature of transformism--only
on this almost hidden assumption is it possible to speak of any sort of
“explanation” which might be offered by the theory of transformism to
the facts of geography, geology, and biological systematics. Later on
we shall study more deeply the logical nature of this “explanation”; at
present it must be enough to understand this term in its quasi-popular
meaning.

What is explained by the hypothesis of descent--including the additional
hypothesis, that there always is a prevalence of the similarities
during transformism--is the fact that in palaeontology, in the groups
of island and continent faunae and florae taken as a whole, as well as
in the single categories of the system, the similarities exceed the
diversities. The *similarities* now are “explained”; that is to say,
they are understood as resting on but one principle: the similarities
are understood as being due to inheritance;[144] and now we have but one
problem instead of an indefinite number. For this reason Wigand granted
that the theory of descent affords what he calls a numerical reduction
of problems.

[144] It seems to me that my argument gives a broader logical basis
to the theory of descent than does that of G. Wolff (*Die Begründung
der Abstammungslehre*, München, 1907). Wolff starts from the concept
of organic teleology, and thus finds the only reason for accepting
the theory of transformism in the existence of so-called “rudimentary
organs”; these organs would form an obstacle to teleology if they could
not be regarded as inherited.

Understanding then what is explained by the theory of descent with its
necessary appendix, we also understand at once what is *not* elucidated
by it: the diversities of the organism remain as unintelligible as they
always were, even if we know that inheritance is responsible for what
is similar or equal. Now there can be no doubt that the diversities are
the more important point in systematics; if there were only similarities
there would be no problem of systematics, for there would be no system.
Let us be glad that there are similarities in the diversities, and that
these similarities have been explained in some way; but let us never
forget what is still awaiting its explanation. Unfortunately it has been
forgotten far too often.


THE SMALL VALUE OF PURE PHYLOGENY

And so we are led to the negative side of the theory of transformism,
after having discussed its positive half. The theory of descent as
such, without a real knowledge of the factors which are concerned in
transformism, or of the law of transformism, in other terms, leaves the
problem of systematics practically where it was, and adds really nothing
to its solution. That may seem very deplorable, but it is true.

Imagine so-called historical geology, without any knowledge of the
physical and chemical factors which are concerned in it: what would
you have except a series of facts absolutely unintelligible to you? Or
suppose that some one stated the cosmogenetic theory of Kant and Laplace
without there being any science of mechanics: what would the theory mean
to you? Or suppose that the whole history of mankind was revealed to
you, but that you had absolutely no knowledge of psychology: what would
you have but facts and facts and facts again, with not a morsel of real
explanation?

But such is the condition in which so-called phylogeny stands. If it
is based only on the pure theory of transformism, there is nothing
explained at all. It was for this reason that the philosopher Liebmann
complained of phylogeny that it furnishes nothing but a “gallery of
ancestors.” And this gallery of ancestors set up in phylogeny is not
even certain; on the contrary, it is absolutely uncertain, and very
far from being a fact. For there is no sound and rational principle
underlying phylogeny; there is mere fantastic speculation. How could it
be otherwise where all is based upon suppositions which themselves have
no leading principle at present? I should not like to be misunderstood
in my polemics against phylogeny. I fully grant you that it may be
possible in a few cases to find out the phylogenetic history of smaller
groups with some probability, if there is some palaeontological
evidence in support of pure comparative anatomy; and I also do not
hesitate to allow that such a statement would be of a certain value with
regard to a future discovery of the “laws” of descent, especially if
taken together with the few facts known about mutations. But it is quite
another thing with phylogeny on the larger scale. Far more eloquent than
any amount of polemics is the fact that vertebrates, for instance, have
already been “proved” to be descended from, firstly, the amphioxus;
secondly, the annelids; thirdly, the *Sagitta* type of worms; fourthly,
from spiders; fifthly, from *Limulus*, a group of crayfishes; and
sixthly, from echinoderm larvae. That is the extent of my acquaintance
with the literature, with which I do not pretend to be specially
familiar. Emil du Bois-Reymond said once that phylogeny of this sort is
of about as much scientific value as are the pedigrees of the heroes of
Homer, and I think we may fully endorse his opinion on this point.


HISTORY AND SYSTEMATICS

A few words should be devoted to the relations between history and
systematics in biology. Is there no contradiction between historical
development and a true and rational system which, we conceded, might
exist some day in biological sciences, even though it does not at
present? By no means. A totality of diversities is regarded from quite
different points of view if taken as the material of a system, and if
considered as realised in time. We have said that chemistry has come
very near to proper rational systematics, at least in some of its
special fields; but the compounds it deals with at the same time may
be said to have originated historically also, though not, of course,
by a process of propagation. It is evident at once that the geological
conditions of very early times prohibited the existence of certain
chemical compounds, both organic and inorganic, which are known at
present. None the less these compounds occupy their proper place in
the system. And there may be many substances theoretically known to
chemical systematics which have never yet been produced, on account
of the impossibility of arranging for their proper conditions of
appearance, and nevertheless they must be said to “exist.” “Existence,”
as understood in systematics, is independent of special space and of
special time, as is the existence of the laws of nature: we may speak of
a Platonic kind of existence here. Of course it does not contradict this
sort of ideal existence if reality proper is added to it.

Thus the problem of systematics remains, no matter whether the theory
of descent be right or wrong. There always remains the question about
the totality of diversities in life: whether it may be understood by
a general principle, and of what kind that principle would be. As,
in fact, it is most probably by history, by descent, that organic
systematics is brought about, it of course most probably will happen
some day that the analysis of the causal factors concerned in the
history will serve to discover the principle of systematics also.

Let us now glance at the different kinds of hypotheses which have been
established in order to explain how the descent of the organisms might
have been possible. We have seen that the theory of transformism alone
is not worth very much as a whole, unless at least a hypothetical
picture can be formed of the nature of the transforming factors: it is
by some such reasoning that almost every author who has defended the
theory of descent in its universality tries to account for the manner in
which organisms have acquired their present diversities.


2. THE PRINCIPLES OF DARWINISM

There is no need in our times and particularly in this country, to
explain in a full manner the theory known under the name of Darwinism.
All of you know this theory, at least in its outlines, and so we may
enter at once upon its analytic discussion. A few words only I beg
you to allow me as to the name of “Darwinism” itself. Strange to say,
Darwinism, and the opinion of Charles Darwin about the descent of
organisms, are two different things. Darwin, the very type of a man
devoted to science alone and not to personal interests,--Darwin was
anything but dogmatic, and yet Darwinism is dogmatism in one of its
purest forms. Darwin, for instance, gave the greatest latitude to the
nature of the variations which form the battleground of the struggle
for existence and natural selection; and he made great allowances for
other causal combinations also, which may come into account besides
the indirect factors of transformism. He was Lamarckian to a very
far-reaching extent. And he had no definite opinion about the origin
and the most intimate nature of life in general. These may seem to
be defects but really are advantages of his theory. He left open the
question which he could not answer, and, in fact, he may be said to be a
good illustration of what Lessing says, that it is not the possession
of truth but the searching after it, that gives happiness to man. It was
but an outcome of this mental condition that Darwin’s polemics never
left the path of true scientific discussions, that he never in all his
life abused any one who found reason to combat his hypotheses, and that
he never turned a logical problem into a question of morality.

How different is this from what many of Darwin’s followers have made out
of his doctrines, especially in Germany; how far is “Darwinism” removed
from Darwin’s own teaching and character!

It is to Darwinism of the *dogmatic* kind, however, that our next
discussions are to relate, for, thanks to its dogmatism, it has the
advantage of allowing the very sharp formulation of a few causal
factors, which *a priori* might be thought to be concerned in organic
transformism, though we are bound to say that a really searching
analysis of these factors ought to have led to their rejection from the
very beginning.

The logical structure of dogmatic Darwinism reveals two different parts,
which have nothing at all to do with one another.


NATURAL SELECTION

We shall first study that part of it which is known under the title
of natural selection, irrespective of the nature of the causes of
primary differences, or, in other words, the nature of variability.
This part may be said to belong to Darwin’s personal teachings and not
only to “Darwinism.” The offspring of a certain number of adults show
differences compared with each other; there are more individuals in the
offspring than can grow up under the given conditions, therefore there
will be a struggle for existence amongst them, which only the fittest
will survive; these survivors may be said to have been “selected” by
natural means.

It must be certain from the very beginning of analysis that natural
selection, as defined here, can only eliminate what cannot survive, what
cannot stand the environment in the broadest sense, but that natural
selection never is able to create diversities. It always acts negatively
only, never positively. And therefore it can “explain”--if you will
allow me to make use of this ambiguous word--it can “explain” only why
certain types of organic specifications, imaginable *a priori*, do
*not* actually exist, but it never explains at all the existence of the
specifications of animal and vegetable forms that are actually found. In
speaking of an “explanation” of the origin of the living specific forms
by natural selection one therefore confuses the sufficient reason for
the non-existence of what there is not, with the sufficient reason for
the existence of what there is. To say that a man has explained some
organic character by natural selection is, in the words of Nägeli, the
same as if some one who is asked the question, “Why is this tree covered
with these leaves,” were to answer “Because the gardener did not cut
them away.” Of course that would explain why there are no more leaves
than those actually there, but it never would account for the existence
and nature of the existing leaves as such. Or do we understand in the
least why there are white bears in the Polar Regions if we are told that
bears of other colours could not survive?

In denying any real explanatory value to the concept of natural
selection I am far from denying the action of natural selection. On
the contrary, natural selection, to some degree, is *self-evident*;
at least as far as it simply states that what is incompatible with
permanent existence cannot exist permanently, it being granted that
the originating of organic individuals is not in itself a guarantee of
permanency. Chemical compounds, indeed, which decompose very rapidly
under the conditions existing at the time when they originated may also
be said to have been eliminated by “natural selection.” It is another
question, of course, whether in fact all eliminations among organic
diversities are exclusively due to the action of natural selection in
the proper Darwinian sense. It has been pointed out already by several
critics of Darwinism and most clearly by Gustav Wolff, that there are
many cases in which an advantage with regard to situation will greatly
outweigh any advantage in organisation or physiology. In a railway
accident, for instance, the passengers that survive are not those who
have the strongest bones, but those who occupied the best seats; and
the eliminating effect of epidemics is determined at least as much by
localities, *e.g.* special houses or special streets, as by the degree
of immunity. But, certainly, natural selection is a *causa vera* in many
other cases.

We now may sum up our discussion of the first half of Darwinism.
Natural selection is a negative, an eliminating factor in transformism;
its action is self-evident to a very large degree, for it simply
states that things do not exist if their continuance under the given
conditions is impossible. To consider natural selection as a positive
factor in descent would be to confound the sufficient reason for the
non-existence of what is not, with the sufficient reason of what is.

Natural selection has a certain important logical bearing on
systematics, as a science of the future, which has scarcely ever been
alluded to. Systematics of course has to deal with the totality of the
possible, not only of the actual diversities; it therefore must remember
that more forms may be possible than are actual, the word “possible”
having reference in this connection to originating, not to surviving.
Moreover, systematics is concerned not only with what has been
eliminated by selection, but also with all that might have originated
from the eliminated types. By such reasoning natural selection gains a
very important aspect--but a logical aspect only.


FLUCTUATING VARIATION THE ALLEGED CAUSE OF ORGANIC DIVERSITY

The second doctrine of dogmatic Darwinism states that all the given
diversities among the organisms that natural selection has to work
upon are offered to natural selection by so-called fluctuating
variation; that is, by variation as studied by means of statistics.
This sort of variation, indeed, is maintained to be indefinite in
direction and amount, at least by the most conservative Darwinians; it
has occasionally been called a real differential; in any case it is
looked upon as being throughout contingent with regard to some unity
or totality; which, of course, is not to mean that it has not had a
sufficient reason for occurring.

It could hardly be said to be beyond the realm of possibility that such
differences among organic species as only relate to degree or quantity
and perhaps to numerical conditions also, might have been “selected” out
of given contingent variations, if but one postulate could be regarded
as fulfilled. This postulate may appropriately be stated as the fixation
of new averages of variation by inheritance. Let the average value of
a variation, with regard to a given property of a given species be *n*
and let the value *n* + *m*--*m* being variable--which is represented in
fewer individuals of course than is *n*, be such as to offer advantages
in the struggle for existence; then the individuals marked by *n* + *m*
will have the greater chance of surviving. Our postulate now states
that, in order that a permanent increase of the average value of the
variation in question may be reached, *n* + *m* in any of its variable
forms must be able to become the average value of the second generation,
as *n* was the average value of the first. Out of the second generation
again it would be the few individuals marked by *n* + *m* + *o*, which
would be selected; *n* + *m* + *o* would be the new average; afterwards
*n* + *m* + *o* + *p* would be selected, would become the new average,
and so on. A black variety for instance might be selected by such a
series of processes out of a grey-coloured one without difficulty.

But our postulate is not beyond all doubt: certain experiments, at
least, which have been carried out about the summation of variations
of the true fluctuating type by any kind of selection seem to show
that there may be a real progress for a few generations, but that this
progress is always followed by a reversion. Of course our experience
is by no means complete on this subject, and, indeed, it may be shown
in the future that positive transforming effects of fluctuating
variability, in connection with selective principles, are possible in
the case of new quantitative differences (in the widest sense), but we
are not entitled to say so at present.

And this is the only condition on which we can give credit to the second
doctrine of dogmatic Darwinism. Its second principle, indeed, proves
to be absolutely inadequate to explain the origin of any other kind of
specific properties whatever.

I cannot enter here into the whole subject of Darwinian criticism.[145]
Our aims are of a positive character, they desiderate construction
and only use destruction where it is not to be avoided. So I shall
only mention that dogmatic Darwinism has been found to be unable to
explain every kind of mutual adaptations, *e.g.* those existing between
plants and insects; that it can never account for the origin of those
properties that are indifferent to the life of their bearer, being mere
features of organisation as an arrangement of parts; that it fails in
the face of all portions of organisation which are composed of many
different parts--like the eye--and nevertheless are functional units
in any passive or active way; and that, last not least, it has been
found to be quite inadequate to explain the first origin of all newly
formed constituents of organisation even if they are not indifferent:
for how could any rudiment of an organ, which is not functioning at all,
not only be useful to its bearer, but be useful in such a degree as to
decide about life or death?

[145] See Wigand, *Der Darwinismus und die Naturforschung Newton’s und
Cuvier’s*, Braunschweig, 1874-7; Nägeli, *Mechanisch-physiologische
Theorie der Abstammungslehre*, München, 1884; G. Wolff, *Beiträge zur
Kritik der Darwin’schen Lehre*, 2nd ed. Leipzig, 1898; etc.

It is only for one special feature that I should like to show, by
a more full analysis, that dogmatic Darwinism does not satisfy the
requirements of the case. The special strength of Darwinism is said to
lie in its explaining everything that is useful in and for organisms;
the competitive factor it introduces does indeed seem to secure at least
a relative sort of adaptedness between the organism and its needs. But
in spite of that, we shall now see that Darwinism fails absolutely to
explain those most intimate organic phenomena which may be said to be
the most useful of all.

Darwinism in its dogmatic form is not able to explain the origin of any
sort of organic restitution; it is altogether impossible to account for
the restitutive power of organisms by the simple means of fluctuating
variation and natural selection in the struggle for existence. Here we
have the logical *experimentum crucis* of Darwinism.

Let us try to study in the Darwinian style the origin of the
regenerative faculty, as shown in the restitution of the leg of a
newt. All individuals of a given species of the newt, say *Triton
taeniatus*, are endowed with this faculty; all of them therefore must
have originated from ancestors which acquired it at some time or other.
But this necessary supposition implies that all of these ancestors must
have lost their legs in some way, and not only one, but all four of
them, as they could not have acquired the restitutive faculty otherwise.
We are thus met at the very beginning of our argument by what must be
called a real absurdity, which is hardly lessened by the assumption that
regeneration was acquired not by all four legs together, but by one
after the other. But it is absolutely inevitable to assume that *all*
the ancestors of our *Triton* must have lost one leg, or more correctly,
that only those of them survived which had lost one! Otherwise not all
newts at the present day could possess the faculty of regeneration! But
a second absurdity follows the first one; out of the ancestors of our
newt, which survived the others by reason of having lost one of their
legs, there were selected only those which showed at least a very small
amount of healing of their wound. It must be granted that such a step
in the process of selection, taken by itself, would not at all seem to
be impossible; since healing of wounds protects the animals against
infection. But the process continues. In every succeeding stage of it
there must have survived only those individuals which formed just a
little more of granulative tissue than did the rest: though *neither*
they themselves *nor* the rest could use the leg, which indeed was
not present! That is the second absurdity we meet in our attempt at a
Darwinian explanation of the faculty of regeneration; but I believe the
first one alone was sufficient.

If we were to study the “selection” of the faculty of one of the
isolated blastomeres of the egg of the sea-urchin to form a whole larva
only of smaller size, the absurdities would increase. At the very
beginning we should encounter the absurdity, that of all the individuals
there survived only those which were not whole but half; for *all*
sea-urchins are capable of the ontogenetical restitution in question,
*all* of their ancestors therefore must have acquired it, and they
could do that only *if* they became halved at first by some accident
during early embryology. But we shall not insist any further on this
instance, for it would not be fair to turn into ridicule a theory which
bears the name of a man who is not at all responsible for its dogmatic
form. Indeed, we are speaking against Darwinism of the most dogmatic
form only, not against Darwin himself. He never analysed the phenomena
of regeneration or of embryonic restitution--they lay in a field very
unfamiliar to him and to his time. I venture to say that if he had taken
them into consideration, he would have agreed with us in stating that
his theory was not at all able to cover them; for he was prepared to
make great concessions, to Lamarckism for instance, in other branches of
biology, and he did not pretend, to know what life itself is.

Darwin was not a decided materialist, though materialism has made
great capital out of his doctrines, especially in Germany. His book,
as is well known, is entitled “The Origin of *Species*,” that is of
organic *diversities*, and he himself possibly might have regarded all
restitution as belonging to the original properties of life, anterior to
the originating of diversities. Personally he might possibly be called
even a vitalist. Thus dogmatic “Darwinism” in fact is driven into all
the absurdities mentioned above, whilst the “doctrine of Darwin” can
only be said to be wrong on account of its failing to explain mutual
adaptation, the origin of new organs, and some other features in organic
diversities; the original properties of life were left unexplained by it
intentionally.


DARWINISM FAILS ALL ALONG THE LINE

The result of our discussion then must be this: selection has proved to
be a negative factor only, and fluctuating variation as the only way
in which new properties of the organisms might have arisen has proved
to fail in the most marked manner, except perhaps for a few merely
quantitative instances. Such a result betokens the complete collapse
of dogmatic Darwinism as a general theory of descent: the most typical
features of all organisms remain as unexplained as ever.

What then shall we put in the place of pure Darwinism? Let us first try
a method of explanation which was also adopted occasionally by Darwin
himself: let us study that form of transformation theories which is
commonly known under the title of Lamarckism.


3. THE PRINCIPLES OF LAMARCKISM.

As the word “Darwinism” does not signify the proper theoretical system
of Charles Darwin, so Lamarckism as commonly understood nowadays is a
good deal removed from the original views of Jean Baptiste Lamarck.
Lamarckism is generally regarded as reducing all organic diversities to
differences in the needs of individual life, but Lamarck himself, as
must be emphasised from the very beginning, did not at all maintain the
opinion that the great characteristics of the types were only due to
such accidental factors. He supposed a sort of law of organisation to
be at the root of systematics, as developed in history, and the needs
of life were only responsible, according to him, for splitting the
given types of organisation into their ultimate branches. Thus Lamarck,
to a great extent at any rate, belongs to a group of authors that we
shall have to study afterwards: authors who regard an unknown law of
phylogenetic development as the real basis of transformism. Modern
so-called Neo-Lamarckism, on the other hand, has indeed conceded the
principle of needs to be the sole principle of transformism. Let us then
study Lamarckism in its dogmatic modern form.


ADAPTATION AS THE STARTING-POINT

All facts of morphological adaptations--facts which we have analysed
already from a different point of view, as being among the most typical
phenomena of organic regulation--form the starting-point of this
theory, and it must be granted that they form a very solid foundation,
for they are facts. The theory only has to enlarge hypothetically the
realm of these facts, or rather the realm of the law that governs them.
Indeed, it is assumed by Lamarckism that the organism is endowed with
the faculty of responding to *any* change of the environment which may
change its function by a morphologically expressed alteration of its
functional state and form, which is adapted to the state of conditions
imposed from without. Of course, as stated in this most general form,
the assumption is not true, but it is true within certain limits, as
we know; and there seems to be no reason why we should not believe
that there are many more cases of adaptation than we actually know at
present, or that, in former phylogenetic times, the organisms were more
capable of active adaptation than they are now. So to a certain extent,
at least, Lamarckism can be said to rest upon a *causa vera*.

It is important to notice that this *causa vera* would imply vitalistic
causality when taken in the wide meaning which Lamarckism allows to
it: indeed, the power of active adaptation to indefinite changes would
imply a sort of causal connection that is nowhere known except in the
organism. Lamarck himself is not very clear about this point, he seems
to be afraid of certain types of uncritical vitalism in vogue in his
days; but modern writers have most clearly seen what the logical
assumptions of pure Lamarckism are. Next to Cope, August Pauly[146] may
be said to be the most conscious representative of a sort of so-called
psychological vitalism, which indeed Lamarckism as a general and
all-embracing theory must have as its basis.

[146] *Darwinismus und Lamarckismus*, München, 1905.


THE ACTIVE STORING OF CONTINGENT VARIATIONS AS A HYPOTHETIC PRINCIPLE

This point will come out more fully, if now we turn to study a certain
group of principles, upon which dogmatic Lamarckism rests: I say
principles and not facts, for there are no facts but only hypothetic
assumptions in this group of statements. We do know a little about
adaptations, at least to a certain extent, and it was only about the
sphere of the validity of a law, which was known to be at work in
certain cases, that hypothetical additions were made. In the second
group of the foundations of Lamarckism we know absolutely nothing;
accidental variations of form are supposed to occur, and the organism is
said to possess the faculty of keeping and storing these variations and
of handing them down to the next generation, if they happen to satisfy
any of its needs.

But these needs are not of the actual type, brought forth by a change of
the functional state of the individual, as in the case of adaptations:
they are of a somewhat mysterious nature. A glance at the theory of the
origin of the movements which are called acts of volition in the human
child may serve to elucidate what is meant.

Acts of volition are said thus to originate in random movements of the
new-born infant: certain of these accidental motions which happen to
relieve some pain or to afford some pleasure are “remembered,” and are
used another time quite consciously to bring forth what is liked or to
remove what is disliked. So much for the present on a very difficult
subject, which will occupy us next year at much greater length. It is
clear that at least three fundamental phenomena are concerned in this
theory of the origin of acts of volition: the liking and disliking, the
keeping in mind, and the volition itself. The real act of volition,
indeed, is always based upon a connection of all these factors, these
factors now being connected in such a way that even their kind of
connection may be said to be a fourth fundamental principle. In order
that the particular effect may be obtained which is wanted because it is
liked, the possible ways leading to it, which appeared among the random
movements in the very beginning, are now regarded as “means” and may now
be said to be “used.” But that is as much as to say that the “means”
are judged with respect to their usefulness for the actual purpose, and
therefore *judgment* is the fourth foundation of the act of volition.

In fact, Pauly does not hesitate to attribute judgment, along with the
other psychological elements, to the organisms whilst undergoing their
transformation. There has been formed, for instance, by accidental
variation some pigment which by its chemical nature brings the organism
into a closer connection with the light of the medium; the individual
likes that, keeps the pigment for itself and produces it again in the
next generation; and indeed it will safeguard any sort of improvement
which chance may effect in this primitive “eye.” Such a view is said
to hold well with respect to the origin of every new organ. And this
psychological argument is also said to afford the real explanation of
adaptation proper. Adaptation also is regarded not as a truly primary
faculty of the organism, but as a retention or provoking of metabolic
states which occurred by accident originally and were then found to
be useful; now they are reproduced either in every single case of
individual morphogenesis, without regard to actual requirements, or
else only in response to such: in the first case they are “inherited,”
in the second they only occur as regulations. Thus the process of
judgment, together with all the other elemental factors of psychical
life concerned in it, has been made to account for adaptation proper.
The whole theory has accordingly become very uniform and simple.


CRITICISM OF THE “INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS” ASSUMED BY
LAMARCKISM

In addressing ourselves to the criticism of Neo-Lamarckism we shall
neglect as far as possible all the different psychological principles
concerned in it--which in any case would need rather a great amount of
epistemological sifting--and shall keep to those hypothetic facts which
are supposed to be such as may be actually observed in nature.

All of you know that the so-called inheritance of acquired characters
lies at the root of Lamarckism; and from this hypothesis our critical
analysis is to start, disregarding a larger or smaller number of
psychological principles that are brought into the field.

The name of “acquired characters” may *a priori* be given to three
different types of phenomena: firstly, variations including mutations;
secondly, disease or injuries; and thirdly, the results of the actual
process of adaptation of every kind.

In the first of these groups, the true problem of the inheritance of
“acquired” characters appears only with certain restrictions. All
variations and mutations are indeed “acquired” by one generation so
far as the earlier generation did not possess them, but mutations, at
least, cannot be said to be acquired by the actual adult personality:
they are innate in it from its very beginning, and therefore may better
be called congenital.[147] Congenital properties of the mutation type
are, in fact, known to be inherited: their inheritance does not present
any problem of its own, but is included in the changes of the hereditary
condition to which they are due altogether.[148] All properties of the
variation type, on the other hand, having been studied statistically,
are known to be inherited, to a certain small extent, as we have seen
already whilst studying Darwinism, though they are possibly always
liable to reversion. Modern science, as we know,[149] regards them as
due to changes of nutrition, in the most general meaning of the word.
Under such a view variations might indeed be said to belong to the
acquired group of organic specifications; their inheritance, as will
be seen later on, would hardly be quite a pure instance of what we are
searching for. In no case can true variations claim to be of great
importance in problems of transformism.

[147] This would not be true, if the varieties of plants produced by
Blaringhem, Klebs, and MacDougal by means of *external* agents were
really “mutations” (comp. page 238, note 3).

[148] Of course, the inheritance of mutations would imply a certain sort
of “inheritance of acquired characters,” on the condition stated in the
preceding note. But, probably, the germs of the next generation might
be regarded here as being directly affected by the external agent, in a
manner that will briefly be mentioned later on in the text.

[149] Comp. page 238, note 2.

But what is known about the inheritance of those properties which
beyond any doubt may be said to have originated in the adult individual
as such, and of which lesions and adaptations proper, as shown for
instance among amphibious plants, are instances of the two most
typical groups?[150] Weismann did good service by putting an end to
the scientific credulity which prevailed with regard to this subject.
Weismann was led by his theory of the germ plasm to deny the inheritance
of acquired characters of the typical kinds. He could not imagine how
the effect of any agent upon the adult, be it of the merely passive or
of the adaptive kind, could have such an influence upon the germ as to
force it to produce the same effect in spite of the absence of that
agent. In fact, that is what the inheritance of acquired characters
would render necessary, and a very strange phenomenon it would be,
no doubt. But, of course, taken alone, it could never be a decisive
argument against such inheritance. I fully agree, that science is
obliged to explain new facts by what is known already, as long as it is
possible; but if it is no longer possible, the theory of course has to
be changed, and not the facts. On this principle one would not neglect
the fact of an inheritance of acquired properties, but on the contrary
one perhaps might use it as a new evidence of vitalism.

[150] Certain English authors have applied the term “modification” to
all kinds of organic properties acquired from without, whether they are
adapted or not.

But are there any facts?

At this point we come to speak about the second group of Weismann’s
reasonings. He not only saw the difficulty of understanding inheritance
of acquired characters on the principles of the science of his time,
but he also criticised the supposed facts; and scarcely any of them
stood the test of his criticism. Indeed, it must fairly be granted that
not one case is known which really proves the inheritance of acquired
characters, and that injuries certainly are never found to be inherited.
In spite of that, I do not believe that we are entitled to deny the
possibility of the inheritance of a certain group of acquired characters
in an absolute and dogmatic manner, for there are a few facts which seem
at least to tend in the direction of such an inheritance, and which seem
to show that it might be discovered perhaps one day, if the experimental
conditions were changed.

I am not referring here to the few cases in which bacteria were made
colourless or non-virulent by outside factors, or in which certain
fungi were forced to permanent agamic reproduction by abnormal external
conditions and were shown to retain their “acquired properties”
after the external conditions had been restored. In these cases only
reproduction by simple division occurred, and that does not imply the
true problem of inheritance. Nor am I referring to the few cases of
non-adaptive “modifications” found by Standfuss and Fischer, in which
butterflies that had assumed an abnormal kind of pigmentation under
the influence of abnormal temperature acting upon the pupa, were seen
to form this same kind of pigmentation in the next generation under
normal conditions of temperature. These cases, though important in
themselves, are capable perhaps of a rather simple explanation, as in
fact has been suggested. Some necessary means both of inheritance and of
morphogenesis, the former being present in the propagation cells, may
be said to have been changed or destroyed by heat, and therefore, what
seems to be inherited after the change of the body only, would actually
be the effect of a direct influence of the temperature upon the germ
itself.[151] Let me be clearly understood: I do not say that it is so,
but it may be so. What seems to me to be more important than everything
and to have a direct bearing on the real discovery of the inheritance
of acquired characters in the future, is this. In some instances
plants which had been forced from without to undergo certain typical
morphological adaptations, or at least changes through many generations,
though they did not keep the acquired characters permanently in spite
of the conditions being changed to another type, were yet found to lose
the acquired adaptations not suddenly but only in the course of three
or more generations. A certain fern, *Adiantum*, is known to assume a
very typical modification of form and structure, if grown on serpentine;
now Sadebeck,[152] while cultivating this serpentine modification of
*Adiantum* on ordinary ground, found that the first generation grown in
the ordinary conditions loses only a little of its typical serpentine
character, and that the next generation loses a little more, so that
it is not before the fifth generation that all the characters of the
serpentine modification have disappeared. There are a few more cases
of a similar type relating to plants grown in the plains or on the
mountains. There also it was found to take time, or rather to take the
course of *several* generations, until what was required by the new
conditions was reached. Of course these cases are very very few compared
with those in which a *sudden* change of the adaptive character,
corresponding to the actual conditions, sets in; but it is enough that
they do exist.

[151] Of course the inheritance of specific values from the results of
fluctuating variations, leading to new averages of variability (see
p. 265), may also be understood in this manner, the conditions of
nourishment acting upon the adult and upon its germs equally well.

[152] *Berichte üb. d. Sitzung. d. Ges. f. Bot.*, Hamburg, 1887, 3 Heft.

Would it not be possible at least that adaptations which last
for thousands of generations or more might in fact change the
adaptive character into a congenital one? Then we not only should
have inheritance of acquired characters, but should have a sort
of explanation at the same time for the remarkable fact that
certain histological structures of a very adapted kind are formed
ontogenetically before any function exists, as is known to be the
case with the structures in the bones of vertebrates, for instance.
Experiments are going on at Paris, and perhaps in other places of
scientific research also, which, it is hoped, will show that animals
reared in absolute darkness for many generations will lose their
perfectly formed eyes, and that animals from the dark with very
rudimentary eyes will be endowed with properly functioning ones, after
they have been reared in the light for generations. Such a result indeed
would account for the many animals, of the most different groups, which
live in dark caves and possess only rudiments of eyes: functional
adaptation is no longer necessary, so-called atrophy by inactivity sets
in, and the results “acquired” by it are inherited.[153]

[153] Quite recently Kammerer (*Arch. Entw. Mech.* 25, 1907, p. 7) has
published very important experiments on the inheritance of “acquired”
modifications with regard to the peculiarities of reproduction in
*Salamandra atra* and *S. maculosa*. It seems rather improbable--though
not absolutely impossible--that the germ cells were directly affected by
the external modifying agent in this case.

But enough of possibilities. Let us be content at present to know at
least a few real instances with regard to the slowness of the process of
what might be said to be “re-adaptation” in some plants. This process
shows us a way by which our problem may some day be solved; it allows
us to introduce inheritance of acquired characters as a legitimate
hypothesis at least, which not only will explain many of the diversities
in systematics historically, but also can be called, though not a *causa
vera*, yet certainly more than a mere fiction.


OTHER PRINCIPLES WANTED

We have only dealt with the probability of the inheritance of
morphological or physiological[154] adaptation. If that could really be
considered as one of the factors concerned in the theory of descent,
many, if not all of those congenital diversities among organic species
which are of the type of a true structural correspondence to their
future functional life, might be regarded as explained, that is,
as reduced to one and the same principle. But nothing more than an
explanation of *this* kind of diversities is effected by our principle,
and very much more remains to be done, for organic diversities not only
consist in specifications and differences as to histology, but are to a
much more important degree, differences of organisation proper, that is,
of the arrangement of parts, in the widest sense of the word.[155]

[154] We have not spoken about the hypothetic inheritance of pure
physiological adaptations, for it is clear without further discussion
that innate specific immunity, for instance, being a specific
“adaptedness” (*see* p. 186) *might* be due to the inheritance of the
results of active immunity as an adaptation, just as adaptive congenital
structures *might* be due to such an inheritance.

[155] C. E. v. Baer clearly discriminated between the type, the degree
of organisation, and the histological structure. All these three topics
indeed have to be taken into account separately; the third alone is of
the adaptive type. All of them may be independent of each other: the
Amoeba may be as adapted histologically as is a high vertebrate, but it
is of much lower type; and in its own type it is of a lower degree of
organisation than Radiolaria are.

Would it be possible to interpret the origin of this sort of systematic
diversities by a reasoning similar to that by which we have understood,
at least hypothetically, congenital adaptedness?

Dogmatic Lamarckism, we know, uses two principles as its foundations;
one of them, adaptation and its inheritance, we have studied with what
may be called a partly positive result. The other is the supposed
faculty of the organism to keep, to store, and to transfer those
variations or mutations of a not properly adaptive sort which, though
originating by chance, happen to satisfy some needs of the organism.


CRITICISM OF THE HYPOTHESIS OF STORING AND HANDING DOWN CONTINGENT
VARIATIONS

Strange to say, this second hypothesis of dogmatic Lamarckism, invented
with the express purpose of defeating Darwinism and taking the place of
its fluctuating variability, which was found not to do justice to the
facts--this second hypothesis of dogmatic Lamarckism is liable to just
the same objections as dogmatic Darwinism itself.

As it is important to understand well the real logical nature of
our objections to both of the great transformistic theories, we
think it well to interrupt our argument for a moment, in order to
consider a certain point which, though very important in itself,
seems of only secondary importance to us in our present discussion.
Dogmatic Darwinism--I do not say the doctrine of Charles Darwin--is
materialistic at bottom, and indeed has been used by many to complete
their materialistic view of the universe on its organic side. The word
“materialism” must not necessarily be taken here in its metaphysical
sense, though most materialists are dogmatic metaphysicians. It also
can be understood as forming part of a phenomenological point of view.
Materialism as a doctrine of science means simply this: that whether
“nature” be reality or phenomenon, in any case there is but one ultimate
principle at its base, a principle relating to the movements of
particles of matter. It is this point of view which dogmatic Darwinism
strengthens; on the theory of natural selection and fluctuating
variations, due to accidental differences of nutrition, organisms are
merely arrangements of particles of matter, nothing else; and moreover,
their kinds of arrangement are understood, at least in principle.
Lamarckism, on the other hand, is not materialistic, but most markedly
vitalistic--psychistic even; it takes life for granted when it begins
its explanations.

You may tell me that Darwin did the same, that he expressly states that
his theory has nothing to do with the origin of life; that the title
of his work is “The Origin of *Species*.” It would certainly be right
to say so, at least with reference to Darwin personally; but in spite
of that, it must be granted that Darwin’s doctrine contains a certain
germ of materialism which has been fully developed by the Darwinian
dogmatists, while Lamarckism is antimaterialistic by its very nature.

Now it is very important, I think, to notice that this difference
between the two theories is unable to disguise one main point which is
common to both: and it is to this point, and to this point only, that
our chief objections against both these theories converge at present.

The *contingency* of the typical organic form is maintained by Darwinism
as well as by Lamarckism: both theories, therefore, break down for
almost the same reasons. The term “contingency” can signify very
different relations, having but little in common; but it is sufficient
for our present purpose to observe that there may be distinguished
roughly two main classes of contingencies, which may provisionally be
called the “contingency of being,” and the “contingency of occurring.”
It is with the contingency of being that criticism of Darwinism and
Lamarckism of the dogmatic type has to deal. Darwinism dealt with
variations occurring at random; the organic form was the result of
a fixation of only one kind of such variations, all others being
extinguished by selection. In other terms, the specific organised
form, as understood by Darwinism, was a unit only to the extent that
all its properties related to one and the same body, but for the rest
it was a mere aggregation or summation. It may be objected to this
statement, that by being inherited in its specificity the Darwinian
form proved to be a unit in a higher sense of the word, even in the
opinion of dogmatic Darwinians; and this objection, perhaps, holds good
as far as inheritance is concerned. But on the other hand, it must
never be forgotten that the word “unit” had quite a vague and empty
meaning even then, as indeed everything the organism is made up of
is regarded as being in itself due to a contingent primary process,
which has no relation to its fellow-processes. “Unit,” indeed, in spite
of inheritance--which, by the way, is alleged also to be a merely
materialistic event--means to Darwinians no more when applied to the
organism than it does when applied to mountains or islands, where of
course a sort of “unit” also exists in some sense, as far as one and the
same body comes into account, but where every single character of this
unit, in every single feature of form or of quality, is the result of
factors or agents each of which is independent of every other.

To this sort of contingency of being, as maintained by Darwinians,
criticism has objected, as we know, that it is quite an impossible
basis of a theory of descent, since it would explain neither the first
origin of an organ, nor any sort of harmony among parts or among whole
individuals, nor any sort of restitution processes.

Now Lamarckism of the dogmatic kind, as will easily be seen, only
differs from Darwinism in this respect, that what according to the
latter happens to the organism passively by means of selection, is
according to the former performed actively by the organism, by means of
a “judgment”--by the retention and handing down of chance variations.
The specificity of the form as a whole is contingent also according
to Lamarckism. And, indeed, criticism must reject this contingency of
being in exactly the same way as it rejected the contingency of form
maintained by Darwinians.

As far as the inheritance of truly adaptive characters comes into
account--that is, the inheritance of characters which are due to the
active faculty of adaptation possessed by the organism, bearing a
vitalistic aspect throughout--hardly anything could be said against
Lamarckism, except that inheritance of acquired characters is still
an hypothesis of small and doubtful value at present. But that
*specific organisation proper* is due to *contingent* variations, which
accidentally have been found to satisfy some needs of the individual and
therefore have been maintained and handed down, this reasoning is quite
an impossibility of exactly the same kind as the argument of Darwinism.

The process of restitution, perfect the very first time it occurs, if it
occurs at all, is again the classical instance against this new sort of
contingency, which is assumed to be the basis of transformism. Here we
see with our eyes that the organism can do more than simply perpetuate
variations that have occurred at random and bear in themselves no
relation whatever to any sort of unit or totality. There *exists* a
faculty of a certain higher degree in the organism, and this faculty
cannot possibly have originated by the process which Lamarckians[156]
assume. But if their principle fails in one instance, it fails as a
*general* theory altogether. And now, on the other hand, as we actually
see the individual organism endowed with a morphogenetic power,
inexplicable by Lamarckism, but far exceeding the organogenetic faculty
assumed by that theory, would it not be most reasonable to conclude from
such facts, that there exists a certain organising power at the root of
the transformism of species also, a power which we do not understand,
which we see only partially manifested in the work of restitutions,
but which certainly is not even touched by any of the Lamarckian
arguments? There does indeed exist what Gustav Wolff has called primary
purposefulness (“primäre Zweckmässigkeit”), at least in restitutions,
and this is equally unexplainable by Darwinism and by the dogmatism of
the Lamarckians.

[156] I repeat once more that we are dealing here with dogmatic
“Neo-”Lamarckism exclusively. This theory indeed claims to explain *all*
features and properties of organic bodies on the basis of the feeling
of needs and storing of contingent fulfilments and on this basis alone,
just as dogmatic “Neo”-Darwinism claims to account for *all* those
phenomena on the ground of contingent variations and natural selection.
Darwin himself, as we have seen, intentionally left unexplained certain
primary features of life and therefore cannot be blamed for having
failed to explain them, though even then his theory remains wrong.
Lamarck personally considered a real primary organisatory law of
phylogeny as being of fundamental importance, and therefore he is not in
the least responsible if “Neo-Lamarckism” fails as a universal theory.

But before entering into this area of hypothesis, let us mention a few
more objections to be made to the theory of the contingency of form as
put forward by Lamarckians. In the first place, let us say a few words
about the appropriateness of the term “contingency” as used in this
connection. The forms are regarded as contingent by Lamarckians inasmuch
as the variations which afterwards serve as “means” to the “needs” of
the organism occur quite accidentally with regard to the whole organism.
It might be said that these “needs” are not contingent but subject
to an inherent destiny, but this plea is excluded by the Lamarckians
themselves, when they say that the organism experiences no need until it
has enjoyed the accidental fulfilment of the same. So the only thing in
Lamarckian transformism which is not of a contingent character would be
the psychological agent concerned in it, as being an agent endowed with
the primary power of feeling needs after it has felt fulfilment, and of
judging about what the means of future fulfilment are, in order to keep
them whenever they offer. But these are characteristics of life itself,
irrespective of all its specific forms, which alone are concerned in
transformism. Now indeed, I think, we see as clearly as possible that
Darwinism and Lamarckism, in spite of the great contrast of materialism
and psychologism, shake hands on the common ground of the contingency of
organic forms.

The whole anti-Darwinistic criticism therefore of Gustav Wolff for
instance, may also be applied to Lamarckism with only a few changes
of words. How could the origin of so complete an organ as the eye of
vertebrates be due to contingent variations? How could that account for
the harmony of the different kinds of cells in this very complicated
organ with each other and with parts of the brain? And how is it to be
understood, on the assumption of contingency, that there are two eyes of
almost equal perfection, and that there are two feet, two ears? Islands
and mountains do not show such symmetry in *their* structures.

We shall not repeat our deduction of the origin of restitutions, of
regeneration for instance, on the dogmatic Lamarckian theory. As we
have said already, it would lead to absurdities as great as in the
case of dogmatic Darwinism, and indeed we already have mentioned that
Lamarckians would hardly even attempt to explain these phenomena.
It follows that dogmatic Lamarckism fails as a general theory about
form.[157]

[157] Compare also the excellent criticism of Lamarckism lately given by
G. Wolff, *Die Begründung der Abstammungslehre*, München, 1907.

There is finally one group of facts often brought forward against
Lamarckism by Darwinian authors[158] which may be called the logical
*experimentum crucis* of this doctrine, an *experimentum* destined
to prove fatal. You know that among the polymorphic groups of bees,
termites, and ants, there exists one type of individuals, or even
several types, endowed with some very typical features of organisation,
but at the same time absolutely excluded from reproduction: how could
those morphological types have originated on the plan allowed by the
Lamarckians? Of what use would “judgment” about means that are offered
by chance and happen to satisfy needs, be to individuals which die
without offspring? Here Lamarckism becomes a simple absurdity, just as
Darwinism resulted in absurdities elsewhere.

[158] It has also very often been said by Darwinians that Lamarckism is
only able to explain those cases of adaptedness which relate to active
functioning but not mere passive adapted characters, like “mimicry” for
example. But this argument *taken by itself*, it seems to me, would not
be fatal to Neo-Lamarckism in the special form August Pauly gave to this
doctrine.

We were speaking about dogmatic Darwinism then, and it is about dogmatic
Lamarckism that we are reasoning at present; both theories must fall in
their dogmatic form, though a small part of both can be said to stand
criticism. But these two parts which survive criticism, one offered by
Lamarck, the other by Darwin, are far from being a complete theory of
transformism, even if taken together: they only cover a small area of
the field concerned in the theory of descent. Almost everything is still
to be done, and we may here formulate, briefly at least, what we expect
to be accomplished by the science of the future.


4. THE REAL RESULTS AND THE UNSOLVED PROBLEMS OF TRANSFORMISM

What has been explained to a certain extent by the two great theories
now current is only this. Systematic diversities consisting in mere
differences as to intensity or number may perhaps owe their origin to
ordinary variation. They may at least, if we are entitled to assume
that heredity in some cases is able to hand on such variations without
reversion, which, it must be again remarked, is by no means proved by
the facts at present. Natural selection may share in this process by
eliminating all those individuals that do not show the character which
happens to be useful. That is the Darwinian part of an explanation of
transformism which may be conceded as an hypothesis. On the other side,
congenital histological adaptedness may be regarded hypothetically as
due to an inheritance of adaptive characters which had been acquired by
the organism’s activity, exerted during a great number of generations.
That is the Lamarckian part in the theory of descent.

But nothing more is contributed to this theory either by the doctrine
of Darwin or by that of Lamarck. So it follows that almost everything
has still to be done; for no hypothesis at present accounts for
the foundation of all systematics, viz., for the differences in
organisation, in all that relates to the so-called types as such and
the degree of complication in these types, both of which (types and
degree of complication) are independent of histological adaptation and
adaptedness.

What then do we know about any facts that might be said to bear on
this problem? We have stated already at the end of our chapter devoted
to the analysis of heredity that what we actually know about any
deviation of inheritance proper, that is, about congenital differences
between the parents and the offspring, relating to mere tectonics,
is practically nothing: indeed, there are at our disposal only the
few facts observed by de Vries or derived from the experience of
horticulturalists and breeders. We may admit that these facts at
least prove the possibility[159] of a discontinuous variation, that
is of “mutation,” following certain lines of tectonics and leading to
*constant* results; but everything else, that is everything about a real
theory of phylogeny, must be left to the taste of each author who writes
on the theory of the Living. You may call that a very unscientific state
of affairs, but no other is possible.

[159] But nothing more. All “mutations” hitherto observed in nature
or (comp. page 238, note 3) experimentally produced relate only to
“varieties” and not to “species.” One could hardly say that the
recent investigations about the production of mutations by *external*
means have strengthened their importance for the general theory of
transformism.

And, in fact, it has been admitted by almost all who have dealt with
transformism without prepossessions that such is the state of affairs.
Lamarck himself, as we have mentioned already, was not blind to the fact
that a sort of organisatory law must be at the base of all transformism,
and it is well known that hypothetical statements about an original law
of phylogeny have been attempted by Nägeli, Kölliker, Wigand, Eimer,
and many others. But a full discussion of all these “laws” would hardly
help us much in our theoretical endeavour, as all of them, it must be
confessed, do little more than state the mere fact that some unknown
principle of organisation must have been at work in phylogeny, if we are
to accept the theory of descent at all.

It is important to notice that even such a convinced Darwinian as
Wallace, who is well known to have been an independent discoverer of the
elimination principle, admitted an exception to this principle in at
least one case--with regard to the origin of man. But one exception of
course destroys the generality of a principle.

As we ourselves feel absolutely incapable of adding anything specific
to the general statement that there *must* be an unknown principle of
transformism, if the hypothesis of descent is justified at all, we may
here close our discussion of the subject.


5. THE LOGICAL VALUE OF THE ORGANIC FORM ACCORDING TO THE DIFFERENT
TRANSFORMISTIC THEORIES

A few words only must be added about two topics: on the character of
organic forms as regarded by the different transformistic theories, and
on the relation of transformism in general to our concept of entelechy.

We have learnt that both Darwinism and Lamarckism, in their dogmatic
shape, regard the specific forms of animals and plants as being
contingent; in fact, it was to this contingency that criticism was
mainly directed. We therefore are entitled to say that to Darwinism and
Lamarckism organic forms are accidental in the very sense of the *forma
accidentalis* of the old logicians. There are indefinite forms possible,
according to these theories, and there is no law relating to these
forms. Systematics, under such a view, must lose, of course, any really
fundamental importance. “There is no rational system about organisms”:
that is the ultimate statement of Darwinism and of Lamarckism on this
doubtful question. Systematics is a mere catalogue, not at present
only, but for ever, by the very nature of the organisms. It is not
owing to the indefinite number of possible forms that both our theories
came to deny the importance of systematics, but to the want of a *law*
relating to this indefinite number: among chemical compounds indefinite
possibilities also exist in some cases, but they obey the law of the
general formula. It is very strange that Darwinians of all people are
in the forefront of systematic research in all countries: do they not
see that what they are trying to build up can only relate to accidental
phenomena? Or have they some doubts about the foundations of their own
theoretical views, in spite of the dogmatic air with which they defend
them? Or is it the so-called historical interest which attracts them?

A new question seems to arise at this point: Have not we ourselves
neglected history in favour of systematics and laws? Our next lecture,
the last of this year, will give the answer to this question.

At present we continue our study of the possible aspects of systematics.
It is not difficult to find out what meaning organic forms would assume
under any phylogenetic theory opposed to the theories of contingency.
It was their defence of contingency, that is, their lack of any law
of forms, that caused these theories to be overthrown--reduced to
absurdities even--and therefore, it follows that to assume any kind of
transformistic law is at the same time to deny the accidental character
of the forms of living beings.

There is no *forma accidentalis*. Does that mean that the *forma
essentialis* is introduced by this mere statement? And what would *that*
assert about the character of systematics?


THE ORGANIC FORM AND ENTELECHY

This problem is not as simple as it might seem to be at the first
glance, and, in fact, it is insoluble at present. It is here that the
relation of the hypothetic transformistic principle to our concept of
entelechy is concerned.

We know that entelechy, though not material in itself, uses material
means in each individual morphogenesis, handed down by the material
continuity in inheritance. What then undergoes change in phylogeny,
the means or the entelechy? And what would be the logical aspect of
systematics in either case?

Of course there would be a law in systematics in any case; and therefore
systematics in any case would be rational in principle. But if the
transformistic factor were connected with the means of morphogenesis,
one could hardly say that specific form as such was a primary essence.
Entelechy would be that essence, but entelechy in its generality and
always remaining the same in its most intimate character, as the
specific diversities would only be due to a something, which is not
form, but simply means to form. But the *harmony* revealed to us in
every typical morphogenesis, be it normal or be it regulatory, seems
to forbid us to connect transformism with the means of morphogenesis.
And therefore we shall close this discussion about the most problematic
phenomena of biology with the declaration, that we regard it as more
congruent to the general aspect of life to correlate the unknown
principle concerned in descent with entelechy itself, and not with
its means. Systematics of organisms therefore would be in fact
systematics of entelechies, and therefore organic forms would be
*formae essentiales*, entelechy being the very essence of form in its
specificity. Of course systematics would then be able to assume a truly
rational character at some future date: there might one day be found
a principle to account for the totality of possible[160] forms, a
principle based upon the analysis of entelechy.[161] As we have allowed
that Lamarckism hypothetically explains congenital adaptedness in
histology, and that Darwinism explains a few differences in quantity,
and as such properties, of course, would both be of a contingent
character, it follows that our future rational system would be combined
with certain accidental diversities. And so it might be said to be
one of the principal tasks of systematic biological science in the
future to discover the really rational system among a given totality of
diversities which cannot appear rational at the first glance, one sort
of differences, so to speak, being superimposed upon the other.

[160] The word “possible” relating to originating, of course, not to
surviving. It is here that natural selection may acquire its logical
importance alluded to above (see page 264).

[161] The discussions in the second volume of this book will show the
possible significance of such an analysis. We at present are dealing
with entelechy in a quasi-popular manner.




*C.* THE LOGIC OF HISTORY


History, in the strictest sense of the word, is the enumeration of the
things which have followed one another in order of time. History deals
with the single, with regard both to time and space. Even if its facts
are complex in themselves and proper to certain other kinds of human
study, they are nevertheless regarded by history as single. Facts, we
had better say, so far as they are regarded as single, are regarded
historically, for what relates to specific time and space is called
history.

Taken as a simple enumeration or registration, history, of course,
cannot claim to be a “science” unless we are prepared to denude that
word of all specific meaning. But that would hardly be useful. As a
matter of fact, what has actually claimed to be history, has always
been more than a mere enumeration, even in biology proper. So-called
phylogeny implies, as we have shown, that every one of its actual
forms contains some rational elements. Phylogeny always rests on
the assumption that only some of the characters of the organisms
were changed in transformism and that what remained unchanged may be
explained by the fact of inheritance.

But this, remember, was the utmost we were able to say for phylogeny.
It remains fantastic and for the most part unscientific in spite of
this small degree of rationality, as to which it is generally not very
clear itself. For nothing is known with regard to the positive factors
of transformism, and we were only able to offer the discussion of a few
possibilities in place of a real theory of the factors of descent.

In spite of that it will not be without a certain logical value to begin
our analysis of history in general by the discussion of possibilities
again. Biology proper would hardly allow us to do more: for the
simple “fact” of history is not even a “fact” in this science, but an
hypothesis, albeit one of some probability.

As discussions of mere possibilities should always rest on as broad a
basis as possible, we shall begin our analysis by raising two general
questions. To what kinds of realities may the concept of history
reasonably be applied? And what different types of “history” would be
possible *a priori*, if the word history is to signify more than a mere
enumeration?


1. THE POSSIBLE ASPECTS OF HISTORY

Of course, we could select one definite volume in space and call all the
consecutive stages which it goes through, its history: it then would be
part of its history that a cloud was formed in it, or that a bird passed
through it on the wing. But it would hardly be found very suggestive to
write the history of space-volumes. In fact, it is to *bodies* in space
that all history actually relates, at least indirectly, for even the
history of sciences is in some respect the history of men or of books.
It may suffice for our analysis to understand here the word body in its
popular sense.

Now in its relation to bodies history may have the three following
aspects, as far as anything more than a simple enumeration comes into
account. Firstly, it may relate to one and the same body, the term
body again to be understood popularly. So it is when the individual
history of the organism is traced from the egg to the adult, or when the
history of a cloud or of an island or of a volcano is written. Secondly,
the subject-matter of history may be formed by the single units of a
consecutive series of bodies following each other periodically. To this
variety of history the discoveries of Mendel and his followers would
belong in the strictest sense, but so does our hypothetical phylogeny
and a great part of the history of mankind. And lastly, there is a
rather complicated kind of sequence of which the “history” has actually
been written. History can refer to bodies which are in no direct
relation with one another, but which are each the effect of another body
that belongs to a consecutive series of body-units showing periodicity.
This sounds rather complicated; but it is only the strict expression
of what is perfectly familiar to you all. Our sentence indeed is
simply part of the definition of a history of art or of literature for
instance--or, say, of a phylogenetic history of the nests of birds. The
single pictures are the subjects of the history of art, and nobody would
deny that these pictures are the effects of their painters, and that
the painters are individuals of mankind--that is, that they are bodies
belonging to a consecutive series of body-units showing periodicity. Of
course, it is only improperly that we speak of a history of pictures or
of books or of nests. In fact, we are dealing with painters, and with
men of letters or of science, and with certain birds, and therefore
the third type of history may be reduced to the second. But it was not
without value to pursue our logical discrimination as far as possible.

So far we have always spoken of history as being more than a mere
enumeration, but we have not ascertained what this “more” signifies. It
is not very difficult to do so: in fact, there are three different types
of history, each of a different degree of importance with respect to the
understanding of reality.

In the first place, history may start as a mere enumeration at the
beginning, and at the end, in spite of all further endeavour, may
*remain* that and nothing more. That may occur in the first as well
as in the second group of our division of history with regard to
its relation to bodies. Take a cloud and describe its history from
the beginning to the end: there would never be much more than pure
description. Or take one pair of dogs and describe them and their
offspring for four generations or more: I doubt if you will get beyond
mere descriptions in this case either. The only step beyond a mere
enumeration which we can be said to have advanced in these instances,
consists in the conviction, gained at the end of the analysis, that
nothing more than such an enumeration is in any way *possible*.

Quite the opposite happens when “history” deals with the individual
from the egg to the adult: here the whole series of historical facts is
seen to form one whole. This case therefore we shall call not history,
but *evolution*, an evolving of something; the word “evolution” being
understood here in a much wider sense than on former occasions,[162] and
*including*, for instance, the embryological alternative “evolutio” or
“epigenesis.”

[162] See pp. 26, 45, 54, etc.

And half-way between enumeration and evolution there now stands a type
of history which is more than the one and less than the other: there is
a kind of intelligible connection between the consecutive historical
stages and yet the concept of a whole does not come in. The geological
history of a mountain or of an island is a very clear instance of this
class. It is easy to see here, how what *has been* always becomes the
foundation of what *will be* in the *next* phase of the historical
process. There is a sort of *cumulation* of consecutive phases, the
later ones being impossible without the earlier. So we shall speak
of the type of “historical cumulation” as standing between evolution
and bare temporal sequence. By means of historical cumulations history
may fairly claim to “explain” things. We “understand” a mountain or an
island in all its actual characteristics, if we know its history. This
“historical understanding” rests on the fact that what first appeared
as an inconceivable complex has been resolved into a sequence of single
events, each of which may claim to have been explained by actually
existing sciences. The complex has been explained as being, though not
a real “whole,” yet a sum of singularities, every element of which is
familiar.

But you may tell me that my discussion of evolution and of cumulation,
as the higher aspects of history, is by no means complete; nay,
more--that it is altogether wrong. You would certainly not be mistaken
in calling my analysis incomplete. We have called one type of history
evolution, the other cumulation; but how have these higher types been
reached? Has historical enumeration itself, which was supposed to
stand at the beginning of all analysis, or has “history” itself in its
strictest sense, as relating to the single as such, risen unaided into
something more than “history”? By no means: history has grown beyond
its bounds by the aid of something from without. It is unhistorical
elements that have brought us from mere history to more than history.
We have created the concept of evolution, not from our knowledge of the
single line of events attendant on a single egg of a frog, but from our
knowledge that there are billions or more of frogs’ eggs, all destined
to the same “history,” which therefore is not history at all. We have
created the concept of cumulation not from the historical study of
a single mountain, but from our knowledge of physics and chemistry
and so-called dynamical geology: by the aid of these sciences we
“understood” historically, and thus our understanding came from another
source than history itself.


2. PHYLOGENETIC POSSIBILITIES

Does history always gain its importance from what it is not? Must
history always lose its “historical” aspect, in order to become of
importance to human knowledge? And can it *always* become “science” by
such a transformation? We afterwards shall resume this discussion on
a larger scale, but at present we shall apply what we have learned to
hypothetic phylogeny. What then are the possibilities of phylogeny, to
what class of history would it belong if it were complete? Of course, we
shall not be able to answer this question fully; for phylogeny is *not*
complete, and scarcely anything is known about the factors which act
in it. But in spite of that, so much, it seems to me, is gained by our
analysis of the possible aspects of history and of the factors possibly
concerned in transformism, that we are at least able to formulate the
possibilities of a phylogeny of the future in their strict logical
outlines.

Darwinism and Lamarckism, regarding organic forms as contingent, must
at the same time regard organic history as a cumulation; they indeed
*might* claim to furnish an historical explanation in the realm of
biology--if only their statements were unimpeachable, which as we have
seen, they are not.

But any transformistic theory, which locates the very principle of
phylogeny in the organism itself, and to which therefore even organic
forms would be not accidental but essential, might be forced to regard
the descent of organisms as a true evolution. The singularities in
phylogenetic history would thus become links in one whole: history
proper would become more than history. But I only say that phylogeny
*might* be evolution, and in fact I cannot admit more than this *a
priori*, even on the basis of an internal transformistic principle,
as has been assumed. Such a principle also might lead always from one
typical state of organisation to the next: but *ad infinitum*.[163]
Then phylogeny, though containing what might in some sense be called
“progress,” would not be “evolution”; it might even be called cumulation
in such a case, in spite of the internal transforming principle, though,
of course, cumulation from within would always mean something very
different from cumulation from without.[164]

[163] An immanent vitalistic phylogeny *without* a pre-established end
has recently been advocated by H. Bergson (*L’évolution créatrice*,
Paris, 1907).

[164] In this connection the problem may be raised, whether there can be
such a thing as unchangeable “species” in spite of the mutability of the
individuals. Compare page 251, note 1.

But we must leave this problem an open question, as long as our actual
knowledge about transformism remains as poor as it is. We need only add,
for the sake of logical interest, that phylogeny, as a true evolution,
would necessarily be characterised by the possibility of being repeated.


3. THE HISTORY OF MANKIND

We only assume hypothetically that phylogeny has happened, and we know
scarcely anything about the factors concerned in it. Now, it certainly
would be of great importance, if at least in a small and definite field
of biology we were able to state a little more, if the *mere fact* of
phylogeny, of “history,” were at least beyond any doubt within a certain
range of our biological experience. And indeed there is one department
of knowledge, where history, as we know, *has happened*, and where we
also know at least some of the factors concerned in it.

I refer to the history of mankind; and I use the expression not at all
in its anthropological or ethnographical sense, as you might expect
from a biologist, but in its proper and common sense as the history of
politics and of laws and of arts, of literature and of sciences: in a
word, the history of civilisation. Here is the only field, where we know
that there actually *are* historical facts: let us try to find out what
these facts can teach us about their succession.

The theory of history in this narrower meaning of the word has been
the subject of very numerous controversies in the last twenty years,
especially in Germany, and these controversies have led very deeply into
the whole philosophical view of the universe. We shall try to treat our
subject as impartially as possible.

Hegel says, in the introduction to his *Phänomenologie des Geistes*:
“*Die Philosophie muss sich hüten erbaulich sein zu wollen*”
(“Philosophy must beware of trying to be edifying”). These words,
indeed, ought to be inscribed on the lintel of the door that leads
into historical methodology, for they have been sadly neglected by
certain theoretical writers. Instead of analysing history in order to
see what it would yield to philosophy, they have often made philosophy,
especially moral philosophy, the starting-point of research, and history
then has had to obey certain doctrines from the very beginning.

We shall try as far as we can not to become “erbaulich” in our
discussions. We want to learn from history for the purposes of
philosophy, and we want to learn from history as from a phenomenon in
time and in space, just as we have learnt from all the other phenomena
regarding life in nature. Every class of phenomena of course may
be studied with respect to generalities as well as with respect to
particulars. The particular, it is true, has not taught us much in our
studies so far. Perhaps it may be successful in the domain of history
proper.

If I take into consideration what the best authors of the last century
have written about human history with respect to its general value, I
cannot help feeling that none of them has succeeded in assigning to
history a position where it would really prove to be of great importance
for the aims of philosophical inquiry. Is that the fault of the authors
or of human history? And what then would explain the general interest
which almost every one takes, and which I myself take in history in
spite of this unsatisfactory state of things?


CUMULATIONS IN HUMAN HISTORY

Let us begin our analytical studies of the value and the meaning of
human history, by considering some opinions which deserve the foremost
place in our discussion, not as being the first in time, but as being
the first in simplicity. I refer to the views of men like Buckle, Taine,
and Lamprecht, and especially Lamprecht, for he has tried the hardest to
justify theoretically what he regards the only scientific aim of history
to be. If we may make use of our logical scheme of the three possible
aspects of history, it is clear from the beginning that the history of
mankind, as understood by the three authors we have named, but most
particularly by Lamprecht, is neither a mere enumeration nor a true
evolution, but that it has to do with *cumulations*, in the clearest
of their possible forms. The processes of civilisation among the
different peoples are in fact to be compared logically with the origin
of volcanoes or mountain-ranges in Japan, or in Italy, or in America,
and show us a typical series of consecutive phases, as do these. There
exists, for instance, in the sphere of any single civilisation an
economic system, founded first on the exchange of natural products,
and then on money. There are, or better, perhaps, there are said to
be, characteristic phases succeeding one another in the arts, such as
the “typical,” the “individualistic,” and the “subjective” phases. Any
civilisation may be said to have its “middle ages,” and so on. All these
are “laws” of course in the meaning of “rules” only, for they are far
from being elemental, they are not “principles” in any sense. And there
are other sorts of “rules” at work for exceptional cases: revolutions
have their rules, and imperialism, for instance, has its rules also.

Now, as the consecutive phases of history have been shown to be
true cumulations, it follows that the rules which are revealed by
our analysis, are rules relating to the very origin of cumulations
also. The real *element* upon which the cumulation-phases, and the
cumulation-rules together rest, is the human individual as the bearer
of its psychology. Nobody, it seems to me, has shown more clearly than
Simmel that it is the human individual, *qua* individual, which is
concerned in *every* kind of history.

History, viewed as a series of cumulations, may in fact claim to
satisfy the intellect by “explaining” a good deal of historical facts.
It explains by means of the elemental factor of individual psychology,
which every one knows from himself, and by the simple concept that there
is a cumulation, supported by language and by writing as its principal
factors, which both of course rest on psychology again. Psychology,
so we may say, is capable of leading to cumulation phenomena; the
cumulations in history are such that we are able to understand them by
our everyday psychology; and history, so far as it is of scientific
value, consists exclusively of cumulations.

No doubt there is much truth in such a conception of history; but
no doubt also, it puts history in the second rank as compared with
psychology; just as geology stands in the second rank as compared with
chemistry or physics. Geology and human history may lead to generalities
in the form of rules, but these rules are *known* to be not elemental
but only cumulative; and moreover, we know the elements concerned in
them. The elements, therefore, are the real subjects for further studies
in the realm of philosophy, but not the cumulations, not the rules,
which are known to be due to accidental constellations. Of course, the
“single” is the immediate subject of this sort of history, but the
single as such is emphatically pronounced to be insignificant, and the
cumulations and the cumulative rules, though “singles” in a higher sense
of the word, are shown to be anything but elementalities.

Therefore, on a conception of human history such as that of Buckle,
Taine, Lamprecht, and others, we, of course, ought to take an interest
in history, because what is “explained” by historical research touches
all of us most personally every day and every year. But our philosophy,
our view of the world, would remain the same without history as it is
with it. We only study history, and especially the history of our own
civilisation, because it is a field of actuality which directly relates
to ourselves, just as we study for practical purposes the railway
time-tables of our own country, but not of Australia; just as we study
the local time-table in particular.

If the mere *rerum cognoscere causas* is regarded as the criterium of
science, history of Lamprecht’s type of course is a science, for its
explanations rest upon the demonstration of the typical constellations
and of the elemental factor or law from which together the next
constellations are known necessarily to follow. But history of this kind
is not a science in the sense of discovering *den ruhenden Pol in der
Erscheinungen Flucht*.


HUMAN HISTORY NOT AN “EVOLUTION”

Quite another view of history has been maintained by Hegel, if his
explanations about the *Entwicklung des objectiven Geistes* (“the
development of the objective mind”) may be co-ordinated with our
strictly logical categories of the possible aspects of history. But I
believe we are entitled to say that it was a real *evolution* of mankind
that Hegel was thinking of; an evolution regarding mankind as spiritual
beings and having an end, at least ideally. One psychical state was
considered by Hegel to generate the next, not as a mere cumulation
of elemental stages, but in such a way that each of the states would
represent an elementality and an irreducibility in itself; and he
assumed that there was a continuous series of such stages of the mind
through the course of generations. Is there any sufficient reason in
historical facts for such an assumption?

The mind “evolves” itself from error to truth by what might be called
a system of contradictions, according to Hegel, with respect to logic
as well as to morality; the sum of such contradictions becoming smaller
and less complicated with every single step of this evolution. No doubt
there really occurs a process of logical and moral refining, so to say,
in the individual, and no doubt also, the results of this process,
as far as attained, can be handed down to the next generation by the
spoken word or by books. But it is by no means clear, I think, that this
process is of the type of a real evolution towards an end, so far as it
relates to the actual series of generations as such. On the contrary,
it seems to me that we have here simply what we meet everywhere in
history--a sort of cumulation resting upon a psychological basis.

The dissatisfaction that exists at any actual stage of contradiction,
both moral and logical, is one of the psychical factors concerned;
the faculty of reasoning is the other. Now it is a consequence of the
reasoning faculty that the dissatisfaction continually decreases, or
at least changes in such a way that each partial result of the logical
process brings with it the statement of new problems. The number of
such problems may become less, as the logical process advances, and,
indeed, there is an ideal state, both logical and moral, in which there
are no more problems, but only results, though this ideal could hardly
be regarded as attainable by the *human* mind. In the history of those
sciences which are wholly or chiefly of the *a priori* type, this
process of deliverance from contradictions is most advantageously to
be seen. It is obvious in mechanics and thermodynamics, and the theory
of matter is another very good instance. A certain result is reached;
much seems to be gained, but suddenly another group of facts presents
itself, which had been previously unknown or neglected. The first result
has to be changed or enlarged; many problems of the second order arise;
there are contradictions among them, which disappear after a certain
alteration of what was the first fundamental result, and so on. And the
same is true about morality, though the difficulties are much greater
here, as a clear and well-marked standard of measurement of what is good
and what is bad, is wanting, or at least, is not conceded unanimously.
But even here there is a consensus on some matters: one would hardly go
back to slavery again, for instance, and there are still other points
in morality which are claimed as ideals at least by a great majority of
moral thinkers.

But all this is not true “evolution,” and indeed, I doubt if such an
evolution of mankind could be proved at present in the sense in which
Hegel thought it possible. The process of logical and moral deliverance
from contradictions *might* come to an end in *one* individual; at least
that is a logical possibility, or it might come to an end in, say,
six or ten generations. And there is, unfortunately for mankind, no
guarantee that the result will not be lost again and have to be acquired
a second time. All this proves that what Hegel regarded as an evolution
of the race is only a cumulation. There is nothing evolutionary relating
to the generations of mankind as such. At least, nothing is proved about
such an evolution.[165]

[165] On account of the limited size of the earth a certain final stage
of human civilisation might be expected in a future time; but it would
be the size of the earth which determined this end, and not the process
of civilisation itself.

You may call my view pessimistic, and indeed you may be right so far
as the sum total of human beings as such is in question. But, be it
pessimistic or not, we are here moving on scientific ground only, and
have merely to study the probability or improbability of problematic
facts, and with such a view in our mind, we are bound to say that a
true logical and moral evolution of mankind is not at all supported
by known facts. There is a process of logical and moral perfection,
but this process is *not one*, is not “single” in its actuality; it is
not connected with the one and single line of history, but only with a
few generations each time it occurs, or even with one individual, at
least ideally. And this process is not less a process of cumulation
than any other sort of development or so-called “progress” in history
is. Philosophers of the Middle Ages, in fact, sometimes regarded human
history as *one* evolutionary unity, beginning with the Creation and
ending with the Day of Judgment; but every one must agree, I think,
that even under the dogmatic assumptions of orthodoxy history would by
no means *necessarily* be an “evolution.” Even then the paths taken by
different individuals or different branches of the human race on their
way to redemption *can* be regarded as independent lines.

Thus Hegel’s conception of an evolution of mankind, it seems to me,
fails to stand criticism. By emphasising that there are certain lines of
development in history which bring with them a stimulus to perfection,
and that these lines relate to all that is highest in culture, Hegel
certainly rendered the most important service to the theory of history;
but in spite of that he has revealed to us only a special and typical
kind of cumulation process, and nothing like an evolution. We may say
that the very essence of history lies in this sort of cumulation, in
this “pseudo-evolution” as we might say; and if we like to become moral
metaphysicians we might add, that it is for the sake of the possibility
of this sort of cumulation that man lives his earthly life; the Hindoos
say so, indeed, and so do many Christians. But even if we were to depart
from our scientific basis in this way we should not get beyond the realm
of cumulations.

All this, of course, is not to be understood to affirm that there never
*will* be discovered any real evolutionary element in human history--in
the so-called “subconscious” sphere perhaps--but at present we
certainly are ignorant of such an element.


THE PROBLEM OF THE “SINGLE” AS SUCH

If history has failed to appear as a true evolution, and if, on the
other hand, it reveals to us a great sum of different cumulations, some
of very great importance, others of minor importance, what then remains
of the importance of the single historical event in its very singleness?
What importance can the description of this event have with regard to
our scientific aims? We could hardly say at present that it appears to
be of very much importance at all. The historical process as a whole
has proved to be not a real elemental unit, as far as we know, and such
elemental units as there are in it have proved to be of importance only
*for* individual psychology but not *as* history. History has offered
us only instances of what every psychologist knew already from his own
experience, or at least might have known if he had conceived his task in
the widest possible spirit.

But is no other way left by which true history might show its real
importance in spite of all our former analysis? Can history be saved
perhaps to philosophical science by any new sort of reasoning which we
have not yet applied to it here.

As a matter of fact, such new reasoning has been tried, and
Rickert,[166] in particular, has laid much stress upon the point
that natural sciences have to do with generalities, while historical
sciences have to do with the single in its singleness only, and, in
spite of that, are of the highest philosophical importance. He does not
think very highly of so-called “historical laws,” which must be mere
borrowings from psychology or biology, applied to history proper, and
not touching its character as “history.” We agree with these statements
to a considerable extent. But what then about “history proper,” what
about “the single in its very singleness”?

[166] *Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlichen Begriffsbildung*,
Tübingen and Leipzig, 1902.

Let us say at first a few words about this term “single” so very often
applied by us. In the ultimate meaning of the word, of course, the
series of actual sensations or “presentations” is the “single” which is
given “historically” to each individual, and therefore to the writer of
history also, and in fact, history as understood by Rickert is based
to a great extent upon this primordial meaning of single “givenness.”
The word “single,” in his opinion, relates to the *actual and true
specification* of any event, or group of events, at a given time and
at a given locality in space, these events possessing an identity of
their own and never being repeated without change of identity. If the
subject-matter of history is defined like this, then there are, indeed,
“Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlichen Begriffsbildung” with regard to
history, for natural sciences have nothing to do with the single in such
an understanding of the word.

Rickert says somewhere that history as a real evolution, as one
totality of a higher order, would cease to be proper history: and he
is right. History, in fact, would soon lose the character of specific
attachment to a given space and to a given time, and would lose its
“non-repeatability,” in the logical sense at least, if it were one
*unit* in reality: as soon as it was that, it would have become a
logical generality, an element in nature, so to say, in spite of its
factual singularity. But history is not obliged to become that, Rickert
states; and we may add that history in fact cannot become that, because
it simply proves not to be an evolution as far as we know at present.

But what importance does Rickert attach to his history specified and
non-repeatably single?

History has a logic of its own, he says; the scheme of its logic is not
the syllogism, but the *relation to “values.”* So far as the single
historical facts can be related to values, they are of historical
importance, and in such a way only does history in its proper sense
become important in itself and through itself at the same time. Must
history always lose its historical aspect to become of importance to
human knowledge? That is the question we asked whilst considering the
general logical types of the “evolution” and “cumulation” that arose out
of the analysis of the historical facts of problematic phylogeny. It
now might seem that this question may be answered, and that it may be
answered by a clear and simple “No.” The history of mankind, according
to Rickert, seems to be important in itself, and without borrowing from
any other branch of study. But is his reasoning altogether cogent and
convincing?

Has it really been able to attribute to history in the strictest sense
such an importance for philosophy, for the theory of the universe, “für
die Weltanschauung,” that history proper may in fact be allowed to take
its place beside science proper?

The relation to values is not to include any kind of “Bewertung” of
judgment, Rickert allows. In fact, history of any kind would hardly
satisfy the reader, if moral judgment were its basis. Every reader, of
course, has a moral judgment of his own, but, unfortunately, almost
every reader’s judgment is different from his neighbour’s, and there
is no uniformity of moral principles as there is of geometrical ones.
We shall come back to this point. At present we only state the fact
that indeed moral judgment can never be the foundation of history, and
that Rickert was very right to say so: it is enough to put the names
of Tolstoy and Nietzsche together to understand how devoid of even
the smallest general validity would be a history resting upon moral
principles.

But what then are the “values” of Rickert to which history has to
relate, if moral values in their proper sense have to be excluded? It is
here that his discussions begin to become obscure and unsatisfactory,
and the reason is fairly intelligible. He is trying to prove the
impossible; he wants to put history beside science in its real
philosophical importance, in spite of the fact that all evidence to
establish this is wanting.

These “values,” to which every historical act in its singularity has to
be related in order to become an element of real history, are they after
all nothing but those groups of the products of civilisation which in
fact absorb the interest of men? Is it to groups of cultural phenomena,
such as arts, science, the State, religion, war, economics, and so on,
that “historical” facts have to be related? Yes, as far as I understand
our author, it is simply to these or other even less important groups
of cultural effects--cultural “cumulations,” to apply our term--that a
single action of a man or a group of men must bear some relation in
order to become important historically.

But what does that mean? Is the relation to such “values” to be
regarded as really rendering history equal to the sciences of nature in
philosophical importance?

In the first place, there is no more agreement about such “values” than
there is in the field of morals. Imagine, for instance, a religious
enthusiast or recluse writing history! I fancy there would be very
little mention of warriors and politicians: war and politics would
not be “values” in *any* sense to such a man. And we know that there
are others to whom those products of civilised life rank amongst the
first. Rickert well notes that there is one great objection to his
doctrine--the character of universality[167] is wanting to his history,
or rather to the values forming its basis; for there cannot be, or at
least there actually is not at present, a *consensus omnium* with regard
to these “values.”

[167] The word “universality” to be understood here in quite an
unpretentious quasi-popular meaning, not strictly epistemologically.

I am convinced that Rickert is right in his conception of real “history”
as the knowledge of the single acts of mankind. But this conception
proves just the contrary of what Rickert hoped to prove; for history in
this sense is moulded by the actual products of culture, that is, by
the effects which actually exist as groups of cultural processes, and
it cannot be moulded by anything else; the historian correlates history
with what *interests* him personally.

Here now we have met definitively the ambiguous word: history indeed
is to end in “interest” and in being “interesting.” There is nothing
like a real “value” in any sense underlying history; the word *value*
therefore would better give place to the term “centre of interest”--a
collection of stamps may be such a “centre.” History, then, as the
knowledge of cultural singularities, is “interesting,” and its aspects
change with the interests of the person who writes history: there is no
commonly accepted foundation of history.[168]

[168] To avoid mistakes I wish to say here most emphatically that,
according to Rickert, the method of history is regarded as completely
*free* from subjectivity as soon as its “values” are once *established*.
But this cannot avail to save the theory.

And it follows that history as regarded by Rickert cannot serve as
the preliminary to philosophy. It *may* be[169] of use for personal
edification or for practical life: granting that the “centres of
interest” as referred to are of any real ethical or at least factual
importance. But you may take away from history even the greatest
personalities, and your view of the universe, your philosophy, would
remain the same, except of course so far as these personalities
themselves have contributed to philosophy in any way.

[169] This is a rather optimistic conception of “history.” Personally, I
must confess that even its emotional and practical importance seems to
me to be at least diminished by the retarding effects which all sorts
of “historical” considerations--in science as well as in arts and in
public life--carry with them. All real progress is non-historical--and
its champions almost always have become martyrs: this fact seems not to
recommend history as a means of education, except for persons of a very
strong character.

Now, on the other hand, it is worth noticing that, even if there were
generally accepted “values,” history as the doctrine of singularities
would be deprived of philosophical importance. Its single cases would
then be merely *instances* of certain types of actions and occurrences
which have been proved to be “valuable,” *i.e.* to be centres of
interest, before-hand. Rickert has observed that the relation to
any judgments about moral values would render history unhistorical,
for the generalities to which it is related would be the main thing
in such a case. But he did not notice, as far as I can see, that
history, if related to *any* “values” whatever--if there were any
generally conceded--would become “non-historical” just as well: for the
*generalities* as expressed in the “values” would be the main thing in
this case also. In fact, there is no escape from the dilemma:--either no
general centres of interest, and therefore a mere subjective “history”;
or general “values,” and therefore history a mere collection of
instances.

The “limits of concepts in natural sciences” then are the same as the
limits of *intellectual* concepts in general. For intellectual, *i.e.*
logical, “values” are the only centres of interest that can lay claim
to universality. There are indeed other groups of important concepts,
the ethical ones, but they are outside intellectuality and may enter
philosophy only as problems, not as solutions. Therefore, history in
its true sense, even if related to the ethical group of concepts,
has no bearing on philosophy. Philosophically it remains a sum of
contingencies, in which certain laws of cumulation and certain series of
cumulation may be discovered. But these series and these laws, if taken
scientifically, only offer us instances of psychological elementalities.
They also might be instances of primary ethical states and relations, if
there were such relations of more than a mere subjective and personal
validity, which at present at least seems not to be the case.




CONCLUSIONS ABOUT SYSTEMATICS AND HISTORY IN GENERAL


We have finished our analysis of the history of mankind as the only
instance of an historical biological process that is actually known to
exist and is not only assumed hypothetically.

What we have learnt from this analysis, though certainly important in
itself, has not afforded us any new result for theoretical biology.

The history of mankind is proved to be of philosophical importance,
at present, so far only as it offers instances to the science of
psychology; besides that it may be of value and importance to many
conditions of practical and emotional life.

There is only one science, and only one kind of logic too. “In one sense
the only science”--that was the predicate attached to natural sciences
by Lord Gifford, as you will remember from our first lecture. It is not
without interest to note that at the end of our course of this year,
we find occasion to realise on what a deep insight into logical and
philosophical relations that sentence was grounded.

We now leave the theory of human history, which has been to us nothing
more than a branch of biological phylogeny in general. We have dealt
with it from quite a simple realistic point of view, not burdened by any
epistemology. We have taken psychical states as realities, just as we
have taken as realities all parts of the animal body; and it seems to
me that we were entitled to do so, as it was only history *about* the
actions of men we were dealing with, not their actions themselves. Next
summer we shall begin with studying action as action, and then, in fact,
a well-founded epistemology will be among our first requirements. And
history also will come on the scene once more.

It is the main result of our last chapters, devoted to systematics,
transformism, and human history in particular, that no conclusions
really useful for further philosophical discussion can at present be
gained from these topics; there either is too little actual knowledge,
or there are only combinations of natural elementalities, but no
elementalities of any new kind.

To sum up: we expected that a rational system might be a biological
result of the future, but we could not claim at all to possess such a
system. We said that transformism might be proved one day to be a true
evolution, governed by one immanent principle, which then would have to
be regarded as a new primary factor in nature, but we did not know the
least about that principle.

Human history, on the other hand--that is, the only historical process
concerned with life that is actually known to have occurred--could not
teach us anything of an elemental character, since human history, at
present at least, did not appear to us as a true evolution, but only as
a sum of cumulations, and the singularities of this history, taken by
themselves, could only be of practical or emotional interest.

Thus it is from the study of the living *individual* only, that we
have so far gained elemental principles in biology. The analysis of
individual morphogenesis and of individual inheritance has yielded
us the concept of entelechy as the chief result of the first part of
our lectures. We shall be able to get more proofs of the autonomy of
the individual life in the beginning of the second part; indeed, the
beginning of that part will bring us to a full understanding of what the
living individual is, and what it is not. And then the real philosophy
of life, that is, the philosophy of the individual, will occupy us for
the greater half of our lectures of next summer.




INDEX


  Absolute, 5

  Acclimatisation, 191

  Acquired characters, 217, 276 f.

  Adaptation (definition), 166, 171, 185
    to changes from without, 172 ff.
    functional, 114, 176 ff.
    and Lamarckism, 272, 280
    mechanical, 177 f.
    morphological, 168 ff.
    physiological, 184 ff.
    primary and secondary, 188 f.

  Adaptedness, 186 f.

  *Adiantum*, 279

  Adventitious, 55, 74, 111, 221

  Albumen, 200

  Allelomorphs, 231

  Amphibious plants, 172 ff.

  Annelids, 65, 70, 221

  Answering reaction, 181

  Anti-bodies, 206 f.

  Antitoxins, 207 f.

  *A priori*, 6

  Aristotle, 144

  *Ascaris*, 93

  *Aspergillus*, 195

  Assimilation, 17

  Atrophy, 178

  Autonomy of life, 143, 224 f., 324


  Babák, 177

  Baer, C. E. v., 48 f. 282

  Bateson, 229 ff., 238

  Bayliss, 204, 212

  *Begonia*, 221

  Bergson, 305

  Berkeley, 6

  Berthold, 91

  Biogenetisches Grundgesetz, 248

  Biology, 8 ff., 15 f.

  Blaringhem, 238, 276

  Blastoderm, 39

  Blastomeres, 36, 59, 61 f., 79

  Blastula, 37, 61, 79

  Blumenbach, 26

  Boirivant, 174

  Bonnet, 26

  Boveri, 29, 60, 95, 235 f.

  Buckle, 308, 310

  Bunge, v., 248

  Bütschli, 91


  Calcium, 97

  Calkins, 33

  Cambium, 120, 183, 220

  Catalysis, 164, 203

  Categories, 6 f.

  Cause, 99 ff.

  Cell, 27 f.
    -division, 28 ff., 53, 94
    -lineage, 58, 70
    -theory, 27 f.

  Chemical theory (of morphogenesis), 134 ff.

  Chemistry, systematics of, 244.

  Child, C. M., 180

  Chromatic regulations, 197

  Chromatin, 28 f.

  Chromosomes, 30, 237

  Chun, 66

  Classification, 246 f.

  *Clavellina*, 129, 154, 162 f.

  Cleavage, 35 ff., 53, 58, 60, 63, 71, 92

  Colloids, 187

  Compensatory process, 112

  Complex potencies, 112, 120

  Conic sections, 243

  Conjugation, 33

  Conklin, 86

  Contingency, 218, 284 ff. 304

  Continuity of germ-plasm, 215, 227

  Cope, 273

  Correlation (of masses), 93
    (of parts), 247

  Correns, 228

  Crampton, 70 f.

  Crayfish, 105

  Ctenophores, 66

  Cumulation, 301 ff., 308 ff., 314, 317

  Cuvier, 247


  Darwin, Ch., 260 ff., 271, 283

  Darwinism, 260 ff., 271, 283 ff., 293 ff., 304

  Davenport, 191, 206

  Delage, 32

  Descent, theory of, 250 ff.

  Description, 12, 50

  Detto, 172

  Directive stimuli, 102 ff.

  Doncaster, 232

  Dreyer, 92


  *Echinus*, 27, 33 ff., 60 ff., 68, 81, 85, 87,
    98, 104, 108, 111, 154, 232, 235

  Ectoderm, 41, 81, 122

  Egg, 31, 33 f.

  Ehrlich, 207 f.

  Eimer, 292

  Elementary organs, 46 ff.
    processes, 46 ff.

  Elements of nature, 9

  Embryo, 44
    frog’s, 59, 65, 67
    half, 59, 61, 66 ff.
    whole, 61, 67 f.

  Endoderm, 41, 81

  Entelechy, 143 f., 224 f., 295

  Entwickelungsmechanik, 57, 70, 78, 241

  Enumeration, 297, 300

  Enzymes, 164, 203

  Epigenesis, 26, 45, 54, 72, 144, 301

  Equifinality (of restitutions), 159 f.

  Equipotential, 83

  Eschenhagen, 195

  Evolutio, 26, 45 f., 54, 59, 61, 64, 72, 144, 205, 301

  Evolution, 8, 21, 46, 250, 301, 305, 311 ff., 317

  Experience, 7 f., 12, 212

  Experiment, 51, 56 f.

  “Explaining,” 51, 309

  Explicit potency, 84


  Fasting, 199 f.

  Ferments, 164, 203 f.

  Fertilisation, 32 ff.

  Fischer, 278

  Foges, 107

  Form, closed or open, 49

  Form, organic, specific, 16 ff., 25, 92, 293 ff.

  Forma accidentalis, 293
    essentialis, 294 f.

  Formative stimuli, 102 ff., 113, 118, 133

  Francé, 158, 239

  Frédéricq, 196

  Frog, embryo of, 59, 65, 67

  Fromm, 205

  Function (mathematical), 80

  Fungi, metabolism of, 201


  Gaidukow, 197 f.

  Galls, 101

  Galton, 228, 238

  Gamble and Keeble, 198

  Gastrula, 41, 61, 81

  Gautier, 239

  Geographical distribution, 251 f.

  Geometry, solid, 243

  Germ-layers, 41, 44, 61
    -lineage, 215
    -plasm, 52, 215

  Gifford, Lord, 1 ff., 322

  Godlewski, 105, 155, 235

  Goebel, 116

  Goethe, 247

  Goette, 48, 56, 214

  Goltz, 181

  Growth, 30, 93 f.

  Gruber, 236


  Haeckel, 37, 41

  Half-embryo, 59, 61, 66 ff.

  Haller, A. v., 26

  Harmony, 107 ff., 117, 295

  Hausmann, 206

  Heat production, 193

  Hegel, 307, 311 ff.

  Herbst, 96 ff., 102, 104 ff., 172, 177, 200, 232, 236

  Heredity, 21, 52

  Hering, 216 f.

  Hertwig, O., 60, 65

  Hertwig, R., 32 f., 60, 107

  His, 56, 93

  History, 2, 14, 21, 250, 257, 297 ff.
    of mankind, 306 ff.

  Holmes, 180

  Hume, 6

  Hypertrophy, 112, 114

  Hypertypy, 112


  Idealism, 5, 7

  Immunity, 204 ff.

  Implicit potency, 84

  Improvement (of morphogenesis), 212

  Indifferent cells, 182

  Inflammation, 206

  Inheritance, 35, 214 ff.
    of acquired characters, 217, 275 ff., 290

  Irritability, 190 ff.


  Jacoby, 207

  Jaeger, 214

  Jennings, 218


  Kammerer, 176, 280

  Kant, 6 f.

  Kirchhoff, 50

  Klebs, 96, 170, 180, 238, 276

  Kölliker, 292

  Korshinsky, 239

  Krašan, 221, 251


  Lamarck, 271 f., 291

  Lamarckism, 271 f., 284 ff., 293 ff., 304

  Lamprecht, 308, 310

  Larva, 41 f., 44

  Law of nature, 13, 16

  Leibniz, 6

  Lens (of eye), 105, 221

  Liebmann, 256

  Life, 9 f., 16, 21

  Lillie, R. S., 236

  Limits of regulability, 212

  Lithium, 99

  “Living,” 9, 16

  Localisation, 101, 103, 118 ff.

  Locke, 6

  Loeb, J., 32, 102, 164, 179, 196, 236

  Loeb, L., 208

  Lyon, 87


  MacDougal, 238 f., 276

  Machine (definition), 139

  Machine-theory of life, 138 ff., 187, 210

  Maillard, 196

  Manifoldness, 25 f., 30, 45
    intensive, 144

  Materialism, 283

  Materials, transport of, 194

  Matter, theory of, 8

  Maturation, 31, 87

  Mayenburg, v., 195

  Means, of morphogenesis, 89 ff., 101, 113, 118, 228, 234

  Memory, 216 f.

  Mendel, 229 f.

  Merrifield, 198

  Mesenchyme, 39, 41, 104, 111, 151 f.

  Metabolic regulations, 198 f.

  Metabolism, 16, 184
    of fungi, 201

  Metschnikoff, 206

  Micromeres, 36, 60

  Miehe, 116

  Mill, J. S., 57

  *Mimosa*, 191

  Minkiewicz, 198

  Modification, 277

  Molluscs, 70 f., 86

  Morgan, T. H., 32, 66 f., 95, 107, 114 f., 162, 230

  Morphaesthesia, 157

  Morphogenesis, 20, 52, 76, 112, 118 f.

  Morphology, 12

  Movements, organic, 17

  Mutations, 237 f., 276, 291


  Nägeli, 266, 292

  Nathansohn, 196

  Natural selection, 261 f., 290

  Nature, 5 ff.

  Němec, 116

  Newport, 57

  Newt (regeneration of), 155, 221 f.

  Noll, 146, 157 f.

  Nomothetic, 14 f.

  Normal, 78

  Nuclear division, 28 f., 62, 64 f., 72, 235

  Nucleus, 28, 35
    rôle of nucleus in inheritance, 233 f.


  Organ-forming substances, 117

  *Oscillariae*, 197

  Osmotic pressure, 93, 187, 194 f.

  Overton, 196 f.

  Oxidation, rôle of, 198 f.


  Palaeontology, 252

  Parallelism (psycho-physical), 146

  Parthenogenesis, 32

  Pauly, 146, 217, 273 f.

  Pawlow, 204, 210, 212

  Pearl, R., 212

  Pfeffer, 195, 201

  Phagocytosis, 206

  Phenomenon, 5 f.

  Philosophy, natural, 4
    of nature, 4, 7, 9
    of the organism, 9, 15

  Phylogeny, 255, 291, 297, 304 ff.

  Physiology, 12
    of development (morphogenesis), 20

  *Planaria*, 130, 155, 162 f., 200

  Plants, 48 f.

  Plato, 2

  Pluteus, 42

  Poisons, 205 ff.

  Pole, 36

  Polarity, 106

  Potencies, complex, 112, 120
    explicit, 84
    implicit, 84
    primary, 84, 111
    prospective, 77 ff., 83, 89, 118, 125, 241
    secondary, 84, 110

  Poulton, 198

  Precipitin, 207 f.

  Pressure experiments, 63, 141

  Primary potency, 84, 111
    purposefulness, 146, 287
    regulation, 85, 174, 188

  Progress, 305

  Pronuclei, 55

  Prospective potency, 77 ff., 83, 89, 118, 125, 241
    value, 77 f., 80, 122

  Protista (Protozoa), 27, 130, 236

  Protoplasm, 28, 30
    morphogenetic rôle of, 67

  Przibram, 112, 248


  Rádl, 247

  Rauber, 235

  Reaction, answering, 181

  Reciprocity of harmony, 156 f.

  Re-differentiation, 75, 111, 163

  Regeneration, 55, 74, 105, 111, 221
    super-, 115 f.

  Regulation, 68, 73, 85, 111, 165
    defined, 166
    metabolic, 198 f.
    secondary, 85, 165, 188

  Reinke, 146

  Restitution, 21, 74, 110, 112 ff.
    defined, 166
    and Darwinism, 267
    and Lamarckism, 286
    of second order, 158

  Retina, 191

  Retro-differentiation, 163 f.

  Rhumbler, 93

  Ribbert, 114

  Rickert, 315 ff.

  Roux, 26, 48, 55 ff., 66 f., 76, 89, 92 f., 108, 161, 176 f., 241

  Rubner, 193


  Sachs, 117

  Sadebeck, 279

  *Salamandra*, 175, 281

  Schneider, 146

  Schultz, E., 200

  Schultze, O., 67

  Schwendener, 177

  Science, 14, 297
    natural, 1 ff.
    rational, 12

  Sea-urchin, *see* Echinus

  Secondary potency, 84, 110
    regulation, 85, 165, 188

  Secretion, internal, 116, 200

  Segmentation, 35

  Selective qualities (of tissues), 186

  Self-differentiation, 108

  Semon, 216 f.

  Sex, 107

  Single, the, 315 ff.

  Skeleton, 40 ff., 44, 47, 92

  Spemann, 105

  Spermatozoon (spermia), 32 ff.

  Splitting (of hybrids), 229 f.

  Stahl, 197

  Standfuss, 278

  Starfish, 44, 81, 122

  Starling, E., 116, 204, 212

  *Stentor*, 131

  Stimuli, directive, 102 ff.
    formative, 102 ff., 113, 118, 133
    of restitutions, 113 f.

  Structure of protoplasm, 66, 69, 72 f. 85, 88

  Substance, living, 17

  Sumner, 196

  Super-regeneration, 115 f.

  Surface-tension, 91

  Sutton, 230

  Symmetry, 39, 68, 70, 72, 89, 98

  System, combined types of, 153 ff.
    complex, 219 f.
    complex-harmonious, 155
    equipotential, 120
    harmonious-equipotential, 121 ff., 151 f.
    mixed-equipotential, 154
    morphogenetic, 119 f., 163, 241

  Systematics, 14 ff., 21, 243 f., 253, 264, 293, 296


  Taine, 308, 310

  Theology, natural, 1 ff.

  Thomson, J. A., 16

  Thymus, 204

  Thyroid, 204

  Tissue, 38

  Toxins, 207 f.

  Transformism, 251

  Truth, 7

  Tschermak, 228

  *Tubularia*, 126 ff., 133, 158 ff.

  Type, 48, 247 f., 282, 291


  “Understanding” (historically), 302

  Universality, postulate of, 148 f.

  Universe, 5

  Univocality, principle of, 161


  “Values,” 317 ff.
    prospective, 77 f., 80, 122

  Variation, 218, 237 f., 276

  Variation, fluctuating, contingent, 264 f., 273 f., 282, 290

  Vernon, 232, 238

  Vitalism, 143, 145 f., 210 f., 224 f., 234, 240 f., 272, 277

  Vöchting, 174, 179 f., 182, 221

  Volition, acts of, 274

  Vries, de, 228, 238 f.


  Wallace, 292

  Ward, J., 8, 143

  Weber, law of, 191

  Weinland, 202

  Weismann, 33, 52 ff., 58 f., 72, 74 f., 103,
    111, 138, 214 f., 237, 277 f.

  Weldon, 238

  Whole, the, 28, 80, 117
    -embryo, 61, 67 f.

  Wigand, 255, 266, 292

  Wilson, E. B., 27, 65, 70 f., 86 f., 107

  Windelband, 13 f.

  Winkler, 116, 221

  Winterstein, 199

  Wolff, C. F., 26

  Wolff, G., 105, 146, 255, 266, 287 f.

  Wolff, J., 177


  Yung, 177


  Zeleny, 112, 115, 212

  Zur Strassen, 93


                                THE END

           *Printed by* R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, *Edinburgh*.




                         HEREDITY AND SELECTION
                              IN SOCIOLOGY


                                   BY

                           G. CHATTERTON HILL

                      Demy 8vo, Cloth, 600 pages.

                         Price =12s. 6d.= net.

                     *Post Free, Price* =12s. 11d.=

                          SOME PRESS OPINIONS

“A most praiseworthy and suggestive work--should certainly be studied by
every serious thinker.”--*Morning Post.*

“Mr. Hill is decidedly doctrinaire, but his book is packed with
scientific and sociological facts, and it gives the reader healthy
intellectual exercise.”--*Christian World.*

“Shows wide reading, is written in a forcible and clear style, and
contains much that is interesting, fresh, and acute.”--*Aberdeen Free
Press.*

“It is a book of equal calibre with Mr. Kidd’s and goes even deeper
than that remarkable production into the springs of life and
conduct.”--*Methodist Recorder.*

“This most suggestive and valuable work, which contains abundant
sociological data.”--*Aberdeen Journal.*

“Mr. George Chatterton Hill has written a volume of surpassing interest
not alone to scientific but to theological students.”--*Catholic Times.*

Published by A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W.




                            RUDOLF EUCKEN’S
                           PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE

                                   BY

                           W. R. BOYCE GIBSON

           LECTURER IN PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON

                             SECOND EDITION

     Crown 8vo, Cloth, with Frontispiece Portrait of Rudolf Eucken.

                          Price =3s. 6d.= net.

                     *Post Free, Price* =3s. 10d.=

                          SOME PRESS OPINIONS

“Mr. Gibson has given us in small compass a lucid exposition of the
philosophical system of Eucken, who is Professor of Philosophy in
Jena.... This is a most suggestive and stimulating book. In a very
real sense it has brought philosophy down to earth and is deserving of
serious study.”--*Aberdeen Free Press.*

“To it the interested reader will turn with expectation, and his
expectation is likely to be more than realised. For Dr. Boyce Gibson
is himself a scholar, as well as an enthusiastic lover of this great
scholar.”--*Expository Times.*

“No reader should fail to find pleasure in a book so full of fresh and
stimulating thought, expressed with great felicity of language.”--*The
Scottish Review.*

“It is done with just the proper combination of sympathy and
criticism.”--*British Weekly.*

“This little book on Eucken’s Philosophy is of quite exceptional
interest and importance.”--*The Inquirer.*

“Professor Boyce Gibson ... has performed a real service in promoting
the acquaintance of English, and American students with a thinker whose
distinctive views give him a special claim to their attention....
Professor Gibson has achieved a notable success, writing briefly,
lucidly, and sympathetically.”--*The New Age.*


Published by A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Science and Philosophy of the
Organism, by Hans Driesch

