CHAPTER VII.

OF CLASSIFICATION, AS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


§ 1. There is, as has been frequently remarked in this work, a
classification of things, which is inseparable from the fact of giving
them general names. Every name which connotes an attribute, divides, by
that very fact, all things whatever into two classes, those which have
the attribute and those which have it not; those of which the name can
be predicated, and those of which it cannot. And the division thus made
is not merely a division of such things as actually exist, or are known
to exist, but of all such as may hereafter be discovered, and even of
all which can be imagined.

On this kind of Classification we have nothing to add to what has
previously been said. The Classification which requires to be discussed
as a separate act of the mind, is altogether different. In the one, the
arrangement of objects in groups, and distribution of them into
compartments, is a mere incidental effect consequent on the use of names
given for another purpose, namely that of simply expressing some of
their qualities. In the other the arrangement and distribution are the
main object, and the naming is secondary to, and purposely conforms
itself to, instead of governing, that more important operation.

Classification, thus regarded, is a contrivance for the best possible
ordering of the ideas of objects in our minds; for causing the ideas to
accompany or succeed one another in such a way as shall give us the
greatest command over our knowledge already acquired, and lead most
directly to the acquisition of more. The general problem of
Classification, in reference to these purposes, may be stated as
follows: To provide that things shall be thought of in such groups, and
those groups in such an order, as will best conduce to the remembrance
and to the ascertainment of their laws.

Classification thus considered, differs from classification in the wider
sense, in having reference to real objects exclusively, and not to all
that are imaginable: its object being the due co-ordination in our minds
of those things only, with the properties of which we have actually
occasion to make ourselves acquainted. But, on the other hand, it
embraces _all_ really existing objects. We cannot constitute any one
class properly, except in reference to a general division of the whole
of nature; we cannot determine the group in which any one object can
most conveniently be placed, without taking into consideration all the
varieties of existing objects, all at least which have any degree of
affinity with it. No one family of plants or animals could have been
rationally constituted, except as part of a systematic arrangement of
all plants or animals; nor could such a general arrangement have been
properly made, without first determining the exact place of plants and
animals in a general division of nature.


§ 2. There is no property of objects which may not be taken, if we
please, as the foundation for a classification or mental grouping of
those objects; and in our first attempts we are likely to select for
that purpose properties which are simple, easily conceived, and
perceptible on a first view, without any previous process of thought.
Thus Tournefort's arrangement of plants was founded on the shape and
divisions of the corolla; and that which is commonly called the Linnæan
(though Linnæus also suggested another and more scientific arrangement)
was grounded chiefly on the number of the stamens and pistils.

But these classifications, which are at first recommended by the
facility they afford of ascertaining to what class any individual
belongs, are seldom much adapted to the ends of that Classification
which is the subject of our present remarks. The Linnæan arrangement
answers the purpose of making us think together of all those kinds of
plants which possess the same number of stamens and pistils; but to
think of them in that manner is of little use, since we seldom have
anything to affirm in common of the plants which have a given number of
stamens and pistils. If plants of the class Pentandria, order Monogynia,
agreed in any other properties, the habit of thinking and speaking of
the plants under a common designation would conduce to our remembering
those common properties so far as they were ascertained, and would
dispose us to be on the look-out for such of them as were not yet known.
But since this is not the case, the only purpose of thought which the
Linnæan classification serves is that of causing us to remember, better
than we should otherwise have done, the exact number of stamens and
pistils of every species of plants. Now, as this property is of little
importance or interest, the remembering it with any particular accuracy
is of no moment. And, inasmuch as, by habitually thinking of plants in
those groups, we are prevented from habitually thinking of them in
groups which have a greater number of properties in common, the effect
of such a classification, when systematically adhered to, upon our
habits of thought, must be regarded as mischievous.

The ends of scientific classification are best answered, when the
objects are formed into groups respecting which a greater number of
general propositions can be made, and those propositions more important,
than could be made respecting any other groups into which the same
things could be distributed. The properties, therefore, according to
which objects are classified, should, if possible, be those which are
causes of many other properties: or at any rate, which are sure marks of
them. Causes are preferable, both as being the surest and most direct of
marks, and as being themselves the properties on which it is of most use
that our attention should be strongly fixed. But the property which is
the cause of the chief peculiarities of a class, is unfortunately seldom
fitted to serve also as the diagnostic of the class. Instead of the
cause, we must generally select some of its more prominent effects,
which may serve as marks of the other effects and of the cause.

A classification thus formed is properly scientific or philosophical,
and is commonly called a Natural, in contradistinction to a Technical
or Artificial, classification or arrangement. The phrase Natural
Classification seems most peculiarly appropriate to such arrangements as
correspond, in the groups which they form, to the spontaneous tendencies
of the mind, by placing together the objects most similar in their
general aspect: in opposition to those technical systems which,
arranging things according to their agreement in some circumstance
arbitrarily selected, often throw into the same group objects which in
the general aggregate of their properties present no resemblance, and
into different and remote groups, others which have the closest
similarity. It is one of the most valid recommendations of any
classification to the character of a scientific one, that it shall be a
natural classification in this sense also; for the test of its
scientific character is the number and importance of the properties
which can be asserted in common of all objects included in a group; and
properties on which the general aspect of the things depends, are, if
only on that ground, important, as well as, in most cases, numerous.
But, though a strong recommendation, this circumstance is not a _sine
quâ non_; since the most obvious properties of things may be of trifling
importance compared with others that are not obvious. I have seen it
mentioned as a great absurdity in the Linnæan classification, that it
places (which by the way it does not) the violet by the side of the oak:
it certainly dissevers natural affinities, and brings together things
quite as unlike as the oak and the violet are. But the difference,
apparently so wide, which renders the juxtaposition of those two
vegetables so suitable an illustration of a bad arrangement, depends, to
the common eye, mainly on mere size and texture; now if we made it our
study to adopt the classification which would involve the least peril of
similar _rapprochements_, we should return to the obsolete division into
trees, shrubs, and herbs, which though of primary importance with regard
to more general aspect, yet (compared even with so petty and unobvious a
distinction as that into dicotyledons and monocotyledons) answers to so
few differences in the other properties of plants, that a classification
founded on it (independently of the indistinctness of the lines of
demarcation) would be as completely artificial and technical as the
Linnæan.

Our natural groups, therefore, must often be founded not on the obvious,
but on the unobvious properties of things, when these are of greater
importance. But in such cases it is essential that there should be some
other property or set of properties, more readily recognisable by the
observer, which coexist with, and may be received as marks of, the
properties which are the real groundwork of the classification. A
natural arrangement, for example, of animals, must be founded in the
main on their internal structure, but (as has been justly remarked) it
would be absurd that we should not be able to determine the genus and
species of an animal without first killing it. On this ground, the
preference, among zoological classifications, is probably due to that of
M. de Blainville, founded on the differences in the external
integuments; differences which correspond, much more accurately than
might be supposed, to the really important varieties, both in the other
parts of the structure, and in the habits and history of the animals.

This shows, more strongly than ever, how extensive a knowledge of the
properties of objects is necessary for making a good classification of
them. And as it is one of the uses of such a classification that by
drawing attention to the properties on which it is founded, and which if
the classification be good are marks of many others, it facilitates the
discovery of those others; we see in what manner our knowledge of
things, and our classification of them, tend mutually and indefinitely
to the improvement of each other.

We said just now that the classification of objects should follow those
of their properties which indicate not only the most numerous, but also
the most important peculiarities. What is here meant by importance? It
has reference to the particular end in view; and the same objects,
therefore, may admit with propriety of several different
classifications. Each science or art forms its classification of things
according to the properties which fall within its special cognizance, or
of which it must take account in order to accomplish its peculiar
practical end. A farmer does not divide plants, like a botanist, into
dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous, but into useful plants and weeds. A
geologist divides fossils, not like a zoologist, into families
corresponding to those of living species, but into fossils of the
secondary and of the tertiary periods, above the coal and below the
coal, &c. Whales are or are not fish, according to the purpose for which
we are considering them. "If we are speaking of the internal structure
and physiology of the animal, we must not call them fish; for in these
respects they deviate widely from fishes: they have warm blood, and
produce and suckle their young as land quadrupeds do. But this would not
prevent our speaking of the _whale fishery_, and calling such animals
_fish_ on all occasions connected with this employment; for the
relations thus rising depend upon the animal's living in the water, and
being caught in a manner similar to other fishes. A plea that human laws
which mention fish do not apply to whales, would be rejected at once by
an intelligent judge."[19]

These different classifications are all good, for the purposes of their
own particular departments of knowledge or practice. But when we are
studying objects not for any special practical end, but for the sake of
extending our knowledge of the whole of their properties and relations,
we must consider as the most important attributes, those which
contribute most, either by themselves or by their effects, to render the
things like one another, and unlike other things; which give to the
class composed of them the most marked individuality; which fill, as it
were, the largest space in their existence, and would most impress the
attention of a spectator who knew all their properties but was not
specially interested in any. Classes formed on this principle may be
called, in a more emphatic manner than any others, natural groups.


§ 3. On the subject of these groups Dr. Whewell lays down a theory,
grounded on an important truth, which he has, in some respects,
expressed and illustrated very felicitously; but also, as it appears to
me, with some admixture of error. It will be advantageous, for both
these reasons, to extract the statement of his doctrine in the very
words he has used.

"Natural groups," according to this theory,[20] are "given by Type, not
by Definition." And this consideration accounts for that "indefiniteness
and indecision which we frequently find in the descriptions of such
groups, and which must appear so strange and inconsistent to any one who
does not suppose these descriptions to assume any deeper ground of
connexion than an arbitrary choice of the botanist. Thus in the family
of the rose-tree, we are told that the _ovules_ are _very rarely_ erect,
the _stigmata usually_ simple. Of what use, it might be asked, can such
loose accounts be? To which the answer is, that they are not inserted in
order to distinguish the species, but in order to describe the family,
and the total relations of the ovules and the stigmata of the family are
better known by this general statement. A similar observation may be
made with regard to the Anomalies of each group, which occur so
commonly, that Mr. Lindley, in his _Introduction to the Natural System
of Botany_, makes the 'Anomalies' an article in each family. Thus, part
of the character of the Rosaceæ is, that they have alternate _stipulate_
leaves, and that the _albumen_ is _obliterated_; but yet in _Lowea_, one
of the genera of this family, the stipulæ are _absent_; and the albumen
is _present_ in another, _Neillia_. This implies, as we have already
seen, that the artificial character (or _diagnosis_, as Mr. Lindley
calls it,) is imperfect. It is, though very nearly, yet not exactly,
commensurate with the natural group: and hence in certain cases this
character is made to yield to the general weight of natural affinities.

"These views,--of classes determined by characters which cannot be
expressed in words,--of propositions which state, not what happens in
all cases, but only usually,--of particulars which are included in a
class, though they transgress the definition of it, may probably
surprise the reader. They are so contrary to many of the received
opinions respecting the use of definitions, and the nature of scientific
propositions, that they will probably appear to many persons highly
illogical and unphilosophical. But a disposition to such a judgment
arises in a great measure from this, that the mathematical and
mathematico-physical sciences have, in a great degree, determined men's
views of the general nature and form of scientific truth; while Natural
History has not yet had time or opportunity to exert its due influence
upon the current habits of philosophizing. The apparent indefiniteness
and inconsistency of the classifications and definitions of Natural
History belongs, in a far higher degree, to all other except
mathematical speculations; and the modes in which approximations to
exact distinctions and general truths have been made in Natural History,
may be worthy our attention, even for the light they throw upon the best
modes of pursuing truth of all kinds.

"Though in a Natural group of objects a definition can no longer be of
any use as a regulative principle, classes are not therefore left quite
loose, without any certain standard or guide. The class is steadily
fixed, though not precisely limited; it is given, though not
circumscribed; it is determined, not by a boundary line without, but by
a central point within; not by what it strictly excludes, but by what it
eminently includes; by an example, not by a precept; in short, instead
of a Definition we have a Type for our director.

"A Type is an example of any class, for instance a species of a genus,
which is considered as eminently possessing the character of the class.
All the species which have a greater affinity with this type-species
than with any others, form the genus, and are arranged about it,
deviating from it in various directions and different degrees. Thus a
genus may consist of several species which approach very near the type,
and of which the claim to a place with it is obvious; while there may be
other species which straggle further from this central knot, and which
yet are clearly more connected with it than with any other. And even if
there should be some species of which the place is dubious, and which
appear to be equally bound to two generic types, it is easily seen that
this would not destroy the reality of the generic groups, any more than
the scattered trees of the intervening plain prevent our speaking
intelligibly of the distinct forests of two separate hills.

"The type-species of every genus, the type-genus of every family, is,
then, one which possesses all the characters and properties of the genus
in a marked and prominent manner. The type of the Rose family has
alternate stipulate leaves, wants the albumen, has the ovules not erect,
has the stigmata simple, and besides these features, which distinguish
it from the exceptions or varieties of its class, it has the features
which make it prominent in its class. It is one of those which possess
clearly several leading attributes; and thus, though we cannot say of
any one genus that it _must_ be the type of the family, or of any one
species that it _must_ be the type of the genus, we are still not wholly
to seek; the type must be connected by many affinities with most of the
others of its group; it must be near the centre of the crowd, and not
one of the stragglers."

In this passage (the latter part of which especially I cannot help
noticing as an admirable example of philosophic style) Dr. Whewell has
stated very clearly and forcibly, but (I think) without making all
necessary distinctions, one of the principles of a Natural
Classification. What this principle is, what are its limits, and in what
manner he seems to me to have overstepped them, will appear when we have
laid down another rule of Natural Arrangement, which appears to me still
more fundamental.


§ 4. The reader is by this time familiar with the general truth (which I
restate so often on account of the great confusion in which it is
commonly involved), that there are in nature distinctions of Kind;
distinctions not consisting in a given number of definite properties,
_plus_ the effects which follow from those properties, but running
through the whole nature, through the attributes generally, of the
things so distinguished. Our knowledge of the properties of a Kind is
never complete. We are always discovering, and expecting to discover,
new ones. Where the distinction between two classes of things is not one
of Kind, we expect to find their properties alike, except where there is
some reason for their being different. On the contrary, when the
distinction is in Kind, we expect to find the properties different
unless there be some cause for their being the same. All knowledge of a
Kind must be obtained by observation and experiment upon the Kind
itself; no inference respecting its properties from the properties of
things not connected with it by Kind, goes for more than the sort of
presumption usually characterized as an analogy, and generally in one of
its fainter degrees.

Since the common properties of a true Kind, and consequently the general
assertions which can be made respecting it, or which are certain to be
made hereafter as our knowledge extends, are indefinite and
inexhaustible; and since the very first principle of natural
classification is that of forming the classes so that the objects
composing each may have the greatest number of properties in common;
this principle prescribes that every such classification shall recognise
and adopt into itself all distinctions of Kind, which exist among the
objects it professes to classify. To pass over any distinctions of Kind,
and substitute definite distinctions, which, however considerable they
may be, do not point to ulterior unknown differences, would be to
replace classes with more by classes with fewer attributes in common;
and would be subversive of the Natural Method of Classification.

Accordingly all natural arrangements, whether the reality of the
distinction of Kinds was felt or not by their framers, have been led, by
the mere pursuit of their own proper end, to conform themselves to the
distinctions of Kind, so far as these had been ascertained at the time.
The Species of Plants are not only real Kinds, but are probably,[21]
all of them, real lowest Kinds, Infimæ Species; which if we were to
subdivide, as of course it is open to us to do, into subclasses, the
subdivision would necessarily be founded on _definite_ distinctions, not
pointing (apart from what may be known of their causes or effects) to
any difference beyond themselves.

In so far as a natural classification is grounded on real Kinds, its
groups are certainly not conventional; it is perfectly true that they do
not depend upon an arbitrary choice of the naturalist. But it does not
follow, nor, I conceive, is it true, that these classes are determined
by a type, and not by characters. To determine them by a type would be
as sure a way of missing the Kind, as if we were to select a set of
characters arbitrarily. They are determined by characters, but these are
not arbitrary. The problem is, to find a few definite characters which
point to the multitude of indefinite ones. Kinds are Classes between
which there is an impassable barrier; and what we have to seek is, marks
whereby we may determine on which side of the barrier an object takes
its place. The characters which will best do this should be chosen: if
they are also important in themselves, so much the better. When we have
selected the characters, we parcel out the objects according to those
characters, and not, I conceive, according to resemblance to a type. We
do not compose the species Ranunculus acris, of all plants which bear a
satisfactory degree of resemblance to a model-buttercup, but of those
which possess certain characters selected as marks by which we might
recognise the possibility of a common parentage; and the enumeration of
those characters is the definition of the species.

The question next arises, whether, as all Kinds must have a place among
the classes, so all the classes in a natural arrangement must be Kinds?
And to this I answer, certainly not. The distinctions of Kinds are not
numerous enough to make up the whole of a classification. Very few of
the genera of plants, or even of the families, can be pronounced with
certainty to be Kinds. The great distinctions of Vascular and Cellular,
Dicotyledonous or Exogenous and Monocotyledonous or Endogenous plants,
are perhaps differences of Kind; the lines of demarcation which divide
those classes seem (though even on this I would not pronounce
positively) to go through the whole nature of the plants. But the
different species of a genus, or genera of a family, usually have in
common only a limited number of characters. A Rose does not seem to
differ from a Rubus, or the Umbelliferæ from the Ranunculaceæ, in much
else than the characters botanically assigned to those genera or those
families. Unenumerated differences certainly do exist in some cases;
there are families of plants which have peculiarities of chemical
composition, or yield products having peculiar effects on the animal
economy. The Cruciferæ and Fungi contain an unusual proportion of
nitrogen; the Labiatæ are the chief sources of essential oils, the
Solaneæ are very commonly narcotic, &c. In these and similar cases there
are possibly distinctions of Kind; but it is by no means indispensable
that there should be. Genera and Families may be eminently natural,
though marked out from one another by properties limited in number;
provided those properties are important, and the objects contained in
each genus or family resemble each other more than they resemble
anything which is excluded from the genus or family.

After the recognition and definition, then, of the _infimæ species_, the
next step is to arrange those _infimæ species_ into larger groups:
making these groups correspond to Kinds wherever it is possible, but in
most cases without any such guidance. And in doing this it is true that
we are naturally and properly guided, in most cases at least, by
resemblance to a type. We form our groups round certain selected Kinds,
each of which serves as a sort of exemplar of its group. But though the
groups are suggested by types, I cannot think that a group when formed
is _determined_ by the type; that in deciding whether a species belongs
to the group, a reference is made to the type, and not to the
characters; that the characters "cannot be expressed in words." This
assertion is inconsistent with Dr. Whewell's own statement of the
fundamental principle of classification, namely, that "general
assertions shall be possible." If the class did not possess any
characters in common, what general assertions would be possible
respecting it? Except that they all resemble each other more than they
resemble anything else, nothing whatever could be predicated of the
class.

The truth is, on the contrary, that every genus or family is framed with
distinct reference to certain characters, and is composed, first and
principally, of species which agree in possessing all those characters.
To these are added, as a sort of appendix, such other species, generally
in small number, as possess _nearly_ all the properties selected;
wanting some of them one property, some another, and which, while they
agree with the rest _almost_ as much as these agree with one another, do
not resemble in an equal degree any other group. Our conception of the
class continues to be grounded on the characters; and the class might be
defined, those things which _either_ possess that set of characters,
_or_ resemble the things that do so, more than they resemble anything
else.

And this resemblance itself is not, like resemblance between simple
sensations, an ultimate fact, unsusceptible of analysis. Even the
inferior degree of resemblance is created by the possession of common
characters. Whatever resembles the genus Rose more than it resembles any
other genus, does so because it possesses a greater number of the
characters of that genus, than of the characters of any other genus. Nor
can there be any real difficulty in representing, by an enumeration of
characters, the nature and degree of the resemblance which is strictly
sufficient to include any object in the class. There are always some
properties common to all things which are included. Others there often
are, to which some things, which are nevertheless included, are
exceptions. But the objects which are exceptions to one character are
not exceptions to another: the resemblance which fails in some
particulars must be made up for in others. The class, therefore, is
constituted by the possession of _all_ the characters which are
universal, and _most_ of those which admit of exceptions. If a plant had
the ovules erect, the stigmata divided, possessed the albumen, and was
without stipules, it possibly would not be classed among the Rosaceæ.
But it may want any one, or more than one of those characters, and not
be excluded. The ends of a scientific classification are better answered
by including it. Since it agrees so nearly, in its known properties,
with the sum of the characters of the class, it is likely to resemble
that class more than any other in those of its properties which are
still undiscovered.

Not only, therefore, are natural groups, no less than any artificial
classes, determined by characters; they are constituted in contemplation
of, and by reason of, characters. But it is in contemplation not of
those characters only which are rigorously common to all the objects
included in the group, but of the entire body of characters, all of
which are found in most of those objects, and most of them in all. And
hence our conception of the class, the image in our minds which is
representative of it, is that of a specimen complete in all the
characters; most naturally a specimen which, by possessing them all in
the greatest degree in which they are ever found, is the best fitted to
exhibit clearly, and in a marked manner, what they are. It is by a
mental reference to this standard, not instead of, but in illustration
of, the definition of the class, that we usually and advantageously
determine whether any individual or species belongs to the class or not.
And this, as it seems to me, is the amount of truth contained in the
doctrine of Types.

We shall see presently that where the classification is made for the
express purpose of a special inductive inquiry, it is not optional, but
necessary for fulfilling the conditions of a correct Inductive Method,
that we should establish a type-species or genus, namely, the one which
exhibits in the most eminent degree the particular phenomenon under
investigation. But of this hereafter. It remains, for completing the
theory of natural groups, that a few words should be said on the
principles of the nomenclature adapted to them.


§ 5. A Nomenclature in science, is, as we have said, a system of the
names of Kinds. These names, like other class-names, are defined by the
enumeration of the characters distinctive of the class. The only merit
which a set of names can have beyond this, is to convey, by the mode of
their construction, as much information as possible: so that a person
who knows the thing, may receive all the assistance which the name can
give in remembering what he knows, while he who knows it not, may
receive as much knowledge respecting it as the case admits of, by merely
being told its name.

There are two modes of giving to the name of a Kind this sort of
significance. The best, but which unfortunately is seldom practicable,
is when the word can be made to indicate, by its formation, the very
properties which it is designed to connote. The name of a Kind does not,
of course, connote all the properties of the Kind, since these are
inexhaustible, but such of them as are sufficient to distinguish it;
such as are sure marks of all the rest. Now, it is very rarely that one
property, or even any two or three properties, can answer this purpose.
To distinguish the common daisy from all other species of plants would
require the specification of many characters. And a name cannot, without
being too cumbrous for use, give indication, by its etymology or mode of
construction, of more than a very small number of these. The
possibility, therefore, of an ideally perfect Nomenclature, is probably
confined to the one case in which we are happily in possession of
something nearly approaching to it; the Nomenclature of elementary
Chemistry. The substances, whether simple or compound, with which
chemistry is conversant, are Kinds, and, as such, the properties which
distinguish each of them from the rest are innumerable; but in the case
of compound substances (the simple ones are not numerous enough to
require a systematic nomenclature), there is one property, the chemical
composition, which is of itself sufficient to distinguish the Kind; and
is (with certain reservations not yet thoroughly understood) a sure mark
of all the other properties of the compound. All that was needful,
therefore, was to make the name of every compound express, on the first
hearing, its chemical composition; that is, to form the name of the
compound, in some uniform manner, from the names of the simple
substances which enter into it as elements. This was done, most
skilfully and successfully, by the French chemists. The only thing left
unexpressed by them was the exact proportion in which the elements were
combined; and even this, since the establishment of the atomic theory,
it has been found possible to express by a simple adaptation of their
phraseology.

But where the characters which must be taken into consideration in order
sufficiently to designate the Kind, are too numerous to be all signified
in the derivation of the name, and where no one of them is of such
preponderant importance as to justify its being singled out to be so
indicated, we may avail ourselves of a subsidiary resource. Though we
cannot indicate the distinctive properties of the Kind, we may indicate
its nearest natural affinities, by incorporating into its name the name
of the proximate natural group of which it is one of the species. On
this principle is founded the admirable binary nomenclature of botany
and zoology. In this nomenclature the name of every species consists of
the name of the genus, or natural group next above it, with a word added
to distinguish the particular species. The last portion of the compound
name is sometimes taken from some _one_ of the peculiarities in which
that species differs from others of the genus; as Clematis
_integrifolia_, Potentilla _alba_, Viola _palustris_, Artemisia
_vulgaris_; sometimes from a circumstance of an historical nature, as
Narcissus _poeticus_, Potentilla _tormentilla_ (indicating that the
plant was formerly known by the latter name), Exacum _Candollii_ (from
the fact that De Candolle was its first discoverer); and sometimes the
word is purely conventional, as Thlaspi _bursa-pastoris_, Ranunculus
_thora_; it is of little consequence which; since the second, or as it
is usually called, the specific name, could at most express,
independently of convention, no more than a very small portion of the
connotation of the term. But by adding to this the name of the superior
genus, we may make the best amends we can for the impossibility of so
contriving the name as to express all the distinctive characters of the
Kind. We make it, at all events, express as many of those characters as
are common to the proximate natural group in which the Kind is included.
If even those common characters are so numerous or so little familiar as
to require a further extension of the same resource, we might, instead
of a binary, adopt a ternary nomenclature, employing not only the name
of the genus, but that of the next natural group in order of generality
above the genus, commonly called the Family. This was done in the
mineralogical nomenclature proposed by Professor Mohs. "The names framed
by him were not composed of two, but of three elements, designating
respectively the Species, the Genus, and the Order; thus he has such
species as _Rhombohedral Lime Haloide_, _Octohedral Fluor Haloide_,
_Prismatic Hal Baryte_."[22] The binary construction, however, has been
found sufficient in botany and zoology, the only sciences in which this
general principle has hitherto been successfully adopted in the
construction of a nomenclature.

Besides the advantage which this principle of nomenclature possesses, in
giving to the names of species the greatest quantity of independent
significance which the circumstances of the case admit of, it answers
the further end of immensely economizing the use of names, and
preventing an otherwise intolerable burden on the memory. When the names
of species become extremely numerous, some artifice (as Dr. Whewell[23]
observes) becomes absolutely necessary to make it possible to recollect
or apply them. "The known species of plants, for example, were ten
thousand in the time of Linnæus, and are now probably sixty thousand. It
would be useless to endeavour to frame and employ separate names for
each of these species. The division of the objects into a subordinated
system of classification enables us to introduce a Nomenclature which
does not require this enormous number of names. Each of the genera has
its name, and the species are marked by the addition of some epithet to
the name of the genus. In this manner about seventeen hundred generic
names, with a moderate number of specific names, were found by Linnæus
sufficient to designate with precision all the species of vegetables
known at his time." And though the number of generic names has since
greatly increased, it has not increased in anything like the proportion
of the multiplication of known species.




