CHAPTER IV.

FALLACIES OF OBSERVATION.


§ 1. From the fallacies which are properly Prejudices, or presumptions
antecedent to, and superseding, proof, we pass to those which lie in the
incorrect performance of the proving process. And as Proof, in its
widest extent, embraces one or more, or all, of three processes,
Observation, Generalization, and Deduction; we shall consider in their
order the errors capable of being committed in these three operations.
And first, of the first mentioned.

A fallacy of misobservation may be either negative or positive; either
Non-observation or Mal-observation. It is non-observation, when all the
error consists in overlooking, or neglecting, facts or particulars which
ought to have been observed. It is mal-observation, when something is
not simply unseen, but seen wrong; when the fact or phenomenon, instead
of being recognised for what it is in reality, is mistaken for something
else.


§ 2. Non-observation may either take place by overlooking instances, or
by overlooking some of the circumstances of a given instance. If we were
to conclude that a fortune-teller was a true prophet, from not adverting
to the cases in which his predictions had been falsified by the event,
this would be non-observation of instances; but if we overlooked or
remained ignorant of the fact that in cases where the predictions had
been fulfilled, he had been in collusion with some one who had given him
the information on which they were grounded, this would be
non-observation of circumstances.

The former case, in so far as the act of induction from insufficient
evidence is concerned, does not fall under this second class of
Fallacies, but under the third, Fallacies of Generalization. In every
such case, however, there are two defects or errors instead of one:
there is the error of treating the insufficient evidence as if it were
sufficient, which is a Fallacy of the third class; and there is the
insufficiency itself; the not having better evidence; which, when such
evidence, or in other words, when other instances, were to be had, is
Non-observation: and the erroneous inference, so far as it is to be
attributed to this cause, is a Fallacy of the second class.

It belongs not to our purpose to treat of non-observation as arising
from casual inattention, from general slovenliness of mental habits,
want of due practice in the use of the observing faculties, or
insufficient interest in the subject. The question pertinent to logic
is--Granting the want of complete competency in the observer, on what
points is that insufficiency on his part likely to lead him wrong? or
rather, what sorts of instances, or of circumstances in any given
instance, are most likely to escape the notice of observers generally;
of mankind at large.


§ 3. First, then, it is evident that when the instances on one side of a
question are more likely to be remembered and recorded than those on the
other; especially if there be any strong motive to preserve the memory
of the first, but not of the latter; these last are likely to be
overlooked, and escape the observation of the mass of mankind. This is
the recognised explanation of the credit given, in spite of reason and
evidence, to many classes of impostors: to quack doctors, and
fortune-tellers in all ages; to the "cunning man" of modern times and
the oracles of old. Few have considered the extent to which this fallacy
operates in practice, even in the teeth of the most palpable negative
evidence. A striking example of it is the faith which the uneducated
portion of the agricultural classes, in this and other countries,
continue to repose in the prophecies as to weather supplied by almanac
makers: though every season affords to them numerous cases of
completely erroneous prediction; but as every season also furnishes some
cases in which the prediction is fulfilled, this is enough to keep up
the credit of the prophet, with people who do not reflect on the number
of instances requisite for what we have called, in our inductive
terminology, the Elimination of Chance; since a certain number of casual
coincidences not only may but will happen, between any two unconnected
events.

Coleridge, in one of the essays in the _Friend_, has illustrated the
matter we are now considering, in discussing the origin of a proverb,
"which, differently worded, is to be found in all the languages of
Europe," viz. "Fortune favours fools." He ascribes it partly to the
"tendency to exaggerate all effects that seem disproportionate to their
visible cause, and all circumstances that are in any way strongly
contrasted with our notions of the persons under them." Omitting some
explanations which would refer the error to mal-observation, or to the
other species of non-observation (that of circumstances), I take up the
quotation farther on. "Unforeseen coincidences may have greatly helped a
man, yet if they have done for him only what possibly from his own
abilities he might have effected for himself, his good luck will excite
less attention, and the instances be less remembered. That clever men
should attain their objects seems natural, and we neglect the
circumstances that perhaps produced that success of themselves, without
the intervention of skill or foresight; but we dwell on the fact and
remember it, as something strange, when the same happens to a weak or
ignorant man. So too, though the latter should fail in his undertakings
from concurrences that might have happened to the wisest man, yet his
failure being no more than might have been expected and accounted for
from his folly, it lays no hold on our attention, but fleets away among
the other undistinguished waves in which the stream of ordinary life
murmurs by us, and is forgotten. Had it been as true as it was
notoriously false, that those all-embracing discoveries, which have shed
a dawn of _science_ on the _art_ of chemistry, and give no obscure
promise of some one great constitutive law, in the light of which dwell
dominion and the power of prophecy; if these discoveries, instead of
having been, as they really were, preconcerted by meditation, and
evolved out of his own intellect, had occurred by a set of lucky
_accidents_ to the illustrious father and founder of philosophic
alchemy; if they had presented themselves to Professor Davy exclusively
in consequence of his _luck_ in possessing a particular galvanic
battery; if this battery, as far as Davy was concerned, had itself been
an _accident_, and not (as in point of fact it was) desired and obtained
by him for the purpose of ensuring the testimony of experience to his
principles, and in order to bind down material nature under the
inquisition of reason, and force from her, as by torture, unequivocal
answers to _prepared_ and _preconceived_ questions,--yet still they
would not have been talked of or described as instances of _luck_, but
as the natural results of his admitted genius and known skill. But
should an accident have disclosed similar discoveries to a mechanic at
Birmingham or Sheffield, and if the man should grow rich in consequence,
and partly by the envy of his neighbours and partly with good reason, be
considered by them as a man _below par_ in the general powers of his
understanding; then, 'O what a lucky fellow! Well, Fortune _does_ favour
fools--that's for certain!--It is always so!' And forthwith the
exclaimer relates half a dozen similar instances. Thus accumulating the
one sort of facts and never collecting the other, we do, as poets in
their diction, and quacks of all denominations do in their reasoning,
put a part for the whole."

This passage very happily sets forth the manner in which, under the
loose mode of induction which proceeds _per enumerati onem simplicem_,
not seeking for instances of such a kind as to be decisive of the
question, but generalizing from any which occur, or rather which are
remembered, opinions grow up with the apparent sanction of experience,
which have no foundation in the laws of nature at all. "Itaque recte
respondit ille," (we may say with Bacon,[18]) "qui cum suspensa tabula
in templo ei monstraretur eorum, qui vota solverant, quod naufragii
periculo elapsi sint, atque interrogando premeretur, anne tum quidem
Deorum numen agnosceret, quæsivit denuo, _At ubi sunt illi depicti qui
post vota nuncupata perierunt?_ Eadem ratio est fere omnis
superstitionis, ut in Astrologicis, in Somniis, Ominibus, Nemesibus, et
hujusmodi; in quibus, homines delectati hujusmodi vanitatibus, advertunt
eventus, ubi implentur; ast ubi fallunt, licet multo frequentius, tamen
negligunt, et prætereunt." And he proceeds to say, that independently of
the love of the marvellous, or any other bias in the inclinations, there
is a natural tendency in the intellect itself to this kind of fallacy;
since the mind is more moved by affirmative instances, though negative
ones are of most use in philosophy; "Is tamen humano intellectui error
est proprius et perpetuus, ut magis moveatur et excitetur Affirmativis
quam Negativis; cum rite et ordine æquum se utrique præbere debeat; quin
contra, in omni Axiomate vero constituendo, major vis est instantiæ
negativæ."

But the greatest of all causes of non-observation is a preconceived
opinion. This it is which, in all ages, has made the whole race of
mankind, and every separate section of it, for the most part unobservant
of all facts, however abundant, even when passing under their own eyes,
which are contradictory to any first appearance, or any received tenet.
It is worth while to recal occasionally to the oblivious memory of
mankind some of the striking instances in which opinions that the
simplest experiment would have shown to be erroneous, continued to be
entertained because nobody ever thought of trying that experiment. One
of the most remarkable of these was exhibited in the Copernican
controversy. The opponents of Copernicus argued that the earth did not
move, because if it did, a stone let fall from the top of a high tower
would not reach the ground at the foot of the tower, but at a little
distance from it, in a contrary direction to the earth's course; in the
same manner (said they) as, if a ball is let drop from the mast-head
while the ship is in full sail, it does not fall exactly at the foot of
the mast, but nearer to the stern of the vessel. The Copernicans would
have silenced these objectors at once if they had _tried_ dropping a
ball from the mast-head, since they would have found that it does fall
exactly at the foot, as the theory requires: but no; they admitted the
spurious fact, and struggled vainly to make out a difference between the
two cases. "The ball was no _part_ of the ship--and the motion forward
was not _natural_, either to the ship or to the ball. The stone, on the
other hand, let fall from the top of the tower, was a _part_ of the
earth; and therefore, the diurnal and annular revolutions which were
_natural_ to the earth, were also _natural_ to the stone: the stone
would, therefore, retain the same motion with the tower, and strike the
ground precisely at the bottom of it."[19]

Other examples, scarcely less striking, are recorded by Dr. Whewell,[20]
where imaginary laws of nature have continued to be received as real,
merely because no person had steadily looked at facts which almost every
one had the opportunity of observing. "A vague and loose mode of looking
at facts very easily observable, left men for a long time under the
belief that a body ten times as heavy as another falls ten times as
fast; that objects immersed in water are always magnified, without
regard to the form of the surface; that the magnet exerts an
irresistible force; that crystal is always found associated with ice;
and the like. These and many others are examples how blind and careless
man can be even in observation of the plainest and commonest
appearances; and they show us that the mere faculties of perception,
although constantly exercised upon innumerable objects, may long fail in
leading to any exact knowledge."

If even on physical facts, and these of the most obvious character, the
observing faculties of mankind can be to this degree the passive slaves
of their preconceived impressions, we need not be surprised that this
should be so lamentably true as all experience attests it to be, on
things more nearly connected with their stronger feelings--on moral,
social, and religious subjects. The information which an ordinary
traveller brings back from a foreign country, as the result of the
evidence of his senses, is almost always such as exactly confirms the
opinions with which he set out. He has had eyes and ears for such things
only as he expected to see. Men read the sacred books of their religion,
and pass unobserved therein, multitudes of things utterly
irreconcileable with even their own notions of moral excellence. With
the same authorities before them, different historians, alike innocent
of intentional misrepresentation, see only what is favourable to
Protestants or Catholics, royalists or republicans, Charles I. or
Cromwell; while others, having set out with the preconception that
extremes must be in the wrong, are incapable of seeing truth and justice
when these are wholly on one side.

The influence of a preconceived theory is well exemplified in the
superstitions of barbarians respecting the virtues of medicaments and
charms. The negroes, among whom coral, as of old among ourselves, is
worn as an amulet, affirm, according to Dr. Paris,[21] that its colour
"is always affected by the state of health of the wearer, it becoming
paler in disease." On a matter open to universal observation, a general
proposition which has not the smallest vestige of truth is received as a
result of experience; the preconceived opinion preventing, it would
seem, any observation whatever on the subject.


§ 4. For illustration of the first species of non-observation, that of
Instances, what has now been stated may suffice. But there may also be
non-observation of some material circumstances, in instances which have
not been altogether overlooked--nay, which may be the very instances on
which the whole superstructure of a theory has been founded. As, in the
cases hitherto examined, a general proposition was too rashly adopted,
on the evidence of particulars, true indeed, but insufficient to support
it; so in the cases to which we now turn, the particulars themselves
have been imperfectly observed, and the singular propositions on which
the generalization is grounded, or some at least of those singular
propositions, are false.

Such, for instance, was one of the mistakes committed in the celebrated
phlogistic theory; a doctrine which accounted for combustion by the
extrication of a substance called phlogiston, supposed to be contained
in all combustible matter. The hypothesis accorded tolerably well with
superficial appearances: the ascent of flame naturally suggests the
escape of a substance; and the visible residuum of ashes, in bulk and
weight, generally falls extremely short of the combustible material. The
error was, non-observation of an important portion of the actual
residue, namely, the gaseous products of combustion. When these were at
last noticed and brought into account, it appeared to be an universal
law, that all substances gain instead of losing weight by undergoing
combustion; and, after the usual attempt to accommodate the old theory
to the new fact by means of an arbitrary hypothesis (that phlogiston had
the quality of positive levity instead of gravity), chemists were
conducted to the true explanation, namely, that instead of a substance
separated, there was on the contrary a substance absorbed.

Many of the absurd practices which have been deemed to possess medicinal
efficacy, have been indebted for their reputation to non-observance of
some accompanying circumstance which was the real agent in the cures
ascribed to them. Thus, of the sympathetic powder of Sir Kenelm Digby:
"Whenever any wound had been inflicted, this powder was applied to the
weapon that had inflicted it, which was, moreover, covered with
ointment, and dressed two or three times a day. The wound itself, in the
meantime, was directed to be brought together, and carefully bound up
with clean linen rags, but _above all, to be let alone_ for seven days,
at the end of which period the bandages were removed, when the wound was
generally found perfectly united. The triumph of the cure was decreed to
the mysterious agency of the sympathetic powder which had been so
assiduously applied to the weapon, whereas it is hardly necessary to
observe that the promptness of the cure depended on the total exclusion
of air from the wound, and upon the sanative operations of nature not
having received any disturbance from the officious interference of art.
The result, beyond all doubt, furnished the first hint which led
surgeons to the improved practice of healing wounds by what is
technically called the _first intention_."[22] "In all records," adds
Dr. Paris, "of extraordinary cures performed by mysterious agents, there
is a great desire to conceal the remedies and other curative means which
were simultaneously administered with them; thus Oribasius commends in
high terms a necklace of Pæony root for the cure of epilepsy; but we
learn that he always took care to accompany its use with copious
evacuations, although he assigns to them no share of credit in the cure.
In later times we have a good specimen of this species of deception,
presented to us in a work on Scrofula by Mr. Morley, written, as we are
informed, for the sole purpose of restoring the much injured character
and use of the Vervain; in which the author directs the root of this
plant to be tied with a yard of white satin riband around the neck,
where it is to remain until the patient is cured; but mark--during this
interval he calls to his aid the most active medicines in the materia
medica."[23]

In other cases the cures really produced by rest, regimen, and
amusement, have been ascribed to the medicinal, or occasionally to the
supernatural, means which were put in requisition. "The celebrated John
Wesley, while he commemorates the triumph of sulphur and supplication
over his bodily infirmity, forgets to appreciate the resuscitating
influence of four months' repose from his apostolic labours; and such is
the disposition of the human mind to place confidence in the operation
of mysterious agents, that we find him more disposed to attribute his
cure to a brown paper plaister of egg and brimstone, than to Dr.
Fothergill's salutary prescription of country air, rest, asses' milk,
and horse exercise."[24]

In the following example, the circumstance overlooked was of a somewhat
different character. "When the yellow fever raged in America, the
practitioners trusted exclusively to the copious use of mercury; at
first this plan was deemed so universally efficacious, that, in the
enthusiasm of the moment, it was triumphantly proclaimed that death
never took place after the mercury had evinced its effect upon the
system: all this was very true, but it furnished no proof of the
efficacy of that metal, since the disease in its aggravated form was so
rapid in its career, that it swept away its victims long before the
system could be brought under mercurial influence, while in its milder
shape it passed off equally well without any assistance from art."[25]

In these examples the circumstance overlooked was cognizable by the
senses. In other cases, it is one the knowledge of which could only be
arrived at by reasoning; but the fallacy may still be classed under the
head to which, for want of a more appropriate name, we have given the
appellation Fallacies of Non-observation. It is not the nature of the
faculties which ought to have been employed, but the non-employment of
them, which constitutes this Natural Order of Fallacies. Wherever the
error is negative, not positive; wherever it consists especially in
_overlooking_, in being ignorant or unmindful of some fact which, if
known and attended to, would have made a difference in the conclusion
arrived at; the error is properly placed in the Class which we are
considering. In this Class, there is not, as in all other fallacies
there is, a positive mis-estimate of evidence actually had. The
conclusion would be just, if the portion which is seen of the case were
the whole of it; but there is another portion overlooked, which vitiates
the result.

For instance, there is a remarkable doctrine which has occasionally
found a vent in the public speeches of unwise legislators, but which
only in one instance that I am aware of has received the sanction of a
philosophical writer, namely M. Cousin, who, in his preface to the
_Gorgias_ of Plato, contending that punishment must have some other and
higher justification than the prevention of crime, makes use of this
argument--that if punishment were only for the sake of example, it would
be indifferent whether we punished the innocent or the guilty, since the
punishment, considered as an example, is equally efficacious in either
case. Now we must, in order to go along with this reasoning, suppose,
that the person who feels himself under temptation, observing somebody
punished, concludes himself to be in danger of being punished likewise,
and is terrified accordingly. But it is forgotten that if the person
punished is supposed to be innocent, or even if there be any doubt of
his guilt, the spectator will reflect that his own danger, whatever it
may be, is not contingent on his guiltiness, but threatens him equally
if he remains innocent, and how therefore is he deterred from guilt by
the apprehension of such punishment? M. Cousin supposes that people will
be dissuaded from guilt by whatever renders the condition of the guilty
more perilous, forgetting that the condition of the innocent (also one
of the elements in the calculation) is, in the case supposed, made
perilous in precisely an equal degree. This is a fallacy of overlooking;
or of non-observation, within the intent of our classification.

Fallacies of this description are the great stumbling-block to correct
thinking in political economy. The economical workings of society afford
numerous cases in which the effects of a cause consist of two sets of
phenomena: the one immediate, concentrated, obvious to all eyes, and
passing, in common apprehension, for the whole effect; the other widely
diffused, or lying deeper under the surface, and which is exactly
contrary to the former. Take, for instance, the common notion so
plausible at the first glance, of the encouragement given to industry by
lavish expenditure. A, who spends his whole income, and even his
capital, in expensive living, is supposed to give great employment to
labour. B, who lives on a small portion, and invests the remainder in
the funds, is thought to give little or no employment. For everybody
sees the gains which are made by A's tradesmen, servants, and others,
while his money is spending. B's savings, on the contrary, pass into the
hands of the person whose stock he purchased, who with it pays a debt he
owed to some banker, who lends it again to some merchant or
manufacturer; and the capital being laid out in hiring spinners and
weavers, or carriers and the crews of merchant vessels, not only gives
immediate employment to at least as much industry as A employs during
the whole of his career, but coming back with increase by the sale of
the goods which have been manufactured or imported, forms a fund for the
employment of the same and perhaps a greater quantity of labour in
perpetuity. But the observer does not see, and therefore does not
consider, what becomes of B's money; he does see what is done with A's:
he observes the amount of industry which A's profusion feeds; he
observes not the far greater quantity which it prevents from being fed;
and thence the prejudice, universal to the time of Adam Smith, that
prodigality encourages industry, and parsimony is a discouragement to
it.

The common argument against free trade was a fallacy of the same nature.
The purchaser of British silk encourages British industry; the purchaser
of Lyons silk encourages only French; the former conduct is patriotic,
the latter ought to be interdicted by law. The circumstance is
overlooked, that the purchaser of any foreign commodity necessarily
causes, directly or indirectly, the export of an equivalent value of
some article of home production (beyond what would otherwise be
exported), either to the same foreign country or to some other; which
fact, though from the complication of the circumstances it cannot always
be verified by specific observation, no observation can possibly be
brought to contradict, while the evidence of reasoning on which it rests
is irrefragable. The fallacy is, therefore, the same as in the preceding
case, that of seeing a part only of the phenomena, and imagining that
part to be the whole: and may be ranked among Fallacies of
Non-observation.


§ 5. To complete the examination of the second of our five classes, we
have now to speak of Mal-observation; in which the error does not lie in
the fact that something is unseen, but that something seen is seen
wrong.

Perception being infallible evidence of whatever is really perceived,
the error now under consideration can be committed no otherwise than by
mistaking for conception what is in fact inference. We have formerly
shown how intimately the two are blended in almost everything which is
called observation, and still more in every Description.[26] What is
actually on any occasion perceived by our senses being so minute in
amount, and generally so unimportant a portion of the state of facts
which we wish to ascertain or to communicate; it would be absurd to say
that either in our observations, or in conveying their result to others,
we ought not to mingle inference with fact; all that can be said is,
that when we do so we ought to be aware of what we are doing, and to
know what part of the assertion rests on consciousness, and is therefore
indisputable, what part on inference, and is therefore questionable.

One of the most celebrated examples of an universal error produced by
mistaking an inference for the direct evidence of the senses, was the
resistance made, on the ground of common sense, to the Copernican
system. People fancied they _saw_ the sun rise and set, the stars
revolve in circles round the pole. We now know that they saw no such
thing; what they really saw was a set of appearances, equally
reconcileable with the theory they held and with a totally different
one. It seems strange that such an instance as this, of the testimony of
the senses pleaded with the most entire conviction in favour of
something which was a mere inference of the judgment, and, as it turned
out, a false inference, should not have opened the eyes of the bigots of
common sense, and inspired them with a more modest distrust of the
competency of mere ignorance to judge the conclusions of cultivated
thought.

In proportion to any person's deficiency of knowledge and mental
cultivation, is generally his inability to discriminate between his
inferences and the perceptions on which they were grounded. Many a
marvellous tale, many a scandalous anecdote, owes its origin to this
incapacity. The narrator relates, not what he saw or heard, but the
impression which he derived from what he saw or heard, and of which
perhaps the greater part consisted of inference, though the whole is
related not as inference but as matter-of-fact. The difficulty of
inducing witnesses to restrain within any moderate limits the
intermixture of their inferences with the narrative of their
perceptions, is well known to experienced cross-examiners; and still
more is this the case when ignorant persons attempt to describe any
natural phenomenon. "The simplest narrative," says Dugald Stewart,[27]
"of the most illiterate observer involves more or less of hypothesis;
nay, in general, it will be found that, in proportion to his ignorance,
the greater is the number of conjectural principles involved in his
statements. A village apothecary (and, if possible, in a still greater
degree, an experienced nurse) is seldom able to describe the plainest
case, without employing a phraseology of which every word is a theory:
whereas a simple and genuine specification of the phenomena which mark a
particular disease; a specification unsophisticated by fancy, or by
preconceived opinions, may be regarded as unequivocal evidence of a mind
trained by long and successful study to the most difficult of all arts,
that of the faithful _interpretation_ of nature."

The universality of the confusion between perceptions and the inferences
drawn from them, and the rarity of the power to discriminate the one
from the other, ceases to surprise us when we consider that in the far
greater number of instances the actual perceptions of our senses are of
no importance or interest to us except as marks from which we infer
something beyond them. It is not the colour and superficial extension
perceived by the eye that are important to us, but the object, of which
those visible appearances testify the presence; and where the sensation
itself is indifferent, as it generally is, we have no motive to attend
particularly to it, but acquire a habit of passing it over without
distinct consciousness, and going on at once to the inference. So that
to know what the sensation actually was, is a study in itself, to which
painters, for example, have to train themselves by special and
long-continued discipline and application. In things further removed
from the dominion of the outward senses, no one who has not great
experience in psychological analysis is competent to break this intense
association; and when such analytic habits do not exist in the requisite
degree, it is hardly possible to mention any of the habitual judgments
of mankind on subjects of a high degree of abstraction, from the being
of a God and the immortality of the soul down to the multiplication
table, which are not, or have not been, considered as matter of direct
intuition. So strong is the tendency to ascribe an intuitive character
to judgments which are mere inferences, and often false ones. No one can
doubt that many a deluded visionary has actually believed that he was
directly inspired from Heaven, and that the Almighty had conversed with
him face to face; which yet was only, on his part, a conclusion drawn
from appearances to his senses, or feelings in his internal
consciousness, which afforded no warrant for any such belief. A caution,
therefore, against this class of errors, is not only needful but
indispensable; though to determine whether, on any of the great
questions of metaphysics, such errors are actually committed, belongs
not to this place, but, as I have so often said, to a different science.




