CHAPTER II.

CLASSIFICATION OF FALLACIES.


§ 1. In attempting to establish certain general distinctions which shall
mark out from one another the various kinds of Fallacious Evidence, we
propose to ourselves an altogether different aim from that of several
eminent thinkers, who have given, under the name of Political or other
Fallacies, a mere enumeration of a certain number of erroneous opinions;
false general propositions which happen to be often met with; _loci
communes_ of bad arguments on some particular subject. Logic is not
concerned with the false opinions which people happen to entertain, but
with the manner in which they come to entertain them. The question is
not, what facts have at any time been erroneously supposed to be proof
of certain other facts, but what property in the facts it was which led
any one to this mistaken supposition.

When a fact is supposed, though incorrectly, to be evidentiary of, or a
mark of, some other fact, there must be a cause of the error; the
supposed evidentiary fact must be connected in some particular manner
with the fact of which it is deemed evidentiary,--must stand in some
particular relation to it, without which relation it would not be
regarded in that light. The relation may either be one resulting from
the simple contemplation of the two facts side by side with one another,
or it may depend on some process of mind, by which a previous
association has been established between them. Some peculiarity of
relation, however, there must be; the fact which can, even by the
wildest aberration, be supposed to prove another fact, must stand in
some special position with regard to it; and if we could ascertain and
define that special position, we should perceive the origin of the
error.

We cannot regard one fact as evidentiary of another, unless we believe
that the two are always, or in the majority of cases, conjoined. If we
believe A to be evidentiary of B, if when we see A we are inclined to
infer B from it, the reason is because we believe that wherever A is, B
also either always or for the most part exists, either as an antecedent,
a consequent, or a concomitant. If when we see A we are inclined not to
expect B--if we believe A to be evidentiary of the absence of B--it is
because we believe that where A is, B either is never, or at least
seldom, found. Erroneous conclusions, in short, no less than correct
conclusions, have an invariable relation to a general formula, either
expressed or tacitly implied. When we infer some fact from some other
fact which does not really prove it, we either have admitted, or, if we
maintained consistency, ought to admit, some groundless general
proposition respecting the conjunction of the two phenomena.

For every property, therefore, in facts, or in our mode of considering
facts, which leads us to believe that they are habitually conjoined when
they are not, or that they are not when in reality they are, there is a
corresponding kind of Fallacy; and an enumeration of fallacies would
consist in a specification of those properties in facts, and those
peculiarities in our mode of considering them, which give rise to this
erroneous opinion.


§ 2. To begin, then; the supposed connexion, or repugnance, between the
two facts, may either be a conclusion from evidence (that is, from some
other proposition or propositions) or may be admitted without any such
ground; admitted, as the phrase is, on its own evidence; embraced as
self-evident, as an axiomatic truth. This gives rise to the first great
distinction, that between Fallacies of Inference, and Fallacies of
Simple Inspection. In the latter division must be included not only all
cases in which a proposition is believed and held for true, literally
without any extrinsic evidence, either of specific experience or general
reasoning; but those more frequent cases in which simple inspection
creates a _presumption_ in favour of a proposition; not sufficient for
belief, but sufficient to cause the strict principles of a regular
induction to be dispensed with, and creating a predisposition to believe
it on evidence which would be seen to be insufficient if no such
presumption existed. This class, comprehending the whole of what may be
termed Natural Prejudices, and which I shall call indiscriminately
Fallacies of Simple Inspection or Fallacies _à priori_, shall be placed
at the head of our list.

Fallacies of Inference, or erroneous conclusions from supposed evidence,
must be subdivided according to the nature of the apparent evidence from
which the conclusions are drawn; or (what is the same thing) according
to the particular kind of sound argument which the fallacy in question
simulates. But there is a distinction to be first drawn, which does not
answer to any of the divisions of sound arguments, but arises out of the
nature of bad ones. We may know exactly what our evidence is, and yet
draw a false conclusion from it; we may conceive precisely what our
premises are, what alleged matters of fact, or general principles, are
the foundation of our inference; and yet, because the premises are
false, or because we have inferred from them what they will not support,
our conclusion may be erroneous. But a case, perhaps even more frequent,
is that in which the error arises from not conceiving our premises with
due clearness, that is, (as shown in the preceding Book,[1]) with due
fixity: forming one conception of our evidence when we collect or
receive it, and another when we make use of it; or unadvisedly, and in
general unconsciously, substituting, as we proceed, different premises
in the place of those with which we set out, or a different conclusion
for that which we undertook to prove. This gives existence to a class of
fallacies which may be justly termed (in a phrase borrowed from Bentham)
Fallacies of Confusion; comprehending, among others, all those which
have their source in language, whether arising from the vagueness or
ambiguity of our terms, or from casual associations with them.

When the fallacy is not one of Confusion, that is, when the proposition
believed, and the evidence on which it is believed, are steadily
apprehended and unambiguously expressed, there remain to be made two
cross divisions. The Apparent Evidence may be either particular facts,
or foregone generalizations; that is, the process may simulate either
simple Induction, or Deduction; and again, the evidence, whether
consisting of supposed facts or of general propositions, may be false in
itself, or, being true, may fail to bear out the conclusion attempted to
be founded on it. This gives us first, Fallacies of Induction and
Fallacies of Deduction, and then a subdivision of each of these,
according as the supposed evidence is false, or true but inconclusive.

Fallacies of Induction, where the facts on which the induction proceeds
are erroneous, may be termed Fallacies of Observation. The term is not
strictly accurate, or rather, not accurately coextensive with the class
of fallacies which I propose to designate by it. Induction is not always
grounded on facts immediately observed, but sometimes on facts inferred:
and when these last are erroneous, the error may not be, in the literal
sense of the term, an instance of bad observation, but of bad inference.
It will be convenient, however, to make only one class of all the
inductions of which the error lies in not sufficiently ascertaining the
facts on which the theory is grounded; whether the cause of failure be
mal-observation, or simple non-observation, and whether the
mal-observation be direct, or by means of intermediate marks which do
not prove what they are supposed to prove. And in the absence of any
comprehensive term to denote the ascertainment, by whatever means, of
the facts on which an induction is grounded, I will venture to retain
for this class of fallacies, under the explanation now given, the title
of Fallacies of Observation.

The other class of inductive fallacies, in which the facts are correct,
but the conclusion not warranted by them, are properly denominated
Fallacies of Generalization: and these, again, fall into various
subordinate classes or natural groups, some of which will be enumerated
in their proper place.

When we now turn to Fallacies of Deduction, namely those modes of
incorrect argumentation in which the premises, or some of them, are
general propositions, and the argument a ratiocination; we may of course
subdivide these also into two species similar to the two preceding,
namely, those which proceed on false premises, and those of which the
premises, though true, do not support the conclusion. But of these
species, the first must necessarily fall under some one of the heads
already enumerated. For the error must be either in those premises which
are general propositions, or in those which assert individual facts. In
the former case it is an Inductive Fallacy, of one or the other class;
in the latter it is a Fallacy of Observation: unless, in either case,
the erroneous premise has been assumed on simple inspection, in which
case the fallacy is _à priori_. Or finally, the premises, of whichever
kind they are, may never have been conceived in so distinct a manner as
to produce any clear consciousness by what means they were arrived at;
as in the case of what is called reasoning in a circle: and then the
fallacy is one of Confusion.

There remain, therefore, as the only class of fallacies having properly
their seat in deduction, those in which the premises of the
ratiocination do not bear out its conclusion; the various cases, in
short, of vicious argumentation, provided against by the rules of the
syllogism. We shall call these, Fallacies of Ratiocination.

We have thus five distinguishable classes of fallacy, which may be
expressed in the following synoptic table:--

  Fallacies

    of Simple Inspection            1. Fallacies _à priori_.

    of Inference

      from evidence distinctly
          conceived

        Inductive Fallacies         2. Fallacies of Observation.
                                    3. Fallacies of Generalization.

        Deductive Fallacies         4. Fallacies of Ratiocination.

      from evidence indistinctly
          conceived                 5. Fallacies of Confusion.


§ 3. We must not, however, expect to find that men's actual errors
always, or even commonly, fall so unmistakeably under some one of these
classes, as to be incapable of being referred to any other. Erroneous
arguments do not admit of such a sharply cut division as valid arguments
do. An argument fully stated, with all its steps distinctly set out, in
language not susceptible of misunderstanding, must, if it be erroneous,
be so in some one of these five modes unequivocally: or indeed of the
first four, since the fifth, on such a supposition, would vanish. But it
is not in the nature of bad reasoning to express itself thus
unambiguously. When a sophist, whether he is imposing on himself or
attempting to impose on others, can be constrained to throw his
sophistry into so distinct a form, it needs, in a large proportion of
cases, no further exposure.

In all arguments, everywhere but in the schools, some of the links are
suppressed; _à fortiori_ when the arguer either intends to deceive, or
is a lame and inexpert thinker, little accustomed to bring his reasoning
processes to any test: and it is in those steps of the reasoning which
are made in this tacit and half-conscious, or even wholly unconscious
manner, that the error oftenest lurks. In order to detect the fallacy,
the proposition thus silently assumed must be supplied; but the
reasoner, most likely, has never really asked himself what he was
assuming: his confuter, unless permitted to extort it from him by the
Socratic mode of interrogation, must himself judge what the suppressed
premise ought to be in order to support the conclusion. And hence, in
the words of Archbishop Whately, "it must be often a matter of doubt, or
rather, of arbitrary choice, not only to which genus each _kind_ of
fallacy should be referred, but even to which kind to refer any one
_individual_ fallacy; for since, in any course of argument, _one_
premise is usually suppressed, it frequently happens in the case of a
fallacy, that the hearers are left to the alternative of supplying
_either_ a premise which is _not true_, or _else_, one which _does not
prove_ the conclusion: _e. g._ if a man expatiates on the distress of
the country, and thence argues that the government is tyrannical, we
must suppose him to assume _either_ that 'every distressed country is
under a tyranny,' which is a manifest falsehood, _or_ merely that 'every
country under a tyranny is distressed,' which, however true, proves
nothing, the middle term being undistributed." The former would be
ranked, in our distribution, among fallacies of generalization, the
latter among those of ratiocination. "Which are we to suppose the
speaker meant us to understand? Surely" (if he understood himself) "just
whichever each of his hearers might happen to prefer: some might assent
to the false premise; others allow the unsound syllogism."

Almost all fallacies, therefore, might in strictness be brought under
our fifth class, Fallacies of Confusion. A fallacy can seldom be
absolutely referred to any of the other classes; we can only say, that
if all the links were filled up which should be capable of being
supplied in a valid argument, it would either stand thus (forming a
fallacy of one class), or thus (a fallacy of another); or at furthest we
may say, that the conclusion is most _likely_ to have originated in a
fallacy of such and such a class. Thus in the illustration just quoted,
the error committed may be traced with most probability to a fallacy of
generalization; that of mistaking an uncertain mark, or piece of
evidence, for a certain one; concluding from an effect to some one of
its possible causes, when there are others which would have been equally
capable of producing it.

Yet, though the five classes run into each other, and a particular error
often seems to be arbitrarily assigned to one of them rather than to any
of the rest, there is considerable use in so distinguishing them. We
shall find it convenient to set apart, as Fallacies of Confusion, those
of which confusion is the most obvious characteristic; in which no other
cause can be assigned for the mistake committed, than neglect or
inability to state the question properly, and to apprehend the evidence
with definiteness and precision. In the remaining four classes I shall
place not only the cases in which the evidence is clearly seen to be
what it is, and yet a wrong conclusion drawn from it, but also those in
which, although there be confusion, the confusion is not the sole cause
of the error, but there is some shadow of a ground for it in the nature
of the evidence itself. And in distributing these cases of partial
confusion among the four classes, I shall, when there can be any
hesitation as to the precise seat of the fallacy, suppose it to be in
that part of the process in which, from the nature of the case, and the
tendencies of the human mind, an error would in the particular
circumstances be the most probable.

After these observations we shall proceed, without further preamble, to
consider the five classes in their order.




