BOOK IV.

OF OPERATIONS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


"Clear and distinct ideas are terms which, though familiar and frequent
in men's mouths, I have reason to think every one who uses does not
perfectly understand. And possibly it is but here and there one who
gives himself the trouble to consider them so far as to know what he
himself or others precisely mean by them; I have, therefore, in most
places, chose to put determinate or determined, instead of clear and
distinct, as more likely to direct men's thoughts to my meaning in this
matter."--LOCKE'S _Essay on the Human Understanding_; Epistle to the
Reader.

"Il ne peut y avoir qu'une méthode parfaite, qui est la _méthode
naturelle_; on nomme ainsi un arrangement dans lequel les êtres du même
genre seraient plus voisins entre eux que ceux de tous les autres
genres; les genres du même ordre, plus que ceux de tous les autres
ordres; et ainsi de suite. Cette méthode est l'idéal auquel l'histoire
naturelle doit tendre; car il est évident que si l'on y parvenait, l'on
aurait l'expression exacte et complète de la nature entière."--CUVIER,
_Règne Animal_, Introduction.

"Deux grandes notions philosophiques dominent la théorie fondamentale de
la méthode naturelle proprement dite, savoir la formation des groupes
naturels, et ensuite leur succession hiérarchique."--COMTE, _Cours de
Philosophie Positive_, 42me leçon.




CHAPTER I.

OF OBSERVATION AND DESCRIPTION.


§ 1. The inquiry which occupied us in the two preceding books, has
conducted us to what appears a satisfactory solution of the principal
problem of Logic, according to the conception I have formed of the
science. We have found, that the mental process with which Logic is
conversant, the operation of ascertaining truths by means of evidence,
is always, even when appearances point to a different theory of it, a
process of induction. And we have particularized the various modes of
induction, and obtained a clear view of the principles to which it must
conform, in order to lead to results which can be relied on.

The consideration of Induction, however, does not end with the direct
rules for its performance. Something must be said of those other
operations of the mind, which are either necessarily presupposed in all
induction, or are instrumental to the more difficult and complicated
inductive processes. The present book will be devoted to the
consideration of these subsidiary operations: among which our attention
must first be given to those, which are indispensable preliminaries to
all induction whatsoever.

Induction being merely the extension to a class of cases, of something
which has been observed to be true in certain individual instances of
the class; the first place among the operations subsidiary to induction,
is claimed by Observation. This is not, however, the place to lay down
rules for making good observers; nor is it within the competence of
Logic to do so, but of the art of intellectual Education. Our business
with observation is only in its connexion with the appropriate problem
of logic, the estimation of evidence. We have to consider, not how or
what to observe, but under what conditions observation is to be relied
on; what is needful, in order that the fact, supposed to be observed,
may safely be received as true.


§ 2. The answer to this question is very simple, at least in its first
aspect. The sole condition is, that what is supposed to have been
observed shall really have been observed; that it be an observation, not
an inference. For in almost every act of our perceiving faculties,
observation and inference are intimately blended. What we are said to
observe is usually a compound result, of which one-tenth may be
observation, and the remaining nine-tenths inference.

I affirm, for example, that I hear a man's voice. This would pass, in
common language, for a direct perception. All, however, which is really
perception, is that I hear a sound. That the sound is a voice, and that
voice the voice of a man, are not perceptions but inferences. I affirm,
again, that I saw my brother at a certain hour this morning. If any
proposition concerning a matter of fact would commonly be said to be
known by the direct testimony of the senses, this surely would be so.
The truth, however, is far otherwise. I only saw a certain coloured
surface; or rather I had the kind of visual sensations which are usually
produced by a coloured surface; and from these as marks, known to be
such by previous experience, I concluded that I saw my brother. I might
have had sensations precisely similar, when my brother was not there. I
might have seen some other person so nearly resembling him in
appearance, as, at the distance, and with the degree of attention which
I bestowed, to be mistaken for him. I might have been asleep, and have
dreamed that I saw him; or in a state of nervous disorder, which brought
his image before me in a waking hallucination. In all these modes, many
have been led to believe that they saw persons well known to them, who
were dead or far distant. If any of these suppositions had been true,
the affirmation that I saw my brother would have been erroneous; but
whatever was matter of direct perception, namely the visual sensations,
would have been real. The inference only would have been ill grounded;
I should have ascribed those sensations to a wrong cause.

Innumerable instances might be given, and analysed in the same manner,
of what are vulgarly called errors of sense. There are none of them
properly errors of sense; they are erroneous inferences from sense. When
I look at a candle through a multiplying glass, I see what seems a dozen
candles instead of one: and if the real circumstances of the case were
skilfully disguised, I might suppose that there were really that number;
there would be what is called an optical deception. In the kaleidoscope
there really is that deception: when I look through the instrument,
instead of what is actually there, namely a casual arrangement of
coloured fragments, the appearance presented is that of the same
combination several times repeated in symmetrical arrangement round a
point. The delusion is of course effected by giving me the same
sensations which I should have had if such a symmetrical combination had
really been presented to me. If I cross two of my fingers, and bring any
small object, a marble for instance, into contact with both, at points
not usually touched simultaneously by one object, I can hardly, if my
eyes are shut, help believing that there are two marbles instead of one.
But it is not my touch in this case, nor my sight in the other, which is
deceived; the deception, whether durable or only momentary, is in my
judgment. From my senses I have only the sensations, and those are
genuine. Being accustomed to have those or similar sensations when, and
only when, a certain arrangement of outward objects is present to my
organs, I have the habit of instantly, when I experience the sensations,
inferring the existence of that state of outward things. This habit has
become so powerful, that the inference, performed with the speed and
certainty of an instinct, is confounded with intuitive perceptions. When
it is correct, I am unconscious that it ever needed proof; even when I
know it to be incorrect, I cannot without considerable effort abstain
from making it. In order to be aware that it is not made by instinct but
by an acquired habit, I am obliged to reflect on the slow process
through which I learnt to judge by the eye of many things which I now
appear to perceive directly by sight; and on the reverse operation
performed by persons learning to draw, who with difficulty and labour
divest themselves of their acquired perceptions, and learn afresh to see
things as they appear to the eye.

It would be easy to prolong these illustrations, were there any need to
expatiate on a topic so copiously exemplified in various popular works.
From the examples already given, it is seen sufficiently, that the
individual facts from which we collect our inductive generalizations are
scarcely ever obtained by observation alone. Observation extends only to
the sensations by which we recognise objects; but the propositions which
we make use of, either in science or in common life, relate mostly to
the objects themselves. In every act of what is called observation,
there is at least one inference--from the sensations to the presence of
the object; from the marks or diagnostics, to the entire phenomenon. And
hence, among other consequences, follows the seeming paradox, that a
general proposition collected from particulars is often more certainly
true than any one of the particular propositions from which, by an act
of induction, it was inferred. For, each of those particular (or rather
singular) propositions involved an inference, from the impression on the
senses to the fact which caused that impression: and this inference may
have been erroneous in any one of the instances, but cannot well have
been erroneous in all of them, provided their number was sufficient to
eliminate chance. The conclusion, therefore, that is, the general
proposition, may deserve more complete reliance than it would be safe to
repose in any one of the inductive premises.

The logic of observation, then, consists solely in a correct
discrimination between that, in a result of observation, which has
really been perceived, and that which is an inference from the
perception. Whatever portion is inference, is amenable to the rules of
induction already treated of, and requires no further notice here: the
question for us in this place is, when all which is inference is taken
away, what remains. There remains, in the first place, the mind's own
feelings or states of consciousness, namely, its outward feelings or
sensations, and its inward feelings--its thoughts, emotions, and
volitions. Whether anything else remains, or all else is inference from
this; whether the mind is capable of directly perceiving or apprehending
anything except states of its own consciousness--is a problem of
metaphysics not to be discussed in this place. But after excluding all
questions on which metaphysicians differ, it remains true, that for most
purposes the discrimination we are called upon practically to exercise
is that between sensations or other feelings, of our own or of other
people, and inferences drawn from them. And on the theory of Observation
this is all which seems necessary to be said for the purposes of the
present work.


§ 3. If, in the simplest observation, or in what passes for such, there
is a large part which is not observation but something else; so in the
simplest description of an observation, there is, and must always be,
much more asserted than is contained in the perception itself. We cannot
describe a fact, without implying more than the fact. The perception is
only of one individual thing; but to describe it is to affirm a
connexion between it and every other thing which is either denoted or
connoted by any of the terms used. To begin with an example, than which
none can be conceived more elementary: I have a sensation of sight, and
I endeavour to describe it by saying that I see something white. In
saying this, I do not solely affirm my sensation; I also class it. I
assert a resemblance between the thing I see, and all things which I and
others are accustomed to call white. I assert that it resembles them in
the circumstance in which they all resemble one another, in that which
is the ground of their being called by the name. This is not merely one
way of describing an observation, but the only way. If I would either
register my observation for my own future use, or make it known for the
benefit of others, I must assert a resemblance between the fact which I
have observed and something else. It is inherent in a description, to be
the statement of a resemblance, or resemblances.

We thus see that it is impossible to express in words any result of
observation, without performing an act possessing what Dr. Whewell
considers to be characteristic of Induction. There is always something
introduced which was not included in the observation itself; some
conception common to the phenomenon with other phenomena to which it is
compared. An observation cannot be spoken of in language at all without
declaring more than that one observation; without assimilating it to
other phenomena already observed and classified. But this identification
of an object--this recognition of it as possessing certain known
characteristics--has never been confounded with Induction. It is an
operation which precedes all induction, and supplies it with its
materials. It is a perception of resemblances, obtained by comparison.

These resemblances are not always apprehended directly, by merely
comparing the object observed with some other present object, or with
our recollection of an object which is absent. They are often
ascertained through intermediate marks, that is, deductively. In
describing some new kind of animal, suppose me to say that it measures
ten feet in length, from the forehead to the extremity of the tail. I
did not ascertain this by the unassisted eye. I had a two-foot rule
which I applied to the object, and, as we commonly say, measured it; an
operation which was not wholly manual, but partly also mathematical,
involving the two propositions, Five times two is ten, and Things which
are equal to the same thing are equal to one another. Hence, the fact
that the animal is ten feet long is not an immediate perception, but a
conclusion from reasoning; the minor premises alone being furnished by
observation of the object. Nevertheless, this is called an observation
or a description of the animal, not an induction respecting it.

To pass at once from a very simple to a very complex example: I affirm
that the earth is globular. The assertion is not grounded on direct
perception; for the figure of the earth cannot, by us, be directly
perceived, though the assertion would not be true unless circumstances
could be supposed under which its truth could be so perceived. That the
form of the earth is globular is inferred from certain marks, as for
instance from this, that its shadow thrown upon the moon is circular; or
this, that on the sea, or any extensive plain, our horizon is always a
circle; either of which marks is incompatible with any other than a
globular form. I assert further, that the earth is that particular kind
of globe which is termed an oblate spheroid; because it is found by
measurement in the direction of the meridian, that the length on the
surface of the earth which subtends a given angle at its centre,
diminishes as we recede from the equator and approach the poles. But
these propositions, that the earth is globular, and that it is an oblate
spheroid, assert, each of them, an individual fact; in its own nature
capable of being perceived by the senses when the requisite organs and
the necessary position are supposed, and only not actually perceived
because those organs and that position are wanting. This identification
of the earth, first as a globe, and next as an oblate spheroid, which,
if the fact could have been seen, would have been called a description
of the figure of the earth, may without impropriety be so called when,
instead of being seen, it is inferred. But we could not without
impropriety call either of these assertions an induction from facts
respecting the earth. They are not general propositions collected from
particular facts, but particular facts deduced from general
propositions. They are conclusions obtained deductively, from premises
originating in induction: but of these premises some were not obtained
by observation of the earth, nor had any peculiar reference to it.

If, then, the truth respecting the figure of the earth is not an
induction, why should the truth respecting the figure of the earth's
orbit be so? The two cases only differ in this, that the form of the
orbit was not, like the form of the earth itself, deduced by
ratiocination from facts which were marks of ellipticity, but was got at
by boldly guessing that the path was an ellipse, and finding afterwards,
on examination, that the observations were in harmony with the
hypothesis. According to Dr. Whewell, however, this process of guessing
and verifying our guesses is not only induction, but the whole of
induction: no other exposition can be given of that logical operation.
That he is wrong in the latter assertion, the whole of the preceding
book has, I hope, sufficiently proved; and that the process by which the
ellipticity of the planetary orbits was ascertained, is not induction at
all, was attempted to be shown in the second chapter of the same
book.[1] We are now, however, prepared to go more into the heart of the
matter than at that earlier period of our inquiry, and to show, not
merely what the operation in question is not, but what it is.


§ 4. We observed, in the second chapter, that the proposition "the earth
moves in an ellipse," so far as it only serves for the colligation or
connecting together of actual observations, (that is, as it only affirms
that the observed positions of the earth may be correctly represented by
as many points in the circumference of an imaginary ellipse,) is not an
induction, but a description: it is an induction, only when it affirms
that the intermediate positions, of which there has been no direct
observation, would be found to correspond to the remaining points of the
same elliptic circumference. Now, though this real induction is one
thing, and the description another, we are in a very different condition
for making the induction before we have obtained the description, and
after it. For inasmuch as the description, like all other descriptions,
contains the assertion of a resemblance between the phenomenon described
and something else; in pointing out something which the series of
observed places of a planet resembles, it points out something in which
the several places themselves agree. If the series of places correspond
to as many points of an ellipse, the places themselves agree in being
situated in that ellipse. We have, therefore, by the same process which
gave us the description, obtained the requisites for an induction by the
Method of Agreement. The successive observed places of the earth being
considered as effects, and its motion as the cause which produces them,
we find that those effects, that is, those places, agree in the
circumstance of being in an ellipse. We conclude that the remaining
effects, the places which have not been observed, agree in the same
circumstance, and that the _law_ of the motion of the earth is motion in
an ellipse.

The Colligation of Facts, therefore, by means of hypotheses, or, as Dr.
Whewell prefers to say, by means of Conceptions, instead of being, as he
supposes, Induction itself, takes its proper place among operations
subsidiary to Induction. All Induction supposes that we have previously
compared the requisite number of individual instances, and ascertained
in what circumstances they agree. The Colligation of Facts is no other
than this preliminary operation. When Kepler, after vainly endeavouring
to connect the observed places of a planet by various hypotheses of
circular motion, at last tried the hypothesis of an ellipse and found it
answer to the phenomena; what he really attempted, first unsuccessfully
and at last successfully, was to discover the circumstance in which all
the observed positions of the planet agreed. And when he in like manner
connected another set of observed facts, the periodic times of the
different planets, by the proposition that the squares of the times are
proportional to the cubes of the distances, what he did was simply to
ascertain the property in which the periodic times of all the different
planets agreed.

Since, therefore, all that is true and to the purpose in Dr. Whewell's
doctrine of Conceptions might be fully expressed by the more familiar
term Hypothesis; and since his Colligation of Facts by means of
appropriate Conceptions, is but the ordinary process of finding by a
comparison of phenomena, in what consists their agreement or
resemblance; I would willingly have confined myself to those better
understood expressions, and persevered to the end in the same abstinence
which I have hitherto observed from ideological discussions; considering
the mechanism of our thoughts to be a topic distinct from and irrelevant
to the principles and rules by which the trustworthiness of the results
of thinking is to be estimated. Since, however, a work of such high
pretensions, and, it must also be said, of so much real merit, has
rested the whole theory of Induction upon such ideological
considerations, it seems necessary for others who follow, to claim for
themselves and their doctrines whatever position may properly belong to
them on the same metaphysical ground. And this is the object of the
succeeding chapter.




