CHAPTER III.

OF NAMING, AS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


§ 1. It does not belong to the present undertaking to dwell on the
importance of language as a medium of human intercourse, whether for
purposes of sympathy or of information. Nor does our design admit of
more than a passing allusion to that great property of names, on which
their functions as an intellectual instrument are, in reality,
ultimately dependent; their potency as a means of forming, and of
riveting, associations among our other ideas: a subject on which an able
thinker[5] has thus written:--

"Names are impressions of sense, and as such take the strongest hold on
the mind, and of all other impressions can be most easily recalled and
retained in view. They therefore serve to give a point of attachment to
all the more volatile objects of thought and feeling. Impressions that
when passed might be dissipated for ever, are, by their connexion with
language, always within reach. Thoughts, of themselves, are perpetually
slipping out of the field of immediate mental vision; but the name
abides with us, and the utterance of it restores them in a moment. Words
are the custodiers of every product of mind less impressive than
themselves. All extensions of human knowledge, all new generalizations,
are fixed and spread, even unintentionally, by the use of words. The
child growing up learns, along with the vocables of his mother-tongue,
that things which he would have believed to be different, are, in
important points, the same. Without any formal instruction, the language
in which we grow up teaches us all the common philosophy of the age. It
directs us to observe and know things which we should have overlooked;
it supplies us with classifications ready made, by which things are
arranged (as far as the light of by-gone generations admits) with the
objects to which they bear the greatest total resemblance. The number of
general names in a language, and the degree of generality of those
names, afford a test of the knowledge of the era, and of the
intellectual insight which is the birthright of any one born into it."

It is not, however, of the functions of Names, considered generally,
that we have here to treat, but only of the manner and degree in which
they are directly instrumental to the investigation of truth; in other
words, to the process of induction.


§ 2. Observation and Abstraction, the operations which formed the
subject of the two foregoing chapters, are conditions indispensable to
induction; there can be no induction where they are not. It has been
imagined that Naming is also a condition equally indispensable. There
are thinkers who have held that language is not solely, according to a
phrase generally current, _an_ instrument of thought, but _the_
instrument: that names, or something equivalent to them, some species of
artificial signs, are necessary to reasoning; that there could be no
inference, and consequently no induction, without them. But if the
nature of reasoning was correctly explained in the earlier part of the
present work, this opinion must be held to be an exaggeration, though of
an important truth. If reasoning be from particulars to particulars, and
if it consist in recognising one fact as a mark of another, or a mark of
a mark of another, nothing is required to render reasoning possible,
except senses and association: senses to perceive that two facts are
conjoined; association, as the law by which one of those two facts
raises up the idea of the other.[6] For these mental phenomena, as well
as for the belief or expectation which follows, and by which we
recognise as having taken place, or as about to take place, that of
which we have perceived a mark, there is evidently no need of language.
And this inference of one particular fact from another is a case of
induction. It is of this sort of induction that brutes are capable: it
is in this shape that uncultivated minds make almost all their
inductions, and that we all do so in the cases in which familiar
experience forces our conclusions upon us without any active process of
inquiry on our part, and in which the belief or expectation follows the
suggestion of the evidence, with the promptitude and certainty of an
instinct.[7]


§ 3. But though inference of an inductive character is possible without
the use of signs, it could never, without them, be carried much beyond
the very simple cases which we have just described, and which form, in
all probability, the limit of the reasonings of those animals to whom
conventional language is unknown. Without language, or something
equivalent to it, there could only be as much reasoning from experience
as can take place without the aid of general propositions. Now, though
in strictness we may reason from past experience to a fresh individual
case without the intermediate stage of a general proposition, yet
without general propositions we should seldom remember what past
experience we have had, and scarcely ever what conclusions that
experience will warrant. The division of the inductive process into two
parts, the first ascertaining what is a mark of the given fact, the
second whether in the new case that mark exists, is natural, and
scientifically indispensable. It is, indeed, in a majority of cases,
rendered necessary by mere distance of time. The experience by which we
are to guide our judgments may be other people's experience, little of
which can be communicated to us otherwise than by language: when it is
our own, it is generally experience long past; unless, therefore, it
were recorded by means of artificial signs, little of it (except in
cases involving our intenser sensations or emotions, or the subjects of
our daily and hourly contemplation) would be retained in the memory. It
is hardly necessary to add, that when the inductive inference is of any
but the most direct and obvious nature--when it requires several
observations or experiments, in varying circumstances, and the
comparison of one of these with another--it is impossible to proceed a
step, without the artificial memory which words bestow. Without words,
we should, if we had often seen A and B in immediate and obvious
conjunction, expect B whenever we saw A; but to discover their
conjunction when not obvious, or to determine whether it is really
constant or only casual, and whether there is reason to expect it under
any given change of circumstances, is a process far too complex to be
performed without some contrivance to make our remembrance of our own
mental operations accurate. Now, language is such a contrivance. When
that instrument is called to our aid, the difficulty is reduced to that
of making our remembrance of the meaning of words accurate. This being
secured, whatever passes through our minds may be remembered accurately,
by putting it carefully into words, and committing the words either to
writing or to memory.

The function of Naming, and particularly of General Names, in Induction,
may be recapitulated as follows. Every inductive inference which is good
at all, is good for a whole class of cases: and, that the inference may
have any better warrant of its correctness than the mere clinging
together of two ideas, a process of experimentation and comparison is
necessary; in which the whole class of cases must be brought to view,
and some uniformity in the course of nature evolved and ascertained,
since the existence of such an uniformity is required as a
justification for drawing the inference in even a single case. This
uniformity, therefore, may be ascertained once for all; and if, being
ascertained, it can be remembered, it will serve as a formula for
making, in particular cases, all such inferences as the previous
experience will warrant. But we can only secure its being remembered, or
give ourselves even a chance of carrying in our memory any considerable
number of such uniformities, by registering them through the medium of
permanent signs; which (being, from the nature of the case, signs not of
an individual fact, but of an uniformity, that is, of an indefinite
number of facts similar to one another) are general signs; universals;
general names, and general propositions.


§ 4. And here I cannot omit to notice an oversight committed by some
eminent thinkers; who have said that the cause of our using general
names is the infinite multitude of individual objects, which, making it
impossible to have a name for each, compels us to make one name serve
for many. This is a very limited view of the function of general names.
Even if there were a name for every individual object, we should require
general names as much as we now do. Without them we could not express
the result of a single comparison, nor record any one of the
uniformities existing in nature; and should be hardly better off in
respect to Induction than if we had no names at all. With none but names
of individuals, (or in other words, proper names,) we might, by
pronouncing the name, suggest the idea of the object, but we could not
assert any proposition; except the unmeaning ones formed by predicating
two proper names one of another. It is only by means of general names
that we can convey any information, predicate any attribute, even of an
individual, much more of a class. Rigorously speaking we could get on
without any other general names than the abstract names of attributes;
all our propositions might be of the form "such an individual object
possesses such an attribute," or "such an attribute is always (or never)
conjoined with such another attribute." In fact, however, mankind have
always given general names to objects as well as attributes, and indeed
before attributes: but the general names given to objects imply
attributes, derive their whole meaning from attributes; and are chiefly
useful as the language by means of which we predicate the attributes
which they connote.

It remains to be considered what principles are to be adhered to in
giving general names, so that these names, and the general propositions
in which they fill a place, may conduce most to the purposes of
Induction.




