CHAPTER VI.

FALLACIES OF RATIOCINATION.


§ 1. We have now, in our progress through the classes of Fallacies,
arrived at those to which, in the common books of logic, the appellation
is in general exclusively appropriated; those which have their seat in
the ratiocinative or deductive part of the investigation of truth. On
these fallacies it is the less necessary for us to insist at any length,
as they have been most satisfactorily treated in a work familiar to
almost all, in this country at least, who feel any interest in these
speculations, Archbishop Whately's _Logic_. Against the more obvious
forms of this class of fallacies, the rules of the syllogism are a
complete protection. Not (as we have so often said) that the
ratiocination cannot be good unless it be in the form of a syllogism;
but that, by showing it in that form, we are sure to discover if it be
bad, or at least if it contain any fallacy of this class.


§ 2. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination, we ought perhaps to include the
errors committed in processes which have the appearance only, not the
reality, of an inference from premises; the fallacies connected with the
conversion and æquipollency of propositions. I believe errors of this
description to be far more frequently committed than is generally
supposed, or than their extreme obviousness might seem to admit of. For
example, the simple conversion of an universal affirmative proposition,
All A are B, therefore all B are A, I take to be a very common form of
error: though committed, like many other fallacies, oftener in the
silence of thought than in express words, for it can scarcely be clearly
enunciated without being detected. And so with another form of fallacy,
not substantially different from the preceding: the erroneous
conversion of an hypothetical proposition. The proper converse of an
hypothetical proposition is this: If the consequent be false, the
antecedent is false; but this, If the consequent be true, the antecedent
is true, by no means holds good, but is an error corresponding to the
simple conversion of an universal affirmative. Yet hardly anything is
more common than for people, in their private thoughts, to draw this
inference. As when the conclusion is accepted, which it so often is, for
proof of the premises. That the premises cannot be true if the
conclusion is false, is the unexceptionable foundation of the legitimate
mode of reasoning called a _reductio ad absurdum_. But people
continually think and express themselves, as if they also believed that
the premises cannot be false if the conclusion is true. The truth, or
supposed truth, of the inferences which follow from a doctrine, often
enables it to find acceptance in spite of gross absurdities in it. How
many philosophical systems which had scarcely any intrinsic
recommendation, have been received by thoughtful men because they were
supposed to lend additional support to religion, morality, some
favourite view of politics, or some other cherished persuasion: not
merely because their wishes were thereby enlisted on its side, but
because its leading to what they deemed sound conclusions appeared to
them a strong presumption in favour of its truth: though the
presumption, when viewed in its true light, amounted only to the absence
of that particular evidence of falsehood, which would have resulted from
its leading by correct inference to something already known to be false.

Again, the very frequent error in conduct, of mistaking reverse of wrong
for right, is the practical form of a logical error with respect to the
Opposition of Propositions. It is committed for want of the habit of
distinguishing the _contrary_ of a proposition from the _contradictory_
of it, and of attending to the logical canon, that contrary
propositions, though they cannot both be true, may both be false. If the
error were to express itself in words, it would run distinctly counter
to this canon. It generally, however, does not so express itself, and
to compel it to do so is the most effectual method of detecting and
exposing it.


§ 3. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination are to be ranked in the first
place, all the cases of vicious syllogism laid down in the books. These
generally resolve themselves into having more than three terms to the
syllogism, either avowedly, or in the covert mode of an undistributed
middleterm, or an _illicit process_ of one of the two extremes. It is
not, indeed, very easy fully to convict an argument of falling under any
one of these vicious cases in particular; for the reason already more
than once referred to, that the premises are seldom formally set out: if
they were, the fallacy would impose upon nobody; and while they are not,
it is almost always to a certain degree optional in what manner the
suppressed link shall be filled up. The rules of the syllogism are rules
for compelling a person to be aware of the whole of what he must
undertake to defend if he persists in maintaining his conclusion. He has
it almost always in his power to make his syllogism good by introducing
a false premise; and hence it is scarcely ever possible decidedly to
affirm that any argument involves a bad syllogism: but this detracts
nothing from the value of the syllogistic rules, since it is by them
that a reasoner is compelled distinctly to make his election what
premises he is prepared to maintain. The election made, there is
generally so little difficulty in seeing whether the conclusion follows
from the premises set out, that we might without much logical
impropriety have merged this fourth class of fallacies in the fifth, or
Fallacies of Confusion.


§ 4. Perhaps, however, the commonest, and certainly the most dangerous
fallacies of this class, are those which do not lie in a single
syllogism, but slip in between one syllogism and another in a chain of
argument, and are committed by _changing the premises_. A proposition is
proved, or an acknowledged truth laid down, in the first part of an
argumentation, and in the second a further argument is founded not on
the same proposition, but on some other, resembling it sufficiently to
be mistaken for it. Instances of this fallacy will be found in almost
all the argumentative discourses of unprecise thinkers; and we need only
here advert to one of the obscurer forms of it, recognised by the
schoolmen as the fallacy _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter_.
This is committed when, in the premises, a proposition is asserted with
a qualification, and the qualification lost sight of in the conclusion;
or oftener, when a limitation or condition, though not asserted, is
necessary to the truth of the proposition, but is forgotten when that
proposition comes to be employed as a premise. Many of the bad arguments
in vogue belong to this class of error. The premise is some admitted
truth, some common maxim, the reasons or evidence for which have been
forgotten, or are not thought of at the time, but if they had been
thought of would have shown the necessity of so limiting the premise
that it would no longer have supported the conclusion drawn from it.

Of this nature is the fallacy in what is called, by Adam Smith and
others, the Mercantile Theory in Political Economy. That theory sets out
from the common maxim, that whatever brings in money enriches; or that
every one is rich in proportion to the quantity of money he obtains.
From this it is concluded that the value of any branch of trade, or of
the trade of the country altogether, consists in the balance of money it
brings in; that any trade which carries more money out of the country
than it draws into it is a losing trade; that therefore money should be
attracted into the country and kept there, by prohibitions and bounties:
and a train of similar corollaries. All for want of reflecting that if
the riches of an individual are in proportion to the quantity of money
he can command, it is because that is the measure of his power of
purchasing money's worth; and is therefore subject to the proviso that
he is not debarred from employing his money in such purchases. The
premise, therefore, is only true _secundum quid_; but the theory assumes
it to be true absolutely, and infers that increase of money is increase
of riches, even when produced by means subversive of the condition under
which alone money can be riches.

A second instance is, the argument by which it used to be contended,
before the commutation of tithe, that tithes fell on the landlord, and
were a deduction from rent; because the rent of tithe-free land was
always higher than that of land of the same quality, and the same
advantages of situation, subject to tithe. Whether it be true or not
that a tithe falls on rent, a treatise on Logic is not the place to
examine; but it is certain that this is no proof of it. Whether the
proposition be true or false, tithe-free land must, by the necessity of
the case, pay a higher rent. For if tithes do not fall on rent, it must
be because they fall on the consumer; because they raise the price of
agricultural produce. But if the produce be raised in price, the farmer
of tithe-free as well as the farmer of tithed land gets the benefit. To
the latter the rise is but a compensation for the tithe he pays; to the
first, who pays none, it is clear gain, and therefore enables him, and
if there be freedom of competition forces him, to pay so much more rent
to his landlord. The question remains, to what class of fallacies this
belongs. The premise is, that the owner of tithed land receives less
rent than the owner of tithe-free land; the conclusion is, that
therefore he receives less than he himself would receive if tithe were
abolished. But the premise is only true conditionally; the owner of
tithed land receives less than what the owner of tithe-free land is
enabled to receive _when other lands are tithed_; while the conclusion
is applied to a state of circumstances in which that condition fails,
and in which, by consequence, the premise would not be true. The
fallacy, therefore, is _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter_.

A third example is the opposition sometimes made to legitimate
interferences of government in the economical affairs of society,
grounded on a misapplication of the maxim, that an individual is a
better judge than the government, of what is for his own pecuniary
interest. This objection was urged to Mr. Wakefield's principle of
colonization; the concentration of the settlers, by fixing such a price
on unoccupied land as may preserve the most desirable proportion between
the quantity of land in culture, and the labouring population. Against
this it was argued, that if individuals found it for their advantage to
occupy extensive tracts of land, they, being better judges of their own
interest than the legislature (which can only proceed on general rules)
ought not to be restrained from doing so. But in this argument it was
forgotten that the fact of a person's taking a large tract of land is
evidence only that it is his interest to take as much as other people,
but not that it might not be for his interest to content himself with
less, if he could be assured that other people would do so too; an
assurance which nothing but a government regulation can give. If all
other people took much, and he only a little, he would reap none of the
advantages derived from the concentration of the population and the
consequent possibility of procuring labour for hire, but would have
placed himself, without equivalent, in a situation of voluntary
inferiority. The proposition, therefore, that the quantity of land which
people will take when left to themselves is that which is most for their
interest to take, is true only _secundum quid_: it is only their
interest while they have no guarantee for the conduct of one another.
But the arrangement disregards the limitation, and takes the proposition
for true _simpliciter_.

One of the conditions oftenest dropped, when what would otherwise be a
true proposition is employed as a premise for proving others, is the
condition of _time_. It is a principle of political economy that prices,
profits, wages, &c. "always find their level;" but this is often
interpreted as if it meant that they are always, or generally, _at_
their level; while the truth is, as Coleridge epigrammatically expresses
it, that they are always _finding_ their level, "which might be taken as
a paraphrase or ironical definition of a storm."

Under the same head of fallacy (_à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter_) might be placed all the errors which are vulgarly called
misapplications of abstract truths: that is, where a principle, true (as
the common expression is) _in the abstract_, that is, all modifying
causes being supposed absent, is reasoned on as if it were true
absolutely, and no modifying circumstance could ever by possibility
exist. This very common form of error it is not requisite that we
should exemplify here, as it will be particularly treated of hereafter
in its application to the subjects on which it is most frequent and most
fatal, those of politics and society.[33]




