BOOK V.

ON FALLACIES.


"Errare non modo affirmando et negando, sed etiam sentiendo, et in
tacitâ hominum cogitatione contingit."--HOBBES, _Computatio sive
Logica_, ch. v.

"Il leur semble qu'il n'y a qu'à douter par fantaisie, et qu'il n'y a
qu'à dire en général que notre nature est infirme; que notre esprit est
plein d'aveuglement; qu'il faut avoir un grand soin de se défaire de ses
préjugés, et autres choses semblables. Ils pensent que cela suffit pour
ne plus se laisser séduire à ses sens, et pour ne plus se tromper du
tout. Il ne suffit pas de dire que l'esprit est foible, il faut lui
faire sentir ses foiblesses. Ce n'est pas assez de dire qu'il est sujet
à l'erreur, il faut lui découvrir en quoi consistent ses
erreurs."--MALEBRANCHE, _Recherche de la Vérité_.




CHAPTER I.

OF FALLACIES IN GENERAL.


§ 1. It is a maxim of the schoolmen, that "contrariorum eadem est
scientia:" we never really know what a thing is, unless we are also able
to give a sufficient account of its opposite. Conformably to this maxim,
one considerable section, in most treatises on Logic, is devoted to the
subject of Fallacies; and the practice is too well worthy of observance,
to allow of our departing from it. The philosophy of reasoning, to be
complete, ought to comprise the theory of bad as well as of good
reasoning.

We have endeavoured to ascertain the principles by which the sufficiency
of any proof can be tested, and by which the nature and amount of
evidence needful to prove any given conclusion can be determined
beforehand. If these principles were adhered to, then although the
number and value of the truths ascertained would be limited by the
opportunities, or by the industry, ingenuity, and patience, of the
individual inquirer, at least error would not be embraced instead of
truth. But the general consent of mankind, founded on their experience,
vouches for their being far indeed from even this negative kind of
perfection in the employment of their reasoning powers.

In the conduct of life--in the practical business of mankind--wrong
inferences, incorrect interpretations of experience, unless after much
culture of the thinking faculty, are absolutely inevitable: and with
most people, after the highest degree of culture they ever attain, such
erroneous inferences, producing corresponding errors in conduct, are
lamentably frequent. Even in the speculations to which eminent
intellects have systematically devoted themselves, and in reference to
which the collective mind of the scientific world is always at hand to
aid the efforts and correct the aberrations of individuals, it is only
from the more perfect sciences, from those of which the subject-matter
is the least complicated, that opinions not resting on a correct
induction have at length, generally speaking, been expelled. In the
departments of inquiry relating to the more complex phenomena of nature,
and especially those of which the subject is man, whether as a moral and
intellectual, a social, or even as a physical being; the diversity of
opinions still prevalent among instructed persons, and the equal
confidence with which those of the most contrary ways of thinking cling
to their respective tenets, are proof not only that right modes of
philosophizing are not yet generally adopted on those subjects, but that
wrong ones are: that inquirers have not only in general missed the
truth, but have often embraced error; that even the most cultivated
portion of our species have not yet learned to abstain from drawing
conclusions which the evidence does not warrant.

The only complete safeguard against reasoning ill, is the habit of
reasoning well; familiarity with the principles of correct reasoning,
and practice in applying those principles. It is, however, not
unimportant to consider what are the most common modes of bad reasoning;
by what appearances the mind is most likely to be seduced from the
observance of true principles of induction; what, in short, are the most
common and most dangerous varieties of Apparent Evidence, whereby
persons are misled into opinions for which there does not exist evidence
really conclusive.

A catalogue of the varieties of apparent evidence which are not real
evidence, is an enumeration of Fallacies. Without such an enumeration,
therefore, the present work would be wanting in an essential point. And
while writers who included in their theory of reasoning nothing more
than ratiocination, have, in consistency with this limitation, confined
their remarks to the fallacies which have their seat in that portion of
the process of investigation; we, who profess to treat of the whole
process, must add to our directions for performing it rightly, warnings
against performing it wrongly in any of its parts: whether the
ratiocinative or the experimental portion of it be in fault, or the
fault lie in dispensing with ratiocination and induction altogether.


§ 2. In considering the sources of unfounded inference, it is
unnecessary to reckon the errors which arise, not from a wrong method,
nor even from ignorance of the right one, but from a casual lapse,
through hurry or inattention, in the application of the true principles
of induction. Such errors, like the accidental mistakes in casting up a
sum, do not call for philosophical analysis or classification;
theoretical considerations can throw no light upon the means of avoiding
them. In the present treatise our attention is required, not to mere
inexpertness in performing the operation in the right way, (the only
remedies for which are increased attention and more sedulous practice,)
but to the modes of performing it in a way fundamentally wrong; the
conditions under which the human mind persuades itself that it has
sufficient grounds for a conclusion which it has not arrived at by any
of the legitimate methods of induction--which it has not even carelessly
or overhastily, endeavoured to test by those legitimate methods.


§ 3. There is another branch of what may be called the Philosophy of
Error, which must be mentioned here, though only to be excluded from our
subject. The sources of erroneous opinions are twofold, moral and
intellectual. Of these, the moral do not fall within the compass of this
work. They may be classed under two general heads; Indifference to the
attainment of truth, and Bias: of which last the most common case is
that in which we are biassed by our wishes; but the liability is almost
as great to the undue adoption of a conclusion which is disagreeable to
us, as of one which is agreeable, if it be of a nature to bring into
action any of the stronger passions. Persons of timid character are the
more predisposed to believe any statement, the more it is calculated to
alarm them. Indeed it is a psychological law, deducible from the most
general laws of the mental constitution of man, that any strong passion
renders us credulous as to the existence of objects suitable to excite
it.

But the moral causes of opinions, though with most persons the most
powerful of all, are but remote causes: they do not act directly, but by
means of the intellectual causes; to which they bear the same relation
that the circumstances called, in the theory of medicine, _predisposing_
causes, bear to _exciting_ causes. Indifference to truth cannot, in and
by itself, produce erroneous belief; it operates by preventing the mind
from collecting the proper evidences, or from applying to them the test
of a legitimate and rigid induction; by which omission it is exposed
unprotected to the influence of any species of apparent evidence which
offers itself spontaneously, or which is elicited by that smaller
quantity of trouble which the mind may be willing to take. As little is
Bias a direct source of wrong conclusions. We cannot believe a
proposition only by wishing, or only by dreading, to believe it. The
most violent inclination to find a set of propositions true, will not
enable the weakest of mankind to believe them without a vestige of
intellectual grounds--without any, even apparent, evidence. It acts
indirectly, by placing the intellectual grounds of belief in an
incomplete or distorted shape before his eyes. It makes him shrink from
the irksome labour of a rigorous induction, when he has a misgiving that
its result may be disagreeable; and in such examination as he does
institute, it makes him exert that which is in a certain measure
voluntary, his attention, unfairly, giving a larger share of it to the
evidence which seems favourable to the desired conclusion, a smaller to
that which seems unfavourable. It operates, too, by making him look out
eagerly for reasons, or apparent reasons, to support opinions which are
conformable, or resist those which are repugnant, to his interests or
feelings; and when the interests or feelings are common to great numbers
of persons, reasons are accepted and pass current, which would not for a
moment be listened to in that character, if the conclusion had nothing
more powerful than its reasons to speak in its behalf. The natural or
acquired partialities of mankind are continually throwing up
philosophical theories, the sole recommendation of which consists in
the premises they afford for proving cherished doctrines, or justifying
favourite feelings: and when any one of these theories has been so
thoroughly discredited as no longer to serve the purpose, another is
always ready to take its place. This propensity, when exercised in
favour of any widely-spread persuasion or sentiment, is often decorated
with complimentary epithets; and the contrary habit of keeping the
judgment in complete subordination to evidence, is stigmatized by
various hard names, as scepticism, immorality, coldness,
hard-heartedness, and similar expressions according to the nature of the
case. But though the opinions of the generality of mankind, when not
dependent on mere habit and inculcation, have their root much more in
the inclinations than in the intellect, it is a necessary condition to
the triumph of the moral bias that it should first pervert the
understanding. Every erroneous inference, though originating in moral
causes, involves the intellectual operation of admitting insufficient
evidence as sufficient; and whoever was on his guard against all kinds
of inconclusive evidence which can be mistaken for conclusive, would be
in no danger of being led into error even by the strongest bias. There
are minds so strongly fortified on the intellectual side, that they
could not blind themselves to the light of truth, however really
desirous of doing so; they could not, with all the inclination in the
world, pass off upon themselves bad arguments for good ones. If the
sophistry of the intellect could be rendered impossible, that of the
feelings, having no instrument to work with, would be powerless. A
comprehensive classification of all those things which, not being
evidence, are liable to appear such to the understanding, will,
therefore, of itself include all errors of judgment arising from moral
causes, to the exclusion only of errors of practice committed against
better knowledge.

To examine, then, the various kinds of apparent evidence which are not
evidence at all, and of apparently conclusive evidence which do not
really amount to conclusiveness, is the object of that part of our
inquiry into which we are about to enter.

The subject is not beyond the compass of classification and
comprehensive survey. The things, indeed, which are not evidence of any
given conclusion, are manifestly endless, and this negative property,
having no dependence on any positive ones, cannot be made the groundwork
of a real classification. But the things which, not being evidence, are
susceptible of being mistaken for it, are capable of a classification
having reference to the positive property which they possess, of
appearing to be evidence. We may arrange them, at our choice, on either
of two principles; according to the cause which makes them appear to be
evidence, not being so; or according to the particular kind of evidence
which they simulate. The Classification of Fallacies which will be
attempted in the ensuing chapter, is founded on these considerations
jointly.




