CHAPTER VI.

THE PRINCIPLES OF A PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE FURTHER CONSIDERED.


§ 1. We have, thus far, considered only one of the requisites of a
language adapted for the investigation of truth; that its terms shall
each of them convey a determinate and unmistakeable meaning. There are,
however, as we have already remarked, other requisites; some of them
important only in the second degree, but one which is fundamental, and
barely yields in point of importance, if it yields at all, to the
quality which we have already discussed at so much length. That the
language may be fitted for its purposes, not only should every word
perfectly express its meaning, but there should be no important meaning
without its word. Whatever we have occasion to think of often, and for
scientific purposes, ought to have a name appropriated to it.

This requisite of philosophical language may be considered under three
different heads; that number of separate conditions being involved in
it.


§ 2. First: there ought to be all such names, as are needful for making
such a record of individual observations that the words of the record
shall exactly show what fact it is which has been observed. In other
words, there should be an accurate Descriptive Terminology.

The only things which we can observe directly being our own sensations,
or other feelings, a complete descriptive language would be one in which
there should be a name for every variety of elementary sensation or
feeling. Combinations of sensations or feelings may always be described,
if we have a name for each of the elementary feelings which compose
them; but brevity of description, and clearness (which often depends
very much on brevity,) are greatly promoted by giving distinctive names
not to the elements alone, but also to all combinations which are of
frequent recurrence. On this occasion I cannot do better than quote from
Dr. Whewell[17] some of the excellent remarks which he has made on this
important branch of our subject.

"The meaning of [descriptive] technical terms can be fixed in the first
instance only by convention, and can be made intelligible only by
presenting to the senses that which the terms are to signify. The
knowledge of a colour by its name can only be taught through the eye. No
description can convey to a hearer what we mean by _apple-green_ or
_French-grey_. It might, perhaps, be supposed that, in the first
example, the term _apple_, referring to so familiar an object,
sufficiently suggests the colour intended. But it may easily be seen
that this is not true; for apples are of many different hues of green,
and it is only by a conventional selection that we can appropriate the
term to one special shade. When this appropriation is once made, the
term refers to the sensation, and not to the parts of the term; for
these enter into the compound merely as a help to the memory, whether
the suggestion be a natural connexion as in 'apple-green,' or a casual
one as in 'French-grey.' In order to derive due advantage from technical
terms of this kind, they must be associated _immediately_ with the
perception to which they belong; and not connected with it through the
vague usages of common language. The memory must retain the sensation;
and the technical word must be understood as directly as the most
familiar word, and more distinctly. When we find such terms as
_tin-white_ or _pinchbeck-brown_, the metallic colour so denoted ought
to start up in our memory without delay or search.

"This, which it is most important to recollect with respect to the
simpler properties of bodies, as colour and form, is no less true with
respect to more compound notions. In all cases the term is fixed to a
peculiar meaning by convention; and the student, in order to use the
word, must be completely familiar with the convention, so that he has no
need to frame conjectures from the word itself. Such conjectures would
always be insecure, and often erroneous. Thus the term _papilionaceous_
applied to a flower is employed to indicate, not only a resemblance to a
butterfly, but a resemblance arising from five petals of a certain
peculiar shape and arrangement; and even if the resemblance were much
stronger than it is in such cases, yet, if it were produced in a
different way, as for example, by one petal, or two only, instead of a
'standard,' two 'wings,' and a 'keel' consisting of two parts more or
less united into one, we should be no longer justified in speaking of it
as a 'papilionaceous' flower."

When, however, the thing named is, as in this last case, a combination
of simple sensations, it is not necessary, in order to learn the meaning
of the word, that the student should refer back to the sensations
themselves; it may be communicated to him through the medium of other
words; the terms, in short, may be defined. But the names of elementary
sensations, or elementary feelings of any sort, cannot be defined; nor
is there any mode of making their signification known but by making the
learner experience the sensation, or referring him, through some known
mark, to his remembrance of having experienced it before. Hence it is
only the impressions on the outward senses, or those inward feelings
which are connected in a very obvious and uniform manner with outward
objects, that are really susceptible of an exact descriptive language.
The countless variety of sensations which arise, for instance, from
disease, or from peculiar physiological states, it would be in vain to
attempt to name; for as no one can judge whether the sensation I have is
the same with his, the name cannot have, to us two, real community of
meaning. The same may be said, to a considerable extent, of purely
mental feelings. But in some of the sciences which are conversant with
external objects, it is scarcely possible to surpass the perfection to
which this quality of a philosophical language has been carried.

"The formation[18] of an exact and extensive descriptive language for
botany has been executed with a degree of skill and felicity, which,
before it was attained, could hardly have been dreamt of as attainable.
Every part of a plant has been named; and the form of every part, even
the most minute, has had a large assemblage of descriptive terms
appropriated to it, by means of which the botanist can convey and
receive knowledge of form and structure, as exactly as if each minute
part were presented to him vastly magnified. This acquisition was part
of the Linnæan reform.... 'Tournefort,' says Decandolle, 'appears to
have been the first who really perceived the utility of fixing the sense
of terms in such a way as always to employ the same word in the same
sense, and always to express the same idea by the same words; but it was
Linnæus who really created and fixed this botanical language, and this
is his fairest claim to glory, for by this fixation of language he has
shed clearness and precision over all parts of the science.'

"It is not necessary here to give any detailed account of the terms of
botany. The fundamental ones have been gradually introduced, as the
parts of plants were more carefully and minutely examined. Thus the
flower was necessarily distinguished into the _calyx_, the _corolla_,
the _stamens_, and the _pistils_; the sections of the corolla were
termed _petals_ by Columna; those of the calyx were called _sepals_ by
Necker. Sometimes terms of greater generality were devised; as
_perianth_, to include the calyx and corolla, whether one or both of
these were present; _pericarp_, for the part enclosing the grain, of
whatever kind it be, fruit, nut, pod, &c. And it may easily be imagined,
that descriptive terms may, by definition and combination, become very
numerous and distinct. Thus leaves may be called _pinnatifid_,
_pinnatipartite_, _pinnatisect_, _pinnatilobate_, _palmatifid_,
_palmatipartite_, &c., and each of these words designates different
combinations of the modes and extent of the divisions of the leaf with
the divisions of its outline. In some cases, arbitrary numerical
relations are introduced into the definition: thus, a leaf is called
_bilobate_, when it is divided into two parts by a notch; but if the
notch go to the middle of its length, it is _bifid_; if it go near the
base of the leaf, it is _bipartite_; if to the base, it is _bisect_.
Thus, too, a pod of a cruciferous plant is a _siliqua_, if it is four
times as long as it is broad, but if it be shorter than this it is a
_silicula_. Such terms being established, the form of the very complex
leaf or frond of a fern (Hymenophyllum Wilsoni) is exactly conveyed by
the following phrase:--'fronds rigid pinnate, pinnæ recurved
subunilateral, pinnatifid, the segments linear undivided or bifid
spinuloso-serrate.'

"Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with the like
precision: Colour by means of a classified scale of colours.... This was
done with most precision by Werner, and his scale of colours is still
the most usual standard of naturalists. Werner also introduced a more
exact terminology with regard to other characters which are important in
mineralogy, as lustre, hardness. But Mohs improved upon this step by
giving a numerical scale of hardness, in which talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc
spar 3, and so on.... Some properties, as specific gravity, by their
definition give at once a numerical measure; and others, as crystalline
form, require a very considerable array of mathematical calculation and
reasoning, to point out their relations and gradations."


§ 3. Thus far of Descriptive Terminology, or of the language requisite
for placing on record our observation of individual instances. But when
we proceed from this to Induction, or rather to that comparison of
observed instances which is the preparatory step towards it, we stand in
need of an additional and a different sort of general names.

Whenever, for purposes of Induction, we find it necessary to introduce
(in Dr. Whewell's phraseology) some new general conception; that is,
whenever the comparison of a set of phenomena leads to the recognition
in them of some common circumstance, which, our attention not having
been directed to it on any former occasion, is to us a new phenomenon;
it is of importance that this new conception, or this new result of
abstraction, should have a name appropriated to it; especially if the
circumstance it involves be one which leads to many consequences, or
which is likely to be found also in other classes of phenomena. No
doubt, in most cases of the kind, the meaning might be conveyed by
joining together several words already in use. But when a thing has to
be often spoken of, there are more reasons than the saving of time and
space, for speaking of it in the most concise manner possible. What
darkness would be spread over geometrical demonstrations, if wherever
the word _circle_ is used, the definition of a circle were inserted
instead of it. In mathematics and its applications, where the nature of
the processes demands that the attention should be strongly
concentrated, but does not require that it should be widely diffused,
the importance of concentration also in the expressions has always been
duly felt; and a mathematician no sooner finds that he shall often have
occasion to speak of the same two things together, than he at once
creates a term to express them whenever combined: just as, in his
algebraical operations, he substitutes for _(a^m + b^n) p/q_, or for
_a/b + b/c + c/d_ + &c., the single letter P, Q, or S; not solely to
shorten his symbolical expressions, but to simplify the purely
intellectual part of his operations, by enabling the mind to give its
exclusive attention to the relation between the quantity S and the other
quantities which enter into the equation, without being distracted by
thinking unnecessarily of the parts of which S is itself composed.

But there is another reason, in addition to that of promoting
perspicuity, for giving a brief and compact name to each of the more
considerable results of abstraction which are obtained in the course of
our intellectual phenomena. By naming them, we fix our attention upon
them; we keep them more constantly before the mind. The names are
remembered, and being remembered, suggest their definition; while if
instead of specific and characteristic names, the meaning had been
expressed by putting together a number of other names, that particular
combination of words already in common use for other purposes would have
had nothing to make itself remembered by. If we want to render a
particular combination of ideas permanent in the mind, there is nothing
which clenches it like a name specially devoted to express it. If
mathematicians had been obliged to speak of "that to which a quantity,
in increasing or diminishing, is always approaching nearer, so that the
difference becomes less than any assignable quantity, but to which it
never becomes exactly equal," instead of expressing all this by the
simple phrase, "the limit of a quantity," we should probably have long
remained without most of the important truths which have been discovered
by means of the relation between quantities of various kinds and their
limits. If instead of speaking of _momentum_, it had been necessary to
say, "the product of the number of units of velocity in the velocity by
the number of units of mass in the mass," many of the dynamical truths
now apprehended by means of this complex idea would probably have
escaped notice, for want of recalling the idea itself with sufficient
readiness and familiarity. And on subjects less remote from the topics
of popular discussion, whoever wishes to draw attention to some new or
unfamiliar distinction among things, will find no way so sure as to
invent or select suitable names for the express purpose of marking it.

A volume devoted to explaining what the writer means by civilization,
does not raise so vivid a conception of it as the single expression,
that Civilization is a different thing from Cultivation; the compactness
of that brief designation for the contrasted quality being an equivalent
for a long discussion. So, if we would impress forcibly upon the
understanding and memory the distinction between the two different
conceptions of a representative government, we cannot more effectually
do so than by saying that Delegation is not Representation. Hardly any
original thoughts on mental or social subjects ever make their way among
mankind, or assume their proper importance in the minds even of their
inventors, until aptly-selected words or phrases have, as it were,
nailed them down and held them fast.


§ 4. Of the three essential parts of a philosophical language, we have
now mentioned two: a terminology suited for describing with precision
the individual facts observed; and a name for every common property of
any importance or interest, which we detect by comparing those facts:
including (as the concretes corresponding to those abstract terms) names
for the classes which we artificially construct in virtue of those
properties, or as many of them, at least, as we have frequent occasion
to predicate anything of.

But there is a sort of classes, for the recognition of which no such
elaborate process is necessary; because each of them is marked out from
all others not by some one property, the detection of which may depend
on a difficult act of abstraction, but by its properties generally. I
mean, the Kinds of things, in the sense which, in this treatise, has
been specially attached to that term. By a Kind, it will be remembered,
we mean one of those classes which are distinguished from all others not
by one or a few definite properties, but by an unknown multitude of
them: the combination of properties on which the class is grounded,
being a mere index to an indefinite number of other distinctive
attributes. The class horse is a Kind, because the things which agree in
possessing the characters by which we recognise a horse, agree in a
great number of other properties, as we know, and, it cannot be doubted,
in many more than we know. Animal, again, is a Kind, because no
definition that could be given of the name animal could either exhaust
the properties common to all animals, or supply premises from which the
remainder of those properties could be inferred. But a combination of
properties which does not give evidence of the existence of any other
independent peculiarities, does not constitute a Kind. White horse,
therefore, is not a Kind; because horses which agree in whiteness, do
not agree in anything else, except the qualities common to all horses,
and whatever may be the causes or effects of that particular colour.

On the principle that there should be a name for everything which we
have frequent occasion to make assertions about, there ought evidently
to be a name for every Kind; for as it is the very meaning of a Kind
that the individuals composing it have an indefinite multitude of
properties in common, it follows that, if not with our present
knowledge, yet with that which we may hereafter acquire, the Kind is a
subject to which there will have to be applied many predicates. The
third component element of a philosophical language, therefore, is that
there shall be a name for every Kind. In other words, there must not
only be a terminology, but also a nomenclature.

The words Nomenclature and Terminology are employed by most authors
almost indiscriminately; Dr. Whewell being, as far as I am aware, the
first writer who has regularly assigned to the two words different
meanings. The distinction however which he has drawn between them being
real and important, his example is likely to be followed; and (as is apt
to be the case when such innovations in language are felicitously made)
a vague sense of the distinction is found to have influenced the
employment of the terms in common practice, before the expediency had
been pointed out of discriminating them philosophically. Every one would
say that the reform effected by Lavoisier and Guyton-Morveau in the
language of chemistry consisted in the introduction of a new
nomenclature, not of a new terminology. Linear, lanceolate, oval, or
oblong, serrated, dentate, or crenate leaves, are expressions forming
part of the terminology of botany, while the names "Viola odorata," and
"Ulex Europæus," belong to its nomenclature.

A nomenclature may be defined, the collection of the names of all the
Kinds with which any branch of knowledge is conversant; or more
properly, of all the lowest Kinds, or _infimæ species_--those which may
be subdivided indeed, but not into Kinds, and which generally accord
with what in natural history are termed simply species. Science
possesses two splendid examples of a systematic nomenclature; that of
plants and animals, constructed by Linnæus and his successors, and that
of chemistry, which we owe to the illustrious group of chemists who
flourished in France towards the close of the eighteenth century. In
these two departments, not only has every known species, or lowest Kind,
a name assigned to it, but when new lowest Kinds are discovered, names
are at once given to them on an uniform principle. In other sciences the
nomenclature is not at present constructed on any system, either because
the species to be named are not numerous enough to require one, (as in
geometry for example,) or because no one has yet suggested a suitable
principle for such a system, as in mineralogy; in which the want of a
scientifically constructed nomenclature is now the principal cause which
retards the progress of the science.


§ 5. A word which carries on its face that it belongs to a nomenclature,
seems at first sight to differ from other concrete general names in
this--that its meaning does not reside in its connotation, in the
attributes implied in it, but in its denotation, that is, in the
particular group of things which it is appointed to designate; and
cannot, therefore, be unfolded by means of a definition, but must be
made known in another way. This opinion, however, appears to me
erroneous. Words belonging to a nomenclature differ, I conceive, from
other words mainly in this, that besides the ordinary connotation, they
have a peculiar one of their own: besides connoting certain attributes,
they also connote that those attributes are distinctive of a Kind. The
term "peroxide of iron," for example, belonging by its form to the
systematic nomenclature of chemistry, bears on its face that it is the
name of a peculiar Kind of substance. It moreover connotes, like the
name of any other class, some portion of the properties common to the
class; in this instance the property of being a compound of iron and the
largest dose of oxygen with which iron will combine. These two things,
the fact of being such a compound, and the fact of being a Kind,
constitute the connotation of the name peroxide of iron. When we say of
the substance before us, that it is the peroxide of iron, we thereby
assert, first, that it is a compound of iron and a maximum of oxygen,
and next, that the substance so composed is a peculiar Kind of
substance.

Now, this second part of the connotation of any word belonging to a
nomenclature is as essential a portion of its meaning as the first part,
while the definition only declares the first: and hence the appearance
that the signification of such terms cannot be conveyed by a definition:
which appearance, however, is fallacious. The name Viola odorata denotes
a Kind, of which a certain number of characters, sufficient to
distinguish it, are enunciated in botanical works. This enumeration of
characters is surely, as in other cases, a definition of the name. No,
say some, it is not a definition, for the name Viola odorata does not
mean those characters; it means that particular group of plants, and the
characters are selected from among a much greater number, merely as
marks by which to recognise the group. But to this I reply, that the
name does not mean that group, for it would be applied to that group no
longer than while the group is believed to be an _infima species_; if it
were to be discovered that several distinct Kinds have been confounded
under this one name, no one would any longer apply the name Viola
odorata to the whole of the group, but would apply it, if retained at
all, to one only of the Kinds contained therein. What is imperative,
therefore, is not that the name shall denote one particular collection
of objects, but that it shall denote a Kind, and a lowest Kind. The form
of the name declares that, happen what will, it is to denote an _infima
species_; and that, therefore, the properties which it connotes, and
which are expressed in the definition, are to be connoted by it no
longer than while we continue to believe that those properties, when
found together, indicate a Kind, and that the whole of them are found in
no more than one Kind.

With the addition of this peculiar connotation, implied in the form of
every word which belongs to a systematic nomenclature; the set of
characters which is employed to discriminate each Kind from all other
Kinds (and which is a real definition) constitutes as completely as in
any other case the whole meaning of the term. It is no objection to say
that (as is often the case in natural history) the set of characters
may be changed, and another substituted as being better suited for the
purpose of distinction, while the word, still continuing to denote the
same group of things, is not considered to have changed its meaning. For
this is no more than may happen in the case of any other general name:
we may, in reforming its connotation, leave its denotation untouched;
and it is generally desirable to do so. The connotation, however, is not
the less for this the real meaning, for we at once apply the name
wherever the characters set down in the definition are found; and that
which exclusively guides us in applying the term, must constitute its
signification. If we find, contrary to our previous belief, that the
characters are not peculiar to one species, we cease to use the term
coextensively with the characters; but then it is because the other
portion of the connotation fails; the condition that the class must be a
Kind. The connotation, therefore, is still the meaning; the set of
descriptive characters is a true definition; and the meaning is
unfolded, not indeed (as in other cases) by the definition alone, but by
the definition and the form of the word taken together.


§ 6. We have now analysed what is implied in the two principal
requisites of a philosophical language; first, precision, or
definiteness, and secondly, completeness. Any further remarks on the
mode of constructing a nomenclature must be deferred until we treat of
Classification; the mode of naming the Kinds of things being necessarily
subordinate to the mode of arranging those Kinds into larger classes.
With respect to the minor requisites of terminology, some of them are
well stated and illustrated in the "Aphorisms concerning the Language of
Science," included in Dr. Whewell's _Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences_. These, as being of secondary importance in the peculiar point
of view of Logic, I shall not further refer to, but shall confine my
observations to one more quality, which, next to the two already treated
of, appears to be the most valuable which the language of science can
possess. Of this quality a general notion may be conveyed by the
following aphorism:

Whenever the nature of the subject permits our reasoning processes to
be, without danger, carried on mechanically, the language should be
constructed on as mechanical principles as possible; while in the
contrary case, it should be so constructed that there shall be the
greatest possible obstacles to a merely mechanical use of it.

I am aware that this maxim requires much explanation, which I shall at
once proceed to give. And first, as to what is meant by using a language
mechanically. The complete or extreme case of the mechanical use of
language, is when it is used without any consciousness of a meaning, and
with only the consciousness of using certain visible or audible marks in
conformity to technical rules previously laid down. This extreme case is
nowhere realized except in the figures of arithmetic and the symbols of
algebra, a language unique in its kind, and approaching as nearly to
perfection, for the purposes to which it is destined, as can, perhaps,
be said of any creation of the human mind. Its perfection consists in
the completeness of its adaptation to a purely mechanical use. The
symbols are mere counters, without even the semblance of a meaning apart
from the convention which is renewed each time they are employed, and
which is altered at each renewal, the same symbol _a_ or _x_ being used
on different occasions to represent things which (except that, like all
things, they are susceptible of being numbered) have no property in
common. There is nothing, therefore, to distract the mind from the set
of mechanical operations which are to be performed upon the symbols,
such as squaring both sides of the equation, multiplying or dividing
them by the same or by equivalent symbols, and so forth. Each of these
operations, it is true, corresponds to a syllogism; represents one step
of a ratiocination relating not to the symbols, but to the things
signified by them. But as it has been found practicable to frame a
technical form, by conforming to which we can make sure of finding the
conclusion of the ratiocination, our end can be completely attained
without our ever thinking of anything but the symbols. Being thus
intended to work merely as mechanism, they have the qualities which
mechanism ought to have. They are of the least possible bulk, so that
they take up scarcely any room, and waste no time in their manipulation;
they are compact, and fit so closely together that the eye can take in
the whole at once of almost every operation which they are employed to
perform.

These admirable properties of the symbolical language of mathematics
have made so strong an impression on the minds of many thinkers, as to
have led them to consider the symbolical language in question as the
ideal type of philosophical language generally; to think that names in
general, or (as they are fond of calling them) signs, are fitted for the
purposes of thought in proportion as they can be made to approximate to
the compactness, the entire unmeaningness, and the capability of being
used as counters without a thought of what they represent, which are
characteristic of the _a_ and _b_, the _x_ and _y_, of algebra. This
notion has led to sanguine views of the acceleration of the progress of
science by means which, I conceive, cannot possibly conduce to that end,
and forms part of that exaggerated estimate of the influence of signs,
which has contributed in no small degree to prevent the real laws of our
intellectual operations from being rightly understood.

In the first place, a set of signs by which we reason without
consciousness of their meaning, can be serviceable, at most, only in our
deductive operations. In our direct inductions we cannot for a moment
dispense with a distinct mental image of the phenomena, since the whole
operation turns on a perception of the particulars in which those
phenomena agree and differ. But, further, this reasoning by counters is
only suitable to a very limited portion even of our deductive processes.
In our reasonings respecting numbers, the only general principles which
we ever have occasion to introduce, are these, Things which are equal to
the same thing are equal to one another, and The sums or differences of
equal things are equal, with their various corollaries. Not only can no
hesitation ever arise respecting the applicability of these principles,
since they are true of all magnitudes whatever; but every possible
application of which they are susceptible, may be reduced to a
technical rule; and such, in fact, the rules of the calculus are. But if
the symbols represent any other things than mere numbers, let us say
even straight or curve lines, we have then to apply theorems of geometry
not true of all lines without exception, and to select those which are
true of the lines we are reasoning about. And how can we do this unless
we keep completely in mind what particular lines these are? Since
additional geometrical truths may be introduced into the ratiocination
in any stage of its progress, we cannot suffer ourselves, during even
the smallest part of it, to use the names mechanically (as we use
algebraical symbols) without an image annexed to them. It is only after
ascertaining that the solution of a question concerning lines can be
made to depend on a previous question concerning numbers, or in other
words after the question has been (to speak technically) reduced to an
equation, that the unmeaning signs become available, and that the nature
of the facts themselves to which the investigation relates can be
dismissed from the mind. Up to the establishment of the equation, the
language in which mathematicians carry on their reasoning does not
differ in character from that employed by close reasoners on any other
kind of subject.

I do not deny that every correct ratiocination, when thrown into the
syllogistic shape, is conclusive from the mere form of the expression,
provided none of the terms used be ambiguous; and this is one of the
circumstances which have led some writers to think that if all names
were so judiciously constructed and so carefully defined as not to admit
of any ambiguity, the improvement thus made in language would not only
give to the conclusions of every deductive science the same certainty
with those of mathematics, but would reduce all reasonings to the
application of a technical form, and enable their conclusiveness to be
rationally assented to after a merely mechanical process, as is
undoubtedly the case in algebra. But, if we except geometry, the
conclusions of which are already as certain and exact as they can be
made, there is no science but that of number, in which the practical
validity of a reasoning can be apparent to any person who has looked
only at the form of the process. Whoever has assented to what was said
in the last Book concerning the case of the Composition of Causes, and
the still stronger case of the entire supersession of one set of laws by
another, is aware that geometry and algebra are the only sciences of
which the propositions are categorically true: the general propositions
of all other sciences are true only hypothetically, supposing that no
counteracting cause happens to interfere. A conclusion, therefore,
however correctly deduced, in point of form, from admitted laws of
nature, will have no other than an hypothetical certainty. At every step
we must assure ourselves that no other law of nature has superseded, or
intermingled its operation with, those which are the premises of the
reasoning; and how can this be done by merely looking at the words? We
must not only be constantly thinking of the phenomena themselves, but we
must be constantly studying them; making ourselves acquainted with the
peculiarities of every case to which we attempt to apply our general
principles.

The algebraic notation, considered as a philosophical language, is
perfect in its adaptation to the subjects for which it is commonly
employed, namely those of which the investigations have already been
reduced to the ascertainment of a relation between numbers. But,
admirable as it is for its own purpose, the properties by which it is
rendered such are so far from constituting it the ideal model of
philosophical language in general, that the more nearly the language of
any other branch of science approaches to it, the less fit that language
is for its own proper functions. On all other subjects, instead of
contrivances to prevent our attention from being distracted by thinking
of the meaning of our signs, we ought to wish for contrivances to make
it impossible that we should ever lose sight of that meaning even for an
instant.

With this view, as much meaning as possible should be thrown into the
formation of the word itself; the aids of derivation and analogy being
made available to keep alive a consciousness of all that is signified
by it. In this respect those languages have an immense advantage which
form their compounds and derivatives from native roots, like the German,
and not from those of a foreign or dead language, as is so much the case
with English, French, and Italian: and the best are those which form
them according to fixed analogies, corresponding to the relations
between the ideas to be expressed. All languages do this more or less,
but especially, among modern European languages, the German; while even
that is inferior to the Greek, in which the relation between the meaning
of a derivative word and that of its primitive is in general clearly
marked by its mode of formation; except in the case of words compounded
with prepositions, which are often, in both those languages, extremely
anomalous.

But all that can be done, by the mode of constructing words, to prevent
them from degenerating into sounds passing through the mind without any
distinct apprehension of what they signify, is far too little for the
necessity of the case. Words, however well constructed originally, are
always tending, like coins, to have their inscription worn off by
passing from hand to hand; and the only possible mode of reviving it is
to be ever stamping it afresh, by living in the habitual contemplation
of the phenomena themselves, and not resting in our familiarity with the
words that express them. If any one, having possessed himself of the
laws of phenomena as recorded in words, whether delivered to him
originally by others, or even found out by himself, is content from
thenceforth to live among these formulæ, to think exclusively of them,
and of applying them to cases as they arise, without keeping up his
acquaintance with the realities from which these laws were
collected--not only will he continually fail in his practical efforts,
because he will apply his formulæ without duly considering whether, in
this case and in that, other laws of nature do not modify or supersede
them; but the formulæ themselves will progressively lose their meaning
to him, and he will cease at last even to be capable of recognising with
certainty whether a case falls within the contemplation of his formula
or not. It is, in short, as necessary, on all subjects not mathematical,
that the things on which we reason should be conceived by us in the
concrete, and "clothed in circumstances," as it is in algebra that we
should keep all individualizing peculiarities sedulously out of view.

With this remark we close our observations on the Philosophy of
Language.




