CHAPTER XXV.

OF THE GROUNDS OF DISBELIEF.


§ 1. The method of arriving at general truths, or general propositions
fit to be believed, and the nature of the evidence on which they are
grounded, have been discussed, as far as space and the writer's
faculties permitted, in the twenty-four preceding chapters. But the
result of the examination of evidence is not always belief, nor even
suspension of judgment; it is sometimes disbelief. The philosophy,
therefore, of induction and experimental inquiry is incomplete, unless
the grounds not only of belief, but of disbelief, are treated of; and to
this topic we shall devote one, and the final, chapter.

By disbelief is not here to be understood the mere absence of belief.
The ground for abstaining from belief is simply the absence or
insufficiency of proof; and in considering what is sufficient evidence
to support any given conclusion, we have already, by implication,
considered what evidence is not sufficient for the same purpose. By
disbelief is here meant, not the state of mind in which we form no
opinion concerning a subject, but that in which we are fully persuaded
that some opinion is not true; insomuch that if evidence, even of great
apparent strength, (whether grounded on the testimony of others or on
our own supposed perceptions,) were produced in favour of the opinion,
we should believe that the witnesses spoke falsely, or that they, or we
ourselves if we were the direct percipients, were mistaken.

That there are such cases, no one is likely to dispute. Assertions for
which there is abundant positive evidence are often disbelieved, on
account of what is called their improbability, or impossibility. And the
question for consideration is what, in the present case, these words
mean, and how far and in what circumstances the properties which they
express are sufficient grounds for disbelief.


§ 2. It is to be remarked in the first place, that the positive evidence
produced in support of an assertion which is nevertheless rejected on
the score of impossibility or improbability, is never such as amounts to
full proof. It is always grounded on some approximate generalization.
The fact may have been asserted by a hundred witnesses; but there are
many exceptions to the universality of the generalization that what a
hundred witnesses affirm is true. We may seem to ourselves to have
actually seen the fact: but, that we really see what we think we see, is
by no means an universal truth; our organs may have been in a morbid
state; or we may have inferred something, and imagined that we perceived
it. The evidence, then, in the affirmative being never more than an
approximate generalization, all will depend on what the evidence in the
negative is. If that also rests on an approximate generalization, it is
a case for comparison of probabilities. If the approximate
generalizations leading to the affirmative are, when added together,
less strong, or in other words, farther from being universal, than the
approximate generalizations which support the negative side of the
question, the proposition is said to be improbable, and is to be
disbelieved provisionally. If however an alleged fact be in
contradiction, not to any number of approximate generalizations, but to
a completed generalization grounded on a rigorous induction, it is said
to be impossible, and is to be disbelieved totally.

This last principle, simple and evident as it appears, is the doctrine
which, on the occasion of an attempt to apply it to the question of the
credibility of miracles, excited so violent a controversy. Hume's
celebrated doctrine, that nothing is credible which is contradictory to
experience, or at variance with laws of nature, is merely this very
plain and harmless proposition, that whatever is contradictory to a
complete induction is incredible. That such a maxim as this should
either be accounted a dangerous heresy, or mistaken for a great and
recondite truth, speaks ill for the state of philosophical speculation
on such subjects.

But does not (it may be asked) the very statement of the proposition
imply a contradiction? An alleged fact, according to this theory, is not
to be believed if it contradict a complete induction. But it is
essential to the completeness of an induction that it shall not
contradict any known fact. Is it not then a _petitio principii_ to say,
that the fact ought to be disbelieved because the induction opposed to
it is complete? How can we have a right to declare the induction
complete, while facts, supported by credible evidence, present
themselves in opposition to it?

I answer, we have that right whenever the scientific canons of induction
give it to us; that is, whenever the induction _can_ be complete. We
have it, for example, in a case of causation in which there has been an
_experimentum crucis_. If an antecedent A, superadded to a set of
antecedents in all other respects unaltered, is followed by an effect B
which did not exist before, A is, in that instance at least, the cause
of B, or an indispensable part of its cause; and if A be tried again
with many totally different sets of antecedents and B still follows,
then it is the whole cause. If these observations or experiments have
been repeated so often, and by so many persons, as to exclude all
supposition of error in the observer, a law of nature is established;
and so long as this law is received as such, the assertion that on any
particular occasion A took place, and yet B did not follow, _without any
counteracting cause_, must be disbelieved. Such an assertion is not to
be credited on any less evidence than what would suffice to overturn the
law. The general truths, that whatever has a beginning has a cause, and
that when none but the same causes exist, the same effects follow, rest
on the strongest inductive evidence possible; the proposition that
things affirmed by even a crowd of respectable witnesses are true, is
but an approximate generalization; and--even if we fancy we actually saw
or felt the fact which is in contradiction to the law--what a human
being can see is no more than a set of appearances; from which the real
nature of the phenomenon is merely an inference, and in this inference
approximate generalizations usually have a large share. If, therefore,
we make our election to hold by the law, no quantity of evidence
whatever ought to persuade us that there has occurred anything in
contradiction to it. If, indeed, the evidence produced is such that it
is more likely that the set of observations and experiments on which the
law rests should have been inaccurately performed or incorrectly
interpreted, than that the evidence in question should be false, we may
believe the evidence; but then we must abandon the law. And since the
law was received on what seemed a complete induction, it can only be
rejected on evidence equivalent; namely, as being inconsistent not with
any number of approximate generalizations, but with some other and
better established law of nature. This extreme case, of a conflict
between two supposed laws of nature, has probably never actually
occurred where, in the process of investigating both the laws, the true
canons of scientific induction had been kept in view; but if it did
occur, it must terminate in the total rejection of one of the supposed
laws. It would prove that there must be a flaw in the logical process by
which either one or the other was established: and if there be so, that
supposed general truth is no truth at all. We cannot admit a proposition
as a law of nature, and yet believe a fact in real contradiction to it.
We must disbelieve the alleged fact, or believe that we were mistaken in
admitting the supposed law.

But in order that any alleged fact should be contradictory to a law of
causation, the allegation must be, not simply that the cause existed
without being followed by the effect, for that would be no uncommon
occurrence; but that this happened in the absence of any adequate
counteracting cause. Now in the case of an alleged miracle, the
assertion is the exact opposite of this. It is, that the effect was
defeated, not in the absence, but in consequence of a counteracting
cause, namely, a direct interposition of an act of the will of some
being who has power over nature; and in particular of a Being, whose
will being assumed to have endowed all the causes with the powers by
which they produce their effects, may well be supposed able to
counteract them. A miracle (as was justly remarked by Brown[41]) is no
contradiction to the law of cause and effect; it is a new effect,
supposed to be produced by the introduction of a new cause. Of the
adequacy of that cause, if present, there can be no doubt; and the only
antecedent improbability which can be ascribed to the miracle, is the
improbability that any such cause existed.

All, therefore, which Hume has made out, and this he must be considered
to have made out, is, that (at least in the imperfect state of our
knowledge of natural agencies, which leaves it always possible that some
of the physical antecedents may have been hidden from us,) no evidence
can prove a miracle to any one who did not previously believe the
existence of a being or beings with supernatural power; or who believes
himself to have full proof that the character of the Being whom he
recognises, is inconsistent with his having seen fit to interfere on the
occasion in question.

If we do not already believe in supernatural agencies, no miracle can
prove to us their existence. The miracle itself, considered merely as an
extraordinary fact, may be satisfactorily certified by our senses or by
testimony; but nothing can ever prove that it is a miracle: there is
still another possible hypothesis, that of its being the result of some
unknown natural cause: and this possibility cannot be so completely shut
out, as to leave no alternative but that of admitting the existence and
intervention of a being superior to nature. Those, however, who already
believe in such a being, have two hypotheses to choose from, a
supernatural and an unknown natural agency; and they have to judge which
of the two is the most probable in the particular case. In forming this
judgment, an important element of the question will be the conformity of
the result to the laws of the supposed agent, that is, to the character
of the Deity as they conceive it. But, with the knowledge which we now
possess of the general uniformity of the course of nature, religion,
following in the wake of science, has been compelled to acknowledge the
government of the universe as being on the whole carried on by general
laws, and not by special interpositions. To whoever holds this belief,
there is a general presumption against any supposition of divine agency
not operating through general laws, or in other words, there is an
antecedent improbability in every miracle, which, in order to outweigh
it, requires an extraordinary strength of antecedent probability derived
from the special circumstances of the case.


§ 3. It appears from what has been said, that the assertion that a cause
has been defeated of an effect which is connected with it by a
completely ascertained law of causation, is to be disbelieved or not,
according to the probability or improbability that there existed in the
particular instance an adequate counteracting cause. To form an estimate
of this, is not more difficult than of other probabilities. With regard
to all _known_ causes capable of counteracting the given causes, we have
generally some previous knowledge of the frequency or rarity of their
occurrence, from which we may draw an inference as to the antecedent
improbability of their having been present in any particular case. And
neither in respect to known or unknown causes are we required to
pronounce on the probability of their existing in nature, but only of
their having existed at the time and place at which the transaction is
alleged to have happened. We are seldom, therefore, without the means
(when the circumstances of the case are at all known to us) of judging
how far it is likely that such a cause should have existed at that time
and place without manifesting its presence by some other marks, and (in
the case of an unknown cause) without having hitherto manifested its
existence in any other instance. According as this circumstance, or the
falsity of the testimony, appears more improbable, that is, conflicts
with an approximate generalization of a higher order, we believe the
testimony, or disbelieve it; with a stronger or a weaker degree of
conviction, according to the preponderance: at least until we have
sifted the matter further.

So much, then, for the case in which the alleged fact conflicts, or
appears to conflict, with a real law of causation. But a more common
case, perhaps, is that of its conflicting with uniformities of mere
coexistence, not proved to be dependent on causation: in other words,
with the properties of Kinds. It is with these uniformities principally,
that the marvellous stories related by travellers are apt to be at
variance: as of men with tails, or with wings, and (until confirmed by
experience) of flying fish; or of ice, in the celebrated anecdote of the
Dutch travellers and the King of Siam. Facts of this description, facts
previously unheard of but which could not from any known law of
causation be pronounced impossible, are what Hume characterizes as not
contrary to experience, but merely unconformable to it; and Bentham, in
his treatise on Evidence, denominates them facts disconformable _in
specie_, as distinguished from such as are disconformable _in toto_ or
in _degree_.

In a case of this description, the fact asserted is the existence of a
new Kind; which in itself is not in the slightest degree incredible, and
only to be rejected if the improbability that any variety of object
existing at the particular place and time should not have been
discovered sooner, be greater than that of error or mendacity in the
witnesses. Accordingly, such assertions, when made by credible persons,
and of unexplored places, are not disbelieved, but at most regarded as
requiring confirmation from subsequent observers; unless the alleged
properties of the supposed new Kind are at variance with known
properties of some larger kind which includes it; or in other words,
unless, in the new Kind which is asserted to exist, some properties are
said to have been found disjoined from others which have always been
known to accompany them; as in the case of Pliny's men, or any other
kind of animal of a structure different from that which has always been
found to coexist with animal life. On the mode of dealing with any such
case, little needs be added to what has been said on the same topic in
the twenty-second chapter.[42] When the uniformities of coexistence
which the alleged fact would violate, are such as to raise a strong
presumption of their being the result of causation, the fact which
conflicts with them is to be disbelieved; at least provisionally, and
subject to further investigation. When the presumption amounts to a
virtual certainty, as in the case of the general structure of organized
beings, the only question requiring consideration is whether, in
phenomena so little understood, there may not be liabilities to
counteraction from causes hitherto unknown; or whether the phenomena may
not be capable of originating in some other way, which would produce a
different set of derivative uniformities. Where (as in the case of the
flying fish, or the ornithorhynchus) the generalization to which the
alleged fact would be an exception is very special and of limited range,
neither of the above suppositions can be deemed very improbable; and it
is generally, in the case of such alleged anomalies, wise to suspend our
judgment, pending the subsequent inquiries which will not fail to
confirm the assertion if it be true. But when the generalization is very
comprehensive, embracing a vast number and variety of observations, and
covering a considerable province of the domain of nature; then, for
reasons which have been fully explained, such an empirical law comes
near to the certainty of an ascertained law of causation: and any
alleged exception to it cannot be admitted, unless on the evidence of
some law of causation proved by a still more complete induction.

Such uniformities in the course of nature as do not bear marks of being
the results of causation, are, as we have already seen, admissible as
universal truths with a degree of credence proportioned to their
generality. Those which are true of all things whatever, or at least
which are totally independent of the varieties of Kinds, namely, the
laws of number and extension, to which we may add the law of causation
itself, are probably the only ones, an exception to which is absolutely
and permanently incredible. Accordingly, it is to assertions supposed to
be contradictory to these laws, or to some others coming near to them in
generality, that the word impossibility (at least _total_ impossibility)
seems to be generally confined. Violations of other laws, of special
laws of causation for instance, are said, by persons studious of
accuracy in expression, to be impossible _in the circumstances of the
case_; or impossible unless some cause had existed which did not exist
in the particular case.[43] Of no assertion, not in contradiction to
some of these very general laws, will more than improbability be
asserted by any cautious person; and improbability not of the highest
degree, unless the time and place in which the fact is said to have
occurred, render it almost certain that the anomaly, if real, could not
have been overlooked by other observers. Suspension of judgment is in
all other cases the resource of the judicious inquirer; provided the
testimony in favour of the anomaly presents, when well sifted, no
suspicious circumstances.

But the testimony is scarcely ever found to stand that test, in cases in
which the anomaly is not real. In the instances on record in which a
great number of witnesses, of good reputation and scientific
acquirements, have testified to the truth of something which has turned
out untrue, there have almost always been circumstances which, to a keen
observer who had taken due pains to sift the matter, would have rendered
the testimony untrustworthy. There have generally been means of
accounting for the impression on the senses or minds of the alleged
percipients, by fallacious appearances; or some epidemic delusion,
propagated by the contagious influence of popular feeling, has been
concerned in the case; or some strong interest has been
implicated--religious zeal, party feeling, vanity, or at least the
passion for the marvellous, in persons strongly susceptible of it. When
none of these or similar circumstances exist to account for the apparent
strength of the testimony; and where the assertion is not in
contradiction either to those universal laws which know no counteraction
or anomaly, or to the generalizations next in comprehensiveness to them,
but would only amount, if admitted, to the existence of an unknown cause
or an anomalous Kind, in circumstances not so thoroughly explored but
that it is credible that things hitherto unknown may still come to
light; a cautious person will neither admit nor reject the testimony,
but will wait for confirmation at other times and from other unconnected
sources. Such ought to have been the conduct of the King of Siam when
the Dutch travellers affirmed to him the existence of ice. But an
ignorant person is as obstinate in his contemptuous incredulity as he is
unreasonably credulous. Anything unlike his own narrow experience he
disbelieves, if it flatters no propensity; any nursery tale is swallowed
implicitly by him if it does.


§ 4. I shall now advert to a very serious misapprehension of the
principles of the subject, which has been committed by some of the
writers against Hume's Essay on Miracles, and by Bishop Butler before
them, in their anxiety to destroy what appeared to them a formidable
weapon of assault against the Christian religion; and the effect of
which is entirely to confound the doctrine of the Grounds of Disbelief.
The mistake consists in overlooking the distinction between (what may be
called) improbability before the fact, and improbability after it; or
(since, as Mr. Venn remarks, the distinction of past and future is not
the material circumstance) between the improbability of a mere guess
being right, and the improbability of an alleged fact being true.

Many events are altogether improbable to us, before they have happened,
or before we are informed of their happening, which are not in the least
incredible when we are informed of them, because not contrary to any,
even approximate, induction. In the cast of a perfectly fair die, the
chances are five to one against throwing ace, that is, ace will be
thrown on an average only once in six throws. But this is no reason
against believing that ace was thrown on a given occasion, if any
credible witness asserts it; since though ace is only thrown once in six
times, _some_ number which is only thrown once in six times must have
been thrown if the die was thrown at all. The improbability, then, or in
other words, the unusualness, of any fact, is no reason for disbelieving
it, if the nature of the case renders it certain that either that or
something equally improbable, that is, equally unusual, did happen. Nor
is this all: for even if the other five sides of the die were all twos,
or all threes, yet as ace would still on the average come up once in
every six throws, its coming up in a given throw would be not in any way
contradictory to experience. If we disbelieved all facts which had the
chances against them beforehand, we should believe hardly anything. We
are told that A. B. died yesterday: the moment before we were so told,
the chances against his having died on that day may have been ten
thousand to one; but since he was certain to die at some time or other,
and when he died must necessarily die on some particular day, while the
preponderance of chances is very great against every day in particular,
experience affords no ground for discrediting any testimony which may be
produced to the event's having taken place on a given day.

Yet it has been considered, by Dr. Campbell and others, as a complete
answer to Hume's doctrine (that things are incredible which are
_contrary_ to the uniform course of experience), that we do not
disbelieve, merely because the chances were against them, things in
strict _conformity_ to the uniform course of experience; that we do not
disbelieve an alleged fact merely because the combination of causes on
which it depends occurs only once in a certain number of times. It is
evident that whatever is shown by observation, or can be proved from
laws of nature, to occur in a certain proportion (however small) of the
whole number of possible cases, is not contrary to experience; though we
are right in disbelieving it, if some other supposition respecting the
matter in question involves on the whole a less departure from the
ordinary course of events. Yet, on such grounds as this have able
writers been led to the extraordinary conclusion, that nothing supported
by credible testimony ought ever to be disbelieved.


§ 5. We have considered two species of events, commonly said to be
improbable; one kind which are in no way extraordinary, but which,
having an immense preponderance of chances against them, are improbable
until they are affirmed, but no longer; another kind which, being
contrary to some recognised law of nature, are incredible on any amount
of testimony except such as would be sufficient to shake our belief in
the law itself. But between these two classes of events, there is an
intermediate class, consisting of what are commonly termed Coincidences:
in other words, those combinations of chances which present some
peculiar and unexpected regularity, assimilating them, in so far, to the
results of law. As if, for example, in a lottery of a thousand tickets,
the numbers should be drawn in the exact order of what are called the
natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, &c. We have still to consider the principles
of evidence applicable to this case: whether there is any difference
between coincidences and ordinary events, in the amount of testimony or
other evidence necessary to render them credible.

It is certain, that on every rational principle of expectation, a
combination of this peculiar sort may be expected quite as often as any
other given series of a thousand numbers; that with perfectly fair dice,
sixes will be thrown twice, thrice, or any number of times in
succession, quite as often in a thousand or a million throws, as any
other succession of numbers fixed upon beforehand; and that no judicious
player would give greater odds against the one series than against the
other. Notwithstanding this, there is a general disposition to regard
the one as much more improbable than the other, and as requiring much
stronger evidence to make it credible. Such is the force of this
impression, that it has led some thinkers to the conclusion, that nature
has greater difficulty in producing regular combinations than irregular
ones; or in other words, that there is some general tendency of things,
some law, which prevents regular combinations from occurring, or at
least from occurring so often as others. Among these thinkers may be
numbered D'Alembert; who, in an Essay on Probabilities to be found in
the fifth volume of his _Mélanges_, contends that regular combinations,
though equally probable according to the mathematical theory with any
others, are physically less probable. He appeals to common sense, or in
other words, to common impressions; saying, if dice thrown repeatedly in
our presence gave sixes every time, should we not, before the number of
throws had reached ten, (not to speak of thousands of millions,) be
ready to affirm, with the most positive conviction, that the dice were
false?

The common and natural impression is in favour of D'Alembert: the
regular series would be thought much more unlikely than an irregular.
But this common impression is, I apprehend, merely grounded on the fact,
that scarcely anybody remembers to have ever seen one of these peculiar
coincidences: the reason of which is simply that no one's experience
extends to anything like the number of trials, within which that or any
other given combination of events can be expected to happen. The chance
of sixes on a single throw of two dice being 1/36, the chance of sixes
ten times in succession is 1 divided by the tenth power of 36; in other
words, such a concurrence is only likely to happen once in
3,656,158,440,062,976 trials, a number which no dice-player's experience
comes up to a millionth part of. But if, instead of sixes ten times, any
other given succession of ten throws had been fixed upon, it would have
been exactly as unlikely that in any individual's experience that
particular succession had ever occurred; although this does not _seem_
equally improbable, because no one could possibly have remembered
whether it had occurred or not, and because the comparison is tacitly
made, not between sixes ten times and any one particular series of
throws, but between all regular and all irregular successions taken
together.

That (as D'Alembert says) if the succession of sixes was actually thrown
before our eyes, we should ascribe it not to chance, but to unfairness
in the dice, is unquestionably true. But this arises from a totally
different principle. We should then be considering, not the probability
of the fact in itself, but the comparative probability with which, when
it is known to have happened, it may be referred to one or to another
cause. The regular series is not at all less likely than the irregular
one to be brought about by chance, but it is much more likely than the
irregular one to be produced by design; or by some general cause
operating through the structure of the dice. It is the nature of casual
combinations to produce a repetition of the same event, as often and no
oftener than any other series of events. But it is the nature of general
causes to reproduce, in the same circumstances, always the same event.
Common sense and science alike dictate that, all other things being the
same, we should rather attribute the effect to a cause which if real
would be very likely to produce it, than to a cause which would be very
unlikely to produce it. According to Laplace's sixth theorem, which we
demonstrated in a former chapter, the difference of probability arising
from the superior _efficacy_ of the constant cause, unfairness in the
dice, would after a very few throws far outweigh any antecedent
probability which there could be against its existence.

D'Alembert should have put the question in another manner. He should
have supposed that we had ourselves previously tried the dice, and knew
by ample experience that they were fair. Another person then tries them
in our absence, and assures us that he threw sixes ten times in
succession. Is the assertion credible or not? Here the effect to be
accounted for is not the occurrence itself, but the fact of the
witness's asserting it. This may arise either from its having really
happened, or from some other cause. What we have to estimate is the
comparative probability of these two suppositions.

If the witness affirmed that he had thrown any other series of numbers,
supposing him to be a person of veracity, and tolerable accuracy, and to
profess that he took particular notice, we should believe him. But the
ten sixes are exactly as likely to have been really thrown as the other
series. If, therefore, this assertion is less credible than the other,
the reason must be, not that it is less likely than the other to be made
truly, but that it is more likely than the other to be made falsely.

One reason obviously presents itself why what is called a coincidence,
should be oftener asserted falsely than an ordinary combination. It
excites wonder. It gratifies the love of the marvellous. The motives,
therefore, to falsehood, one of the most frequent of which is the desire
to astonish, operate more strongly in favour of this kind of assertion
than of the other kind. Thus far there is evidently more reason for
discrediting an alleged coincidence, than a statement in itself not more
probable, but which if made would not be thought remarkable. There are
cases, however, in which the presumption on this ground would be the
other way. There are some witnesses who, the more extraordinary an
occurrence might appear, would be the more anxious to verify it by the
utmost carefulness of observation before they would venture to believe
it, and still more before they would assert it to others.


§ 6. Independently, however, of any peculiar chances of mendacity
arising from the nature of the assertion, Laplace contends, that merely
on the general ground of the fallibility of testimony, a coincidence is
not credible on the same amount of testimony on which we should be
warranted in believing an ordinary combination of events. In order to do
justice to his argument, it is necessary to illustrate it by the example
chosen by himself.

If, says Laplace, there were one thousand tickets in a box, and one only
has been drawn out, then if an eye-witness affirms that the number drawn
was 79, this, though the chances were 999 in 1000 against it, is not on
that account the less credible; its credibility is equal to the
antecedent probability of the witness's veracity. But if there were in
the box 999 black balls and only one white, and the witness affirms that
the white ball was drawn, the case according to Laplace is very
different: the credibility of his assertion is but a small fraction of
what it was in the former case; the reason of the difference being as
follows.

The witnesses of whom we are speaking must, from the nature of the case,
be of a kind whose credibility falls materially short of certainty: let
us suppose, then, the credibility of the witness in the case in question
to be 9/10; that is, let us suppose that in every ten statements which
the witness makes, nine on an average are correct, and one incorrect.
Let us now suppose that there have taken place a sufficient number of
drawings to exhaust all the possible combinations, the witness deposing
in every one. In one case out of every ten in all these drawings he will
actually have made a false announcement. But in the case of the thousand
tickets these false announcements will have been distributed impartially
over all the numbers, and of the 999 cases in which No. 79 was not
drawn, there will have been only one case in which it was announced. On
the contrary, in the case of the thousand balls, (the announcement being
always either "black" or "white,") if white was not drawn, and there was
a false announcement, that false announcement _must_ have been white;
and since by the supposition there was a false announcement once in
every ten times, white will have been announced falsely in one tenth
part of all the cases in which it was not drawn, that is, in one tenth
part of 999 cases out of every thousand. White, then, is drawn, on an
average, exactly as often as No. 79, but it is announced, without having
been really drawn, 999 times as often as No. 79; the announcement
therefore requires a much greater amount of testimony to render it
credible.[44]

To make this argument valid it must of course be supposed, that the
announcements made by the witness are average specimens of his general
veracity and accuracy; or, at least, that they are neither more nor less
so in the case of the black and white balls, than in the case of the
thousand tickets. This assumption, however, is not warranted. A person
is far less likely to mistake, who has only one form of error to guard
against, than if he had 999 different errors to avoid. For instance, in
the example chosen, a messenger who might make a mistake once in ten
times in reporting the number drawn in a lottery, might not err once in
a thousand times if sent simply to observe whether a ball was black or
white. Laplace's argument therefore is faulty even as applied to his own
case. Still less can that case be received as completely representing
all cases of coincidence. Laplace has so contrived his example, that
though black answers to 999 distinct possibilities, and white only to
one, the witness has nevertheless no bias which can make him prefer
black to white. The witness did not know that there were 999 black balls
in the box and only one white; or if he did, Laplace has taken care to
make all the 999 cases so undistinguishably alike, that there is hardly
a possibility of any cause of falsehood or error operating in favour of
any of them, which would not operate in the same manner if there were
only one. Alter this supposition, and the whole argument falls to the
ground. Let the balls, for instance, be numbered, and let the white ball
be No. 79. Considered in respect of their colour, there are but two
things which the witness can be interested in asserting, or can have
dreamt or hallucinated, or has to choose from if he answers at random,
viz. black and white: but considered in respect of the numbers attached
to them, there are a thousand: and if his interest or error happens to
be connected with the numbers, though the only assertion he makes is
about the colour, the case becomes precisely assimilated to that of the
thousand tickets. Or instead of the balls suppose a lottery, with 1000
tickets and but one prize, and that I hold No. 79, and being interested
only in that, ask the witness not what was the number drawn, but whether
it was 79 or some other. There are now only two cases, as in Laplace's
example; yet he surely would not say that if the witness answered 79,
the assertion would be in an enormous proportion less credible, than if
he made the same answer to the same question asked in the other way. If,
for instance, (to put a case supposed by Laplace himself,) he has staked
a large sum on one of the chances, and thinks that by announcing its
occurrence he shall increase his credit; he is equally likely to have
betted on any one of the 999 numbers which are attached to black balls,
and so far as the chances of mendacity from this cause are concerned,
there will be 999 times as many chances of his announcing black falsely,
as white.

Or suppose a regiment of 1000 men, 999 Englishmen and one Frenchman, and
that of these one man has been killed, and it is not known which. I ask
the question, and the witness answers, the Frenchman. This was not only
as improbable _à priori_, but is in itself as singular a circumstance,
as remarkable a coincidence, as the drawing of the white ball: yet we
should believe the statement as readily, as if the answer had been John
Thompson. Because though the 999 Englishmen were all alike in the point
in which they differed from the Frenchman, they were not, like the 999
black balls, undistinguishable in every other respect; but being all
different, they admitted as many chances of interest or error, as if
each man had been of a different nation; and if a lie was told or a
mistake made, the misstatement was as likely to fall on any Jones or
Thompson of the set, as on the Frenchman.

The example of a coincidence selected by D'Alembert, that of sixes
thrown on a pair of dice ten times in succession, belongs to this sort
of cases rather than to such as Laplace's. The coincidence is here far
more remarkable, because of far rarer occurrence, than the drawing of
the white ball. But though the improbability of its really occurring is
greater, the superior probability of its being announced falsely cannot
be established with the same evidence. The announcement "black"
represented 999 cases, but the witness may not have known this, and if
he did, the 999 cases are so exactly alike, that there is really only
one set of possible causes of mendacity corresponding to the whole. The
announcement "sixes _not_ drawn ten times," represents, and is known by
the witness to represent, a great multitude of contingencies, every one
of which being unlike every other, there may be a different and a fresh
set of causes of mendacity corresponding to each.

It appears to me, therefore, that Laplace's doctrine is not strictly
true of any coincidences, and is wholly inapplicable to most: and that
to know whether a coincidence does or does not require more evidence to
render it credible than an ordinary event, we must refer, in every
instance, to first principles, and estimate afresh what is the
probability that the given testimony would have been delivered in that
instance, supposing the fact which it asserts not to be true.

With these remarks we close the discussion of the Grounds of Disbelief;
and along with it, such exposition as space admits, and as the writer
has it in his power to furnish, of the Logic of Induction.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Cours de Philosophie Positive_, ii. 656.

[2] Vide supra, book iii. ch. xi.

[3] _Philosophy of Discovery_, pp. 185 et seqq.

[4] _Philosophie Positive_, ii. 434-437.

[5] As an example of legitimate hypothesis according to the test here
laid down, has been justly cited that of Broussais, who, proceeding on
the very rational principle that every disease must originate in some
definite part or other of the organism, boldly assumed that certain
fevers, which not being known to be local were called constitutional,
had their origin in the mucous membrane of the alimentary canal. The
supposition was indeed, as is now generally admitted, erroneous; but he
was justified in making it, since by deducing the consequences of the
supposition, and comparing them with the facts of those maladies, he
might be certain of disproving his hypothesis if it was ill founded, and
might expect that the comparison would materially aid him in framing
another more conformable to the phenomena.

The doctrine now universally received, that the earth is a natural
magnet, was originally an hypothesis of the celebrated Gilbert.

Another hypothesis, to the legitimacy of which no objection can lie, and
which is well calculated to light the path of scientific inquiry, is
that suggested by several recent writers, that the brain is a voltaic
pile, and that each of its pulsations is a discharge of electricity
through the system. It has been remarked that the sensation felt by the
hand from the beating of a brain, bears a strong resemblance to a
voltaic shock. And the hypothesis, if followed to its consequences,
might afford a plausible explanation of many physiological facts, while
there is nothing to discourage the hope that we may in time sufficiently
understand the conditions of voltaic phenomena to render the truth of
the hypothesis amenable to observation and experiment.

The attempt to localize, in different regions of the brain, the physical
organs of our different mental faculties and propensities, was, on the
part of its original author, a legitimate example of a scientific
hypothesis; and we ought not, therefore, to blame him for the extremely
slight grounds on which he often proceeded, in an operation which could
only be tentative, though we may regret that materials barely sufficient
for a first rude hypothesis should have been hastily worked up into the
vain semblance of a science. If there be really a connexion between the
scale of mental endowments and the various degrees of complication in
the cerebral system, the nature of that connexion was in no other way so
likely to be brought to light as by framing, in the first instance, an
hypothesis similar to that of Gall. But the verification of any such
hypothesis is attended, from the peculiar nature of the phenomena, with
difficulties which phrenologists have not shown themselves even
competent to appreciate, much less to overcome.

Mr. Darwin's remarkable speculation on the Origin of Species is another
unimpeachable example of a legitimate hypothesis. What he terms "natural
selection" is not only a _vera causa_, but one proved to be capable of
producing effects of the same kind with those which the hypothesis
ascribes to it: the question of possibility is entirely one of degree.
It is unreasonable to accuse Mr. Darwin (as has been done) of violating
the rules of Induction. The rules of Induction are concerned with the
conditions of Proof. Mr. Darwin has never pretended that his doctrine
was proved. He was not bound by the rules of Induction, but by those of
Hypothesis. And these last have seldom been more completely fulfilled.
He has opened a path of inquiry full of promise, the results of which
none can foresee. And is it not a wonderful feat of scientific knowledge
and ingenuity to have rendered so bold a suggestion, which the first
impulse of every one was to reject at once, admissible and discussable,
even as a conjecture?

[6] Whewell's _Phil. of Discovery_, pp. 275, 276.

[7] What has most contributed to accredit the hypothesis of a physical
medium for the conveyance of light, is the certain fact that light
_travels_, (which cannot be proved of gravitation,) that its
communication is not instantaneous, but requires time, and that it is
intercepted (which gravitation is not) by intervening objects. These are
analogies between its phenomena and those of the mechanical motion of a
solid or fluid substance. But we are not entitled to assume that
mechanical motion is the only power in nature capable of exhibiting
those attributes.

[8] _Phil. of Disc._ p. 274.

[9] P. 271.

[10] P. 251 and the whole of Appendix G.

[11] In Dr. Whewell's latest version of his theory (_Philosophy of
Discovery_, p. 331) he makes a concession respecting the medium of the
transmission of light, which, taken in conjunction with the rest of his
doctrine on the subject, is not, I confess, very intelligible to me, but
which goes far towards removing, if it does not actually remove, the
whole of the difference between us. He is contending, against Sir
William Hamilton, that all matter has weight. Sir William, in proof of
the contrary, cited the luminiferous ether, and the calorific and
electric fluids, "which," he said, "we can neither denude of their
character of substance, nor clothe with the attribute of weight." "To
which," continues Dr. Whewell, "my reply is, that precisely because I
cannot clothe these agents with the attribute of Weight, I _do_ denude
them of the character of Substance. They are not substances, but
agencies. These Imponderable Agents, are not properly called
Imponderable Fluids. This I conceive that I have proved." Nothing can be
more philosophical. But if the luminiferous ether is not matter, and
fluid matter too, what is the meaning of its undulations? Can an agency
undulate? Can there be alternate motion forward and backward of the
particles of an agency? And does not the whole mathematical theory of
the undulations imply them to be material? Is it not a series of
deductions from the known properties of elastic fluids? _This_ opinion
of Dr. Whewell reduces the undulations to a figure of speech, and the
undulatory theory to the proposition which all must admit, that the
transmission of light takes place according to laws which present a very
striking and remarkable agreement with those of undulations. If Dr.
Whewell is prepared to stand by this doctrine, I have no difference with
him on the subject.

Since this chapter was written, the hypothesis of the luminiferous ether
has acquired a great accession of apparent strength, by being adopted
into the new doctrine of the Conservation of Force, as affording a
mechanism by which to explain the mode of production not of light only,
but of heat, and probably of all the other so-called imponderable
agencies. In the present immature stage of the great speculation in
question, I would not undertake to define the ultimate relation of the
hypothetical fluid to it; but I must remark that the essential part of
the new theory, the reciprocal convertibility and interchangeability of
these great cosmic agencies, is quite independent of the molecular
motions which have been imagined as the immediate causes of those
different manifestations and of their substitutions for one another; and
the former doctrine by no means necessarily carries the latter with it.
I confess that the entire theory of the vibrations of the ether, and the
movements which these vibrations are supposed to communicate to the
particles of solid bodies, seems to me at present the weakest part of
the new system, tending rather to weigh down than to prop up those of
its doctrines which rest on real scientific induction.

[12] Thus, water, of which eight-ninths in weight are oxygen, dissolves
most bodies which contain a high proportion of oxygen, such as all the
nitrates, (which have more oxygen than any others of the common salts,)
most of the sulphates, many of the carbonates, &c. Again, bodies largely
composed of combustible elements, like hydrogen and carbon, are soluble
in bodies of similar composition; rosin, for instance, will dissolve in
alcohol, tar in oil of turpentine. This empirical generalization is far
from being universally true; no doubt because it is a remote, and
therefore easily defeated, result of general laws too deep for us at
present to penetrate; but it will probably in time suggest processes of
inquiry, leading to the discovery of those laws.

[13] Or (according to Laplace's theory) the sun and the sun's rotation.

[14] Supra, book iii. ch. v. § 7.

[15] Supra, book iii. ch. x. § 2.

[16] In the preceding discussion, the _mean_ is spoken of as if it were
exactly the same thing with the _average_. But the mean for purposes of
inductive inquiry, is not the average, or arithmetical mean, though in a
familiar illustration of the theory the difference may be disregarded.
If the deviations on one side of the average are much more numerous than
those on the other (these last being fewer but greater), the effect due
to the invariable cause, as distinct from the variable ones, will not
coincide with the average, but will be either below or above the
average, whichever be the side on which the greatest number of the
instances are found. This follows from a truth, ascertained both
inductively and deductively, that small deviations from the true central
point are greatly more frequent than large ones. The mathematical law
is, "that the most probable determination of one or more invariable
elements from observation is that in which _the sum of the squares_ of
the individual aberrations," or deviations, "_shall be the least
possible_." See this principle stated, and its grounds popularly
explained, by Sir John Herschel, in his review of Quetelet on
Probabilities, _Essays_, pp. 395 _et seq._

[17] _Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités_, fifth Paris Edition, p.
7.

[18] It even appears to me that the calculation of chances, where there
are no data grounded either on special experience or on special
inference, must, in an immense majority of cases, break down, from sheer
impossibility of assigning any principle by which to be guided in
setting out the list of possibilities. In the case of the coloured balls
we have no difficulty in making the enumeration, because we ourselves
determine what the possibilities shall be. But suppose a case more
analogous to those which occur in nature: instead of three colours, let
there be in the box all possible colours: we being supposed ignorant of
the comparative frequency with which different colours occur in nature,
or in the productions of art. How is the list of cases to be made out?
Is every distinct shade to count as a colour? If so, is the test to be a
common eye, or an educated eye, a painter's for instance? On the answer
to these questions would depend whether the chances against some
particular colour would be estimated at ten, twenty, or perhaps five
hundred to one. While if we knew from experience that the particular
colour occurs on an average a certain number of times in every hundred
or thousand, we should not require to know anything either of the
frequency or of the number of the other possibilities.

[19] _Prospective Review_ for February 1850.

[20] "If this be not so, why do we feel so much more probability added
by the first instance, than by any single subsequent instance? Why,
except that the first instance gives us its possibility (a cause
_adequate_ to it), while every other only gives us the frequency of its
conditions? If no reference to a cause be supposed, possibility would
have no meaning; yet it is clear, that, antecedent to its happening, we
might have supposed the event impossible, _i.e._, have believed that
there was no physical energy really existing in the world equal to
producing it.... After the first time of happening, which is, then, more
important to the whole probability than any other single instance
(because proving the possibility), the _number_ of times becomes
important as an index to the intensity or extent of the cause, and its
independence of any particular time. If we took the case of a tremendous
leap, for instance, and wished to form an estimate of the probability of
its succeeding a certain number of times; the first instance, by showing
its possibility (before doubtful) is of the most importance; but every
succeeding leap shows the power to be more perfectly under control,
greater and more invariable, and so increases the probability; and no
one would think of reasoning in this case straight from one instance to
the next, without referring to the physical energy which each leap
indicated. Is it not then clear that we do not ever" (let us rather say,
that we do not in an advanced state of our knowledge) "conclude directly
from the happening of an event to the probability of its happening
again; but that we refer to the cause, regarding the past cases as an
index to the cause, and the cause as our guide to the future?"--_Ibid._

[21] The writer last quoted says that the valuation of chances by
comparing the number of cases in which the event occurs with the number
in which it does not occur, "would generally be wholly erroneous," and
"is not the true theory of probability." It is at least that which forms
the foundation of insurance, and of all those calculations of chances in
the business of life which experience so abundantly verifies. The reason
which the reviewer gives for rejecting the theory, is that it "would
regard an event as certain which had hitherto never failed; which is
exceedingly far from the truth, even for a very large number of constant
successes." This is not a defect in a particular theory, but in any
theory of chances. No principle of evaluation can provide for such a
case as that which the reviewer supposes. If an event has never once
failed, in a number of trials sufficient to eliminate chance, it really
has all the certainty which can be given by an empirical law: it _is_
certain during the continuance of the same collocation of causes which
existed during the observations. If it ever fails, it is in consequence
of some change in that collocation. Now, no theory of chances will
enable us to infer the future probability of an event from the past, if
the causes in operation, capable of influencing the event, have
intermediately undergone a change.

[22] Pp. 18, 19. The theorem is not stated by Laplace in the exact terms
in which I have stated it; but the identity of import of the two modes
of expression is easily demonstrable.

[23] For a fuller treatment of the many interesting questions raised by
the theory of probabilities, I may now refer to a recent work by Mr.
Venn, Fellow of Caius College, Cambridge, "The Logic of Chance;" one of
the most thoughtful and philosophical treatises on any subject connected
with Logic and Evidence, which have been produced in this or any other
country for many years. Some criticisms contained in it have been very
useful to me in revising the corresponding chapters of the present work.
In several of Mr. Venn's opinions, however, I do not agree. What these
are will be obvious to any reader of Mr. Venn's work who is also a
reader of this.

[24] There was no greater foundation for this than for Newton's
celebrated conjecture that the diamond was combustible. He grounded his
guess on the very high refracting power of the diamond, comparatively to
its density; a peculiarity which had been observed to exist in
combustible substances; and on similar grounds he conjectured that
water, though not combustible, contained a combustible ingredient.
Experiment having subsequently shown that in both instances he guessed
right, the prophecy is considered to have done great honour to his
scientific sagacity; but it is to this day uncertain whether the guess
was, in truth, what there are so many examples of in the history of
science, a farsighted anticipation of a law afterwards to be discovered.
The progress of science has not hitherto shown ground for believing that
there is any real connexion between combustibility and a high refracting
power.

[25] Hartley's _Observations on Man_, vol. i. p. 16. The passage is not
in Priestley's curtailed edition.

[26] I am happy to be able to quote the following excellent passage from
Mr. Baden Powell's _Essay on the Inductive Philosophy_, in confirmation,
both in regard to history and to doctrine, of the statement made in the
text. Speaking of the "conviction of the universal and permanent
uniformity of nature," Mr. Powell says (pp. 98-100),

"We may remark that this idea, in its proper extent, is by no means one
of popular acceptance or natural growth. Just so far as the daily
experience of every one goes, so far indeed he comes to embrace a
certain persuasion of this kind, but merely to this limited extent, that
what is going on around him at present, in his own narrow sphere of
observation, will go on in like manner in future. The peasant believes
that the sun which rose to-day will rise again to-morrow; that the seed
put into the ground will be followed in due time by the harvest this
year as it was last year, and the like; but has no notion of such
inferences in subjects beyond his immediate observation. And it should
be observed that each class of persons, in admitting this belief within
the limited range of his own experience, though he doubt or deny it in
everything beyond, is, in fact, bearing unconscious testimony to its
universal truth. Nor, again, is it only among the _most_ ignorant that
this limitation is put upon the truth. There is a very general
propensity to believe that everything beyond common experience, or
especially ascertained laws of nature, is left to the dominion of chance
or fate or arbitrary intervention; and even to object to any attempted
explanation by physical causes, if conjecturally thrown out for an
apparently unaccountable phenomenon.

"The precise doctrine of the _generalization_ of this idea of the
uniformity of nature, so far from being obvious, natural, or intuitive,
is utterly beyond the attainment of the many. In all the extent of its
universality it is characteristic of the philosopher. It is clearly the
result of philosophic cultivation and training, and by no means the
spontaneous offspring of any primary principle naturally inherent in the
mind, as some seem to believe. It is no mere vague persuasion taken up
without examination, as a common prepossession to which we are always
accustomed; on the contrary, all common prejudices and associations are
against it. It is pre-eminently _an acquired idea_. It is not attained
without deep study and reflection. The best informed philosopher is the
man who most firmly believes it, even in opposition to received notions;
its acceptance depends on the extent and profoundness of his inductive
studies."

[27] Supra, book iii. ch. iii. § 1.

[28] It deserves remark, that these early generalizations did not, like
scientific inductions, presuppose causation. What they did presuppose,
was _uniformity_ in physical facts. But the observers were as ready to
presume uniformity in the coexistences of facts as in the sequences. On
the other hand, they never thought of assuming that this uniformity was
a principle pervading all nature: their generalizations did not imply
that there was uniformity in everything, but only that as much
uniformity as existed within their observation, existed also beyond it.
The induction, Fire burns, does not require for its validity that all
nature should observe uniform laws, but only that there should be
uniformity in one particular class of natural phenomena: the effects of
fire on the senses and on combustible substances. And uniformity to this
extent was not assumed, anterior to the experience, but proved by the
experience. The same observed instances which proved the narrower truth,
proved as much of the wider one as corresponded to it. It is from losing
sight of this fact, and considering the law of causation in its full
extent as necessarily presupposed in the very earliest generalizations,
that persons have been led into the belief that the law of causation is
known _à priori_, and is not itself a conclusion from experience.

[29] Book ii. chap. iii.

[30] One of the most rising thinkers of the new generation in France, M.
Taine (who has given, in the Revue des Deux Mondes, the most masterly
analysis, at least in one point of view, ever made of the present work),
though he rejects, on this and similar points of psychology, the
intuition theory in its ordinary form, nevertheless assigns to the law
of causation, and to some other of the most universal laws, that
certainty beyond the bounds of human experience, which I have not been
able to accord to them. He does this on the faith of our faculty of
abstraction, in which he seems to recognise an independent source of
evidence, not indeed disclosing truths not contained in our experience,
but affording an assurance which experience cannot give, of the
universality of those which it does contain. By abstraction M. Taine
seems to think that we are able, not merely to analyse that part of
nature which we see, and exhibit apart the elements which pervade it,
but to distinguish such of them as are elements of the system of nature
considered as a whole, not incidents belonging to our limited
terrestrial experience. I am not sure that I fully enter into M. Taine's
meaning; but I confess I do not see how any mere abstract conception,
elicited by our minds from our experience, can be evidence of an
objective fact in universal Nature, beyond what the experience itself
bears witness of; or how, in the process of interpreting in general
language the testimony of experience, the limitations of the testimony
itself can be cast off.

[31] Book i. chap. vii.

[32] In some cases, a Kind is sufficiently identified by some one
remarkable property: but most commonly several are required; each
property considered singly, being a joint property of that and of other
Kinds. The colour and brightness of the diamond are common to it with
the paste from which false diamonds are made; its octohedral form is
common to it with alum, and magnetic iron ore; but the colour and
brightness and the form together, identify its Kind; that is, are a mark
to us that it is combustible; that when burnt it produces carbonic acid;
that it cannot be cut with any known substance; together with many other
ascertained properties, and the fact that there exist an indefinite
number still unascertained.

[33] This doctrine of course assumes that the allotropic forms of what
is chemically the same substance are so many different Kinds; and such,
in the sense in which the word Kind is used in this treatise, they
really are.

[34] Mr. De Morgan, in his _Formal Logic_, makes the just remark, that
from two such premises as Most A are B, and Most A are C, we may infer
with certainty that some B are C. But this is the utmost limit of the
conclusions which can be drawn from two approximate generalizations,
when the precise degree of their approximation to universality is
unknown or undefined.

[35] _Rationale of Judicial Evidence_, vol. iii. p. 224.

[36] Supra, vol. i. p. 115.

[37] Supra, book i. ch. v. § 1, and book ii. ch. v. § 5.

[38] The axiom, "Equals subtracted from equals leave equal differences,"
may be demonstrated from the two axioms in the text. If A = _a_ and B =
_b_, A - B = _a - b_. For if not, let A - B = _a - b + c_. Then since B
= _b_, adding equals to equals, A = _a + c_. But A = _a_. Therefore _a =
a + c_, which is impossible.

This proposition having been demonstrated, we may, by means of it,
demonstrate the following: "If equals be added to unequals, the sums are
unequal." If A = _a_ and B not = _b_, A + B is not = _a + b_. For
suppose it be so. Then, since A = _a_ and A + B = _a + b_, subtracting
equals from equals, B = _b_; which is contrary to the hypothesis.

So again, it may be proved that two things, one of which is equal and
the other unequal to a third thing, are unequal to one another. If A =
_a_ and A not = B, neither is _a_ = B. For suppose it to be equal. Then
since A = _a_ and _a_ = B, and since things equal to the same thing are
equal to one another, A = B: which is contrary to the hypothesis.

[39] Geometers have usually preferred to define parallel lines by the
property of being in the same plane and never meeting. This, however,
has rendered it necessary for them to assume, as an additional axiom,
some other property of parallel lines; and the unsatisfactory manner in
which properties for that purpose have been selected by Euclid and
others has always been deemed the opprobrium of elementary geometry.
Even as a verbal definition, equidistance is a fitter property to
characterize parallels by, since it is the attribute really involved in
the signification of the name. If to be in the same plane and never to
meet were all that is meant by being parallel, we should feel no
incongruity in speaking of a curve as parallel to its asymptote. The
meaning of parallel lines is, lines which pursue exactly the same
direction, and which, therefore, neither draw nearer nor go farther from
one another; a conception suggested at once by the contemplation of
nature. That the lines will never meet is of course included in the more
comprehensive proposition that they are everywhere equally distant. And
that any straight lines which are in the same plane and not equidistant
will certainly meet, may be demonstrated in the most rigorous manner
from the fundamental property of straight lines assumed in the text,
viz. that if they set out from the same point, they diverge more and
more without limit.

[40] _Philosophie Positive_, iii. 414-416.

[41] See the two remarkable notes (A) and (F), appended to his _Inquiry
into the Relation of Cause and Effect_.

[42] Supra, pp. 119, 120.

[43] A writer to whom I have several times referred, gives as the
definition of an impossibility, that which there exists in the world no
cause adequate to produce. This definition does not take in such
impossibilities as these--that two and two should make five; that two
straight lines should inclose a space; or that anything should begin to
exist without a cause. I can think of no definition of impossibility
comprehensive enough to include all its varieties, except the one which
I have given: viz. An impossibility is that, the truth of which would
conflict with a complete induction, that is, with the most conclusive
evidence which we possess of universal truth.

As to the reputed impossibilities which rest on no other grounds than
our ignorance of any cause capable of producing the supposed effects;
very few of them are certainly impossible, or permanently incredible.
The facts of travelling seventy miles an hour, painless surgical
operations, and conversing by instantaneous signals between London and
New York, held a high place, not many years ago, among such
impossibilities.

[44] Not, however, as might at first sight appear, 999 times as much. A
complete analysis of the cases shows that (always assuming the veracity
of the witness to be 9/10) in 10,000 drawings, the drawing of No. 79
will occur nine times, and be announced incorrectly once; the
credibility therefore of the announcement of No. 79 is 9/10; while the
drawing of a white ball will occur nine times, and be announced
incorrectly 999 times. The credibility therefore of the announcement of
white is 9/1008, and the ratio of the two 1008:10; the one announcement
being thus only about a hundred times more credible than the other,
instead of 999 times.




