CHAPTER V.

ON THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE VARIATIONS IN THE MEANING OF TERMS.


§ 1. It is not only in the mode which has now been pointed out, namely
by gradual inattention to a portion of the ideas conveyed, that words in
common use are liable to shift their connotation. The truth is, that the
connotation of such words is perpetually varying; as might be expected
from the manner in which words in common use acquire their connotation.
A technical term, invented for purposes of art or science, has, from the
first, the connotation given to it by its inventor; but a name which is
in every one's mouth before any one thinks of defining it, derives its
connotation only from the circumstances which are habitually brought to
mind when it is pronounced. Among these circumstances, the properties
common to the things denoted by the name, have naturally a principal
place; and would have the sole place, if language were regulated by
convention rather than by custom and accident. But besides these common
properties, which if they exist are _certainly_ present whenever the
name is employed, any other circumstance may _casually_ be found along
with it, so frequently as to become associated with it in the same
manner, and as strongly, as the common properties themselves. In
proportion as this association forms itself, people give up using the
name in cases in which those casual circumstances do not exist. They
prefer using some other name, or the same name with some adjunct, rather
than employ an expression which will call up an idea they do not want to
excite. The circumstance originally casual, thus becomes regularly a
part of the connotation of the word.

It is this continual incorporation of circumstances originally
accidental, into the permanent signification of words, which is the
cause that there are so few exact synonymes. It is this also which
renders the dictionary meaning of a word, by universal remark so
imperfect an exponent of its real meaning. The dictionary meaning is
marked out in a broad, blunt way, and probably includes all that was
originally necessary for the correct employment of the term; but in
process of time so many collateral associations adhere to words, that
whoever should attempt to use them with no other guide than the
dictionary, would confound a thousand nice distinctions and subtle
shades of meaning which dictionaries take no account of; as we notice in
the use of a language in conversation or writing by a foreigner not
thoroughly master of it. The history of a word, by showing the causes
which determine its use, is in these cases a better guide to its
employment than any definition; for definitions can only show its
meaning at the particular time, or at most the series of its successive
meanings, but its history may show the law by which the succession was
produced. The word _gentleman_, for instance, to the correct employment
of which a dictionary would be no guide, originally meant simply a man
born in a certain rank. From this it came by degrees to connote all such
qualities or adventitious circumstances as were usually found to belong
to persons of that rank. This consideration at once explains why in one
of its vulgar acceptations it means any one who lives without labour, in
another without manual labour, and in its more elevated signification it
has in every age signified the conduct, character, habits, and outward
appearance, in whomsoever found, which, according to the ideas of that
age, belonged or were expected to belong to persons born and educated in
a high social position.

It continually happens that of two words, whose dictionary meanings are
either the same or very slightly different, one will be the proper word
to use in one set of circumstances, another in another, without its
being possible to show how the custom of so employing them originally
grew up. The accident that one of the words was used and not the other
on a particular occasion or in a particular social circle, will be
sufficient to produce so strong an association between the word and some
speciality of circumstances, that mankind abandon the use of it in any
other case, and the speciality becomes part of its signification. The
tide of custom first drifts the word on the shore of a particular
meaning, then retires and leaves it there.

An instance in point is the remarkable change which, in the English
language at least, has taken place in the signification of the word
_loyalty_. That word originally meant in English, as it still means in
the language from whence it came, fair, open dealing, and fidelity to
engagements; in that sense the quality it expressed was part of the
ideal chivalrous or knightly character. By what process, in England, the
term became restricted to the single case of fidelity to the throne, I
am not sufficiently versed in the history of courtly language to be able
to pronounce. The interval between a _loyal chevalier_ and a loyal
subject is certainly great. I can only suppose that the word was, at
some period, the favourite term at court to express fidelity to the oath
of allegiance; until at length those who wished to speak of any other,
and as it was probably deemed, inferior sort of fidelity, either did not
venture to use so dignified a term, or found it convenient to employ
some other in order to avoid being misunderstood.


§ 2. Cases are not unfrequent in which a circumstance, at first casually
incorporated into the connotation of a word which originally had no
reference to it, in time wholly supersedes the original meaning, and
becomes not merely a part of the connotation, but the whole of it. This
is exemplified in the word pagan, _paganus_; which originally, as its
etymology imports, was equivalent to _villager_; the inhabitant of a
_pagus_, or village. At a particular era in the extension of
Christianity over the Roman empire, the adherents of the old religion,
and the villagers or country people, were nearly the same body of
individuals, the inhabitants of the towns having been earliest
converted; as in our own day, and at all times, the greater activity of
social intercourse renders them the earliest recipients of new opinions
and modes, while old habits and prejudices linger longest among the
country people: not to mention that the towns were more immediately
under the direct influence of the government, which at that time had
embraced Christianity. From this casual coincidence, the word _paganus_
carried with it, and began more and more steadily to suggest, the idea
of a worshipper of the ancient divinities; until at length it suggested
that idea so forcibly that people who did not desire to suggest the idea
avoided using the word. But when _paganus_ had come to connote
heathenism, the very unimportant circumstance, with reference to that
fact, of the place of residence, was soon disregarded in the employment
of the word. As there was seldom any occasion for making separate
assertions respecting heathens who lived in the country, there was no
need for a separate word to denote them; and pagan came not only to mean
heathen, but to mean that exclusively.

A case still more familiar to most readers is that of the word _villain_
or _villein_. This term, as everybody knows, had in the middle ages a
connotation as strictly defined as a word could have, being the proper
legal designation for those persons who were the subjects of the less
onerous forms of feudal bondage. The scorn of the semibarbarous military
aristocracy for these their abject dependants, rendered the act of
likening any person to this class of people a mark of the greatest
contumely: the same scorn led them to ascribe to the same people all
manner of hateful qualities, which doubtless also, in the degrading
situation in which they were held, were often not unjustly imputed to
them. These circumstances combined to attach to the term villain, ideas
of crime and guilt in so forcible a manner, that the application of the
epithet even to those to whom it legally belonged became an affront, and
was abstained from whenever no affront was intended. From that time
guilt was part of the connotation; and soon became the whole of it,
since mankind were not prompted by any urgent motive to continue making
a distinction in their language between bad men of servile station and
bad men of any other rank in life.

These and similar instances in which the original signification of a
term is totally lost--another and an entirely distinct meaning being
first engrafted upon the former, and finally substituted for it--afford
examples of the double movement which is always taking place in
language: two counter-movements, one of Generalization, by which words
are perpetually losing portions of their connotation, and becoming of
less meaning and more general acceptation; the other of Specialization,
by which other, or even these same words, are continually taking on
fresh connotation; acquiring additional meaning, by being restricted in
their employment to a part only of the occasions on which they might
properly be used before. This double movement is of sufficient
importance in the natural history of language, (to which natural history
the artificial modifications ought always to have some degree of
reference,) to justify our dwelling a little longer on the nature of the
twofold phenomenon, and the causes to which it owes its existence.


§ 3. To begin with the movement of generalization. It is unnecessary to
dwell on the changes in the meaning of names which take place merely
from their being used ignorantly, by persons who, not having properly
mastered the received connotation of a word, apply it in a looser and
wider sense than belongs to it. This, however, is a real source of
alterations in the language; for when a word, from being often employed
in cases where one of the qualities which it connotes does not exist,
ceases to suggest that quality with certainty, then even those who are
under no mistake as to the proper meaning of the word, prefer expressing
that meaning in some other way, and leave the original word to its fate.
The word 'Squire as standing for an owner of a landed estate; Parson, as
denoting not the rector of the parish, but clergymen in general; Artist,
to denote only a painter or sculptor; are cases in point.[15]
Independently, however, of the generalization of names through their
ignorant misuse, there is a tendency in the same direction, consistently
with a perfect knowledge of their meaning; arising from the fact, that
the number of things known to us, and of which we feel a desire to
speak, multiply faster than the names for them. Except on subjects for
which there has been constructed a scientific terminology, with which
unscientific persons do not meddle, great difficulty is generally found
in bringing a new name into use; and independently of that difficulty,
it is natural to prefer giving to a new object a name which at least
expresses its resemblance to something already known, since by
predicating of it a name entirely new we at first convey no information.
In this manner the name of a species often becomes the name of a genus;
as _salt_, for example, or _oil_; the former of which words originally
denoted only the muriate of soda, the latter, as its etymology
indicates, only olive oil; but which now denote large and diversified
classes of substances resembling these in some of their qualities, and
connote only those common qualities, instead of the whole of the
distinctive properties of olive oil and sea salt. The words _glass_ and
_soap_ are used by modern chemists in a similar manner, to denote genera
of which the substances vulgarly so called are single species. And it
often happens, as in those instances, that the term keeps its special
signification in addition to its more general one, and becomes
ambiguous, that is, two names instead of one.

These changes, by which words in ordinary use become more and more
generalized, and less and less expressive, take place in a still greater
degree with the words which express the complicated phenomena of mind
and society. Historians, travellers, and in general those who speak or
write concerning moral and social phenomena with which they are not
familiarly acquainted, are the great agents in this modification of
language. The vocabulary of all except unusually instructed as well as
thinking persons, is, on such subjects, eminently scanty. They have a
certain small set of words to which they are accustomed, and which they
employ to express phenomena the most heterogeneous, because they have
never sufficiently analysed the facts to which those words correspond in
their own country, to have attached perfectly definite ideas to the
words. The first English conquerors of Bengal, for example, carried with
them the phrase _landed proprietor_ into a country where the rights of
individuals over the soil were extremely different in degree, and even
in nature, from those recognised in England. Applying the term with all
its English associations in such a state of things; to one who had only
a limited right they gave an absolute right, from another because he had
not an absolute right they took away all right, drove whole classes of
people to ruin and despair, filled the country with banditti, created a
feeling that nothing was secure, and produced, with the best intentions,
a disorganization of society which had not been produced in that country
by the most ruthless of its barbarian invaders. Yet the usage of persons
capable of so gross a misapprehension, determines the meaning of
language; and the words they thus misuse grow in generality, until the
instructed are obliged to acquiesce; and to employ those words (first
freeing them from vagueness by giving them a definite connotation) as
generic terms, subdividing the genera into species.


§ 4. While the more rapid growth of ideas than of names thus creates a
perpetual necessity for making the same names serve, even if
imperfectly, on a greater number of occasions; a counter-operation is
going on, by which names become on the contrary restricted to fewer
occasions, by taking on, as it were, additional connotation, from
circumstances not originally included in the meaning, but which have
become connected with it in the mind by some accidental cause. We have
seen above, in the words _pagan_ and _villain_, remarkable examples of
the specialization of the meaning of words from casual associations, as
well as of the generalization of it in a new direction, which often
follows.

Similar specializations are of frequent occurrence in the history even
of scientific nomenclature. "It is by no means uncommon," says Dr.
Paris, in his _Pharmacologia_,[16] "to find a word which is used to
express general characters subsequently become the name of a specific
substance in which such characters are predominant; and we shall find
that some important anomalies in nomenclature may be thus explained. The
term _Αρσενίκον_, from which the word Arsenic is derived, was an ancient
epithet applied to those natural substances which possessed strong and
acrimonious properties, and as the poisonous quality of arsenic was
found to be remarkably powerful, the term was especially applied to
Orpiment, the form in which this metal most usually occurred. So the
term _Verbena_ (quasi _Herbena_) originally denoted all those herbs that
were held sacred on account of their being employed in the rites of
sacrifice, as we learn from the poets; but as _one_ herb was usually
adopted upon these occasions, the word Verbena came to denote that
particular herb _only_, and it is transmitted to us to this day under
the same title, viz. Verbena or Vervain, and indeed until lately it
enjoyed the medical reputation which its sacred origin conferred upon
it, for it was worn suspended around the neck as an amulet. _Vitriol_,
in the original application of the word, denoted _any_ crystalline body
with a certain degree of transparency (_vitrum_); it is hardly necessary
to observe that the term is now appropriated to a particular species: in
the same manner, Bark, which is a general term, is applied to express
_one_ genus, and by way of eminence, it has the article _The_ prefixed,
as _The_ bark: the same observation will apply to the word Opium, which,
in its primitive sense, signifies _any_ juice (_ὀπὸς_, _Succus_), while
it now only denotes _one_ species, viz. that of the poppy. So, again,
_Elaterium_ was used by Hippocrates to signify various internal
applications, especially purgatives, of a violent and drastic nature
(from the word _ἐλαύνω_, _agito_, _moveo_, _stimulo_), but by succeeding
authors it was exclusively applied to denote the active matter which
subsides from the juice of the wild cucumber. The word _Fecula_, again,
originally meant to imply _any_ substance which was derived by
spontaneous subsidence from a liquid (from _fæx_, the grounds or
settlement of _any_ liquor); afterwards it was applied to Starch, which
is deposited in this manner by agitating the flour of wheat in water;
and lastly, it has been applied to a peculiar vegetable principle,
which, like starch, is insoluble in cold, but completely soluble in
boiling water, with which it forms a gelatinous solution. This
indefinite meaning of the word _fecula_ has created numerous mistakes in
pharmaceutic chemistry; Elaterium, for instance, is said to be _fecula_,
and, in the original sense of the word, it is properly so called,
inasmuch as it is procured from a vegetable juice by spontaneous
subsidence, but in the limited and modern acceptation of the term, it
conveys an erroneous idea; for instead of the active principle of the
juice residing in _fecula_, it is a peculiar proximate principle, _sui
generis_, to which I have ventured to bestow the name of _Elatin_. For
the same reason, much doubt and obscurity involve the meaning of the
word _Extract_, because it is applied _generally_ to any substance
obtained by the evaporation of a vegetable solution, and _specifically_
to a peculiar proximate principle, possessed of certain characters, by
which it is distinguished from every other elementary body."

A generic term is always liable to become thus limited to a single
species, or even individual, if people have occasion to think and speak
of that individual or species much oftener than of anything else which
is contained in the genus. Thus by cattle, a stage-coachman will
understand horses; beasts, in the language of agriculturists, stands for
oxen; and birds, with some sportsmen, for partridges only. The law of
language which operates in these trivial instances, is the very same in
conformity to which the terms Θεός, Deus, and God, were adopted from
Polytheism by Christianity, to express the single object of its own
adoration. Almost all the terminology of the Christian Church is made
up of words originally used in a much more general acceptation:
_Ecclesia_, Assembly; _Bishop_, Episcopus, Overseer; _Priest_,
Presbyter, Elder; _Deacon_, Diaconus, Administrator; _Sacrament_, a vow
of allegiance; _Evangelium_, good tidings; and some words, as
_Minister_, are still used both in the general and in the limited sense.
It would be interesting to trace the progress by which _author_ came, in
its most familiar sense, to signify a writer, and _ποίητης_, or maker, a
poet.

Of the incorporation into the meaning of a term, of circumstances
accidentally connected with it at some particular period, as in the case
of Pagan, instances might easily be multiplied. Physician (_φυσίκος_, or
naturalist) became, in England, synonymous with a healer of diseases,
because until a comparatively late period medical practitioners were the
only naturalists. _Clerc_, or clericus, a scholar, came to signify an
ecclesiastic, because the clergy were for many centuries the only
scholars.

Of all ideas, however, the most liable to cling by association to
anything with which they have ever been connected by proximity, are
those of our pleasures and pains, or of the things which we habitually
contemplate as sources of our pleasures or pains. The additional
connotation, therefore, which a word soonest and most readily takes on,
is that of agreeableness or painfulness, in their various kinds and
degrees: of being a good or bad thing; desirable or to be avoided; an
object of hatred, of dread, contempt, admiration, hope, or love.
Accordingly there is hardly a single name, expressive of any moral or
social fact calculated to call forth strong affections either of a
favourable or of a hostile nature, which does not carry with it
decidedly and irresistibly a connotation of those strong affections, or,
at the least, of approbation or censure; insomuch that to employ those
names in conjunction with others by which the contrary sentiments were
expressed, would produce the effect of a paradox, or even a
contradiction in terms. The baneful influence of a connotation thus
acquired, on the prevailing habits of thought, especially in morals and
politics, has been well pointed out on many occasions by Bentham. It
gives rise to the fallacy of "question-begging names." The very property
which we are inquiring whether a thing possesses or not, has become so
associated with the name of the thing as to be part of its meaning,
insomuch that by merely uttering the name we assume the point which was
to be made out: one of the most frequent sources of apparently
self-evident propositions.

Without any further multiplication of examples to illustrate the changes
which usage is continually making in the signification of terms, I shall
add, as a practical rule, that the logician, not being able to prevent
such transformations, should submit to them with a good grace when they
are irrevocably effected, and if a definition is necessary, define the
word according to its new meaning; retaining the former as a second
signification, if it is needed, and if there is any chance of being able
to preserve it either in the language of philosophy or in common use.
Logicians cannot _make_ the meaning of any but scientific terms: that of
all other words is made by the collective human race. But logicians can
ascertain clearly what it is which, working obscurely, has guided the
general mind to a particular employment of a name; and when they have
found this, they can clothe it in such distinct and permanent terms,
that mankind shall see the meaning which before they only felt, and
shall not suffer it to be afterwards forgotten or misapprehended.




