CHAPTER III.

FALLACIES OF SIMPLE INSPECTION; OR _À PRIORI_ FALLACIES.


§ 1. The tribe of errors of which we are to treat in the first instance,
are those in which no actual inference takes place at all: the
proposition (it cannot in such cases be called a conclusion) being
embraced, not as proved, but as requiring no proof; as a self-evident
truth; or else as having such intrinsic verisimilitude, that external
evidence not in itself amounting to proof, is sufficient in aid of the
antecedent presumption.

An attempt to treat this subject comprehensively would be a
transgression of the bounds prescribed to this work, since it would
necessitate the inquiry which, more than any other, is the grand
question of what is called metaphysics, viz. What are the propositions
which may reasonably be received without proof? That there must be some
such propositions all are agreed, since there cannot be an infinite
series of proof, a chain suspended from nothing. But to determine what
these propositions are, is the _opus magnum_ of the more recondite
mental philosophy. Two principal divisions of opinion on the subject
have divided the schools of philosophy from its first dawn. The one
recognises no ultimate premises but the facts of our subjective
consciousness; our sensations, emotions, intellectual states of mind,
and volitions. These, and whatever by strict rules of induction can be
derived from these, it is possible, according to this theory, for us to
know; of all else we must remain in ignorance. The opposite school hold
that there are other existences, suggested indeed to our minds by these
subjective phenomena, but not inferrible from them, by any process
either of deduction or of induction; which, however, we must, by the
constitution of our mental nature recognise as realities; and
realities, too, of a higher order than the phenomena of our
consciousness, being the efficient causes and necessary substrata of all
Phenomena. Among these entities they reckon Substances, whether matter
or spirit; from the dust under our feet to the soul, and from that to
Deity. All these, according to them, are preternatural or supernatural
beings, having no likeness in experience, though experience is entirely
a manifestation of their agency. Their existence, together with more or
less of the laws to which they conform in their operations, are, on this
theory, apprehended and recognised as real by the mind itself
intuitively: experience (whether in the form of sensation or of mental
feeling) having no other part in the matter than as affording facts
which are consistent with these necessary postulates of reason, and
which are explained and accounted for by them.

As it is foreign to the purpose of the present treatise to decide
between these conflicting theories, we are precluded from inquiring into
the existence, or defining the extent and limits, of knowledge _à
priori_, and from characterizing the kind of correct assumption which
the fallacy of incorrect assumption, now under consideration, simulates.
Yet since it is allowed on both sides that such assumptions are often
made improperly, we may find it practicable, without entering into the
ultimate metaphysical grounds of the discussion, to state some
speculative propositions, and suggest some practical cautions,
respecting the forms in which such unwarranted assumptions are most
likely to be made.


§ 2. In the cases in which, according to the thinkers of the ontological
school, the mind apprehends, by intuition, things, and the laws of
things, not cognizable by our sensitive faculty; those intuitive, or
supposed intuitive, perceptions are undistinguishable from what the
opposite school are accustomed to call ideas of the mind. When they
themselves say that they perceive the things by an immediate act of a
faculty given for that purpose by their Creator, it would be said of
them by their opponents that they find an idea or conception in their
own minds, and from the idea or conception, infer the existence of a
corresponding objective reality. Nor would this be an unfair statement,
but a mere version into other words of the account given by many of
themselves; and one to which the more clear-sighted of them might, and
generally do, without hesitation, subscribe. Since, therefore, in the
cases which lay the strongest claims to be examples of knowledge _à
priori_, the mind proceeds from the idea of a thing to the reality of
the thing itself, we cannot be surprised by finding that illicit
assumptions _à priori_ consist in doing the same thing erroneously: in
mistaking subjective facts for objective, laws of the percipient mind
for laws of the perceived object, properties of the ideas or conceptions
for properties of the things conceived.

Accordingly, a large proportion of the erroneous thinking which exists
in the world proceeds on a tacit assumption, that the same order must
obtain among the objects in nature which obtains among our ideas of
them. That if we always think of two things together, the two things
must always exist together. That if one thing makes us think of another
as preceding or following it, that other must precede it or follow it in
actual fact. And conversely, that when we cannot conceive two things
together they cannot exist together, and that their combination may,
without further evidence, be rejected from the list of possible
occurrences.

Few persons, I am inclined to think, have reflected on the great extent
to which this fallacy has prevailed, and prevails, in the actual beliefs
and actions of mankind. For a first illustration of it, we may refer to
a large class of popular superstitions. If any one will examine in what
circumstances most of those things agree, which in different ages and by
different portions of the human race have been considered as omens or
prognostics of some interesting event, whether calamitous or fortunate;
they will be found very generally characterized by this peculiarity,
that they cause the mind to _think_ of that, of which they are therefore
supposed to forebode the actual occurrence. "Talk of the devil, and he
will appear," has passed into a proverb. Talk of the devil, that is,
raise the idea, and the reality will follow. In times when the
appearance of that personage in a visible form was thought to be no
unfrequent occurrence, it has doubtless often happened to persons of
vivid imagination and susceptible nerves, that talking of the devil has
caused them to fancy they saw him; as, even in our more incredulous
days, listening to ghost stories predisposes us to see ghosts; and thus,
as a prop to the _à priori_ fallacy, there might come to be added an
auxiliary fallacy of mal-observation, with one of false generalization
grounded on it. Fallacies of different orders often herd or cluster
together in this fashion, one smoothing the way for another. But the
origin of the superstition is evidently that which we have assigned. In
like manner it has been universally considered unlucky to speak of
misfortune. The day on which any calamity happened has been considered
an unfortunate day, and there has been a feeling everywhere, and in some
nations a religious obligation, against transacting any important
business on that day. For on such a day our thoughts are likely to be of
misfortune. For a similar reason, any untoward occurrence in commencing
an undertaking has been considered ominous of failure; and often,
doubtless, has really contributed to it, by putting the persons engaged
in the enterprise more or less out of spirits: but the belief has
equally prevailed where the disagreeable circumstance was, independently
of superstition, too insignificant to depress the spirits by any
influence of its own. All know the story of Cæsar's accidentally
stumbling in the act of landing on the African coast; and the presence
of mind with which he converted the direful presage into a favourable
one by exclaiming, "Africa, I embrace thee." Such omens, it is true,
were often conceived as warnings of the future, given by a friendly or a
hostile deity; but this very superstition grew out of a pre-existing
tendency; the god was supposed to send, as an indication of what was to
come, something which people were already disposed to consider in that
light. So in the case of lucky or unlucky names. Herodotus tells us how
the Greeks, on the way to Mycale, were encouraged in their enterprise by
the arrival of a deputation from Samos, one of the members of which was
named Hegesistratus, the leader of armies.

Cases may be pointed out in which something which could have no real
effect but to make persons _think_ of misfortune, was regarded not
merely as a prognostic, but as something approaching to an actual cause
of it. The _εὐφήμει_ of the Greeks, and _favete linguis_, or _bona verba
quæso_, of the Romans, evince the care with which they endeavoured to
repress the utterance of any word expressive or suggestive of ill
fortune; not from notions of delicate politeness, to which their general
mode of conduct and feeling had very little reference, but from _bonâ
fide_ alarm lest the event so suggested to the imagination should in
fact occur. Some vestige of a similar superstition has been known to
exist among uneducated persons even in our own day: it is thought an
unchristian thing to talk of, or suppose, the death of any person while
he is alive. It is known how careful the Romans were to avoid, by an
indirect mode of speech, the utterance of any word directly expressive
of death or other calamity: how instead of _mortuus est_ they said
_vixit_; and "be the event fortunate or _otherwise_" instead of
_adverse_. The name Maleventum, of which Salmasius so sagaciously
detected the Thessalian origin (_Μαλόεις_, _Μαλοέντος_), they changed
into the highly propitious denomination, Beneventum; Egesta into
Segesta; and Epidamnus, a name so interesting in its associations to the
reader of Thucydides, they exchanged for Dyrrhachium, to escape the
perils of a word suggestive of _damnum_ or detriment.

"If an hare cross the highway," says Sir Thomas Browne,[2] "there are
few above threescore that are not perplexed thereat; which
notwithstanding is but an augurial terror, according to that received
expression, _Inauspicatum dat iter oblatus lepus_. And the ground of the
conceit was probably no greater than this, that a fearful animal passing
by us portended unto us something to be feared; as upon the like
consideration the meeting of a fox presaged some future imposture." Such
superstitions as these last must be the result of study; they are too
recondite for natural or spontaneous growth. But when the attempt was
once made to construct a science of predictions, any association, though
ever so faint or remote, by which an object could be connected in
however far-fetched a manner with ideas either of prosperity or of
danger and misfortune, was enough to determine its being classed among
good or evil omens.

An example of rather a different kind from any of these, but falling
under the same principle, is the famous attempt on which so much labour
and ingenuity were expended by the alchemists, to make gold potable. The
motive to this was a conceit that potable gold could be no other than
the universal medicine: and why gold? Because it was so precious. It
must have all marvellous properties as a physical substance, because the
mind was already accustomed to marvel at it.

From a similar feeling, "every substance," says Dr. Paris,[3] "whose
origin is involved in mystery, has at different times been eagerly
applied to the purposes of medicine. Not long since, one of those
showers which are now known to consist of the excrements of insects,
fell in the north of Italy; the inhabitants regarded it as manna, or
some supernatural panacea, and they swallowed it with such avidity, that
it was only by extreme address that a small quantity was obtained for a
chemical examination." The superstition, in this instance, though
doubtless partly of a religious character, probably in part also arose
from the prejudice that a wonderful thing must of course have wonderful
properties.


§ 3. The instances of _à priori_ fallacy which we have hitherto cited
belong to the class of vulgar errors, and do not now, nor in any but a
rude age ever could, impose upon minds of any considerable attainments.
But those to which we are about to proceed, have been, and still are,
all but universally prevalent among thinkers. The same disposition to
give objectivity to a law of the mind--to suppose that what is true of
our ideas of things must be true of the things themselves--exhibits
itself in many of the most accredited modes of philosophical
investigation, both on physical and on metaphysical subjects. In one of
its most undisguised manifestations, it embodies itself in two maxims,
which lay claim to axiomatic truth: Things which we cannot think of
together, cannot coexist; and Things which we cannot help thinking of
together, must coexist. I am not sure that the maxims were ever
expressed in these precise words, but the history both of philosophy and
of popular opinions abounds with exemplifications of both forms of the
doctrine.

To begin with the latter of them: Things which we cannot think of except
together, must exist together. This is assumed in the generally received
and accredited mode of reasoning which concludes that A must accompany B
in point of fact, because "it is involved in the idea." Such thinkers do
not reflect that the idea, being a result of abstraction, ought to
conform to the facts, and cannot make the facts conform to it. The
argument is at most admissible as an appeal to authority; a surmise,
that what is now part of the idea, must, before it became so, have been
found by previous inquirers in the facts. Nevertheless, the philosopher
who more than all others made professions of rejecting authority,
Descartes, constructed his system on this very basis. His favourite
device for arriving at truth, even in regard to outward things, was by
looking into his own mind for it. "Credidi me," says his celebrated
maxim, "pro regulâ generali sumere posse, omne id quod valdè dilucidè et
distinctè concipiebam, verum esse;" whatever can be very clearly
conceived, must certainly exist; that is, as he afterwards explains it,
if the idea includes existence. And on this ground he infers that
geometrical figures really exist, because they can be distinctly
conceived. Whenever existence is "involved in an idea," a thing
conformable to the idea must really exist; which is as much as to say,
whatever the idea contains must have its equivalent in the thing; and
what we are not able to leave out of the idea cannot be absent from the
reality.[4] This assumption pervades the philosophy not only of
Descartes, but of all the thinkers who received their impulse mainly
from him, in particular the two most remarkable among them, Spinoza and
Leibnitz, from whom the modern German metaphysical philosophy is
essentially an emanation. I am indeed disposed to think that the fallacy
now under consideration has been the cause of two-thirds of the bad
philosophy, and especially of the bad metaphysics, which the human mind
has never ceased to produce. Our general ideas contain nothing but what
has been put into them, either by our passive experience, or by our
active habits of thought; and the metaphysicians in all ages, who have
attempted to construct the laws of the universe by reasoning from our
supposed necessities of thought, have always proceeded, and only could
proceed, by laboriously finding in their own minds what they themselves
had formerly put there, and evolving from their ideas of things what
they had first _involved_ in those ideas. In this way all deeply-rooted
opinions and feelings are enabled to create apparent demonstrations of
their truth and reasonableness, as it were out of their own substance.

The other form of the fallacy; Things which we cannot think of together
cannot exist together,--including as one of its branches, that what we
cannot think of as existing cannot exist at all,--may thus be briefly
expressed: Whatever is inconceivable must be false.

Against this prevalent doctrine I have sufficiently argued in a former
Book,[5] and nothing is required in this place but examples. It was
long held that Antipodes were impossible because of the difficulty which
was found in conceiving persons with their heads in the same direction
as our feet. And it was one of the received arguments against the
Copernican system, that we cannot conceive so great a void space as that
system supposes to exist in the celestial regions. When men's
imaginations had always been used to conceive the stars as firmly set in
solid spheres, they naturally found much difficulty in imagining them in
so different, and, as it doubtless appeared to them, so precarious a
situation. But they had no right to mistake the limitation (whether
natural, or, as it in fact proved, only artificial) of their own
faculties, for an inherent limitation of the possible modes of existence
in the universe.

It may be said in objection, that the error in these cases was in the
minor premise, not the major; an error of fact, not of principle; that
it did not consist in supposing that what is inconceivable cannot be
true, but in supposing antipodes to be inconceivable, when present
experience proves that they can be conceived. Even if this objection
were allowed, and the proposition that what is inconceivable cannot be
true were suffered to remain unquestioned as a speculative truth, it
would be a truth on which no practical consequence could ever be
founded, since, on this showing, it is impossible to affirm of any
proposition, not being a contradiction in terms, that it is
inconceivable. Antipodes were really, not fictitiously, inconceivable to
our ancestors: they are indeed conceivable to us; and as the limits of
our power of conception have been so largely extended, by the extension
of our experience and the more varied exercise of our imagination, so
may posterity find many combinations perfectly conceivable to them which
are inconceivable to us. But, as beings of limited experience, we must
always and necessarily have limited conceptive powers; while it does not
by any means follow that the same limitation obtains in the
possibilities of nature, nor even in her actual manifestations.

Rather more than a century and a half ago it was a scientific maxim,
disputed by no one, and which no one deemed to require any proof, that
"a thing cannot act where it is not." With this weapon the Cartesians
waged a formidable war against the theory of gravitation, which,
according to them, involving so obvious an absurdity, must be rejected
_in limine_: the sun could not possibly act upon the earth, not being
there. It was not surprising that the adherents of the old systems of
astronomy should urge this objection against the new; but the false
assumption imposed equally on Newton himself, who in order to turn the
edge of the objection, imagined a subtle ether which filled up the space
between the sun and the earth, and by its intermediate agency was the
proximate cause of the phenomena of gravitation. "It is inconceivable,"
said Newton, in one of his letters to Dr. Bentley,[6] "that inanimate
brute matter should, without the mediation of something else, which is
not material, operate upon and affect other matter _without mutual
contact_.... That gravity should be innate, inherent, and essential to
matter, so that one body may act on another, at a distance, through a
vacuum, without the mediation of anything else, by and through which
their action and force may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so
great an absurdity, that I believe no man, who in philosophical matters
has a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall into it." This
passage should be hung up in the cabinet of every cultivator of science
who is ever tempted to pronounce a fact impossible because it appears to
him inconceivable. In our own day one would be more tempted, though with
equal injustice, to reverse the concluding observation, and consider the
seeing any absurdity at all in a thing so simple and natural, to be what
really marks the absence of "a competent faculty of thinking." No one
now feels any difficulty in conceiving gravity to be, as much as any
other property is, "inherent, and essential to matter," nor finds the
comprehension of it facilitated in the smallest degree by the
supposition of an ether (though some recent inquirers do give this as an
explanation of it); nor thinks it at all incredible that the celestial
bodies can and do act where they, in actual bodily presence, are not.
To us it is not more wonderful that bodies should act upon one another
"without mutual contact," than that they should do so when in contact;
we are familiar with both these facts, and we find them equally
inexplicable, but equally easy to believe. To Newton, the one, because
his imagination was familiar with it, appeared natural and a matter of
course, while the other, for the contrary reason, seemed too absurd to
be credited.

It is strange that any one, after such a warning, should rely implicitly
on the evidence _à priori_ of such propositions as these, that matter
cannot think; that space, or extension, is infinite; that nothing can be
made out of nothing (_ex nihilo nihil fit_). Whether these propositions
are true or not this is not the place to determine, nor even whether the
questions are soluble by the human faculties. But such doctrines are no
more self-evident truths, than the ancient maxim that a thing cannot act
where it is not, which probably is not now believed by any educated
person in Europe.[7] Matter cannot think; why? because we _cannot
conceive_ thought to be annexed to any arrangement of material
particles. Space is infinite, because having never known any part of it
which had not other parts beyond it, we _cannot conceive_ an absolute
termination. _Ex nihilo nihil fit_, because having never known any
physical product without a pre-existing physical material, we _cannot_,
or think we cannot, _imagine_ a creation out of nothing. But these
things may in themselves be as conceivable as gravitation without an
intervening medium, which Newton thought too great an absurdity for any
person of a competent faculty of philosophical thinking to admit: and
even supposing them not conceivable, this, for aught we know, may be
merely one of the limitations of our very limited minds, and not in
nature at all.

No writer has more directly identified himself with the fallacy now
under consideration, or has embodied it in more distinct terms, than
Leibnitz. In his view, unless a thing was not merely conceivable, but
even explainable, it could not exist in nature. All _natural_ phenomena,
according to him, must be susceptible of being accounted for _à priori_.
The only facts of which no explanation could be given but the will of
God, were miracles properly so called. "Je reconnais," says he,[8]
"qu'il n'est pas permis de nier ce qu'on n'entend pas; mais j'ajoute
qu'on a droit de nier (au moins dans l'ordre naturel) ce qui absolument
n'est point intelligible ni explicable. Je soutiens aussi ... qu'enfin
la conception des créatures n'est pas la mesure du pouvoir de Dieu, mais
que leur conceptivité, ou force de concevoir, est la mesure du pouvoir
de la nature, tout ce qui est conforme à l'ordre naturel pouvant être
conçu ou entendu par quelque créature."

Not content with assuming that nothing can be true which we are unable
to conceive, scientific inquirers have frequently given a still further
extension to the doctrine, and held that, even of things not altogether
inconceivable, that which we can conceive with the greatest ease is
likeliest to be true. It was long an admitted axiom, and is not yet
entirely discredited, that "nature always acts by the simplest means,"
_i.e._ by those which are most easily conceivable.[9] A large proportion
of all the errors ever committed in the investigation of the laws of
nature, have arisen from the assumption that the most familiar
explanation or hypothesis must be the truest. One of the most
instructive facts in scientific history is the pertinacity with which
the human mind clung to the belief that the heavenly bodies must move in
circles, or be carried round by the revolution of spheres; merely
because those were in themselves the simplest suppositions: though, to
make them accord with the facts which were ever contradicting them more
and more, it became necessary to add sphere to sphere and circle to
circle, until the original simplicity was converted into almost
inextricable complication.


§ 4. We pass to another _à priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, allied
to the former, and originating as that does, in the tendency to presume
an exact correspondence between the laws of the mind and those of things
external to it. The fallacy may be enunciated in this general
form--Whatever can be thought of apart exists apart: and its most
remarkable manifestation consists in the personification of
abstractions. Mankind in all ages have had a strong propensity to
conclude that wherever there is a name, there must be a distinguishable
separate entity corresponding to the name; and every complex idea which
the mind has formed for itself by operating upon its conceptions of
individual things, was considered to have an outward objective reality
answering to it. Fate, Chance, Nature, Time, Space, were real beings,
nay, even gods. If the analysis of qualities in the earlier part of this
work be correct, names of qualities and names of substances stand for
the very same sets of facts or phenomena; _whiteness_ and _a white
thing_ are only different phrases, required by convenience for speaking
of the same external fact under different relations. Not such, however,
was the notion which this verbal distinction suggested of old, either to
the vulgar or to the scientific. Whiteness was an entity, inhering or
sticking in the white substance: and so of all other qualities. So far
was this carried, that even concrete general terms were supposed to be,
not names of indefinite numbers of individual substances, but names of a
peculiar kind of entities termed Universal Substances. Because we can
think and speak of man in general, that is, of all persons in so far as
possessing the common attributes of the species, without fastening our
thoughts permanently on some one individual person; therefore man in
general was supposed to be, not an aggregate of individual persons, but
an abstract or universal man, distinct from these.

It may be imagined what havoc metaphysicians trained in these habits
made with philosophy, when they came to the largest generalizations of
all. _Substantiæ Secundæ_ of any kind were bad enough, but such
Substantiæ Secundæ as _τὸ ὄν_, for example, and _τὸ ἕν_, standing for
peculiar entities supposed to be inherent in all things which _exist_,
or which are said to be _one_, were enough to put an end to all
intelligible discussion; especially since, with a just perception that
the truths which philosophy pursues are _general_ truths, it was soon
laid down that these general substances were the only subjects of
science, being immutable, while individual substances cognizable by the
senses, being in a perpetual flux, could not be the subject of real
knowledge. This misapprehension of the import of general language
constitutes Mysticism, a word so much oftener written and spoken than
understood. Whether in the Vedas, in the Platonists, or in the
Hegelians, mysticism is neither more nor less than ascribing objective
existence to the subjective creations of our own faculties, to ideas or
feelings of the mind; and believing that by watching and contemplating
these ideas of its own making, it can read in them what takes place in
the world without.


§ 5. Proceeding with the enumeration of _à priori_ fallacies, and
endeavouring to arrange them with as much reference as possible to their
natural affinities, we come to another, which is also nearly allied to
the fallacy preceding the last, standing in the same relation to one
variety of it as the fallacy last mentioned does to the other. This,
too, represents nature as under incapacities corresponding to those of
our intellect; but instead of only asserting that nature cannot do a
thing because we cannot conceive it done, goes the still greater length
of averring that nature does a particular thing, on the sole ground that
we can see no reason why she should not. Absurd as this seems when so
plainly stated, it is a received principle among scientific authorities
for demonstrating _à priori_ the laws of physical phenomena. A
phenomenon must follow a certain law, because we see no reason why it
should deviate from that law in one way rather than in another. This is
called the Principle of the Sufficient Reason;[10] and by means of it
philosophers often flatter themselves that they are able to establish,
without any appeal to experience, the most general truths of
experimental physics.

Take, for example, two of the most elementary of all laws, the law of
inertia and the first law of motion. A body at rest cannot, it is
affirmed, begin to move unless acted upon by some external force:
because, if it did, it must either move up or down, forward or backward,
and so forth; but if no outward force acts upon it, there can be _no
reason_ for its moving up rather than down, or down rather than up, &c.,
_ergo_, it will not move at all.

This reasoning I conceive to be entirely fallacious, as indeed Dr.
Brown, in his treatise on Cause and Effect, has shown with great
acuteness and justness of thought. We have before remarked, that almost
every fallacy may be referred to different genera by different modes of
filling up the suppressed steps; and this particular one may, at our
option, be brought under _petitio principii_. It supposes that nothing
can be a "sufficient reason" for a body's moving in one particular
direction, except some external force. But this is the very thing to be
proved. Why not some _internal_ force? Why not the law of the thing's
own nature? Since these philosophers think it necessary to prove the law
of inertia, they of course do not suppose _it_ to be self-evident; they
must, therefore, be of opinion that, previously to all proof, the
supposition of a body's moving by internal impulse is an admissible
hypothesis; but if so, why is not the hypothesis also admissible, that
the internal impulse acts naturally in some one particular direction,
not in another? If spontaneous motion might have been the law of matter,
why not spontaneous motion towards the sun, towards the earth, or
towards the zenith? Why not, as the ancients supposed, towards a
particular place in the universe, appropriated to each particular kind
of substance? Surely it is not allowable to say that spontaneity of
motion is credible in itself, but not credible if supposed to take place
in any determinate direction.

Indeed, if any one chose to assert that all bodies when uncontrolled set
out in a direct line towards the north pole, he might equally prove his
point by the principle of the Sufficient Reason. By what right is it
assumed that a state of rest is the particular state which cannot be
deviated from without special cause? Why not a state of motion, and of
some particular sort of motion? Why may we not say that the natural
state of a horse left to himself is to amble, because otherwise he must
either trot, gallop, or stand still, and because we know no reason why
he should do one of these rather than another? If this is to be called
an unfair use of the "sufficient reason," and the other a fair one,
there must be a tacit assumption that a state of rest is more natural to
a horse than a state of ambling. If this means that it is the state
which the animal will assume when left to himself, that is the very
point to be proved; and if it does not mean this, it can only mean that
a state of rest is the simplest state, and therefore the most likely to
prevail in nature, which is one of the fallacies or natural prejudices
we have already examined.

So again of the First Law of Motion; that a body once moving will, if
left to itself, continue to move uniformly in a straight line. An
attempt is made to prove this law by saying, that if not, the body must
deviate either to the right or to the left, and that there is no reason
why it should do one more than the other. But who could know,
antecedently to experience, whether there was a reason or not? Might it
not be the nature of bodies, or of some particular bodies, to deviate
towards the right? or if the supposition is preferred, towards the east,
or south? It was long thought that bodies, terrestrial ones at least,
had a natural tendency to deflect downwards; and there is no shadow of
anything objectionable in the supposition, except that it is not true.
The pretended proof of the law of motion is even more manifestly
untenable than that of the law of inertia, for it is flagrantly
inconsistent; it assumes that the continuance of motion in the direction
first taken is more natural than deviation either to the right or to the
left, but denies that one of these can possibly be more natural than the
other. All these fancies of the possibility of knowing what is natural
or not natural by any other means than experience, are, in truth,
entirely futile. The real and only proof of the laws of motion, or of
any other law of the universe, is experience; it is simply that no
other suppositions explain or are consistent with the facts of universal
nature.

Geometers have, in all ages, been open to the imputation of endeavouring
to prove the most general facts of the outward world by sophistical
reasoning, in order to avoid appeals to the senses. Archimedes, says
Professor Playfair,[11] established some of the elementary propositions
of statics by a process in which he "borrows no principle from
experiment, but establishes his conclusion entirely by reasoning _à
priori_. He assumes, indeed, that equal bodies, at the ends of the equal
arms of a lever, will balance one another; and also that a cylinder or
parallelopiped of homogeneous matter, will be balanced about its centre
of magnitude. These, however, are not inferences from experience; they
are, properly speaking, conclusions deduced from the principle of the
Sufficient Reason." And to this day there are few geometers who would
not think it far more scientific to establish these or any other
premises in this way, than to rest their evidence on that familiar
experience which in the case in question might have been so safely
appealed to.


§ 6. Another natural prejudice, of most extensive prevalence, and which
had a great share in producing the errors fallen into by the ancients in
their physical inquiries, was this: That the differences in nature must
correspond to our received distinctions; that effects which we are
accustomed, in popular language, to call by different names, and arrange
in different classes, must be of different natures, and have different
causes. This prejudice, so evidently of the same origin with those
already treated of, marks more especially the earliest stage of science,
when it has not yet broken loose from the trammels of every-day
phraseology. The extraordinary prevalence of the fallacy among the Greek
philosophers may be accounted for by their generally knowing no other
language than their own; from which it was a consequence that their
ideas followed the accidental or arbitrary combinations of that
language, more completely than can happen among the moderns to any but
illiterate persons. They had great difficulty in distinguishing between
things which their language confounded, or in putting mentally together
things which it distinguished; and could hardly combine the objects in
nature, into any classes but those which were made for them by the
popular phrases of their own country: or at least could not help
fancying those classes to be natural, and all others arbitrary and
artificial. Accordingly, scientific investigation among the Greek
schools of speculation and their followers in the middle ages, was
little more than a mere sifting and analysing of the notions attached to
common language. They thought that by determining the meaning of words,
they could become acquainted with facts. "They took for granted," says
Dr. Whewell,[12] "that philosophy must result from the relations of
those notions which are involved in the common use of language, and they
proceeded to seek it by studying such notions." In his next chapter, Dr.
Whewell has so well illustrated and exemplified this error, that I shall
take the liberty of quoting him at some length.

"The propensity to seek for principles in the common usages of language
may be discerned at a very early period. Thus we have an example of it
in a saying which is reported of Thales, the founder of Greek
philosophy. When he was asked, 'What is the _greatest_ thing?' he
replied '_Place_; for all other things are _in_ the world, but the world
is _in_ it.' In Aristotle we have the consummation of this mode of
speculation. The usual point from which he starts in his inquiries is,
that _we say_ thus or thus in common language. Thus, when he has to
discuss the question whether there be, in any part of the universe, a
void, or space in which there is nothing, he inquires first in how many
senses we say that one thing is _in_ another. He enumerates many of
these; we say the part is in the whole, as the finger is _in_ the hand;
again we say, the species is in the genus, as man is included _in_
animal; again, the government of Greece is _in_ the king; and various
other senses are described and exemplified, but of all these _the most
proper_ is when we say a thing is _in_ a vessel, and generally _in
place_. He next examines what _place_ is, and comes to this conclusion,
that 'if about a body there be another body including it, it is in
place, and if not, not.' A body moves when it changes its place; but he
adds, that if water be in a vessel, the vessel being at rest, the parts
of the water may still move, for they are included by each other; so
that while the whole does not change its place, the parts may change
their place in a circular order. Proceeding then to the question of a
_void_, he as usual examines the different senses in which the term is
used, and adopts as the most proper, _place without matter_: with no
useful result.

"Again, in a question concerning mechanical action, he says, 'When a man
moves a stone by pushing it with a stick, _we say_ both that the man
moves the stone, and that the stick moves the stone, but the latter
_more properly_.'

"Again, we find the Greek philosophers applying themselves to extract
their dogmas from the most general and abstract notions which they could
detect; for example, from the conception of the Universe as One or as
Many things. They tried to determine how far we may, or must, combine
with these conceptions that of a whole, of parts, of number, of limits,
of place, of beginning or end, of full or void, of rest, or motion, of
cause and effect, and the like. The analysis of such conceptions with
such a view, occupies, for instance, almost the whole of Aristotle's
Treatise on the Heavens."

The following paragraph merits particular attention:--"Another mode of
reasoning, very widely applied in these attempts, was the _doctrine of
contrarieties_, in which it was assumed, that adjectives or substances
which are in common language, or in some abstract mode of conception,
opposed to each other, must point at some fundamental antithesis in
nature, which it is important to study. Thus Aristotle says that the
Pythagoreans, from the contrasts which number suggests, collected ten
principles--Limited and Unlimited, Odd and Even, One and Many, Right and
Left, Male and Female, Rest and Motion, Straight and Curved, Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil, Square and Oblong.... Aristotle himself deduced
the doctrine of four elements and other dogmas by oppositions of the
same kind."

Of the manner in which, from premises obtained in this way, the ancients
attempted to deduce laws of nature, an example is given in the same work
a few pages further on. "Aristotle decides that there is no void, on
such arguments as this. In a void there could be no difference of up and
down; for as in nothing there are no differences, so there are none in a
privation or negation; but a void is merely a privation or negation of
matter; therefore, in a void, bodies could not move up and down, which
it is in their nature to do. It is easily seen" (Dr. Whewell very justly
adds) "that such a mode of reasoning elevates the familiar forms of
language, and the intellectual connexions of terms, to a supremacy over
facts; making truth depend upon whether terms are or are not privative,
and whether we say that bodies fall _naturally_."

The propensity to assume that the same relations obtain between objects
themselves, which obtain between our ideas of them, is here seen in the
extreme stage of its development. For the mode of philosophizing,
exemplified in the foregoing instances, assumes no less than that the
proper way of arriving at knowledge of nature, is to study nature itself
subjectively; to apply our observation and analysis not to the facts,
but to the common notions entertained of the facts.

Many other equally striking examples may be given of the tendency to
assume that things which for the convenience of common life are placed
in different classes, must differ in every respect. Of this nature was
the universal and deeply-rooted prejudice of antiquity and the middle
ages, that celestial and terrestrial phenomena must be essentially
different, and could in no manner or degree depend on the same laws. Of
the same kind, also, was the prejudice against which Bacon contended,
that nothing produced by nature could be successfully imitated by man:
"Calorem solis et ignis toto genere differre; ne scilicet homines
putent se per opera ignis, aliquid simile iis quæ in Natura fiunt,
educere et formare posse:" and again, "Compositionem tantum opus
Hominis, Mistionem vero opus solius Naturæ esse: ne scilicet homines
sperent aliquam ex arte Corporum naturalium generationem aut
transformationem."[13] The grand distinction in the ancient scientific
speculations, between natural and violent motions, though not without a
plausible foundation in the appearances themselves, was doubtless
greatly recommended to adoption by its conformity to this prejudice.


§ 7. From the fundamental error of the scientific inquirers of
antiquity, we pass, by a natural association, to a scarcely less
fundamental one of their great rival and successor, Bacon. It has
excited the surprise of philosophers that the detailed system of
inductive logic, which this extraordinary man laboured to construct, has
been turned to so little direct use by subsequent inquirers, having
neither continued, except in a few of its generalities, to be recognised
as a theory, nor having conducted in practice to any great scientific
results. But this, though not unfrequently remarked, has scarcely
received any plausible explanation; and some, indeed, have preferred to
assert that all rules of induction are useless, rather than suppose that
Bacon's rules are grounded on an insufficient analysis of the inductive
process. Such, however, will be seen to be the fact, as soon as it is
considered, that Bacon entirely overlooked Plurality of Causes. All his
rules tacitly imply the assumption, so contrary to all we now know of
nature, that a phenomenon cannot have more than one cause.

When he is inquiring into what he terms the _forma calidi aut frigidi_,
_gravis aut levis_, _sicci aut humidi_, and the like, he never for an
instant doubts that there is some one thing, some invariable condition
or set of conditions, which is present in all cases of heat, or cold, or
whatever other phenomenon he is considering; the only difficulty being
to find what it is; which accordingly he tries to do by a process of
elimination, rejecting or excluding, by negative instances, whatever is
not the _forma_ or cause, in order to arrive at what is. But, that this
_forma_ or cause is _one_ thing, and that it is the same in all hot
objects, he has no more doubt of, than another person has that there is
always some cause _or other_. In the present state of knowledge it could
not be necessary, even if we had not already treated so fully of the
question, to point out how widely this supposition is at variance with
the truth. It is particularly unfortunate for Bacon that, falling into
this error, he should have fixed almost exclusively upon a class of
inquiries in which it was especially fatal; namely, inquiries into the
causes of the sensible qualities of objects. For his assumption,
groundless in every case, is false in a peculiar degree with respect to
those sensible qualities. In regard to scarcely any of them has it been
found possible to trace any unity of cause, any set of conditions
invariably accompanying the quality. The conjunctions of such qualities
with one another constitute the variety of Kinds, in which, as already
remarked, it has not been found possible to trace any law. Bacon was
seeking for what did not exist. The phenomenon of which he sought for
the one cause has oftenest no cause at all, and when it has, depends (as
far as hitherto ascertained) on an unassignable variety of distinct
causes.

And on this rock every one must split, who represents to himself as the
first and fundamental problem of science to ascertain what is the cause
of a given effect, rather than what are the effects of a given cause. It
was shown, in an early stage of our inquiry into the nature of
Induction,[14] how much more ample are the resources which science
commands for the latter than for the former inquiry, since it is upon
the latter only that we can throw any direct light by means of
experiment; the power of artificially producing an effect, implying a
previous knowledge of at least one of its causes. If we discover the
causes of effects, it is generally by having previously discovered the
effects of causes: the greatest skill in devising crucial instances for
the former purpose may only end, as Bacon's physical inquiries did, in
no result at all. Was it that his eagerness to acquire the power of
producing for man's benefit effects of practical importance to human
life, rendering him impatient of pursuing that end by a circuitous
route, made even him, the champion of experiment, prefer the direct
mode, though one of mere observation, to the indirect, in which alone
experiment was possible? Or had even Bacon not entirely cleared his mind
from the notion of the ancients, that "rerum cognoscere _causas_" was
the sole object of philosophy, and that to inquire into the _effects_ of
things belonged to servile and mechanical arts?

It is worth remarking that, while the only efficient mode of cultivating
speculative science was missed from an undue contempt of manual
operations, the false speculative views thus engendered gave in their
turn a false direction to such practical and mechanical aims as were
suffered to exist. The assumption universal among the ancients and in
the middle ages, that there were _principles_ of heat and cold, dryness
and moisture, &c., led directly to a belief in alchemy; in a
transmutation of substances, a change from one Kind into another. Why
should it not be possible to make gold? Each of the characteristic
properties of gold has its _forma_, its essence, its set of conditions,
which if we could discover, and learn how to realize, we could
superinduce that particular property upon any other substance, upon
wood, or iron, or lime, or clay. If, then, we could effect this with
respect to every one of the essential properties of the precious metal,
we should have converted the other substance into gold. Nor did this, if
once the premises were granted, appear to transcend the real powers of
mankind. For daily experience showed that almost every one of the
distinctive sensible properties of any object, its consistence, its
colour, its taste, its smell, its shape, admitted of being totally
changed by fire, or water, or some other chemical agent. The _formæ_ of
all those qualities seeming, therefore, to be within human power either
to produce or to annihilate, not only did the transmutation of
substances appear abstractedly possible, but the employment of the
power, at our choice, for practical ends, seemed by no means
hopeless.[15]

A prejudice, universal in the ancient world, and from which Bacon was so
far from being free, that it pervaded and vitiated the whole practical
part of his system of logic, may with good reason be ranked high in the
order of Fallacies of which we are now treating.


§ 8. There remains one _à priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, the most
deeply-rooted, perhaps, of all which we have enumerated: one which not
only reigned supreme in the ancient world, but still possesses almost
undisputed dominion over many of the most cultivated minds; and some of
the most remarkable of the numerous instances by which I shall think it
necessary to exemplify it, will be taken from recent thinkers. This is,
that the conditions of a phenomenon must, or at least probably will,
resemble the phenomenon itself.

Conformably to what we have before remarked to be of frequent
occurrence, this fallacy might without much impropriety have been placed
in a different class, among Fallacies of Generalization: for experience
does afford a certain degree of countenance to the assumption. The cause
does, in very many cases, resemble its effect; like produces like. Many
phenomena have a direct tendency to perpetuate their own existence, or
to give rise to other phenomena similar to themselves. Not to mention
forms actually moulded on one another, as impressions on wax and the
like, in which the closest resemblance between the effect and its cause
is the very law of the phenomenon; all motion tends to continue itself,
with its own velocity, and in its own original direction; and the motion
of one body tends to set others in motion, which is indeed the most
common of the modes in which the motions of bodies originate. We need
scarcely refer to contagion, fermentation, and the like; or to the
production of effects by the growth or expansion of a germ or rudiment
resembling on a smaller scale the completed phenomenon, as in the growth
of a plant or animal from an embryo, that embryo itself deriving its
origin from another plant or animal of the same kind. Again, the
thoughts, or reminiscences, which are effects of our past sensations,
resemble those sensations; feelings produce similar feelings by way of
sympathy; acts produce similar acts by involuntary or voluntary
imitation. With so many appearances in its favour, no wonder if a
presumption naturally grew up, that causes must _necessarily_ resemble
their effects, and that like could _only_ be produced by like.

This principle of fallacy has usually presided over the fantastical
attempts to influence the course of nature by conjectural means, the
choice of which was not directed by previous observation and experiment.
The guess almost always fixed upon some means which possessed features
of real or apparent resemblance to the end in view. If a charm was
wanted, as by Ovid's Medea, to prolong life, all long-lived animals, or
what were esteemed such, were collected and brewed into a broth:--

             ... nec defuit illic
     Squamea Cinyphii tenuis membrana chelydri
     Vivacisque jecur cervi: quibus insuper addit
     Ora caputque novem cornicis sæcula passæ.

A similar notion was embodied in the celebrated medical theory called
the "Doctrine of Signatures," "which is no less," says Dr. Paris,[16]
"than a belief that every natural substance which possesses any
medicinal virtue indicates by an obvious and well-marked external
character the disease for which it is a remedy, or the object for which
it should be employed." This outward character was generally some
feature of resemblance, real or fantastical, either to the effect it
was supposed to produce, or to the phenomenon over which its power was
thought to be exercised. "Thus the lungs of a fox must be a specific for
asthma, because that animal is remarkable for its strong powers of
respiration. Turmeric has a brilliant yellow colour, which indicates
that it has the power of curing the jaundice; for the same reason,
poppies must relieve diseases of the head; Agaricus those of the
bladder; _Cassia fistula_ the affections of the intestines, and
Aristolochia the disorders of the uterus: the polished surface and stony
hardness which so eminently characterize the seeds of the Lithospermum
officinale (common gromwell) were deemed a certain indication of their
efficacy in calculous and gravelly disorders; for a similar reason, the
roots of the Saxifraga granulata (white saxifrage) gained reputation in
the cure of the same disease; and the Euphrasia (eye-bright) acquired
fame, as an application in complaints of the eye, because it exhibits a
black spot in its corolla resembling the pupil. The blood-stone, the
Heliotropium of the ancients, from the occasional small specks or points
of a blood-red colour exhibited on its green surface, is even at this
very day employed in many parts of England and Scotland, to stop a
bleeding from the nose; and nettle tea continues a popular remedy for
the cure of _Urticaria_. It is also asserted that some substances bear
the _signatures_ of the humours, as the petals of the red rose that of
the blood, and the roots of rhubarb and the flowers of saffron that of
the bile."

The early speculations respecting the chemical composition of bodies
were rendered abortive by no circumstance more, than by their invariably
taking for granted that the properties of the elements must resemble
those of the compounds which were formed from them.

To descend to more modern instances; it was long thought, and was
stoutly maintained by the Cartesians and even by Leibnitz against the
Newtonian system, (nor did Newton himself, as we have seen, contest the
assumption, but eluded it by an arbitrary hypothesis), that nothing (of
a physical nature at least) could account for motion, except previous
motion; the impulse or impact of some other body. It was very long
before the scientific world could prevail upon itself to admit
attraction and repulsion (_i. e._ spontaneous tendencies of particles to
approach or recede from one another) as ultimate laws, no more requiring
to be accounted for than impulse itself, if indeed the latter were not,
in truth, resolvable into the former. From the same source arose the
innumerable hypotheses devised to explain those classes of motions which
appeared more mysterious than others because there was no obvious mode
of attributing them to impulse, as for example the voluntary motions of
the human body. Such were the interminable systems of vibrations
propagated along the nerves, or animal spirits rushing up and down
between the muscles and the brain; which, if the facts could have been
proved, would have been an important addition to our knowledge of
physiological laws; but the mere invention, or arbitrary supposition of
them, could not unless by the strongest delusion be supposed to render
the phenomena of animal life more comprehensible, or less mysterious.
Nothing, however, seemed satisfactory, but to make out that motion was
caused by motion; by something like itself. If it was not one kind of
motion, it must be another. In like manner it was supposed that the
physical qualities of objects must arise from some similar quality, or
perhaps only some quality bearing the same name, in the particles or
atoms of which the objects were composed; that a sharp taste, for
example, must arise from sharp particles. And reversing the inference,
the effects produced by a phenomenon must, it was supposed, resemble in
their physical attributes the phenomenon itself. The influences of the
planets were supposed to be analogous to their visible peculiarities:
Mars, being of a red colour, portended fire and slaughter; and the like.

Passing from physics to metaphysics, we may notice among the most
remarkable fruits of this _à priori_ fallacy, two closely analogous
theories, employed in ancient and modern times to bridge over the chasm
between the world of mind and that of matter: the _species sensibiles_
of the Epicureans, and the modern doctrine of perception by means of
ideas. These theories are indeed, probably, indebted for their existence
not solely to the fallacy in question, but to that fallacy combined
with another natural prejudice already adverted to, that a thing cannot
act where it is not. In both doctrines it is assumed that the phenomenon
which takes place _in us_ when we see or touch an object, and which we
regard as an effect of that object, or rather as its presence to our
organs, must of necessity resemble very closely the outward object
itself. To fulfil this condition, the Epicureans supposed that objects
were constantly projecting in all directions impalpable images of
themselves, which entered at the eyes and penetrated to the mind; while
modern metaphysicians, though they rejected this hypothesis, agreed in
deeming it necessary to suppose that not the thing itself, but a mental
image or representation of it, was the direct object of perception. Dr.
Reid had to employ a world of argument and illustration to familiarize
people with the truth, that the sensations or impressions on our minds
need not necessarily be copies of, or bear any resemblance to, the
causes which produce them; in opposition to the natural prejudice which
led people to assimilate the action of bodies upon our senses, and
through them upon our minds, to the transfer of a given form from one
object to another by actual moulding. The works of Dr. Reid are even now
the most effectual course of study for detaching the mind from the
prejudice of which this was an example. And the value of the service
which he thus rendered to popular philosophy, is not much diminished
although we may hold, with Brown, that he went too far in imputing the
"ideal theory" as an actual tenet, to the generality of the philosophers
who preceded him, and especially to Locke and Hume: for if they did not
themselves consciously fall into the error, unquestionably they often
led their readers into it.

The prejudice, that the conditions of a phenomenon must resemble the
phenomenon, is occasionally exaggerated, at least verbally, into a still
more palpable absurdity; the conditions of the thing are spoken of as if
they _were_ the very thing itself. In Bacon's model-inquiry, which
occupies so great a space in the _Novum Organum_, the _inquisitio in
formam calidi_, the conclusion which he favours is that heat is a kind
of motion; meaning of course not the feeling of heat, but the
conditions of the feeling; meaning, therefore, only that wherever there
is heat, there must first be a particular kind of motion; but he makes
no distinction in his language between these two ideas, expressing
himself as if heat, and the conditions of heat, were one and the same
thing. So Darwin, in the beginning of his _Zoonomia_, says, "The word
_idea_ has various meanings in the writers of metaphysic: it is here
used simply for those notions of external things which our organs of
sense bring us acquainted with originally," (thus far the proposition,
though vague, is unexceptionable in meaning,) "and is defined a
contraction, a motion, or configuration, of the fibres which constitute
the immediate organ of sense." Our _notions_, a configuration of the
fibres! What kind of logician must he be who thinks that a phenomenon is
_defined_ to _be_ the condition on which he supposes it to depend?
Accordingly he says soon after, not that our ideas are caused by, or
consequent on, certain organic phenomena, but "our ideas _are_ animal
motions of the organs of sense." And this confusion runs through the
four volumes of the _Zoonomia_; the reader never knows whether the
writer is speaking of the effect, or of its supposed cause; of the idea,
a state of mental consciousness, or of the state of the nerves and brain
which he considers it to presuppose.

I have given a variety of instances in which the natural prejudice, that
causes and their effects must resemble one another, has operated in
practice so as to give rise to serious errors. I shall now go further,
and produce from writings even of the present or very recent times,
instances in which this prejudice is laid down as an established
principle. M. Victor Cousin, in the last of his celebrated lectures on
Locke, enunciates the maxim in the following unqualified terms. "Tout ce
qui est vrai de l'effet est vrai de la cause." A doctrine to which,
unless in some peculiar and technical meaning of the words cause and
effect, it is not to be imagined that any person would literally adhere:
but he who could so write must be far enough from seeing, that the very
reverse might be the fact; that there is nothing impossible in the
supposition that no one property which is true of the effect might be
true of the cause. Without going quite so far in point of expression,
Coleridge, in his _Biographia Literaria_,[17] affirms as an "evident
truth," that "the law of causality holds only between homogeneous
things, _i. e._ things having some common property," and therefore
"cannot extend from one world into another, its opposite:" hence, as
mind and matter have no common property, mind cannot act upon matter,
nor matter upon mind. What is this but the _à priori_ fallacy of which
we are speaking? The doctrine, like many others of Coleridge, is taken
from Spinoza, in the first book of whose _Ethica (De Deo)_ it stands as
the Third Proposition, "Quæ res nihil commune inter se habent, earum una
alterius causa esse non potest," and is there proved from two so-called
axioms, equally gratuitous with itself: but Spinoza, ever systematically
consistent, pursued the doctrine to its inevitable consequence, the
materiality of God.

The same conception of impossibility led the ingenious and subtle mind
of Leibnitz to his celebrated doctrine of a pre-established harmony. He,
too, thought that mind could not act upon matter, nor matter upon mind,
and that the two, therefore, must have been arranged by their Maker like
two clocks, which, though unconnected with one another, strike
simultaneously, and always point to the same hour. Malebranche's equally
famous theory of Occasional Causes was another form of the same
conception: instead of supposing the clocks originally arranged to
strike together, he held that when the one strikes, God interposes, and
makes the other strike in correspondence with it.

Descartes, in like manner, whose works are a rich mine of almost every
description of _à priori_ fallacy, says that the Efficient Cause must at
least have all the perfections of the effect, and for this singular
reason: "Si enim ponamus aliquid in ideâ reperiri quod non fuerit in
ejus causâ, hoc igitur habet a nihilo;" of which it is scarcely a parody
to say, that if there be pepper in the soup there must be pepper in the
cook who made it, since otherwise the pepper would be without a cause. A
similar fallacy is committed by Cicero in his second book _De Finibus_,
where, speaking in his own person against the Epicureans, he charges
them with inconsistency in saying that the pleasures of the mind had
their origin from those of the body, and yet that the former were more
valuable, as if the effect could surpass the cause. "Animi voluptas
oritur propter voluptatem corporis, et major est animi voluptas quam
corporis? ita fit ut gratulator lætior sit quam is cui gratulatur." Even
that, surely, is not an impossibility: a person's good fortune has often
given more pleasure to others than it gave to the person himself.

Descartes, with no less readiness, applies the same principle the
converse way, and infers the nature of the effects from the assumption
that they must, in this or that property or in all their properties,
resemble their cause. To this class belong his speculations, and those
of so many others after him, tending to infer the order of the universe,
not from observation, but by _à priori_ reasoning from supposed
qualities of the Godhead. This sort of inference was probably never
carried to a greater length than it was in one particular instance by
Descartes, when, as a proof of one of his physical principles, that the
quantity of motion in the universe is invariable, he had recourse to the
immutability of the Divine Nature. Reasoning of a very similar character
is however nearly as common now as it was in his time, and does duty
largely as a means of fencing off disagreeable conclusions. Writers have
not yet ceased to oppose the theory of divine benevolence to the
evidence of physical facts, to the principle of population for example.
And people seem in general to think that they have used a very powerful
argument, when they have said, that to suppose some proposition true,
would be a reflection on the goodness or wisdom of the Deity. Put into
the simplest possible terms, their argument is, "If it had depended on
me, I would not have made the proposition true, therefore it is not
true." Put into other words it stands thus: "God is perfect, therefore
(what I think) perfection must obtain in nature." But since in reality
every one feels that nature is very far from perfect, the doctrine is
never applied consistently. It furnishes an argument which (like many
others of a similar character) people like to appeal to when it makes
for their own side. Nobody is convinced by it, but each appears to think
that it puts religion on his side of the question, and that it is a
useful weapon of offence for wounding an adversary.

Although several other varieties of _à priori_ fallacy might probably be
added to those here specified, these are all against which it seems
necessary to give any special caution. Our object is to open, without
attempting or affecting to exhaust, the subject. Having illustrated,
therefore, this first class of Fallacies at sufficient length, I shall
proceed to the second.




