CHAPTER VII.

FALLACIES OF CONFUSION.


§ 1. Under this fifth and last class it is convenient to arrange all
those fallacies, in which the source of error is not so much a false
estimate of the probative force of known evidence, as an indistinct,
indefinite, and fluctuating conception of what the evidence is.

At the head of these stands that multitudinous body of fallacious
reasonings, in which the source of error is the ambiguity of terms: when
something which is true if a word be used in a particular sense, is
reasoned on as if it were true in another sense. In such a case there is
not a mal-estimation of evidence, because there is not properly any
evidence to the point at all; there is evidence, but to a different
point, which from a confused apprehension of the meaning of the terms
used, is supposed to be the same. This error will naturally be oftener
committed in our ratiocinations than in our direct inductions, because
in the former we are deciphering our own or other people's notes, while
in the latter we have the things themselves present, either to the
senses or to the memory. Except, indeed, when the induction is not from
individual cases to a generality, but from generalities to a still
higher generalization; in that case the fallacy of ambiguity may affect
the inductive process as well as the ratiocinative. It occurs in
ratiocination in two ways: when the middleterm is ambiguous, or when one
of the terms of the syllogism is taken in one sense in the premises, and
in another sense in the conclusion.

Some good exemplifications of this fallacy are given by Archbishop
Whately. "One case," says he, "which may be regarded as coming under the
head of Ambiguous Middle, is (what I believe logical writers mean by
'_Fallacia Figuræ Dictionis_,') the fallacy built on the grammatical
structure of language, from men's usually taking for granted that
_paronymous_ (or _conjugate_) words, _i.e._ those belonging to each
other, as the substantive, adjective, verb, &c. of the same root, have a
precisely corresponding meaning; which is by no means universally the
case. Such a fallacy could not indeed be even exhibited in strict
logical form, which would preclude even the attempt at it, since it has
two middleterms in sound as well as sense. But nothing is more common in
practice than to vary continually the terms employed, with a view to
grammatical convenience; nor is there anything unfair in such a
practice, as long as the _meaning_ is preserved unaltered; _e.g._
'murder should be punished with death; this man is a murderer, therefore
he deserves to die,' &c. Here we proceed on the assumption (in this case
just) that to commit murder, and to be a murderer,--to deserve death,
and to be one who ought to die, are, respectively, equivalent
expressions; and it would frequently prove a heavy inconvenience to be
debarred this kind of liberty; but the abuse of it gives rise to the
Fallacy in question: _e.g._ _projectors_ are unfit to be trusted; this
man has formed a _project_, therefore he is unfit to be trusted: here
the sophist proceeds on the hypothesis that he who forms a _project_
must be a _projector_: whereas the bad sense that commonly attaches to
the latter word, is not at all implied in the former. This fallacy may
often be considered as lying not in the Middle, but in one of the terms
of the Conclusion; so that the conclusion drawn shall not be, in
reality, at all warranted by the premises, though it will appear to be
so, by means of the grammatical affinity of the words: _e.g._ to be
acquainted with the guilty is a _presumption_ of guilt; this man is so
acquainted, therefore we may _presume_ that he is guilty: this argument
proceeds on the supposition of an exact correspondence between _presume_
and _presumption_, which, however, does not really exist; for
'presumption' is commonly used to express a kind of _slight suspicion_;
whereas, 'to presume' amounts to actual belief. There are innumerable
instances of a non-correspondence in paronymous words, similar to that
above instanced; as between _art_ and _artful_, _design_ and
_designing_, _faith_ and _faithful_, &c.; and the more slight the
variation of the meaning, the more likely is the fallacy to be
successful; for when the words have become so widely removed in sense as
'pity' and 'pitiful,' every one would perceive such a fallacy, nor could
it be employed but in jest.[34]

"The present Fallacy is nearly allied to, or rather, perhaps, may be
regarded as a branch of, that founded on _etymology_; viz. when a term
is used, at one time in its customary, and at another in its
etymological sense. Perhaps no example of this can be found that is more
extensively and mischievously employed than in the case of the word
_representative_: assuming that its right meaning must correspond
exactly with the strict and original sense of the verb 'represent,' the
sophist persuades the multitude, that a member of the House of Commons
is bound to be guided in all points by the opinion of his constituents;
and, in short, to be merely their _spokesman_; whereas law and custom,
which in this case may be considered as fixing the meaning of the term,
require no such thing, but enjoin the representative to act according to
the best of his _own_ judgment, and on his own responsibility."

The following are instances of great practical importance, in which
arguments are habitually founded on a verbal ambiguity.

The mercantile public are frequently led into this fallacy by the
phrase, "scarcity of money." In the language of commerce "money" has two
meanings: _currency_, or the circulating medium; and _capital seeking
investment_, especially investment on loan. In this last sense the word
is used when the "money market" is spoken of, and when the "value of
money" is said to be high or low, the rate of interest being meant. The
consequence of this ambiguity is, that as soon as scarcity of money in
the latter of these senses begins to be felt,--as soon as there is
difficulty of obtaining loans, and the rate of interest is high,--it is
concluded that this must arise from causes acting upon the quantity of
money in the other and more popular sense; that the circulating medium
must have diminished in quantity, or ought to be increased. I am aware
that, independently of the double meaning of the term, there are in
facts themselves some peculiarities, giving an apparent support to this
error; but the ambiguity of the language stands on the very threshold of
the subject, and intercepts all attempts to throw light upon it.

Another ambiguous expression which continually meets us in the political
controversies of the present time, especially in those which relate to
organic changes, is the phrase "influence of property:" which is
sometimes used for the influence of respect for superior intelligence,
or gratitude for the kind offices which persons of large property have
it so much in their power to bestow; at other times for the influence of
fear; fear of the worst sort of power, which large property also gives
to its possessor, the power of doing mischief to dependents. To confound
these two, is the standing fallacy of ambiguity brought against those
who seek to purify the electoral system from corruption and
intimidation. Persuasive influence, acting through the conscience of the
voter, and carrying his heart and mind with it, is beneficial--therefore
(it is pretended) coercive influence, which compels him to forget that
he is a moral agent, or to act in opposition to his moral convictions,
ought not to be placed under restraint.

Another word which is often turned into an instrument of the fallacy of
ambiguity, is Theory. In its most proper acceptation, theory means the
completed result of philosophical induction from experience. In that
sense, there are erroneous as well as true theories, for induction may
be incorrectly performed, but theory of some sort is the necessary
result of knowing anything of a subject, and having put one's knowledge
into the form of general propositions for the guidance of practice. In
this, the proper sense of the word, Theory is the explanation of
practice. In another and a more vulgar sense, theory means any mere
fiction of the imagination, endeavouring to conceive how a thing may
possibly have been produced, instead of examining how it was produced.
In this sense only are theory, and theorists, unsafe guides; but because
of this, ridicule or discredit is attempted to be attached to theory in
its proper sense, that is, to legitimate generalization, the end and aim
of all philosophy; and a conclusion is represented as worthless, just
because that has been done, which if done correctly, constitutes the
highest worth that a principle for the guidance of practice can possess,
namely, to comprehend in a few words the real law on which a phenomenon
depends, or some property or relation which is universally true of it.

"The Church" is sometimes understood to mean the clergy alone, sometimes
the whole body of believers, or at least of communicants. The
declamations respecting the inviolability of church property are
indebted for the greater part of their apparent force to this ambiguity.
The clergy, being called the church, are supposed to be the real owners
of what is called church property; whereas they are in truth only the
managing members of a much larger body of proprietors, and enjoy on
their own part a mere usufruct, not extending beyond a life interest.

The following is a Stoical argument taken from Cicero _De Finibus_, book
the third: "Quod est bonum, omne laudabile est. Quod autem laudabile
est, omne honestum est. Bonum igitur quod est, honestum est." Here the
ambiguous word is _laudabile_, which in the minor premise means anything
which mankind are accustomed, on good grounds, to admire or value; as
beauty, for instance, or good fortune: but in the major, it denotes
exclusively moral qualities. In much the same manner the Stoics
endeavoured logically to justify as philosophical truths, their
figurative and rhetorical expressions of ethical sentiment: as that the
virtuous man is alone free, alone beautiful, alone a king, &c. Whoever
has virtue has Good (because it has been previously determined not to
call anything else good); but, again, Good necessarily includes
freedom, beauty, and even kingship, all these being good things;
therefore whoever has virtue has all these.

The following is an argument of Descartes to prove, in his _à priori_
manner, the being of a God. The conception, says he, of an infinite
Being proves the real existence of such a being. For if there is not
really any such being, _I_ must have made the conception; but if I could
make it, I can also unmake it; which evidently is not true; therefore
there must be, externally to myself, an archetype, from which the
conception was derived. In this argument (which, it may be observed,
would equally prove the real existence of ghosts and of witches) the
ambiguity is in the pronoun _I_, by which, in one place, is to be
understood my _will_, in another the _laws of my nature_. If the
conception, existing as it does in my mind, had no original without, the
conclusion would unquestionably follow that _I_ made it; that is, the
laws of my nature must have somehow evolved it: but that my _will_ made
it, would not follow. Now when Descartes afterwards adds that I cannot
unmake the conception, he means that I cannot get rid of it by an act of
my will: which is true, but is not the proposition required. I can as
much unmake this conception as I can any other: no conception which I
have once had, can I ever dismiss by mere volition: but what some of the
laws of my nature have produced, other laws, or those same laws in other
circumstances, may, and often do, subsequently efface.

Analogous to this are some of the ambiguities in the free-will
controversy; which, as they will come under special consideration in the
concluding Book, I only mention _memoriæ causâ_. In that discussion,
too, the word _I_ is often shifted from one meaning to another, at one
time standing for my volitions, at another time for the actions which
are the consequences of them, or the mental dispositions from which they
proceed. The latter ambiguity is exemplified in an argument of Coleridge
(in his _Aids to Reflection_), in support of the freedom of the will. It
is not true, he says, that a man is governed by motives; "the man makes
the motive, not the motive the man;" the proof being that "what is a
strong motive to one man is no motive at all to another." The premise is
true, but only amounts to this, that different persons have different
degrees of susceptibility to the same motive; as they have also to the
same intoxicating liquid, which however does not prove that they are
free to be drunk or not drunk, whatever quantity of the fluid they may
drink. What is proved is, that certain mental conditions in the person
himself, must co-operate, in the production of the act, with the
external inducement: but those mental conditions also are the effect of
causes; and there is nothing in the argument to prove that they can
arise without a cause--that a spontaneous determination of the will,
without any cause at all, ever takes place, as the free-will doctrine
supposes.

The double use, in the free-will controversy, of the word Necessity,
which sometimes stands only for Certainty, at other times for
Compulsion; sometimes for what _cannot_ be prevented, at other times
only for what we have reason to be assured _will_ not; we shall have
occasion hereafter to pursue to some of its ulterior consequences.

A most important ambiguity, both in common and in metaphysical language,
is thus pointed out by Archbishop Whately in the Appendix to his Logic:
"_Same_ (as well as _One_, _Identical_, and other words derived from
them,) is used frequently in a sense very different from its primary
one, as applicable to a _single_ object; being employed to denote great
_similarity_. When several objects are undistinguishably alike, _one
single description_ will apply equally to any of them; and thence they
are said to be all of _one and the same_ nature, appearance, &c. As,
_e.g._ when we say 'this house is built of the _same_ stone with such
another,' we only mean that the stones are undistinguishable in their
qualities; not that the one building was pulled down, and the other
constructed with the materials. Whereas _sameness_, in the primary
sense, does not even necessarily imply similarity; for if we say of any
man that he is greatly altered since such a time, we understand, and
indeed imply by the very expression, that he is _one person_, though
different in several qualities. It is worth observing also, that Same,
in the secondary sense, admits, according to popular usage, of degrees:
we speak of two things being _nearly_ the same, but not entirely:
personal identity does not admit of degrees. Nothing, perhaps, has
contributed more to the error of Realism than inattention to this
ambiguity. When several persons are said to have _one and the same_
opinion, thought, or idea, many men, overlooking the true simple
statement of the case, which is, that they are _all thinking alike_,
look for something more abstruse and mystical, and imagine there must be
some _One Thing_, in the primary sense, though not an individual, which
is present at once in the mind of each of these persons; and thence
readily sprung Plato's theory of Ideas, each of which was, according to
him, one real, eternal object, existing entire and complete in each of
the individual objects that are known by one name."

It is, indeed, not a matter of inference but of authentic history, that
Plato's doctrine of Ideas, and the Aristotelian doctrine (in this
respect similar to the Platonic) of substantial forms and second
substances, grew up in the precise way here pointed out; from the
supposed necessity of finding, in things which were said to have the
_same_ nature, or the _same_ qualities, something which was the _same_
in the very sense in which a man is the same as himself. All the idle
speculations respecting _τὸ ὄν_, _τὸ ἕν_, _τὸ ὅμοίον_, and similar
abstractions, so common in the ancient and in some modern schools of
thought, sprang from the same source. The Aristotelian logicians saw,
however, one case of the ambiguity, and provided against it with their
peculiar felicity in the invention of technical language, when they
distinguished things which differed both _specie_ and _numero_, from
those which differed _numero tantum_, that is, which were exactly alike
(in some particular respect at least) but were distinct individuals. An
extension of this distinction to the two meanings of the word Same,
namely, things which are the same _specie tantum_, and a thing which is
the same _numero_ as well as _specie_, would have prevented the
confusion which has been a source of so much darkness and such an
abundance of positive error in metaphysical philosophy.

One of the most singular examples of the length to which a thinker of
eminence may be led away by an ambiguity of language, is afforded by
this very case. I refer to the famous argument by which Bishop Berkeley
flattered himself that he had for ever put an end to "scepticism,
atheism, and irreligion." It is briefly as follows. I thought of a thing
yesterday; I ceased to think of it; I think of it again to-day. I had,
therefore, in my mind yesterday an _idea_ of the object; I have also an
idea of it to-day; this idea is evidently not another, but the very same
idea. Yet an intervening time elapsed in which I had it not. Where was
the idea during this interval? It must have been somewhere; it did not
cease to exist; otherwise the idea I had yesterday could not be the
_same_ idea; no more than the man I see alive to-day can be the same
whom I saw yesterday, if the man has died in the meanwhile. Now an idea
cannot be conceived to exist anywhere except in a mind; and hence there
must exist an Universal Mind, in which all ideas have their permanent
residence, during the intervals of their conscious presence in our own
minds.

It is evident that Berkeley here confounded sameness _numero_ with
sameness _specie_, that is, with exact resemblance, and assumed the
former where there was only the latter; not perceiving that when we say
we have the same thought to-day which we had yesterday, we do not mean
the same individual thought, but a thought exactly similar: as we say
that we have the same illness which we had last year, meaning only the
same sort of illness.

In one remarkable instance the scientific world was divided into two
furiously hostile parties by an ambiguity of language affecting a branch
of science which, more completely than most others, enjoys the advantage
of a precise and well-defined terminology. I refer to the famous dispute
respecting the _vis viva_, the history of which is given at large in
Professor Playfair's Dissertation. The question was, whether the _force_
of a moving body was proportional (its mass being given) to its velocity
simply, or to the square of its velocity: and the ambiguity was in the
word Force. "One of the effects," says Playfair, "produced by a moving
body is proportional to the square of the velocity, while another is
proportional to the velocity simply:" from whence clearer thinkers were
subsequently led to establish a double measure of the efficiency of a
moving power, one being called _vis viva_, and the other _momentum_.
About the facts, both parties were from the first agreed: the only
question was, with which of the two effects the term _force_ should be,
or could most conveniently be, associated. But the disputants were by no
means aware that this was all; they thought that force was one thing,
the production of effects another; and the question, by which set of
effects the force which produced both the one and the other should be
measured, was supposed to be a question not of terminology but of fact.

The ambiguity of the word Infinite is the real fallacy in the amusing
logical puzzle of Achilles and the Tortoise, a puzzle which has been too
hard for the ingenuity or patience of many philosophers, and which no
less a thinker than Sir William Hamilton considered as insoluble; as a
sound argument, though leading to a palpable falsehood. The fallacy, as
Hobbes hinted, lies in the tacit assumption that whatever is infinitely
divisible is infinite; but the following solution, (to the invention of
which I have no claim,) is more precise and satisfactory.

The argument is, let Achilles run ten times as fast as the tortoise, yet
if the tortoise has the start, Achilles will never overtake him. For
suppose them to be at first separated by an interval of a thousand feet:
when Achilles has run these thousand feet, the tortoise will have got on
a hundred; when Achilles has run those hundred, the tortoise will have
run ten, and so on for ever: therefore Achilles may run for ever without
overtaking the tortoise.

Now, the "for ever," in the conclusion, means, for any length of time
that can be supposed; but in the premises "ever" does not mean any
_length_ of time: it means any _number of subdivisions_ of time. It
means that we may divide a thousand feet by ten, and that quotient again
by ten, and so on as often as we please; that there never needs be an
end to the subdivisions of the distance, nor consequently to those of
the time in which it is performed. But an unlimited number of
subdivisions may be made of that which is itself limited. The argument
proves no other infinity of duration than may be embraced within five
minutes. As long as the five minutes are not expired, what remains of
them may be divided by ten, and again by ten, as often as we like, which
is perfectly compatible with their being only five minutes altogether.
It proves, in short, that to pass through this finite space requires a
time which is infinitely divisible, but not an infinite time: the
confounding of which distinction Hobbes had already seen to be the gist
of the fallacy.

The following ambiguities of the word _right_ (in addition to the
obvious and familiar one of _a_ right and the _adjective_ right) are
extracted from a forgotten paper of my own, in a periodical:--

"Speaking morally, you are said to have a right to do a thing, if all
persons are morally bound not to hinder you from doing it. But, in
another sense, to have a right to do a thing is the opposite of having
_no_ right to do it, _i.e._ of being under a moral obligation to forbear
doing it. In this sense, to say that you have a right to do a thing,
means that you may do it without any breach of duty on your part; that
other persons not only ought not to hinder you, but have no cause to
think worse of you for doing it. This is a perfectly distinct
proposition from the preceding. The right which you have by virtue of a
duty incumbent upon other persons, is obviously quite a different thing
from a right consisting in the absence of any duty incumbent upon
yourself. Yet the two things are perpetually confounded. Thus a man will
say he has a right to publish his opinions; which may be true in this
sense, that it would be a breach of duty in any other person to
interfere and prevent the publication: but he assumes thereupon, that in
publishing his opinions, he himself violates no duty; which may either
be true or false, depending, as it does, on his having taken due pains
to satisfy himself, first, that the opinions are true, and next, that
their publication in this manner, and at this particular juncture, will
probably be beneficial to the interests of truth on the whole.

"The second ambiguity is that of confounding a right of any kind, with a
right to enforce that right by resisting or punishing a violation of it.
People will say, for example, that they have a right to good government,
which is undeniably true, it being the moral duty of their governors to
govern them well. But in granting this, you are supposed to have
admitted their right or liberty to turn out their governors, and perhaps
to punish them, for having failed in the performance of this duty;
which, far from being the same thing, is by no means universally true,
but depends on an immense number of varying circumstances," requiring to
be conscientiously weighed before adopting or acting on such a
resolution. This last example is (like others which have been cited) a
case of fallacy within fallacy; it involves not only the second of the
two ambiguities pointed out, but the first likewise.

One not unusual form of the Fallacy of Ambiguous Terms, is known
technically as the Fallacy of Composition and Division: when the same
term is collective in the premises, distributive in the conclusion, or
_vice versâ_: or when the middle term is collective in one premise,
distributive in the other. As if one were to say (I quote from
Archbishop Whately) "All the angles of a triangle are equal to two right
angles: ABC is an angle of a triangle; therefore ABC is equal to two
right angles.... There is no fallacy more common, or more likely to
deceive, than the one now before us. The form in which it is most
usually employed is to establish some truth, separately, concerning
_each single_ member of a certain class, and thence to infer the same of
the _whole collectively_." As in the argument one sometimes hears, to
prove that the world could do without great men. If Columbus (it is
said) had never lived, America would still have been discovered, at most
only a few years later; if Newton had never lived, some other person
would have discovered the law of gravitation; and so forth. Most true:
these things would have been done, but in all probability not until
some one had again been found with the qualities of Columbus or Newton.
Because any one great man might have had his place supplied by other
great men, the argument concludes that all great men could have been
dispensed with. The term "great men" is distributive in the premises and
collective in the conclusion.

"Such also is the fallacy which probably operates on most adventurers in
lotteries; _e.g._ 'the gaining of a high prize is no uncommon
occurrence; and what is no uncommon occurrence may reasonably be
expected; therefore the gaining of a high prize may reasonably be
expected:' the conclusion when applied to the individual (as in practice
it is) must be understood in the sense of 'reasonably expected _by a
certain individual_;' therefore for the major premise to be true, the
middle term must be understood to mean, 'no uncommon occurrence to some
one _particular_ person;' whereas for the minor (which has been placed
first) to be true, you must understand it of 'no uncommon occurrence to
_some one or other_;' and thus you will have the Fallacy of Composition.

"This is a Fallacy with which men are extremely apt to deceive
_themselves_; for when a multitude of particulars are presented to the
mind, many are too weak or too indolent to take a comprehensive view of
them, but confine their attention to each single point, by turns; and
then decide, infer, and act, accordingly: _e.g._ the imprudent
spendthrift, finding that he is able to afford this, _or_ that, _or_ the
other expense, forgets that _all of them together_ will ruin him." The
debauchee destroys his health by successive acts of intemperance,
because no _one_ of those acts would be of itself sufficient to do him
any serious harm. A sick person reasons with himself, "one, and another,
and another, of my symptoms, do not prove that I have a fatal disease;"
and practically concludes that all taken together do not prove it.


§ 2. We have now sufficiently exemplified one of the principal Genera in
this Order of Fallacies; where, the source of error being the ambiguity
of terms, the premises are verbally what is required to support the
conclusion, but not really so. In the second great Fallacy of Confusion
they are neither verbally nor really sufficient, though, from their
multiplicity and confused arrangement, and still oftener from defect of
memory, they are not seen to be what they are. The fallacy I mean is
that of Petitio Principii, or begging the question; including the more
complex and not uncommon variety of it, which is termed Reasoning in a
Circle.

_Petitio Principii_, as defined by Archbishop Whately, is the fallacy
"in which the premise either appears manifestly to be the same as the
conclusion, or is actually proved from the conclusion, or is such as
would naturally and properly so be proved." By the last clause I presume
is meant, that it is not susceptible of any other proof; for otherwise,
there would be no fallacy. To deduce from a proposition, propositions
from which it would itself more naturally be deduced, is often an
allowable deviation from the usual didactic order; or at most, what, by
an adaptation of a phrase familiar to mathematicians, may be called a
logical _inelegance_.[35]

The employment of a proposition to prove that on which it is itself
dependent for proof, by no means implies the degree of mental imbecility
which might at first be supposed. The difficulty of comprehending how
this fallacy could possibly be committed, disappears when we reflect
that all persons, even the instructed, hold a great number of opinions
without exactly recollecting how they came by them. Believing that they
have at some former time verified them by sufficient evidence, but
having forgotten what the evidence was, they may easily be betrayed into
deducing from them the very propositions which are alone capable of
serving as premises for their establishment. "As if," says Archbishop
Whately, "one should attempt to prove the being of a God from the
authority of Holy Writ;" which might easily happen to one with whom both
doctrines, as fundamental tenets of his religious creed, stand on the
same ground of familiar and traditional belief.

Arguing in a circle, however, is a stronger case of the fallacy, and
implies more than the mere passive reception of a premise by one who
does not remember how it is to be proved. It implies an actual attempt
to prove two propositions reciprocally from one another; and is seldom
resorted to, at least in express terms, by any person in his own
speculations, but is committed by those who, being hard pressed by an
adversary, are forced into giving reasons for an opinion of which, when
they began to argue, they had not sufficiently considered the grounds.
As in the following example from Archbishop Whately: "Some mechanicians
attempt to prove (what they ought to lay down as a probable but doubtful
hypothesis[36]) that every particle of matter gravitates equally: 'why?'
'because those bodies which contain more particles ever gravitate more
strongly, _i.e._ are heavier:' 'but, (it may be urged,) those which are
heaviest are not always more bulky;' 'no, but they contain more
particles, though more closely condensed:' 'how do you know that?'
'because they are heavier:' 'how does that prove it?' 'because all
particles of matter gravitating equally, that mass which is specifically
the heavier must needs have the more of them in the same space.'" It
appears to me that the fallacious reasoner, in his private thoughts,
would not be likely to proceed beyond the first step. He would acquiesce
in the sufficiency of the reason first given, "bodies which contain more
particles are heavier." It is when he finds this questioned, and is
called upon to prove it, without knowing how, that he tries to
establish his premise by supposing proved what he is attempting to prove
by it. The most effectual way, in fact, of exposing a Petitio Principii,
when circumstances allow of it, is by challenging the reasoner to prove
his premises; which if he attempts to do, he is necessarily driven into
arguing in a circle.

It is not uncommon, however, for thinkers, and those not of the lowest
description, to be led, even in their own thoughts, not indeed into
formally proving each of two propositions from the other, but into
admitting propositions which can only be so proved. In the preceding
example the two together form a complete and consistent, though
hypothetical, explanation of the facts concerned. And the tendency to
mistake mutual coherency for truth; to trust one's safety to a strong
chain though it has no point of support; is at the bottom of much which,
when reduced to the strict forms of argumentation, can exhibit itself no
otherwise than as reasoning in a circle. All experience bears testimony
to the enthralling effect of neat concatenation in a system of
doctrines, and the difficulty with which people admit the persuasion
that anything which holds so well together can possibly fall.

Since every case where a conclusion which can only be proved from
certain premises is used for the proof of those premises, is a case of
_petitio principii_, that fallacy includes a very great proportion of
all incorrect reasoning. It is necessary, for completing our view of the
fallacy, to exemplify some of the disguises under which it is accustomed
to mask itself, and to escape exposure.

A proposition would not be admitted by any person in his senses as a
corollary from itself, unless it were expressed in language which made
it seem different. One of the commonest modes of so expressing it, is to
present the proposition itself in abstract terms, as a proof of the same
proposition expressed in concrete language. This is a very frequent
mode, not only of pretended proof, but of pretended explanation; and is
parodied when Molière makes one of his absurd physicians say, "l'opium
endormit parcequ'il a une vertu soporifique," or, in the equivalent
doggrel,

       Mihi à docto doctore,
       Domandatur causam et rationem quare
     Opium facit dormire.
       A quoi respondeo,
       Quia est in eo
       Virtus dormitiva,
     Cujus est natura
       Sensus assoupire.

The words Nature and Essence are grand instruments of this mode of
begging the question. As in the well-known argument of the scholastic
theologians, that the mind thinks always, because the _essence_ of the
mind is to think. Locke had to point out, that if by essence is here
meant some property which must manifest itself by actual exercise at all
times, the premise is a direct assumption of the conclusion; while if it
only means that to think is the distinctive property of a mind, there is
no connexion between the premise and the conclusion, since it is not
necessary that a distinctive property should be perpetually in action.

The following is one of the modes in which these abstract terms, Nature
and Essence, are used as instruments of this fallacy. Some particular
properties of a thing are selected, more or less arbitrarily, to be
termed its nature or essence; and when this has been done, these
properties are supposed to be invested with a kind of indefeasibleness;
to have become paramount to all the other properties of the thing, and
incapable of being prevailed over or counteracted by them. As when
Aristotle, in a passage already cited, "decides that there is no void on
such arguments as this: in a void there could be no difference of up and
down; for as in nothing there are no differences, so there are none in a
privation or negation; but a void is merely a privation or negation of
matter; therefore, in a void, bodies could not move up and down, which
it is in their _nature_ to do."[37] In other words; it is in the
_nature_ of bodies to move up and down, _ergo_ any physical fact which
supposes them not so to move, cannot be authentic. This mode of
reasoning, by which a bad generalization is made to overrule all facts
which contradict it, is _petitio principii_ in one of its most palpable
forms.

None of the modes of assuming what should be proved are in more frequent
use than what are termed by Bentham "question-begging appellatives;"
names which beg the question under the disguise of stating it. The most
potent of these are such as have a laudatory or vituperative character.
For instance, in politics, the word Innovation. The dictionary meaning
of this term being merely "a change to something new," it is difficult
for the defenders even of the most salutary improvement to deny that it
is an innovation; yet the word having acquired in common usage a
vituperative connotation in addition to its dictionary meaning, the
admission is always construed as a large concession to the disadvantage
of the thing proposed.

The following passage from the argument in refutation of the Epicureans,
in the second book of Cicero _de Finibus_, affords a fine example of
this sort of fallacy. "Et quidem illud ipsum non nimium probo (et tantum
patior) philosophum loqui de cupiditatibus finiendis. An potest
cupiditas finiri? tollenda est, atque extrahenda radicitus. Quis est
enim, in quo sit cupiditas, quin recte cupidus dici possit? Ergo et
avarus erit, sed finite: adulter, verum habebit modum: et luxuriosus
eodem modo. Qualis ista philosophia est, quæ non interitum afferat
pravitatis, sed sit contenta mediocritate vitiorum?" The question was,
whether certain desires, when kept within bounds, are vices or not; and
the argument decides the point by applying to them a word (_cupiditas_)
which _implies_ vice. It is shown, however, in the remarks which follow,
that Cicero did not intend this as a serious argument, but as a
criticism on what he deemed an inappropriate expression. "Rem ipsam
prorsus probo: elegantiam desidero. Appellet hæc _desideria naturæ_;
cupiditatis nomen servet alio," &c. But many persons, both ancient and
modern, have employed this, or something equivalent to it, as a real and
conclusive argument. We may remark that the passage respecting
_cupiditas_ and _cupidus_ is also an example of another fallacy already
noticed, that of Paronymous Terms.

Many more of the arguments of the ancient moralists, and especially of
the Stoics, fall within the definition of Petitio Principii. In the _De
Finibus_, for example, which I continue to quote as being probably the
best extant exemplification at once of the doctrines and the methods of
the schools of philosophy existing at that time; of what value as
arguments are such pleas as those of Cato in the third book: That if
virtue were not happiness, it could not be a thing to _boast_ of: That
if death or pain were evils, it would be impossible not to fear them,
and it could not, therefore, be laudable to despise them, &c. In one way
of viewing these arguments, they may be regarded as appeals to the
authority of the general sentiment of mankind, which had stamped its
approval upon certain actions and characters by the phrases referred to;
but that such could have been the meaning intended is very unlikely,
considering the contempt of the ancient philosophers for vulgar opinion.
In any other sense they are clear cases of Petitio Principii, since the
word laudable, and the idea of boasting, imply principles of conduct;
and practical maxims can only be proved from speculative truths, namely
from the properties of the subject matter, and cannot, therefore, be
employed to prove those properties. As well might it be argued that a
government is good because we ought to support it, or that there is a
God because it is our duty to pray to him.

It is assumed by all the disputants in the _De Finibus_ as the
foundation of the inquiry into the _summum bonum_, that "sapiens semper
beatus est." Not simply that wisdom gives the best chance of happiness,
or that wisdom consists in knowing what happiness is, and by what things
it is promoted; these propositions would not have been enough for
them:--but that the sage always is, and must of necessity be, happy. The
idea that wisdom could be consistent with unhappiness, was always
rejected as inadmissible: the reason assigned by one of the
interlocutors, near the beginning of the third book, being, that if the
wise could be unhappy, there was little use in pursuing wisdom. But by
unhappiness they did not mean pain or suffering; to that, it was granted
that the wisest person was liable in common with others: he was happy,
because in possessing wisdom he had the most valuable of all
possessions, the most to be sought and prized of all things, and to
possess the most valuable thing was to be the most happy. By laying it
down, therefore, at the commencement of the inquiry, that the sage must
be happy, the disputed question respecting the _summum bonum_ was in
fact begged; with the further assumption, that pain and suffering, so
far as they can coexist with wisdom, are not unhappiness, and are no
evil.

The following are additional instances of Petitio Principii, under more
or less of disguise.

Plato, in the _Sophistes_, attempts to prove that things may exist which
are incorporeal, by the argument that justice and wisdom are
incorporeal, and justice and wisdom must be something. Here, if by
_something_ be meant, as Plato did in fact mean, a thing capable of
existing in and by itself, and not as a quality of some other thing, he
begs the question in asserting that justice and wisdom must be
something: if he means anything else, his conclusion is not proved. This
fallacy might also be classed under ambiguous middleterm: _something_,
in the one premise, meaning some substance, in the other merely some
object of thought, whether substance or attribute.

It was formerly an argument employed in proof of what is now no longer a
popular doctrine, the infinite divisibility of matter, that every
portion of matter, however small, must at least have an upper and an
under surface. Those who used this argument did not see that it assumed
the very point in dispute, the impossibility of arriving at a minimum of
thickness; for if there be a minimum, its upper and under surface will
of course be one: it will be itself a surface, and no more. The argument
owes its very considerable plausibility to this, that the premise does
actually seem more obvious than the conclusion, though really identical
with it. As expressed in the premise, the proposition appeals directly
and in concrete language to the incapacity of the human imagination for
conceiving a minimum. Viewed in this light, it becomes a case of the _à
priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, that whatever cannot be conceived
cannot exist. Every fallacy of Confusion (it is almost unnecessary to
repeat) will, if cleared up, become a fallacy of some other sort; and it
will be found of deductive or ratiocinative fallacies generally, that
when they mislead, there is mostly, as in this case, a fallacy of some
other description lurking under them, by virtue of which chiefly it is
that the verbal juggle, which is the outside or body of this kind of
fallacy, passes undetected.

Euler's Algebra, a book otherwise of great merit, but full, to
overflowing, of logical errors in respect to the foundation of the
science, contains the following argument to prove that _minus_
multiplied by _minus_ gives _plus_, a doctrine the opprobrium of all
mere mathematicians, and which Euler had not a glimpse of the true
method of proving. He says, _minus_ multiplied by _minus_ cannot give
_minus_; for _minus_ multiplied by _plus_ gives _minus_, and _minus_
multiplied by _minus_ cannot give the same product as _minus_ multiplied
by _plus_. Now one is obliged to ask, why minus multiplied by minus must
give any product at all? and if it does, why its product cannot be the
same as that of minus multiplied by plus? for this would seem, at the
first glance, not more absurd than that minus by minus should give the
same as plus by plus, the proposition which Euler prefers to it. The
premise requires proof, as much as the conclusion: nor can it be proved,
except by that more comprehensive view of the nature of multiplication,
and of algebraic processes in general, which would also supply a far
better proof of the mysterious doctrine which Euler is here endeavouring
to demonstrate.

A striking instance of reasoning in a circle is that of some ethical
writers, who first take for their standard of moral truth what, being
the general, they deem to be the natural or instinctive sentiments and
perceptions of mankind, and then explain away the numerous instances of
divergence from their assumed standard, by representing them as cases in
which the perceptions are unhealthy. Some particular mode of conduct or
feeling is affirmed to be _unnatural_; why? because it is abhorrent to
the universal and natural sentiments of mankind. Finding no such
sentiment in yourself, you question the fact; and the answer is (if your
antagonist is polite), that you are an exception, a peculiar case. But
neither (say you) do I find in the people of some other country, or of
some former age, any such feeling of abhorrence; "ay, but their feelings
were sophisticated and unhealthy."

One of the most notable specimens of reasoning in a circle is the
doctrine of Hobbes, Rousseau, and others, which rests the obligations by
which human beings are bound as members of society, on a supposed social
compact. I wave the consideration of the fictitious nature of the
compact itself; but when Hobbes, through the whole Leviathan,
elaborately deduces the obligation of obeying the sovereign, not from
the necessity or utility of doing so, but from a promise supposed to
have been made by our ancestors, on renouncing savage life and agreeing
to establish political society, it is impossible not to retort by the
question, why are we bound to keep a promise made for us by others? or
why bound to keep a promise at all? No satisfactory ground can be
assigned for the obligation, except the mischievous consequences of the
absence of faith and mutual confidence among mankind. We are, therefore,
brought round to the interests of society, as the ultimate ground of the
obligation of a promise; and yet those interests are not admitted to be
a sufficient justification for the existence of government and law.
Without a promise it is thought that we should not be bound to that
which is implied in all modes of living in society, namely, to yield a
general obedience to the laws therein established; and so necessary is
the promise deemed, that if none has actually been made, some additional
safety is supposed to be given to the foundations of society by feigning
one.


§ 3. Two principal subdivisions of the class of Fallacies of Confusion
having been disposed of; there remains a third, in which the confusion
is not, as in the Fallacy of Ambiguity, in misconceiving the import of
the premises, nor, as in _Petitio Principii_, in forgetting what the
premises are, but in mistaking the conclusion which is to be proved.
This is the fallacy of _Ignoratio Elenchi_, in the widest sense of the
phrase; also called by Archbishop Whately the Fallacy of Irrelevant
Conclusion. His examples and remarks are highly worthy of citation.

"Various kinds of propositions are, according to the occasion,
substituted for the one of which proof is required: sometimes the
particular for the universal; sometimes a proposition with different
terms; and various are the contrivances employed to effect and to
conceal this substitution, and to make the conclusion which the sophist
has drawn, answer practically the same purpose as the one he ought to
have established. We say, 'practically the same purpose,' because it
will very often happen that some _emotion_ will be excited, some
sentiment impressed on the mind, (by a dexterous employment of this
fallacy), such as shall bring men into the _disposition_ requisite for
your purpose; though they may not have assented to, or even stated
distinctly in their own minds, the _proposition_ which it was your
business to establish. Thus if a sophist has to defend one who has been
guilty of some _serious_ offence, which he wishes to extenuate, though
he is unable distinctly to prove that it is not such, yet if he can
succeed in _making the audience laugh_ at some casual matter, he has
gained practically the same point. So also if any one has pointed out
the extenuating circumstances in some particular case of offence, so as
to show that it differs widely from the generality of the same class,
the sophist if he find himself unable to disprove these circumstances,
may do away the force of them, by simply _referring the action to that
very class_, which no one can deny that it belongs to, and the very name
of which will excite a feeling of disgust sufficient to counteract the
extenuation; _e.g._ let it be a case of peculation, and that many
_mitigating_ circumstances have been brought forward which cannot be
denied; the sophistical opponent will reply, 'Well, but after all, the
man is a _rogue_, and there is an end of it;' now in reality this was
(by hypothesis) never the question; and the mere assertion of what was
never denied, _ought_ not, in fairness, to be regarded as decisive: but,
practically, the odiousness of the word, arising in great measure from
the association of those very circumstances which belong to most of the
class, but which we have supposed to be _absent_ in _this particular_
instance, excites precisely that feeling of disgust, which in effect
destroys the force of the defence. In like manner we may refer to this
head all cases of improper appeal to the passions, and everything else
which is mentioned by Aristotle as extraneous to the matter in hand
(_ἔξω τοῦ πράγματος_)."

Again, "instead of proving that 'this prisoner has committed an
atrocious fraud,' you prove that the fraud he is accused of is
atrocious: instead of proving (as in the well-known tale of Cyrus and
the two coats) that the taller boy had a right to force the other boy to
exchange coats with him, you prove that the exchange would have been
advantageous to both: instead of proving that the poor ought to be
relieved in this way rather than in that, you prove that the poor ought
to be relieved: instead of proving that the irrational agent--whether a
brute or a madman--can never be deterred from any act by apprehension of
punishment (as for instance a dog from sheep-biting, by fear of being
beaten), you prove that the beating of one dog does not operate as an
_example_ to _other_ dogs, &c.

"It is evident that _ignoratio elenchi_ may be employed as well for the
apparent refutation of your opponent's proposition, as for the apparent
establishment of your own; for it is substantially the same thing, to
prove what was not denied or to disprove what was not asserted. The
latter practice is not less common, and it is more offensive, because it
frequently amounts to a personal affront, in attributing to a person,
opinions, &c., which he perhaps holds in abhorrence. Thus, when in a
discussion one party vindicates, on the ground of general expediency, a
particular instance of resistance to government in a case of intolerable
oppression, the opponent may gravely maintain, 'that we ought not to do
evil that good may come;' a proposition which of course had never been
denied, the point in dispute being, 'whether resistance in this
particular case _were_ doing evil or not.' Or again, by way of
disproving the assertion of the right of private judgment in religion,
one may hear a grave argument to prove that 'it is impossible every one
can be _right in his judgment_.'"

The works of controversial writers are seldom free from this fallacy.
The attempts, for instance, to disprove the population doctrines of
Malthus, have been mostly cases of _ignoratio elenchi_. Malthus has been
supposed to be refuted if it could be shown that in some countries or
ages population has been nearly stationary; as if he had asserted that
population always increases in a given ratio, or had not expressly
declared that it increases only in so far as it is not restrained by
prudence, or kept down by poverty and disease. Or, perhaps, a collection
of facts is produced to prove that in some one country the people are
better off with a dense population than they are in another country with
a thin one; or that the people have become more numerous and better off
at the same time. As if the assertion were that a dense population could
not possibly be well off: as if it were not part of the very doctrine,
and essential to it, that where there is a more abundant capital there
may be a greater population without any increase of poverty, or even
with a diminution of it.

The favourite argument against Berkeley's theory of the non-existence of
matter, and the most popularly effective, next to a "grin"[38]--an
argument, moreover, which is not confined to "coxcombs," nor to men like
Samuel Johnson, whose greatly overrated ability certainly did not lie in
the direction of metaphysical speculation, but is the stock argument of
the Scotch school of metaphysicians--is a palpable _ignoratio elenchi_.
The argument is perhaps as frequently expressed by gesture as by words,
and one of its commonest forms consists in knocking a stick against the
ground. This short and easy confutation overlooks the fact, that in
denying matter, Berkeley did not deny anything to which our senses bear
witness, and therefore cannot be answered by any appeal to them. His
scepticism related to the supposed substratum, or hidden cause of the
appearances perceived by our senses: the evidence of which, whatever may
be thought of its conclusiveness, is certainly not the evidence of
sense. And it will always remain a signal proof of the want of
metaphysical profundity of Reid, Stewart, and, I am sorry to add, of
Brown, that they should have persisted in asserting that Berkeley, if he
believed his own doctrine, was bound to walk into the kennel, or run his
head against a post. As if persons who do not recognise an occult cause
of their sensations, could not possibly believe that a fixed order
subsists among the sensations themselves. Such a want of comprehension
of the distinction between a thing and its sensible manifestation, or,
in metaphysical language, between the noumenon and the phenomenon, would
be impossible to even the dullest disciple of Kant or Coleridge.

It would be easy to add a greater number of examples of this fallacy, as
well as of the others which I have attempted to characterize. But a more
copious exemplification does not seem to be necessary; and the
intelligent reader will have little difficulty in adding to the
catalogue from his own reading and experience. We shall therefore here
close our exposition of the general principles of logic, and proceed to
the supplementary inquiry which is necessary to complete our design.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Supra, p. 204.

[2] _Vulgar Errors_, book v. chap. 21.

[3] _Pharmacologia_, Historical Introduction, p. 16.

[4] The author of one of the Bridgewater Treatises has fallen, as it
seems to me, into a similar fallacy when, after arguing in rather a
curious way to prove that matter may exist without any of the known
properties of matter, and may therefore be changeable, he concludes that
it cannot be eternal, because "eternal (passive) existence necessarily
involves incapability of change." I believe it would be difficult to
point out any other connexion between the facts of eternity and
unchangeableness, than a strong association between the two ideas. Most
of the _à priori_ arguments, both religious and anti-religious, on the
origin of things, are fallacies drawn from the same source.

[5] Supra, book ii. chap. v. § 6, and ch. vii. § 1, 2, 3. See also
_Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_, chap. vi. and
elsewhere.

[6] I quote this passage from Playfair's celebrated _Dissertations on
the Progress of Mathematical and Physical Science_.

[7] This statement I must now correct, as too unqualified. The maxim in
question was maintained with full conviction by no less an authority
than Sir William Hamilton. See my _Examination_, chap. xxiv.

[8] _Nouveaux Essais sur l'Entendement Humain--Avant-propos_.
(Œuvres, Paris ed. 1842, vol. i. p. 19.)

[9] This doctrine also was accepted as true, and conclusions were
grounded on it, by Sir William Hamilton. See _Examination_, chap. xxiv.

[10] Not that of Leibnitz, but the principle commonly appealed to under
that name by mathematicians.

[11] _Dissertation_, ut supra, p. 27.

[12] _Hist. Ind. Sc._ Book i. chap. i.

[13] _Novum Organum_, Aph. 75.

[14] Supra, book iii. ch. vii. § 4.

[15] It is hardly needful to remark that nothing is here intended to be
said against the possibility at some future period of making gold; by
first discovering it to be a compound, and putting together its
different elements or ingredients. But this is a totally different idea
from that of the seekers of the grand arcanum.

[16] _Pharmacologia_, pp. 43-5.

[17] Vol. i. chap. 8.

[18] _Nov. Org._, Aph. 46.

[19] Playfair's _Dissertation_, sect. 4.

[20] _Nov. Org. Renov._, p. 61.

[21] _Pharmacologia_, p. 21.

[22] _Pharmacologia_, pp. 23-4.

[23] Ibid. p. 28.

[24] Ibid. p. 62.

[25] _Pharmacologia_, pp. 61-2.

[26] Supra, p. 182.

[27] _Elements of the Philosophy of the Mind_, vol. ii. ch. 4, sect. 5.

[28] "Thus Fourcroy," says Dr. Paris, "explained the operation of
mercury by its specific gravity, and the advocates of this doctrine
favoured the general introduction of the preparations of iron,
especially in scirrhus of the spleen or liver, upon the same
hypothetical principle; for, say they, whatever is most forcible in
removing the obstruction must be the most proper instrument of cure;
such is steel, which, besides the attenuating power with which it is
furnished, has still a greater force in this case from the gravity of
its particles, which, being seven times specifically heavier than any
vegetable, acts in proportion with a stronger impulse, and therefore is
a more powerful deobstruent. This may be taken as a specimen of the
style in which these mechanical physicians reasoned and
practised."--_Pharmacologia_, pp. 38-9.

[29] _Pharmacologia_, pp. 39, 40.

[30] I quote from Dr. Whewell's _Hist. Ind. Sc._ 3rd ed. i. 129.

[31] _Hist. Ind. Sc._ i. 52.

[32] _Nov. Org._ Aph. 60.

[33] "An advocate," says Mr. De Morgan (_Formal Logic_, p. 270), "is
sometimes guilty of the argument _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter_: it is his business to do for his client all that his
client might _honestly_ do for himself. Is not the word in italics
frequently omitted? _Might_ any man honestly try to do for himself all
that counsel frequently try to do for him? We are often reminded of the
two men who stole the leg of mutton; one could swear he had not got it,
the other that he had not taken it. The counsel is doing his duty by his
client, the client has left the matter to his counsel. Between the
unexecuted intention of the client, and the unintended execution of the
counsel, there may be a wrong done, and, if we are to believe the usual
maxims, no wrong-doer."

The same writer justly remarks (p. 251) that there is a converse
fallacy, _à dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid_, called by the
scholastic logicians, _fallacia accidentis_; and another which may be
called _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum secundum alterum quid_ (p. 265).
For apt instances of both, I must refer the reader to Mr. De Morgan's
able chapter on Fallacies.

[34] An example of this fallacy is the popular error that _strong_ drink
must be a cause of _strength_. There is here fallacy within fallacy; for
granting that the words "strong" and "strength" were not (as they are)
applied in a totally different sense to fermented liquors and to the
human body, there would still be involved the error of supposing that an
effect must be like its cause; that the conditions of a phenomenon are
likely to resemble the phenomenon itself; which we have already treated
of as an _à priori_ fallacy of the first rank. As well might it be
supposed that a strong poison will make the person who takes it, strong.

[35] In his later editions, Archbishop Whately confines the name of
Petitio Principii "to those cases in which one of the premises either is
manifestly the same in sense with the conclusion, or is actually proved
from it, or is such as the persons you are addressing are not likely to
know, or to admit, except as an inference from the conclusion: as,
_e.g._ if any one should infer the authenticity of a certain history,
from its recording such and such facts, the reality of which rests on
the evidence of that history."

[36] No longer even a probable hypothesis, since the establishment of
the atomic theory; it being now certain that the integral particles of
different substances gravitate unequally. It is true that these
particles, though real _minima_ for the purposes of chemical
combination, may not be the ultimate particles of the substance; and
this doubt alone renders the hypothesis admissible, even as an
hypothesis.

[37] _Hist. Ind. Sc._ i. 34.

[38] "And coxcombs vanquish Berkeley with a grin."




