CHAPTER V.

FALLACIES OF GENERALIZATION.


§ 1. The class of Fallacies of which we are now to speak, is the most
extensive of all; embracing a greater number and variety of unfounded
inferences than any of the other classes, and which it is even more
difficult to reduce to sub-classes or species. If the attempt made in
the preceding books to define the principles of well-grounded
generalization has been successful, all generalizations not conformable
to those principles might, in a certain sense, be brought under the
present class: when however the rules are known and kept in view, but a
casual lapse committed in the application of them, this is a blunder,
not a fallacy. To entitle an error of generalization to the latter
epithet, it must be committed on principle; there must lie in it some
erroneous general conception of the inductive process; the legitimate
mode of drawing conclusions from observation and experiment must be
fundamentally misconceived.

Without attempting anything so chimerical as an exhaustive
classification of all the misconceptions which can exist on the subject,
let us content ourselves with noting, among the cautions which might be
suggested, a few of the most useful and needful.


§ 2. In the first place, there are certain kinds of generalization
which, if the principles already laid down be correct, _must_ be
groundless: experience cannot afford the necessary conditions for
establishing them by a correct induction. Such, for instance, are all
inferences from the order of nature existing on the earth, or in the
solar system, to that which may exist in remote parts of the universe;
where the phenomena, for aught we know, may be entirely different, or
may succeed one another according to different laws, or even according
to no fixed law at all. Such, again, in matters dependent on causation,
are all universal negatives, all propositions that assert impossibility.
The non-existence of any given phenomenon, however uniformly experience
may as yet have testified to the fact, proves at most that no cause,
adequate to its production, has yet manifested itself; but that no such
causes exist in nature can only be inferred if we are so foolish as to
suppose that we know all the forces in nature. The supposition would at
least be premature while our acquaintance with some even of those which
we do know is so extremely recent. And however much our knowledge of
nature may hereafter be extended, it is not easy to see how that
knowledge could ever be complete, or how, if it were, we could ever be
assured of its being so.

The only laws of nature which afford sufficient warrant for attributing
impossibility (even with reference to the existing order of nature, and
to our own region of the universe), are first, those of number and
extension, which are paramount to the laws of the succession of
phenomena, and not exposed to the agency of counteracting causes; and
secondly, the universal law of causality itself. That no variation in
any effect or consequent will take place while the whole of the
antecedents remain the same, may be affirmed with full assurance. But,
that the addition of some new antecedent might not entirely alter and
subvert the accustomed consequent, or that antecedents competent to do
this do not exist in nature, we are in no case empowered positively to
conclude.


§ 3. It is next to be remarked that all generalizations which profess,
like the theories of Thales, Democritus, and others of the early Greek
speculators, to resolve all things into some one element, or like many
modern theories, to resolve phenomena radically different into the same,
are necessarily false. By radically different phenomena I mean
impressions on our senses which differ in quality, and not merely in
degree. On this subject what appeared necessary was said in the chapter
on the Limits to the Explanation of Laws of Nature; but as the fallacy
is even in our own times a common one, I shall touch on it somewhat
further in this place.

When we say that the force which retains the planets in their orbits is
resolved into gravity, or that the force which makes substances combine
chemically is resolved into electricity, we assert in the one case what
is, and in the other case what might, and probably will ultimately, be a
legitimate result of induction. In both these cases, motion is resolved
into motion. The assertion is, that a case of motion, which was supposed
to be special, and to follow a distinct law of its own, conforms to and
is included in the general law which regulates another class of motions.
But, from these and similar generalizations, countenance and currency
have been given to attempts to resolve, not motion into motion, but heat
into motion, light into motion, sensation itself into motion; states of
consciousness into states of the nervous system, as in the ruder forms
of the materialist philosophy; vital phenomena into mechanical or
chemical processes, as in some schools of physiology.

Now I am far from pretending that it may not be capable of proof, or
that it will not be an important addition to our knowledge if proved,
that certain motions in the particles of bodies are among the
_conditions_ of the production of heat or light; that certain assignable
physical modifications of the nerves may be the _conditions_ not only of
our sensations or emotions, but even of our thoughts; that certain
mechanical and chemical conditions may, in the order of nature, be
sufficient to determine to action the physiological laws of life. All I
insist upon, in common with every thinker who entertains any clear idea
of the logic of science, is, that it shall not be supposed that by
proving these things one step would be made towards a real explanation
of heat, light, or sensation; or that the generic peculiarity of those
phenomena can be in the least degree evaded by any such discoveries,
however well established. Let it be shown, for instance, that the most
complex series of physical causes and effects succeed one another in the
eye and in the brain to produce a sensation of colour; rays falling on
the eye, refracted, converging, crossing one another, making an inverted
image on the retina, and after this a motion--let it be a vibration, or
a rush of nervous fluid, or whatever else you are pleased to suppose,
along the optic nerve--a propagation of this motion to the brain itself,
and as many more different motions as you choose; still, at the end of
these motions, there is something which is not motion, there is a
feeling or sensation of colour. Whatever number of motions we may be
able to interpolate, and whether they be real or imaginary, we shall
still find, at the end of the series, a motion antecedent and a colour
consequent. The mode in which any one of the motions produces the next,
might possibly be susceptible of explanation by some general law of
motion; but the mode in which the last motion produces the sensation of
colour, cannot be explained by any law of motion; it is the law of
colour: which is, and must always remain, a peculiar thing. Where our
consciousness recognises between two phenomena an inherent distinction;
where we are sensible of a difference which is not merely of degree, and
feel that no adding one of the phenomena to itself would produce the
other; any theory which attempts to bring either under the laws of the
other must be false; though a theory which merely treats the one as a
cause or condition of the other, may possibly be true.


§ 4. Among the remaining forms of erroneous generalization, several of
those most worthy of and most requiring notice have fallen under our
examination in former places, where, in investigating the rules of
correct induction, we have had occasion to advert to the distinction
between it and some common mode of the incorrect. In this number is what
I have formerly called the natural Induction of uninquiring minds, the
Induction of the ancients, which proceeds _per enumerationem
simplicem_: "This, that, and the other A are B, I cannot think of any A
which is not B, therefore every A is B." As a final condemnation of this
rude and slovenly mode of generalization, I will quote Bacon's emphatic
denunciation of it; the most important part, as I have more than once
ventured to assert, of the permanent service rendered by him to
philosophy. "Inductio quæ procedit per enumerationem simplicem, res
puerilis est, et precario concludit" (concludes only _by your leave_, or
provisionally,) "et periculo exponitur ab instantiâ contradictoriâ, et
plerumque secundum pauciora quam par est, et _ex his tantummodo quæ
præsto sunt pronunciat_. At Inductio quæ ad inventionem et
demonstrationem Scientiarum et Artium erit utilis, Naturam separare
debet, per rejectiones et exclusiones debitas; ac deinde post negativas
tot quot sufficiunt, super affirmativas concludere."

I have already said that the mode of Simple Enumeration is still the
common and received method of Induction in whatever relates to man and
society. Of this a very few instances, more by way of memento than of
instruction, may suffice. What, for example, is to be thought of all the
"common-sense" maxims for which the following may serve as the universal
formula, "Whatsoever has never been, will never be." As for example:
negroes have never been as civilized as whites sometimes are, therefore
it is impossible they should be so. Women, as a class, are supposed not
to have hitherto been equal in intellect to men, therefore they are
necessarily inferior. Society cannot prosper without this or the other
institution; _e.g._ in Aristotle's time, without slavery; in later
times, without an established priesthood, without artificial
distinctions of rank, &c. One poor person in a thousand, educated, while
the nine hundred and ninety-nine remain uneducated, has usually aimed at
raising himself out of his class, therefore education makes people
dissatisfied with the condition of a labourer. Bookish men, taken from
speculative pursuits and set to work on something they know nothing
about, have generally been found or thought to do it ill; therefore
philosophers are unfit for business, &c. &c. All these are inductions by
simple enumeration. Reasons having some reference to the canons of
scientific investigation have been attempted to be given, however
unsuccessfully, for some of these propositions; but to the multitude of
those who parrot them, the _enumeratio simplex, ex his tantummodo quæ
præsto sunt pronuncians_, is the sole evidence. Their fallacy consists
in this, that they are inductions without elimination: there has been no
real comparison of instances, nor even ascertainment of the material
facts in any given instance. There is also the further error, of
forgetting that such generalizations, even if well established, could
not be ultimate truths, but must be results of laws much more
elementary; and therefore, until deduced from such, could at most be
admitted as empirical laws, holding good within the limits of space and
time by which the particular observations that suggested the
generalization were bounded.

This error, of placing more empirical laws, and laws in which there is
no direct evidence of causation, on the same footing of certainty as
laws of cause and effect, an error which is at the root of perhaps the
greater number of bad inductions, is exemplified only in its grossest
form in the kind of generalizations to which we have now referred.
These, indeed, do not possess even the degree of evidence which pertains
to a well-ascertained empirical law; but admit of refutation on the
empirical ground itself, without ascending to causal laws. A little
reflection, indeed, will show that mere negations can only form the
ground of the lowest and least valuable kind of empirical law. A
phenomenon has never been noticed; this only proves that the conditions
of that phenomenon have not yet occurred in experience, but does not
prove that they may not occur hereafter. There is a better kind of
empirical law than this, namely, when a phenomenon which is observed
presents within the limits of observation a series of gradations, in
which a regularity, or something like a mathematical law, is
perceptible: from which, therefore, something may be rationally presumed
as to those terms of the series which are beyond the limits of
observation. But in negation there are no gradations, and no series: the
generalizations, therefore, which deny the possibility of any given
condition of man and society merely because it has never yet been
witnessed, cannot possess this higher degree of validity even as
empirical laws. What is more, the minuter examination which that higher
order of empirical laws presupposes, being applied to the subject-matter
of these, not only does not confirm but actually refutes them. For in
reality the past history of Man and Society, instead of exhibiting them
as immovable, unchangeable, incapable of ever presenting new phenomena,
shows them on the contrary to be, in many most important particulars,
not only changeable, but actually undergoing a progressive change. The
empirical law, therefore, best expressive, in most cases, of the genuine
result of observation, would be, not that such and such a phenomenon
will continue unchanged, but that it will continue to change in some
particular manner.

Accordingly, while almost all generalizations relating to Man and
Society, antecedent to the last fifty years, have erred in the gross way
which we have attempted to characterize, namely, by implicitly assuming
that human nature and society will for ever revolve in the same orbit,
and exhibit essentially the same phenomena; which is also the vulgar
error of the ostentatiously practical, the votaries of so-called common
sense, in our day, especially in Great Britain; the more thinking minds
of the present age, having applied a more minute analysis to the past
records of our race, have for the most part adopted a contrary opinion,
that the human species is in a state of necessary progression, and that
from the terms of the series which are past we may infer positively
those which are yet to come. Of this doctrine, considered as a
philosophical tenet, we shall have occasion to speak more fully in the
concluding Book. If not, in all its forms, free from error, it is at
least free from the gross and stupid error which we previously
exemplified. But, in all except the most eminently philosophical minds,
it is infected with precisely the same _kind_ of fallacy as that is. For
we must remember that even this other and better generalization, the
progressive change in the condition of the human species, is, after all,
but an empirical law: to which, too, it is not difficult to point out
exceedingly large exceptions; and even if these could be got rid of,
either by disputing the facts or by explaining and limiting the theory,
the general objection remains valid against the supposed law, as
applicable to any other than what, in our third book, were termed
Adjacent Cases. For not only is it no ultimate, but not even a causal
law. Changes do indeed take place in human affairs, but every one of
those changes depends on determinate causes; the "progressiveness of the
species" is not a cause, but a summary expression for the general result
of all the causes. So soon as, by a quite different sort of induction,
it shall be ascertained what causes have produced these successive
changes, from the beginning of history, in so far as they have really
taken place, and by what causes of a contrary tendency they have been
occasionally checked or entirely counteracted, we may then be prepared
to predict the future with reasonable foresight; we may be in possession
of the real _law_ of the future; and may be able to declare on what
circumstances the continuance of the same onward movement will
eventually depend. But this it is the error of many of the more advanced
thinkers, in the present age, to overlook; and to imagine that the
empirical law collected from a mere comparison of the condition of our
species at different past times, is a real law, is _the_ law of its
changes, not only past but also to come. The truth is, that the causes
on which the phenomena of the moral world depend, are in every age, and
almost in every country, combined in some different proportion; so that
it is scarcely to be expected that the general result of them all should
conform very closely, in its details at least, to any uniformly
progressive series. And all generalizations which affirm that mankind
have a tendency to grow better or worse, richer or poorer, more
cultivated or more barbarous, that population increases faster than
subsistence, or subsistence than population, that inequality of fortune
has a tendency to increase or to break down, and the like, propositions
of considerable value as empirical laws within certain (but generally
rather narrow) limits, are in reality true or false according to times
and circumstances.

What we have said of empirical generalizations from times past to times
still to come, holds equally true of similar generalizations from
present times to times past; when persons whose acquaintance with moral
and social facts is confined to their own age, take the men and the
things of that age for the type of men and things in general, and apply
without scruple to the interpretation of the events of history, the
empirical laws which represent sufficiently for daily guidance the
common phenomena of human nature at that time and in that particular
state of society. If examples are wanted, almost every historical work,
until a very recent period, abounded in them. The same may be said of
those who generalize empirically from the people of their own country to
the people of other countries, as if human beings felt, judged, and
acted, everywhere in the same manner.


§ 5. In the foregoing instances, the distinction is confounded between
empirical laws, which express merely the customary order of the
succession of effects, and the laws of causation on which the effects
depend. There may, however, be incorrect generalization when this
mistake is not committed; when the investigation takes its proper
direction, that of causes, and the result erroneously obtained purports
to be a really causal law.

The most vulgar form of this fallacy is that which is commonly called
_post hoc, ergo propter hoc_, or, _cum hoc, ergo propter hoc_. As when
it was inferred that England owed her industrial pre-eminence to her
restrictions on commerce: as when the old school of financiers, and some
speculative writers, maintained that the national debt was one of the
causes of national prosperity: as when the excellence of the Church, of
the Houses of Lords and Commons, of the procedure of the law courts,
&c., were inferred from the mere fact that the country had prospered
under them. In such cases as these, if it can be rendered probable by
other evidence that the supposed causes have some tendency to produce
the effect ascribed to them, the fact of its having been produced,
though only in one instance, is of some value as a verification by
specific experience: but in itself it goes scarcely any way at all
towards establishing such a tendency, since, admitting the effect, a
hundred other antecedents could show an equally strong title of _that_
kind to be considered as the cause.

In these examples we see bad generalization _à posteriori_, or
empiricism properly so called: causation inferred from casual
conjunction, without either due elimination, or any presumption arising
from known properties of the supposed agent. But bad generalization _à
priori_ is fully as common: which is properly called false theory;
conclusions drawn, by way of deduction, from properties of some one
agent which is known or supposed to be present, all other coexisting
agents being overlooked. As the former is the error of sheer ignorance,
so the latter is especially that of semi-instructed minds; and is mainly
committed in attempting to explain complicated phenomena by a simpler
theory than their nature admits of. As when one school of physicians
sought for the universal principle of all disease in "lentor and morbid
viscidity of the blood," and imputing most bodily derangements to
mechanical obstructions, thought to cure them by mechanical
remedies;[28] while another, the chemical school, "acknowledged no
source of disease but the presence of some hostile acid or alkali, or
some deranged condition in the chemical composition of the fluid or
solid parts," and conceived, therefore, that "all remedies must act by
producing chemical changes in the body. We find Tournefort busily
engaged in testing every vegetable juice, in order to discover in it
some traces of an acid or alkaline ingredient, which might confer upon
it medicinal activity. The fatal errors into which such an hypothesis
was liable to betray the practitioner, received an awful illustration in
the history of the memorable fever that raged at Leyden in the year
1699, and which consigned two-thirds of the population of that city to
an untimely grave; an event which in a great measure depended upon the
Professor Sylvius de la Boe, who having just embraced the chemical
doctrines of Van Helmont, assigned the origin of the distemper to a
prevailing acid, and declared that its cure could alone [only] be
effected by the copious administration of absorbent and testaceous
medicines."[29]

These aberrations in medical theory have their exact parallels in
politics. All the doctrines which ascribe absolute goodness to
particular forms of government, particular social arrangements, and even
to particular modes of education, without reference to the state of
civilization and the various distinguishing characters of the society
for which they are intended, are open to the same objection--that of
assuming one class of influencing circumstances to be the paramount
rulers of phenomena which depend in an equal or greater degree on many
others. But on these considerations it is the less necessary that we
should now dwell, as they will occupy our attention more largely in the
concluding Book.


§ 6. The last of the modes of erroneous generalization to which I shall
advert, is that to which we may give the name of False Analogies. This
Fallacy stands distinguished from those already treated of by the
peculiarity, that it does not even simulate a complete and conclusive
induction, but consists in the misapplication of an argument which is at
best only admissible as an inconclusive presumption, where real proof is
unattainable.

An argument from analogy, is an inference that what is true in a certain
case, is true in a case known to be somewhat similar, but not known to
be exactly parallel, that is, to be similar in all the material
circumstances. An object has the property B: another object is not known
to have that property, but resembles the first in a property A, not
known to be connected with B; and the conclusion to which the analogy
points, is that this object has the property B also. As, for example,
that the planets are inhabited, because the earth is so. The planets
resemble the earth in describing elliptical orbits round the sun, in
being attracted by it and by one another, in being nearly spherical,
revolving on their axes, &c.; but it is not known that any of these
properties, or all of them together, are the conditions on which the
possession of inhabitants is dependent, or are marks of those
conditions. Nevertheless, so long as we do not know what the conditions
are, they _may_ be connected by some law of nature with those common
properties; and to the extent of that possibility the planets are more
likely to be inhabited, than if they did not resemble the earth at all.
This non-assignable and generally small increase of probability, beyond
what would otherwise exist, is all the evidence which a conclusion can
derive from analogy. For if we have the slightest reason to suppose any
real connexion between the two properties A and B, the argument is no
longer one of analogy. If it had been ascertained (I purposely put an
absurd supposition) that there was a connexion by causation between the
fact of revolving on an axis and the existence of animated beings, or if
there were any reasonable ground for even suspecting such a connexion, a
probability would arise of the existence of inhabitants in the planets,
which might be of any degree of strength, up to a complete induction;
but we should then infer the fact from the ascertained or presumed law
of causation, and not from the analogy of the earth.

The name analogy, however, is sometimes employed by extension to denote
those arguments of an inductive character but not amounting to a real
induction, which are employed to strengthen the argument drawn from a
simple resemblance. Though A, the property common to the two cases,
cannot be shown to be the cause or effect of B, the analogical reasoner
will endeavour to show that there is some less close degree of connexion
between them; that A is one of a set of conditions from which, when all
united, B would result; or is an occasional effect of some cause which
has been known also to produce B; and the like. Any of which things, if
shown, would render the existence of B by so much more probable, than if
there had not been even that amount of known connexion between B and A.

Now an error or fallacy of analogy may occur in two ways. Sometimes it
consists in employing an argument of either of the above kinds with
correctness indeed, but overrating its probative force. This very common
aberration is sometimes supposed to be particularly incident to persons
distinguished for their imagination; but in reality it is the
characteristic intellectual vice of those whose imaginations are barren,
either from want of exercise, natural defect, or the narrowness of their
range of ideas. To such minds objects present themselves clothed in but
few properties; and as, therefore, few analogies between one object and
another occur to them, they almost invariably overrate the degree of
importance of those few: while one whose fancy takes a wider range,
perceives and remembers so many analogies tending to conflicting
conclusions, that he is much less likely to lay undue stress on any of
them. We always find that those are the greatest slaves to metaphorical
language, who have but one set of metaphors.

But this is only one of the modes of error in the employment of
arguments of analogy. There is another, more properly deserving the name
of fallacy; namely, when resemblance in one point is inferred from
resemblance in another point, though there is not only no evidence to
connect the two circumstances by way of causation, but the evidence
tends positively to disconnect them. This is properly the Fallacy of
False Analogies.

As a first instance, we may cite that favourite argument in defence of
absolute power, drawn from the analogy of paternal government in a
family, which government, however much in need of control, is not and
cannot be controlled by the children themselves, while they remain
children. Paternal government, says the argument, works well; therefore,
despotic government in a state will work well. I wave, as not pertinent
in this place, all that could be said in qualification of the alleged
excellence of paternal government. However this might be, the argument
from the family to the state would not the less proceed on a false
analogy; implying that the beneficial working of parental government
depends, in the family, on the only point which it has in common with
political despotism, namely, irresponsibility. Whereas it depends, when
real, not on that but on two other circumstances of the case, the
affection of the parent for the children, and the superiority of the
parent in wisdom and experience; neither of which properties can be
reckoned on, or are at all likely to exist, between a political despot
and his subjects; and when either of these circumstances fails even in
the family, and the influence of the irresponsibility is allowed to work
uncorrected, the result is anything but good government. This,
therefore, is a false analogy.

Another example is the not uncommon _dictum_, that bodies politic have
youth, maturity, old age, and death, like bodies natural: that after a
certain duration of prosperity, they tend spontaneously to decay. This
also is a false analogy, because the decay of the vital powers in an
animated body can be distinctly traced to the natural progress of those
very changes of structure which, in their earlier stages, constitute its
growth to maturity: while in the body politic the progress of those
changes cannot, generally speaking, have any effect but the still
further continuance of growth: it is the stoppage of that progress, and
the commencement of retrogression, that alone would constitute decay.
Bodies politic die, but it is of disease, or violent death: they have no
old age.

The following sentence from Hooker's _Ecclesiastical Polity_ is an
instance of a false analogy from physical bodies to what are called
bodies politic. "As there could be in natural bodies no motion of
anything unless there were some which moveth all things, and continueth
immovable: even so in politic societies there must be some unpunishable,
or else no man shall suffer punishment." There is a double fallacy here,
for not only the analogy, but the premise from which it is drawn, is
untenable. The notion that there must be something immovable which
moves all other things, is the old scholastic error of a _primum
mobile_.

The following instance I quote from Archbishop Whately's _Rhetoric_: "It
would be admitted that a great and permanent diminution in the quantity
of some useful commodity, such as corn, or coal, or iron, throughout the
world, would be a serious and lasting loss; and again, that if the
fields and coal mines yielded regularly double quantities, with the same
labour, we should be so much the richer; hence it might be inferred,
that if the quantity of gold and silver in the world were diminished
one-half, or were doubled, like results would follow; the utility of
these metals, for the purposes of coin, being very great. Now there are
many points of resemblance and many of difference, between the precious
metals on the one hand, and corn, coal, &c., on the other; but the
important circumstance to the supposed argument is, that the _utility_
of gold and silver (as coin, which is far the chief) _depends on their
value_, which is regulated by their scarcity; or rather, to speak
strictly, by the difficulty of obtaining them; whereas, if corn and coal
were ten times as abundant (_i.e._ more easily obtained), a bushel of
either would still be as useful as now. But if it were twice as easy to
procure gold as it is, a sovereign would be twice as large; if only half
as easy it would be of the size of a half-sovereign, and this (besides
the trifling circumstance of the cheapness or dearness of gold
ornaments) would be all the difference. The analogy, therefore, fails in
the point essential to the argument."

The same author notices, after Bishop Copleston, the case of False
Analogy which consists in inferring from the similarity in many respects
between the metropolis of a country and the heart of the animal body,
that the increased size of the metropolis is a disease.

Some of the false analogies on which systems of physics were confidently
grounded in the time of the Greek philosophers, are such as we now call
fanciful, not that the resemblances are not often real, but that it is
long since any one has been inclined to draw from them the inferences
which were then drawn. Such, for instance, are the curious speculations
of the Pythagoreans on the subject of numbers. Finding that the
distances of the planets bore or seemed to bear to one another a
proportion not varying much from that of the divisions of the monochord,
they inferred from it the existence of an inaudible music, that of the
spheres: as if the music of a harp had depended solely on the numerical
proportions, and not on the material, nor even on the existence of any
material, any strings at all. It has been similarly imagined that
certain combinations of numbers, which were found to prevail in some
natural phenomena, must run through the whole of nature: as that there
must be four elements, because there are four possible combinations of
hot and cold, wet and dry; that there must be seven planets, because
there were seven metals, and even because there were seven days of the
week. Kepler himself thought that there could be only six planets
because there were only five regular solids. With these we may class the
reasonings, so common in the speculations of the ancients, founded on a
supposed _perfection_ in nature: meaning by nature the customary order
of events as they take place of themselves without human interference.
This also is a rude guess at an analogy supposed to pervade all
phenomena, however dissimilar. Since what was thought to be perfection
appeared to obtain in some phenomena, it was inferred (in opposition to
the plainest evidence) to obtain in all. "We always suppose that which
is better to take place in nature, if it be possible," says Aristotle:
and the vaguest and most heterogeneous qualities being confounded
together under the notion of being _better_, there was no limit to the
wildness of the inferences. Thus, because the heavenly bodies were
"perfect," they must move in circles and uniformly. For "they" (the
Pythagoreans) "would not allow," says Geminus,[30] "of any such disorder
among divine and eternal things, as that they should sometimes move
quicker and sometimes slower, and sometimes stand still; for no one
would tolerate such anomaly in the movements even of a man, who was
decent and orderly. The occasions of life, however, are often reasons
for men going quicker or slower; but in the incorruptible nature of the
stars, it is not possible that any cause can be alleged of quickness or
slowness." It is seeking an argument of analogy very far, to suppose
that the stars must observe the rules of decorum in gait and carriage,
prescribed for themselves by the long-bearded philosophers satirized by
Lucian.

As late as the Copernican controversy it was urged as an argument in
favour of the true theory of the solar system, that it placed the fire,
the noblest element, in the centre of the universe. This was a remnant
of the notion that the order of nature must be perfect, and that
perfection consisted in conformity to rules of precedency in dignity,
either real or conventional. Again, reverting to numbers: certain
numbers were _perfect_, therefore those numbers must obtain in the great
phenomena of nature. Six was a perfect number, that is, equal to the sum
of all its factors; an additional reason why there must be exactly six
planets. The Pythagoreans, on the other hand, attributed perfection to
the number ten; but agreed in thinking that the perfect number must be
somehow realized in the heavens; and knowing only of nine heavenly
bodies, to make up the enumeration, they asserted "that there was an
_antichthon_ or counter-earth, on the other side of the sun, invisible
to us."[31] Even Huygens was persuaded that when the number of the
heavenly bodies had reached twelve, it could not admit of any further
increase. Creative power could not go beyond that sacred number.

Some curious instances of false analogy are to be found in the arguments
of the Stoics to prove the equality of all crimes, and the equal
wretchedness of all who had not realized their idea of perfect virtue.
Cicero, towards the end of his Fourth Book _De Finibus_, states some of
these as follows. "Ut, inquit, in fidibus plurimis, si nulla earum ita
contenta numeris sit, ut concentum servare possit, omnes æque incontentæ
sunt; sic peccata, quia discrepant, æque discrepant; paria sunt igitur."
To which Cicero himself aptly answers, "æque contingit omnibus fidibus,
ut incontentæ sint; illud non continuo, ut æque incontentæ." The Stoic
resumes: "Ut enim, inquit, gubernator æque peccat, si palcarum navem
evertit, et si auri; item æque peccat qui parentem, et qui servum,
injuriâ verberat;" assuming, that because the magnitude of the interest
at stake makes no difference in the mere defect of skill, it can make
none in the moral defect: a false analogy. Again, "Quis ignorat, si
plures ex alto emergere velint, propius fore eos quidem ad respirandum,
qui ad summam jam aquam appropinquant, sed nihilo magis respirare posse,
quam eos, qui sunt in profundo? Nihil ergo adjuvat procedere, et
progredi in virtute, quominus miserrimus sit, antequam ad eam
pervenerit, quoniam in aquâ nihil adjuvat: et quoniam catuli, qui jam
despecturi sunt, cæci æque, et ii qui modo nati; Platonem quoque necesse
est, quoniam nondum videbat sapientiam, æque cæcum animo, ac Phalarim
fuisse." Cicero, in his own person, combats these false analogies by
other analogies tending to an opposite conclusion. "Ista similia non
sunt, Cato.... Illa sunt similia; hebes acies est cuipiam oculorum:
corpore alius languescit: hi curatione adhibitâ levantur in dies: alter
valet plus quotidie: alter videt. Hi similes sunt omnibus, qui virtuti
student; levantur vitiis, levantur erroribus."


§ 7. In these and all other arguments drawn from remote analogies, and
from metaphors, which are cases of analogy, it is apparent (especially
when we consider the extreme facility of raising up contrary analogies
and conflicting metaphors) that so far from the metaphor or analogy
proving anything, the applicability of the metaphor is the very thing to
be made out. It has to be shown that in the two cases asserted to be
analogous, the same law is really operating; that between the known
resemblance and the inferred one there is some connexion by means of
causation. Cicero and Cato might have bandied opposite analogies for
ever; it rested with each of them to prove by just induction, or at
least to render probable, that the case resembled the one set of
analogous cases and not the other, in the circumstances on which the
disputed question really hinged. Metaphors, for the most part,
therefore, assume the proposition which they are brought to prove:
their use is, to aid the apprehension of it; to make clearly and vividly
comprehended what it is that the person who employs the metaphor is
proposing to make out; and sometimes also, by what media he proposes to
do so. For an apt metaphor, though it cannot prove, often suggests the
proof.

For instance, when D'Alembert (I believe) remarked that in certain
governments, only two creatures find their way to the highest places,
the eagle and the serpent; the metaphor not only conveys with great
vividness the assertion intended, but contributes towards substantiating
it, by suggesting, in a lively manner, the means by which the two
opposite characters thus typified effect their rise. When it is said
that a certain person misunderstands another because the lesser of two
objects cannot comprehend the greater, the application of what is true
in the literal sense of the word _comprehend_, to its metaphorical
sense, points to the fact which is the ground and justification of the
assertion, viz. that one mind cannot thoroughly understand another
unless it can contain it in itself, that is, unless it possesses all
that is contained in the other. When it is urged as an argument for
education, that if the soil is left uncultivated, weeds will spring up,
the metaphor, though no proof, but a statement of the thing to be
proved, states it in terms which, by suggesting a parallel case, put the
mind upon the track of the real proof. For, the reason why weeds grow in
an uncultivated soil, is that the seeds of worthless products exist
everywhere, and can germinate and grow in almost all circumstances,
while the reverse is the case with those which are valuable; and this
being equally true of mental products, this mode of conveying an
argument, independently of its rhetorical advantages, has a logical
value; since it not only suggests the grounds of the conclusion, but
points to another case in which those grounds have been found, or at
least deemed to be, sufficient.

On the other hand, when Bacon, who is equally conspicuous in the use and
abuse of figurative illustration, says that the stream of time has
brought down to us only the least valuable part of the writings of the
ancients, as a river carries froth and straws floating on its surface,
while more weighty objects sink to the bottom; this, even if the
assertion illustrated by it were true, would be no good illustration,
there being no parity of cause. The levity by which substances float on
a stream, and the levity which is synonymous with worthlessness, have
nothing in common except the name; and (to show how little value there
is in the metaphor) we need only change the word into _buoyancy_, to
turn the semblance of argument involved in Bacon's illustration against
himself.

A metaphor, then, is not to be considered as an argument, but as an
assertion that an argument exists; that a parity subsists between the
case from which the metaphor is drawn and that to which it is applied.
This parity may exist though the two cases be apparently very remote
from one another; the only resemblance existing between them may be a
resemblance of relations, an analogy in Ferguson's and Archbishop
Whately's sense: as in the preceding instance, in which an illustration
from agriculture was applied to mental cultivation.


§ 8. To terminate the subject of Fallacies of Generalization, it remains
to be said, that the most fertile source of them is bad classification:
bringing together in one group, and under one name, things which have no
common properties, or none but such as are too unimportant to allow
general propositions of any considerable value to be made respecting the
class. The misleading effect is greatest, when a word which in common
use expresses some definite fact, is extended by slight links of
connexion to cases in which that fact does not exist, but some other or
others, only slightly resembling it. Thus Bacon,[32] in speaking of the
_Idola_ or Fallacies arising from notions _temere et inæqualiter à rebus
abstractæ_, exemplifies them by the notion of Humidum or Wet, so
familiar in the physics of antiquity and of the middle ages. "Invenietur
verbum istud, Humidum, nihil aliud quam nota confusa diversarum
actionum, quæ nullam constantiam aut reductionem patiuntur. Significat
enim, et quod circa aliud corpus facile se circumfundit; et quod in se
est indeterminabile, nec consistere potest; et quod facile cedit
undique; et quod facile se dividit et dispergit; et quod facile se unit
et colligit; et quod facile fluit, et in motu ponitur; et quod alteri
corpori facile adhæret, idque madefacit; et quod facile reducitur in
liquidum, sive colliquatur, cum antea consisteret. Itaque quum ad hujus
nominis prædicationem et impositionem ventum sit; si alia accipias,
flamma humida est; si alia accipias, aer humidus non est; si alia,
pulvis minutus humidus est; si alia, vitrum humidum est: ut facile
appareat, istam notionem ex aquâ tantum, et communibus et vulgaribus
liquoribus, absque ullâ debitâ verificatione, temere abstractam esse."

Bacon himself is not exempt from a similar accusation when inquiring
into the nature of heat: where he occasionally proceeds like one who
seeking for the cause of hardness, after examining that quality in iron,
flint, and diamond, should expect to find that it is something which can
be traced also in hard water, a hard knot, and a hard heart.

The word _κίνησις_ in the Greek philosophy, and the words Generation and
Corruption both then and long afterwards, denoted such a multitude of
heterogeneous phenomena, that any attempt at philosophizing in which
those words were used was almost as necessarily abortive as if the word
_hard_ had been taken to denote a class including all the things
mentioned above. _Κίνησις_, for instance, which properly signified
motion, was taken to denote not only all motion but even all change:
_ἀλλοίωσις_ being recognised as one of the modes of _κίνησις_. The
effect was, to connect with every form of _ἀλλοίωσις_ or change, ideas
drawn from motion in the proper and literal sense, and which had no real
connexion with any other kind of _κίνησις_ than that. Aristotle and
Plato laboured under a continual embarrassment from this misuse of
terms. But if we proceed further in this direction we shall encroach
upon the Fallacy of Ambiguity, which belongs to a different class, the
last in order of our classification, Fallacies of Confusion.




