CHAPTER IV.

OF THE REQUISITES OF A PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE, AND THE PRINCIPLES OF
DEFINITION.


§ 1. In order that we may possess a language perfectly suitable for the
investigation and expression of general truths, there are two principal,
and several minor, requisites. The first is, that every general name
should have a meaning, steadily fixed, and precisely determined. When,
by the fulfilment of this condition, such names as we possess are fitted
for the due performance of their functions, the next requisite, and the
second in order of importance, is that we should possess a name wherever
one is needed; wherever there is anything to be designated by it, which
it is of importance to express.

The former of these requisites is that to which our attention will be
exclusively directed in the present chapter.


§ 2. Every general name, then, must have a certain and knowable meaning.
Now the meaning (as has so often been explained) of a general
connotative name, resides in the connotation; in the attribute on
account of which, and to express which, the name is given. Thus, the
name animal being given to all things which possess the attributes of
sensation and voluntary motion, the word connotes those attributes
exclusively, and they constitute the whole of its meaning. If the name
be abstract, its denotation is the same with the connotation of the
corresponding concrete: it designates directly the attribute, which the
concrete term implies. To give a precise meaning to general names is,
then, to fix with steadiness the attribute or attributes connoted by
each concrete general name, and denoted by the corresponding abstract.
Since abstract names, in the order of their creation, do not precede
but follow concrete ones, as is proved by the etymological fact that
they are almost always derived from them; we may consider their meaning
as determined by, and dependent on, the meaning of their concrete: and
thus the problem of giving a distinct meaning to general language, is
all included in that of giving a precise connotation to all concrete
general names.

This is not difficult in the case of new names; of the technical terms
created by scientific inquirers for the purposes of science or art. But
when a name is in common use, the difficulty is greater; the problem in
this case not being that of choosing a convenient connotation for the
name, but of ascertaining and fixing the connotation with which it is
already used. That this can ever be a matter of doubt, is a sort of
paradox. But the vulgar (including in that term all who have not
accurate habits of thought) seldom know exactly what assertion they
intend to make, what common property they mean to express, when they
apply the same name to a number of different things. All which the name
expresses with them, when they predicate it of an object, is a confused
feeling of resemblance between that object and some of the other things
which they have been accustomed to denote by the name. They have applied
the name Stone to various objects previously seen; they see a new
object, which appears to them somewhat like the former, and they call it
a stone, without asking themselves in what respect it is like, or what
mode or degree of resemblance the best authorities, or even they
themselves, require as a warrant for using the name. This rough general
impression of resemblance is, however, made up of particular
circumstances of resemblance; and into these it is the business of the
logician to analyse it; to ascertain what points of resemblance among
the different things commonly called by the name, have produced in the
common mind this vague feeling of likeness; have given to the things the
similarity of aspect, which has made them a class, and has caused the
same name to be bestowed upon them.

But though general names are imposed by the vulgar without any more
definite connotation than that of a vague resemblance; general
propositions come in time to be made, in which predicates are applied to
those names, that is, general assertions are made concerning the _whole_
of the things which are denoted by the name. And since by each of these
propositions some attribute, more or less precisely conceived, is of
course predicated, the ideas of these various attributes thus become
associated with the name, and in a sort of uncertain way it comes to
connote them; there is a hesitation to apply the name in any new case in
which any of the attributes familiarly predicated of the class do not
exist. And thus, to common minds, the propositions which they are in the
habit of hearing or uttering concerning a class, make up in a loose way
a sort of connotation for the class-name. Let us take, for instance, the
word Civilized. How few could be found, even among the most educated
persons, who would undertake to say exactly what the term Civilized
connotes. Yet there is a feeling in the minds of all who use it, that
they are using it with a meaning; and this meaning is made up, in a
confused manner, of everything which they have heard or read that
civilized men, or civilized communities, are, or may be expected to be.

It is at this stage, probably, in the progress of a concrete name, that
the corresponding abstract name generally comes into use. Under the
notion that the concrete name must of course convey a meaning, or in
other words, that there is some property common to all things which it
denotes, people give a name to this common property; from the concrete
Civilized, they form the abstract Civilization. But since most people
have never compared the different things which are called by the
concrete name, in such a manner as to ascertain what properties these
things have in common, or whether they have any; each is thrown back
upon the marks by which he himself has been accustomed to be guided in
his application of the term: and these, being merely vague hearsays and
current phrases, are not the same in any two persons, nor in the same
person at different times. Hence the word (as Civilization, for example)
which professes to be the designation of the unknown common property,
conveys scarcely to any two minds the same idea. No two persons agree in
the things they predicate of it; and when it is itself predicated of
anything, no other person knows, nor does the speaker himself know with
precision, what he means to assert. Many other words which could be
named, as the word _honour_, or the word _gentleman_, exemplify this
uncertainty still more strikingly.

It needs scarcely be observed, that general propositions of which no one
can tell exactly what they assert, cannot possibly have been brought to
the test of a correct induction. Whether a name is to be used as an
instrument of thinking, or as a means of communicating the result of
thought, it is imperative to determine exactly the attribute or
attributes which it is to express: to give it, in short, a fixed and
ascertained connotation.


§ 3. It would, however, be a complete misunderstanding of the proper
office of a logician in dealing with terms already in use, if we were to
think that because a name has not at present an ascertained connotation,
it is competent to any one to give it such a connotation at his own
choice. The meaning of a term actually in use is not an arbitrary
quantity to be fixed, but an unknown quantity to be sought.

In the first place, it is obviously desirable to avail ourselves, as far
as possible, of the associations already connected with the name; not
enjoining the employment of it in a manner which conflicts with all
previous habits, and especially not so as to require the rupture of
those strongest of all associations between names, which are created by
familiarity with propositions in which they are predicated of one
another. A philosopher would have little chance of having his example
followed, if he were to give such a meaning to his terms as should
require us to call the North American Indians a civilized people, or the
higher classes in France or England savages; or to say that civilized
people live by hunting, and savages by agriculture. Were there no other
reason, the extreme difficulty of effecting so complete a revolution in
speech would be more than a sufficient one. The endeavour should be,
that all generally received propositions into which the term enters,
should be at least as true after its meaning is fixed, as they were
before; and that the concrete name, therefore, should not receive such a
connotation as shall prevent it from denoting things which, in common
language, it is currently affirmed of. The fixed and precise connotation
which it receives, should not be in deviation from, but in agreement (as
far as it goes) with, the vague and fluctuating connotation which the
term already had.

To fix the connotation of a concrete name, or the denotation of the
corresponding abstract, is to define the name. When this can be done
without rendering any received assertions inadmissible, the name can be
defined in accordance with its received use, which is vulgarly called
defining not the name but the thing. What is meant by the improper
expression of defining a thing, (or rather a class of things--for nobody
talks of defining an individual,) is to define the name, subject to the
condition that it shall denote those things. This, of course, supposes a
comparison of the things, feature by feature and property by property,
to ascertain what attributes they agree in; and not unfrequently an
operation strictly inductive, for the purpose of ascertaining some
unobvious agreement, which is the cause of the obvious agreements.

For, in order to give a connotation to a name, consistently with its
denoting certain objects, we have to make our selection from among the
various attributes in which those objects agree. To ascertain in what
they do agree is, therefore, the first logical operation requisite. When
this has been done as far as is necessary or practicable, the question
arises, which of these common attributes shall be selected to be
associated with the name. For if the class which the name denotes be a
Kind, the common properties are innumerable; and even if not, they are
often extremely numerous. Our choice is first limited by the preference
to be given to properties which are well known, and familiarly
predicated of the class; but even these are often too numerous to be all
included in the definition, and, besides, the properties most generally
known may not be those which serve best to mark out the class from all
others. We should therefore select from among the common properties, (if
among them any such are to be found,) those on which it has been
ascertained by experience, or proved by deduction, that many others
depend; or at least which are sure marks of them, and from whence,
therefore, many others will follow by inference. We thus see that to
frame a good definition of a name already in use, is not a matter of
choice but of discussion, and discussion not merely respecting the usage
of language, but respecting the properties of things, and even the
origin of those properties. And hence every enlargement of our knowledge
of the objects to which the name is applied, is liable to suggest an
improvement in the definition. It is impossible to frame a perfect set
of definitions on any subject, until the theory of the subject is
perfect: and as science makes progress, its definitions are also
progressive.


§ 4. The discussion of Definitions, in so far as it does not turn on the
use of words but on the properties of things, Dr. Whewell calls the
Explication of Conceptions. The act of ascertaining, better than before,
in what particulars any phenomena which are classed together agree, he
calls in his technical phraseology, unfolding the general conception in
virtue of which they are so classed. Making allowance for what appears
to me the darkening and misleading tendency of this mode of expression,
several of his remarks are so much to the purpose, that I shall take the
liberty of transcribing them.

He observes,[8] that many of the controversies which have had an
important share in the formation of the existing body of science, have
"assumed the form of a battle of Definitions. For example, the inquiry
concerning the laws of falling bodies, led to the question whether the
proper definition of a _uniform force_ is that it generates a velocity
proportional to the _space_ from rest, or to the _time_. The controversy
of the _vis viva_ was what was the proper definition of the _measure of
force_. A principal question in the classification of minerals is, what
is the definition of a _mineral species_. Physiologists have endeavoured
to throw light on their subject by defining _organization_, or some
similar term." Questions of the same nature are still open respecting
the definitions of Specific Heat, Latent Heat, Chemical Combination, and
Solution.

"It is very important for us to observe, that these controversies have
never been questions of insulated and _arbitrary_ definitions, as men
seem often tempted to imagine them to have been. In all cases there is a
tacit assumption of some proposition which is to be expressed by means
of the definition, and which gives it its importance. The dispute
concerning the definition thus acquires a real value, and becomes a
question concerning true and false. Thus in the discussion of the
question, What is a uniform force? it was taken for granted that gravity
is a uniform force. In the debate of the _vis viva_, it was assumed that
in the mutual action of bodies the whole effect of the force is
unchanged. In the zoological definition of species, (that it consists of
individuals which have, or may have, sprung from the same parents,) it
is presumed that individuals so related resemble each other more than
those which are excluded by such a definition; or, perhaps, that species
so defined have permanent and definite differences. A definition of
organization, or of some other term, which was not employed to express
some principle, would be of no value.

"The establishment, therefore, of a right definition of a term, may be a
useful step in the explication of our conceptions; but this will be the
case then only when we have under our consideration some proposition in
which the term is employed. For then the question really is, how the
conception shall be understood and defined in order that the proposition
may be true.

"To unfold our conceptions by means of definitions has never been
serviceable to science, except when it has been associated with an
immediate use of the definitions. The endeavour to define a Uniform
Force was combined with the assertion that gravity is a uniform force:
the attempt to define Accelerating Force was immediately followed by
the doctrine that accelerating forces may be compounded: the process of
defining Momentum was connected with the principle that momenta gained
and lost are equal: naturalists would have given in vain the definition
of Species which we have quoted, if they had not also given the
characters of species so separated.... Definition may be the best mode
of explaining our conception, but that which alone makes it worth while
to explain it in any mode, is the opportunity of using it in the
expression of truth. When a definition is propounded to us as a useful
step in knowledge, we are always entitled to ask what principle it
serves to enunciate."

In giving, then, an exact connotation to the phrase, "an uniform force,"
the condition was understood, that the phrase should continue to denote
gravity. The discussion, therefore, respecting the definition, resolved
itself into this question, What is there of an uniform nature in the
motions produced by gravity? By observations and comparisons, it was
found, that what was uniform in those motions was the ratio of the
velocity acquired to the time elapsed; equal velocities being added in
equal times. An uniform force, therefore, was defined, a force which
adds equal velocities in equal times. So, again, in defining momentum.
It was already a received doctrine, that when two objects impinge upon
one another, the momentum lost by the one is equal to that gained by the
other. This proportion it was deemed necessary to preserve, not from the
motive (which operates in many other cases) that it was firmly fixed in
popular belief; for the proposition in question had never been heard of
by any but the scientifically instructed. But it was felt to contain a
truth: even a superficial observation of the phenomena left no doubt
that in the propagation of motion from one body to another, there was
something of which the one body gained precisely what the other lost;
and the word momentum had been invented to express this unknown
something. The settlement, therefore, of the definition of momentum,
involved the determination of the question, What is that of which a
body, when it sets another body in motion, loses exactly as much as it
communicates? And when experiment had shown that this _something_ was
the product of the velocity of the body by its mass, or quantity of
matter, this became the definition of momentum.

The following remarks,[9] therefore, are perfectly just: "The business
of definition is part of the business of discovery.... To define, so
that our definition shall have any scientific value, requires no small
portion of that sagacity by which truth is detected.... When it has been
clearly seen what ought to be our definition, it must be pretty well
known what truth we have to state. The definition, as well as the
discovery, supposes a decided step in our knowledge to have been made.
The writers on Logic, in the middle ages, made Definition the last stage
in the progress of knowledge; and in this arrangement at least, the
history of science, and the philosophy derived from the history, confirm
their speculative views." For in order to judge finally how the name
which denotes a class may best be defined, we must know all the
properties common to the class, and all the relations of causation or
dependence among those properties.

If the properties which are fittest to be selected as marks of other
common properties are also obvious and familiar, and especially if they
bear a great part in producing that general air of resemblance which was
the original inducement to the formation of the class, the definition
will then be most felicitous. But it is often necessary to define the
class by some property not familiarly known, provided that property be
the best mark of those which are known. M. de Blainville, for instance,
founded his definition of life on the process of decomposition and
recomposition which incessantly takes place in every living body, so
that the particles composing it are never for two instants the same.
This is by no means one of the most obvious properties of living bodies;
it might escape altogether the notice of an unscientific observer. Yet
great authorities (independently of M. de Blainville, who is himself a
first-rate authority) have thought that no other property so well
answers the conditions required for the definition.


§ 5. Having laid down the principles which ought for the most part to be
observed in attempting to give a precise connotation to a term in use, I
must now add, that it is not always practicable to adhere to those
principles, and that even when practicable, it is occasionally not
desirable.

Cases in which it is impossible to comply with all the conditions of a
precise definition of a name in agreement with usage, occur very
frequently. There is often no one connotation capable of being given to
a word, so that it shall still denote everything it is accustomed to
denote; or that all the propositions into which it is accustomed to
enter, and which have any foundation in truth, shall remain true.
Independently of accidental ambiguities, in which the different meanings
have no connexion with one another; it continually happens that a word
is used in two or more senses derived from each other, but yet radically
distinct. So long as a term is vague, that is, so long as its
connotation is not ascertained and permanently fixed, it is constantly
liable to be applied by _extension_ from one thing to another, until it
reaches things which have little, or even no, resemblance to those which
were first designated by it.

Suppose, says Dugald Stewart, in his _Philosophical Essays_,[10] "that
the letters A, B, C, D, E, denote a series of objects; that A possesses
some one quality in common with B; B a quality in common with C; C a
quality in common with D; D a quality in common with E; while at the
same time, no quality can be found which belongs in common to any
_three_ objects in the series. Is it not conceivable, that the affinity
between A and B may produce a transference of the name of the first to
the second; and that, in consequence of the other affinities which
connect the remaining objects together, the same name may pass in
succession from B to C; from C to D; and from D to E? In this manner, a
common appellation will arise between A and E, although the two objects
may, in their nature and properties, be so widely distant from each
other, that no stretch of imagination can conceive how the thoughts were
led from the former to the latter. The transitions, nevertheless, may
have been all so easy and gradual, that, were they successfully detected
by the fortunate ingenuity of a theorist, we should instantly recognise,
not only the verisimilitude, but the truth of the conjecture: in the
same way as we admit, with the confidence of intuitive conviction, the
certainty of the well-known etymological process which connects the
Latin preposition _e_ or _ex_ with the English substantive _stranger_,
the moment that the intermediate links of the chain are submitted to our
examination."[11]

The applications which a word acquires by this gradual extension of it
from one set of objects to another, Stewart, adopting an expression from
Mr. Payne Knight, calls its _transitive_ applications; and after briefly
illustrating such of them as are the result of local or casual
associations, he proceeds as follows:[12]--

"But although by far the greater part of the transitive or derivative
applications of words depend on casual and unaccountable caprices of the
feelings or the fancy, there are certain cases in which they open a very
interesting field of philosophical speculation. Such are those, in which
an analogous transference of the corresponding term may be remarked
universally, or very generally, in other languages; and in which, of
course, the uniformity of the result must be ascribed to the essential
principles of the human frame. Even in such cases, however, it will by
no means be always found, on examination, that the various applications
of the same term have arisen from any common quality or qualities in the
objects to which they relate. In the greater number of instances, they
may be traced to some natural and universal associations of ideas,
founded in the common faculties, common organs, and common condition of
the human race.... According to the different degrees of intimacy and
strength in the associations on which the _transitions_ of language are
founded, very different effects may be expected to arise. Where the
association is slight and casual, the several meanings will remain
distinct from each other, and will often, in process of time, assume the
appearance of capricious varieties in the use of the same arbitrary
sign. _Where the association is so natural and habitual as to become
virtually indissoluble, the transitive meanings will coalesce in one
complex conception; and every new transition will become a more
comprehensive generalization of the term in question._"

I solicit particular attention to the law of mind expressed in the last
sentence, and which is the source of the perplexity so often experienced
in detecting these transitions of meaning. Ignorance of that law is the
shoal on which some of the most powerful intellects which have adorned
the human race have been stranded. The inquiries of Plato into the
definitions of some of the most general terms of moral speculation are
characterized by Bacon as a far nearer approach to a true inductive
method than is elsewhere to be found among the ancients, and are,
indeed, almost perfect examples of the preparatory process of comparison
and abstraction: but, from being unaware of the law just mentioned, he
often wasted the powers of this great logical instrument on inquiries in
which it could realize no result, since the phenomena, whose common
properties he so elaborately endeavoured to detect, had not really any
common properties. Bacon himself fell into the same error in his
speculations on the nature of heat, in which he evidently confounded
under the name hot, classes of phenomena which had no property in
common. Stewart certainly overstates the matter when he speaks of "a
prejudice which has descended to modern times from the scholastic ages,
that when a word admits of a variety of significations, these different
significations must all be species of the same genus, and must
consequently include some essential idea common to every individual to
which the generic term can be applied:"[13] for both Aristotle and his
followers were well aware that there are such things as ambiguities of
language, and delighted in distinguishing them. But they never suspected
ambiguity in the cases where (as Stewart remarks) the association on
which the transition of meaning was founded is so natural and habitual,
that the two meanings blend together in the mind, and a real transition
becomes an apparent generalization. Accordingly they wasted infinite
pains in endeavouring to find a definition which would serve for several
distinct meanings at once: as in an instance noticed by Stewart himself,
that of "causation; the ambiguity of the word which, in the Greek
language, corresponds to the English word _cause_, having suggested to
them the vain attempt of tracing the common idea which, in the case of
any _effect_, belongs to the _efficient_, to the _matter_, to the
_form_, and to the _end_. The idle generalities" (he adds) "we meet with
in other philosophers, about the ideas of the _good_, the _fit_, and the
_becoming_, have taken their rise from the same undue influence of
popular epithets on the speculations of the learned."[14]

Among the words which have undergone so many successive transitions of
meaning that every trace of a property common to all the things they are
applied to, or at least common and also peculiar to those things, has
been lost, Stewart considers the word Beautiful to be one. And (without
attempting to decide a question which in no respect belongs to logic) I
cannot but feel, with him, considerable doubt, whether the word
beautiful connotes the same property when we speak of a beautiful
colour, a beautiful face, a beautiful scene, a beautiful character, and
a beautiful poem. The word was doubtless extended from one of these
objects to another on account of a resemblance between them, or more
probably, between the emotions they excited; and, by this progressive
extension, it has at last reached things very remote from those objects
of sight to which there is no doubt that it was first appropriated; and
it is at least questionable whether there is now any property common to
all the things which, consistently with usage, may be called beautiful,
except the property of agreeableness, which the term certainly does
connote, but which cannot be all that people usually intend to express
by it, since there are many agreeable things which are never called
beautiful. If such be the case, it is impossible to give to the word
Beautiful any fixed connotation, such that it shall denote all the
objects which in common use it now denotes, but no others. A fixed
connotation, however, it ought to have; for, so long as it has not, it
is unfit to be used as a scientific term, and is a perpetual source of
false analogies and erroneous generalizations.

This, then, constitutes a case in exemplification of our remark, that
even when there is a property common to all the things denoted by a
name, to erect that property into the definition and exclusive
connotation of the name is not always desirable. The various things
called beautiful unquestionably resemble one another in being agreeable;
but to make this the definition of beauty, and so extend the word
Beautiful to all agreeable things, would be to drop altogether a portion
of meaning which the word really, though indistinctly, conveys, and to
do what depends on us towards causing those qualities of the objects
which the word previously, though vaguely, pointed at, to be overlooked
and forgotten. It is better, in such a case, to give a fixed connotation
to the term by restricting, than by extending its use; rather excluding
from the epithet Beautiful some things to which it is commonly
considered applicable, than leaving out of its connotation any of the
qualities by which, though occasionally lost sight of, the general mind
may have been habitually guided in the commonest and most interesting
applications of the term. For there is no question that when people
call anything beautiful, they think they are asserting more than that it
is merely agreeable. They think they are ascribing a peculiar _sort_ of
agreeableness, analogous to that which they find in some other of the
things to which they are accustomed to apply the same name. If,
therefore, there be any peculiar sort of agreeableness which is common
though not to all, yet to the principal things which are called
beautiful, it is better to limit the denotation of the term to those
things, than to leave that kind of quality without a term to connote it,
and thereby divert attention from its peculiarities.


§ 6. The last remark exemplifies a rule of terminology, which is of
great importance, and which has hardly yet been recognised as a rule,
but by a few thinkers of the present century. In attempting to rectify
the use of a vague term by giving it a fixed connotation, we must take
care not to discard (unless advisedly, and on the ground of a deeper
knowledge of the subject) any portion of the connotation which the word,
in however indistinct a manner, previously carried with it. For
otherwise language loses one of its inherent and most valuable
properties, that of being the conservator of ancient experience; the
keeper-alive of those thoughts and observations of former ages, which
may be alien to the tendencies of the passing time. This function of
language is so often overlooked or undervalued, that a few observations
on it appear to be extremely required.

Even when the connotation of a term has been accurately fixed, and still
more if it has been left in the state of a vague unanalysed feeling of
resemblance; there is a constant tendency in the word, through familiar
use, to part with a portion of its connotation. It is a well-known law
of the mind, that a word originally associated with a very complex
cluster of ideas, is far from calling up all those ideas in the mind,
every time the word is used: it calls up only one or two, from which the
mind runs on by fresh associations to another set of ideas, without
waiting for the suggestion of the remainder of the complex cluster. If
this were not the case, processes of thought could not take place with
anything like the rapidity which we know they possess. Very often,
indeed, when we are employing a word in our mental operations, we are so
far from waiting until the complex idea which corresponds to the meaning
of the word is consciously brought before us in all its parts, that we
run on to new trains of ideas by the other associations which the mere
word excites, without having realized in our imagination any part
whatever of the meaning: thus using the word, and even using it well and
accurately, and carrying on important processes of reasoning by means of
it, in an almost mechanical manner; so much so, that some
metaphysicians, generalizing from an extreme case, have fancied that all
reasoning is but the mechanical use of a set of terms according to a
certain form. We may discuss and settle the most important interests of
towns or nations, by the application of general theorems or practical
maxims previously laid down, without having had consciously suggested to
us, once in the whole process, the houses and green fields, the thronged
market-places and domestic hearths, of which not only those towns and
nations consist, but which the words town and nation confessedly mean.

Since, then, general names come in this manner to be used (and even to
do a portion of their work well) without suggesting to the mind the
whole of their meaning, and often with the suggestion of a very small,
or no part at all of that meaning; we cannot wonder that words so used
come in time to be no longer capable of suggesting any other of the
ideas appropriated to them, than those with which the association is
most immediate and strongest, or most kept up by the incidents of life:
the remainder being lost altogether; unless the mind, by often
consciously dwelling on them, keeps up the association. Words naturally
retain much more of their meaning to persons of active imagination, who
habitually represent to themselves things in the concrete, with the
detail which belongs to them in the actual world. To minds of a
different description, the only antidote to this corruption of language
is predication. The habit of predicating of the name, all the various
properties which it originally connoted, keeps up the association
between the name and those properties.

But in order that it may do so, it is necessary that the predicates
should themselves retain their association with the properties which
they severally connote. For the propositions cannot keep the meaning of
the words alive, if the meaning of the propositions themselves should
die. And nothing is more common than for propositions to be mechanically
repeated, mechanically retained in the memory, and their truth
undoubtingly assented to and relied on, while yet they carry no meaning
distinctly home to the mind; and while the matter of fact or law of
nature which they originally expressed is as much lost sight of, and
practically disregarded, as if it never had been heard of at all. In
those subjects which are at the same time familiar and complicated, and
especially in those which are so in as great a degree as moral and
social subjects are, it is a matter of common remark how many important
propositions are believed and repeated from habit, while no account
could be given, and no sense is practically manifested, of the truths
which they convey. Hence it is, that the traditional maxims of old
experience, though seldom questioned, have often so little effect on the
conduct of life; because their meaning is never, by most persons, really
felt, until personal experience has brought it home. And thus also it is
that so many doctrines of religion, ethics, and even politics, so full
of meaning and reality to first converts, have manifested (after the
association of that meaning with the verbal formulas has ceased to be
kept up by the controversies which accompanied their first introduction)
a tendency to degenerate rapidly into lifeless dogmas; which tendency,
all the efforts of an education expressly and skilfully directed to
keeping the meaning alive, are barely sufficient to counteract.

Considering, then, that the human mind, in different generations,
occupies itself with different things, and in one age is led by the
circumstances which surround it to fix more of its attention upon one of
the properties of a thing, in another age upon another; it is natural
and inevitable that in every age a certain portion of our recorded and
traditional knowledge, not being continually suggested by the pursuits
and inquiries with which mankind are at that time engrossed, should fall
asleep, as it were, and fade from the memory. It would be in danger of
being totally lost, if the propositions or formulas, the results of the
previous experience, did not remain, as forms of words it may be, but of
words that once really conveyed, and are still supposed to convey, a
meaning: which meaning, though suspended, may be historically traced,
and when suggested, may be recognised by minds of the necessary
endowments as being still matter of fact, or truth. While the formulas
remain, the meaning may at any time revive; and as on the one hand the
formulas progressively lose the meaning they were intended to convey,
so, on the other, when this forgetfulness has reached its height and
begun to produce obvious consequences, minds arise which from the
contemplation of the formulas rediscover the truth, when truth it was,
which was contained in them, and announce it again to mankind, not as a
discovery, but as the meaning of that which they have been taught, and
still profess to believe.

Thus there is a perpetual oscillation in spiritual truths, and in
spiritual doctrines of any significance, even when not truths. Their
meaning is almost always in a process either of being lost or of being
recovered. Whoever has attended to the history of the more serious
convictions of mankind--of the opinions by which the general conduct of
their lives is, or as they conceive ought to be, more especially
regulated--is aware that even when recognising verbally the same
doctrines, they attach to them at different periods a greater or a less
quantity, and even a different kind, of meaning. The words in their
original acceptation connoted, and the propositions expressed, a
complication of outward facts and inward feelings, to different portions
of which the general mind is more particularly alive in different
generations of mankind. To common minds, only that portion of the
meaning is in each generation suggested, of which that generation
possesses the counterpart in its own habitual experience. But the words
and propositions lie ready to suggest to any mind duly prepared the
remainder of the meaning. Such individual minds are almost always to be
found: and the lost meaning, revived by them, again by degrees works its
way into the general mind.

The arrival of this salutary reaction may however be materially
retarded, by the shallow conceptions and incautious proceedings of mere
logicians. It sometimes happens that towards the close of the downward
period, when the words have lost part of their significance, and have
not yet begun to recover it, persons arise whose leading and favourite
idea is the importance of clear conceptions and precise thought, and the
necessity, therefore, of definite language. These persons, in examining
the old formulas, easily perceive that words are used in them without a
meaning; and if they are not the sort of persons who are capable of
rediscovering the lost signification, they naturally enough dismiss the
formula, and define the name without reference to it. In so doing they
fasten down the name to what it connotes in common use at the time when
it conveys the smallest quantity of meaning; and introduce the practice
of employing it, consistently and uniformly, according to that
connotation. The word in this way acquires an extent of denotation far
beyond what it had before; it becomes extended to many things to which
it was previously, in appearance capriciously, refused. Of the
propositions in which it was formerly used, those which were true in
virtue of the forgotten part of its meaning are now, by the clearer
light which the definition diffuses, seen not to be true according to
the definition; which, however, is the recognised and sufficiently
correct expression of all that is perceived to be in the mind of any one
by whom the term is used at the present day. The ancient formulas are
consequently treated as prejudices; and people are no longer taught as
before, though not to understand them, yet to believe that there is
truth in them. They no longer remain in the general mind surrounded by
respect, and ready at any time to suggest their original meaning.
Whatever truths they contain are not only, in these circumstances,
rediscovered far more slowly, but, when rediscovered, the prejudice
with which novelties are regarded is now, in some degree at least,
against them, instead of being on their side.

An example may make these remarks more intelligible. In all ages, except
where moral speculation has been silenced by outward compulsion, or
where the feelings which prompt to it still continue to be satisfied by
the traditional doctrines of an established faith, one of the subjects
which have most occupied the minds of thinking persons is the inquiry,
What is virtue? or, What is a virtuous character? Among the different
theories on the subject which have, at different times, grown up and
obtained partial currency, every one of which reflected as in the
clearest mirror, the express image of the age which gave it birth; there
was one, according to which virtue consists in a correct calculation of
our own personal interests, either in this world only, or also in
another. To make this theory plausible, it was of course necessary that
the only beneficial actions which people in general were accustomed to
see, or were therefore accustomed to praise, should be such as were, or
at least might without contradicting obvious facts be supposed to be,
the result of a prudential regard to self-interest; so that the words
really connoted no more, in common acceptation, than was set down in the
definition.

Suppose, now, that the partisans of this theory had contrived to
introduce a consistent and undeviating use of the term according to this
definition. Suppose that they had seriously endeavoured, and had
succeeded in the endeavour, to banish the word disinterestedness from
the language; had obtained the disuse of all expressions attaching odium
to selfishness or commendation to self-sacrifice, or which implied
generosity or kindness to be anything but doing a benefit in order to
receive a greater personal advantage in return. Need we say, that this
abrogation of the old formulas for the sake of preserving clear ideas
and consistency of thought, would have been a great evil? while the very
inconsistency incurred by the coexistence of the formulas with
philosophical opinions which seemed to condemn them as absurdities,
operated as a stimulus to the re-examination of the subject; and thus
the very doctrines originating in the oblivion into which a part of the
truth had fallen, were rendered indirectly, but powerfully, instrumental
to its revival.

The doctrine of the Coleridge school, that the language of any people
among whom culture is of old date, is a sacred deposit, the property of
all ages, and which no one age should consider itself empowered to
alter--borders indeed, as thus expressed, on an extravagance; but it is
grounded on a truth, frequently overlooked by that class of logicians
who think more of having a clear than of having a comprehensive meaning;
and who perceive that every age is adding to the truths which it has
received from its predecessors, but fail to see that a counter process
of losing truths already possessed, is also constantly going on, and
requiring the most sedulous attention to counteract it. Language is the
depository of the accumulated body of experience to which all former
ages have contributed their part, and which is the inheritance of all
yet to come. We have no right to prevent ourselves from transmitting to
posterity a larger portion of this inheritance than we may ourselves
have profited by. However much we may be able to improve on the
conclusions of our forefathers, we ought to be careful not inadvertently
to let any of their premises slip through our fingers. It may be good to
alter the meaning of a word, but it is bad to let any part of the
meaning drop. Whoever seeks to introduce a more correct use of a term
with which important associations are connected, should be required to
possess an accurate acquaintance with the history of the particular
word, and of the opinions which in different stages of its progress it
served to express. To be qualified to define the name, we must know all
that has ever been known of the properties of the class of objects which
are, or originally were, denoted by it. For if we give it a meaning
according to which any proposition will be false which has ever been
generally held to be true, it is incumbent on us to be sure that we know
and have considered all which those, who believed the proposition,
understood by it.




