CHAPTER II.

OF ABSTRACTION, OR THE FORMATION OF CONCEPTIONS.


§ 1. The metaphysical inquiry into the nature and composition of what
have been called Abstract Ideas, or in other words, of the notions which
answer in the mind to classes and to general names, belongs not to
Logic, but to a different science, and our purpose does not require that
we should enter upon it here. We are only concerned with the universally
acknowledged fact, that such notions or conceptions do exist. The mind
can conceive a multitude of individual things as one assemblage or
class; and general names do really suggest to us certain ideas or mental
representations, otherwise we could not use the names with consciousness
of a meaning. Whether the idea called up by a general name is composed
of the various circumstances in which all the individuals denoted by the
name agree, and of no others, (which is the doctrine of Locke, Brown,
and the Conceptualists;) or whether it be the idea of some one of those
individuals, clothed in its individualizing peculiarities, but with the
accompanying knowledge that those peculiarities are not properties of
the class, (which is the doctrine of Berkeley, Mr. Bailey,[2] and the
modern Nominalists;) or whether (as held by Mr. James Mill) the idea of
the class is that of a miscellaneous assemblage of individuals belonging
to the class; or whether, finally, (what appears to be the truest
opinion,) it be any one or any other of all these, according to the
accidental circumstances of the case; certain it is, that _some_ idea or
mental conception is suggested by a general name, whenever we either
hear it or employ it with consciousness of a meaning. And this, which we
may call if we please a general idea, _represents_ in our minds the
whole class of things to which the name is applied. Whenever we think or
reason concerning the class, we do so by means of this idea. And the
voluntary power which the mind has, of attending to one part of what is
present to it at any moment, and neglecting another part, enables us to
keep our reasonings and conclusions respecting the class unaffected by
anything in the idea or mental image which is not really, or at least
which we do not really believe to be, common to the whole class.[3]

There are, then, such things as general conceptions, or conceptions by
means of which we can think generally: and when we form a set of
phenomena into a class, that is, when we compare them with one another
to ascertain in what they agree, some general conception is implied in
this mental operation. And inasmuch as such a comparison is a necessary
preliminary to Induction, it is most true that Induction could not go on
without general conceptions.


§ 2. But it does not therefore follow that these general conceptions
must have existed in the mind previously to the comparison. It is not a
law of our intellect, that in comparing things with each other and
taking note of their agreement we merely recognise as realized in the
outward world something that we already had in our minds. The conception
originally found its way to us as the _result_ of such a comparison. It
was obtained (in metaphysical phrase) by _abstraction_ from individual
things. These things may be things which we perceived or thought of on
former occasions, but they may also be the things which we are
perceiving or thinking of on the very occasion. When Kepler compared the
observed places of the planet Mars, and found that they agreed in being
points of an elliptic circumference, he applied a general conception
which was already in his mind, having been derived from his former
experience. But this is by no means universally the case. When we
compare several objects and find them to agree in being white, or when
we compare the various species of ruminating animals and find them to
agree in being cloven-footed, we have just as much a general conception
in our minds as Kepler had in his: we have the conception of "a white
thing," or the conception of "a cloven-footed animal." But no one
supposes that we necessarily bring these conceptions with us, and
_superinduce_ them (to adopt Dr. Whewell's expression) upon the facts:
because in these simple cases everybody sees that the very act of
comparison which ends in our connecting the facts by means of the
conception, may be the source from which we derive the conception
itself. If we had never seen any white object or had never seen any
cloven-footed animal before, we should at the same time and by the same
mental act acquire the idea, and employ it for the colligation of the
observed phenomena. Kepler, on the contrary, really had to bring the
idea with him, and superinduce it upon the facts; he could not evolve it
out of them: if he had not already had the idea, he would not have been
able to acquire it by a comparison of the planet's positions. But this
inability was a mere accident: the idea of an ellipse could have been
acquired from the paths of the planets as effectually as from anything
else, if the paths had not happened to be invisible. If the planet had
left a visible track, and we had been so placed that we could see it at
the proper angle, we might have abstracted our original idea of an
ellipse from the planetary orbit. Indeed, every conception which can be
made the instrument for connecting a set of facts, might have been
originally evolved from those very facts. The conception is a conception
_of_ something; and that which it is a conception of, is really _in_ the
facts, and might, under some supposable circumstances, or by some
supposable extension of the faculties which we actually possess, have
been detected in them. And not only is this always in itself possible,
but it actually happens, in almost all cases in which the obtaining of
the right conception is a matter of any considerable difficulty. For if
there be no new conception required; if one of those already familiar to
mankind will serve the purpose, the accident of being the first to whom
the right one occurs, may happen to almost anybody; at least in the case
of a set of phenomena which the whole scientific world are engaged in
attempting to connect. The honour, in Kepler's case, was that of the
accurate, patient, and toilsome calculations by which he compared the
results that followed from his different guesses, with the observations
of Tycho Brahe; but the merit was very small of guessing an ellipse; the
only wonder is that men had not guessed it before, nor could they have
failed to do so if there had not existed an obstinate _à priori_
prejudice that the heavenly bodies must move, if not in a circle, in
some combination of circles.

The really difficult cases are those in which the conception destined to
create light and order out of darkness and confusion, has to be sought
for among the very phenomena which it afterwards serves to arrange. Why,
according to Dr. Whewell himself, did the ancients fail in discovering
the laws of mechanics, that is, of equilibrium and of the communication
of motion? Because they had not, or at least had not clearly, the ideas
or conceptions of pressure and resistance, momentum, and uniform and
accelerating force. And whence could they have obtained these ideas,
except from the very facts of equilibrium and motion? The tardy
development of several of the physical sciences, for example of optics,
electricity, magnetism, and the higher generalizations of chemistry, he
ascribes to the fact that mankind had not yet possessed themselves of
the Idea of Polarity, that is, the idea of opposite properties in
opposite directions. But what was there to suggest such an idea, until,
by a separate examination of several of these different branches of
knowledge, it was shown that the facts of each of them did present, in
some instances at least, the curious phenomenon of opposite properties
in opposite directions? The thing was superficially manifest only in two
cases, those of the magnet, and of electrified bodies; and there the
conception was encumbered with the circumstance of material poles, or
fixed points in the body itself, in which points this opposition of
properties seemed to be inherent. The first comparison and abstraction
had led only to this conception of poles; and if anything corresponding
to that conception had existed in the phenomena of chemistry or optics,
the difficulty now justly considered so great, would have been extremely
small. The obscurity rose from the fact, that the polarities in
chemistry and optics were distinct species, though of the same genus,
with the polarities in electricity and magnetism: and that in order to
assimilate the phenomena to one another, it was necessary to compare a
polarity without poles, such for instance as is exemplified in the
polarization of light, and the polarity with (apparent) poles, which we
see in the magnet; and to recognise that these polarities, while
different in many other respects, agree in the one character which is
expressed by the phrase, opposite properties in opposite directions.
From the result of such a comparison it was that the minds of scientific
men formed this new general conception: between which, and the first
confused feeling of an analogy between some of the phenomena of light
and those of electricity and magnetism, there is a long interval, filled
up by the labours and more or less sagacious suggestions of many
superior minds.

The conceptions, then, which we employ for the colligation and
methodization of facts, do not develop themselves from within, but are
impressed upon the mind from without; they are never obtained otherwise
than by way of comparison and abstraction, and, in the most important
and the most numerous cases, are evolved by abstraction from the very
phenomena which it is their office to colligate. I am far, however, from
wishing to imply that it is not often a very difficult thing to perform
this process of abstraction well, or that the success of an inductive
operation does not, in many cases, principally depend on the skill with
which we perform it. Bacon was quite justified in designating as one of
the principal obstacles to good induction, general conceptions wrongly
formed, "notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ:" to which Dr. Whewell adds,
that not only does bad abstraction make bad induction, but that in order
to perform induction well, we must have abstracted well; our general
conceptions must be "clear" and "appropriate" to the matter in hand.


§ 3. In attempting to show what the difficulty in this matter really is,
and how it is surmounted, I must beg the reader, once for all, to bear
this in mind; that although in discussing the opinions of a different
school of philosophy, I am willing to adopt their language, and to
speak, therefore, of connecting facts through the instrumentality of a
conception, this technical phraseology means neither more nor less than
what is commonly called comparing the facts with one another and
determining in what they agree. Nor has the technical expression even
the advantage of being metaphysically correct. The facts are not
_connected_, except in a merely metaphorical acceptation of the term.
The _ideas_ of the facts may become connected, that is, we may be led to
think of them together; but this consequence is no more than what may be
produced by any casual association. What really takes place, is, I
conceive, more philosophically expressed by the common word Comparison,
than by the phrases "to connect" or "to superinduce." For, as the
general conception is itself obtained by a comparison of particular
phenomena, so, when obtained, the mode in which we apply it to other
phenomena is again by comparison. We compare phenomena with each other
to get the conception, and we then compare those and other phenomena
_with_ the conception. We get the conception of an animal (for instance)
by comparing different animals, and when we afterwards see a creature
resembling an animal, we compare it with our general conception of an
animal; and if it agrees with that general conception, we include it in
the class. The conception becomes the type of comparison.

And we need only consider what comparison is, to see that where the
objects are more than two, and still more when they are an indefinite
number, a type of some sort is an indispensable condition of the
comparison. When we have to arrange and classify a great number of
objects according to their agreements and differences, we do not make a
confused attempt to compare all with all. We know that two things are as
much as the mind can easily attend to at a time, and we therefore fix
upon one of the objects, either at hazard or because it offers in a
peculiarly striking manner some important character, and, taking this as
our standard, compare it with one object after another. If we find a
second object which presents a remarkable agreement with the first,
inducing us to class them together, the question instantly arises, in
what particular circumstances do they agree? and to take notice of these
circumstances is already a first stage of abstraction, giving rise to a
general conception. Having advanced thus far, when we now take in hand a
third object we naturally ask ourselves the question, not merely whether
this third object agrees with the first, but whether it agrees with it
in the same circumstances in which the second did? in other words,
whether it agrees with the general conception which has been obtained by
abstraction from the first and second? Thus we see the tendency of
general conceptions, as soon as formed, to substitute themselves as
types, for whatever individual objects previously answered that purpose
in our comparisons. We may, perhaps, find that no considerable number of
other objects agree with this first general conception; and that we must
drop the conception, and beginning again with a different individual
case, proceed by fresh comparisons to a different general conception.
Sometimes, again, we find that the same conception will serve, by merely
leaving out some of its circumstances; and by this higher effort of
abstraction, we obtain a still more general conception; as in the case
formerly referred to, the scientific world rose from the conception of
poles to the general conception of opposite properties in opposite
directions; or as those South-Sea islanders, whose conception of a
quadruped had been abstracted from hogs (the only animals of that
description which they had seen), when they afterwards compared that
conception with other quadrupeds, dropped some of the circumstances,
and arrived at the more general conception which Europeans associate
with the term.

These brief remarks contain, I believe, all that is well-grounded in the
doctrine, that the conception by which the mind arranges and gives unity
to phenomena must be furnished by the mind itself, and that we find the
right conception by a tentative process, trying first one and then
another until we hit the mark. The conception is not furnished _by_ the
mind until it has been furnished _to_ the mind; and the facts which
supply it are sometimes extraneous facts, but more often the very facts
which we are attempting to arrange by it. It is quite true, however,
that in endeavouring to arrange the facts, at whatever point we begin,
we never advance three steps without forming a general conception, more
or less distinct and precise; and that this general conception becomes
the clue which we instantly endeavour to trace through the rest of the
facts, or rather, becomes the standard with which we thenceforth compare
them. If we are not satisfied with the agreements which we discover
among the phenomena by comparing them with this type, or with some still
more general conception which by an additional stage of abstraction we
can form from the type; we change our path, and look out for other
agreements: we recommence the comparison from a different
starting-point, and so generate a different set of general conceptions.
This is the tentative process which Dr. Whewell speaks of; and which has
not unnaturally suggested the theory, that the conception is supplied by
the mind itself: since the different conceptions which the mind
successively tries, it either already possessed from its previous
experience, or they were supplied to it in the first stage of the
corresponding act of comparison; so that, in the subsequent part of the
process, the conception manifested itself as something compared with the
phenomena, not evolved from them.


§ 4. If this be a correct account of the instrumentality of general
conceptions in the comparison which necessarily precedes Induction, we
shall easily be able to translate into our own language what Dr. Whewell
means by saying that conceptions, to be subservient to Induction, must
be "clear" and "appropriate."

If the conception corresponds to a real agreement among the phenomena;
if the comparison which we have made of a set of objects has led us to
class them according to real resemblances and differences; the
conception which does this cannot fail to be appropriate, for some
purpose or other. The question of appropriateness is relative to the
particular object we have in view. As soon as, by our comparison, we
have ascertained some agreement, something which can be predicated in
common of a number of objects; we have obtained a basis on which an
inductive process is capable of being founded. But the agreements, or
the ulterior consequences to which those agreements lead, may be of very
different degrees of importance. If, for instance, we only compare
animals according to their colour, and class those together which are
coloured alike, we form the general conceptions of a white animal, a
black animal, &c., which are conceptions legitimately formed; and if an
induction were to be attempted concerning the causes of the colours of
animals, this comparison would be the proper and necessary preparation
for such an induction, but would not help us towards a knowledge of the
laws of any other of the properties of animals: while if, with Cuvier,
we compare and class them according to the structure of the skeleton,
or, with Blainville, according to the nature of their outward
integuments, the agreements and differences which are observable in
these respects are not only of much greater importance in themselves,
but are marks of agreements and differences in many other important
particulars of the structure and mode of life of the animals. If,
therefore, the study of their structure and habits be our object, the
conceptions generated by these last comparisons are far more
"appropriate" than those generated by the former. Nothing, other than
this, can be meant by the appropriateness of a conception.

When Dr. Whewell says that the ancients, or the schoolmen, or any modern
inquirers, missed discovering the real law of a phenomenon because they
applied to it an inappropriate instead of an appropriate conception; he
can only mean that in comparing various instances of the phenomenon, to
ascertain in what those instances agreed, they missed the important
points of agreement; and fastened upon such as were either imaginary,
and not agreements at all, or if real agreements, were comparatively
trifling, and had no connexion with the phenomenon, the law of which was
sought.

Aristotle, philosophizing on the subject of motion, remarked that
certain motions apparently take place spontaneously; bodies fall to the
ground, flame ascends, bubbles of air rise in water, &c.: and these he
called natural motions; while others not only never take place without
external incitement, but even when such incitement is applied, tend
spontaneously to cease; which, to distinguish them from the former, he
called violent motions. Now, in comparing the so-called natural motions
with one another, it appeared to Aristotle that they agreed in one
circumstance, namely, that the body which moved (or seemed to move)
spontaneously, was moving _towards its own place_; meaning thereby the
place from whence it originally came, or the place where a great
quantity of matter similar to itself was assembled. In the other class
of motions, as when bodies are thrown up in the air, they are, on the
contrary, moving _from_ their own place. Now, this conception of a body
moving towards its own place may justly be considered inappropriate;
because, though it expresses a circumstance really found in some of the
most familiar instances of motion apparently spontaneous, yet, first,
there are many other cases of such motion, in which that circumstance is
absent: the motion, for instance, of the earth and planets. Secondly,
even when it is present, the motion, on closer examination, would often
be seen not to be spontaneous: as, when air rises in water, it does not
rise by its own nature, but is pushed up by the superior weight of the
water which presses upon it. Finally, there are many cases in which the
spontaneous motion takes place in the contrary direction to what the
theory considers as the body's own place; for instance, when a fog rises
from a lake, or when water dries up. The agreement, therefore, which
Aristotle selected as his principle of classification, did not extend to
all cases of the phenomenon he wanted to study, spontaneous motion;
while it did include cases of the absence of the phenomenon, cases of
motion not spontaneous. The conception was hence "inappropriate." We may
add that, in the case in question, no conception would be appropriate;
there is no agreement which runs through all the cases of spontaneous or
apparently spontaneous motion and no others: they cannot be brought
under one law: it is a case of Plurality of Causes.[4]


§ 5. So much for the first of Dr. Whewell's conditions, that conceptions
must be appropriate. The second is, that they shall be "clear:" and let
us consider what this implies. Unless the conception corresponds to a
real agreement, it has a worse defect than that of not being clear; it
is not applicable to the case at all. Among the phenomena, therefore,
which we are attempting to connect by means of the conception, we must
suppose that there really is an agreement, and that the conception is a
conception of that agreement. In order, then, that it may be clear, the
only requisite is, that we shall know exactly in what the agreement
consists; that it shall have been carefully observed, and accurately
remembered. We are said not to have a clear conception of the
resemblance among a set of objects, when we have only a general feeling
that they resemble, without having analysed their resemblance, or
perceived in what points it consists, and fixed in our memory an exact
recollection of those points. This want of clearness, or, as it may be
otherwise called, this vagueness, in the general conception, may be
owing either to our having no accurate knowledge of the objects
themselves, or merely to our not having carefully compared them. Thus a
person may have no clear idea of a ship because he has never seen one,
or because he remembers but little, and that faintly, of what he has
seen. Or he may have a perfect knowledge and remembrance of many ships
of various kinds, frigates among the rest, but he may have no clear but
only a confused idea of a frigate, because he has never been told, and
has not compared them sufficiently to have remarked and remembered, in
what particular points a frigate differs from some other kind of ship.

It is not, however, necessary, in order to have clear ideas, that we
should know all the common properties of the things which we class
together. That would be to have our conception of the class complete as
well as clear. It is sufficient if we never class things together
without knowing exactly why we do so,--without having ascertained
exactly what agreements we are about to include in our conception; and
if, after having thus fixed our conception, we never vary from it, never
include in the class anything which has not those common properties, nor
exclude from it anything which has. A clear conception means a
determinate conception; one which does not fluctuate, which is not one
thing to-day and another to-morrow, but remains fixed and invariable,
except when, from the progress of our knowledge, or the correction of
some error, we consciously add to it or alter it. A person of clear
ideas, is a person who always knows in virtue of what properties his
classes are constituted; what attributes are connoted by his general
names.

The principal requisites, therefore, of clear conceptions, are habits of
attentive observation, an extensive experience, and a memory which
receives and retains an exact image of what is observed. And in
proportion as any one has the habit of observing minutely and comparing
carefully a particular class of phenomena, and an accurate memory for
the results of the observation and comparison, so will his conceptions
of that class of phenomena be clear; provided he has the indispensable
habit, (naturally, however, resulting from those other endowments,) of
never using general names without a precise connotation.

As the clearness of our conceptions chiefly depends on the _carefulness_
and _accuracy_ of our observing and comparing faculties, so their
appropriateness, or rather the chance we have of hitting upon the
appropriate conception in any case, mainly depends on the _activity_ of
the same faculties. He who by habit, grounded on sufficient natural
aptitude, has acquired a readiness in accurately observing and comparing
phenomena, will perceive so many more agreements and will perceive them
so much more rapidly than other people, that the chances are much
greater of his perceiving, in any instance, the agreement on which the
important consequences depend.


§ 6. It is of so much importance that the part of the process of
investigating truth, discussed in this chapter, should be rightly
understood, that I think it is desirable to restate the results we have
arrived at, in a somewhat different mode of expression.

We cannot ascertain general truths, that is, truths applicable to
classes, unless we have formed the classes in such a manner that general
truths can be affirmed of them. In the formation of any class, there is
involved a conception of it as a class, that is, a conception of certain
circumstances as being those which characterize the class, and
distinguish the objects composing it from all other things. When we know
exactly what these circumstances are, we have a clear idea (or
conception) of the class, and of the meaning of the general name which
designates it. The primary condition implied in having this clear idea,
is that the class be really a class; that it correspond to a real
distinction; that the things it includes really do agree with one
another in certain particulars, and differ, in those same particulars,
from all other things. A person without clear ideas, is one who
habitually classes together, under the same general names, things which
have no common properties, or none which are not possessed also by other
things; or who, if the usage of other people prevents him from actually
misclassing things, is unable to state to himself the common properties
in virtue of which he classes them rightly.

But it is not the sole requisite of classification that the classes
should be real classes, framed by a legitimate mental process. Some
modes of classing things are more valuable than others for human uses,
whether of speculation or of practice; and our classifications are not
well made, unless the things which they bring together not only agree
with each other in something which distinguishes them from all other
things, but agree with each other and differ from other things in the
very circumstances which are of primary importance for the purpose
(theoretical or practical) which we have in view, and which constitutes
the problem before us. In other words, our conceptions, though they may
be clear, are not _appropriate_ for our purpose, unless the properties
we comprise in them are those which will help us towards what we wish to
understand--_i. e._, either those which go deepest into the nature of
the things, if our object be to understand that, or those which are most
closely connected with the particular property which we are endeavouring
to investigate.

We cannot, therefore, frame good general conceptions beforehand. That
the conception we have obtained is the one we want, can only be known
when we have done the work for the sake of which we wanted it; when we
completely understand the general character of the phenomena, or the
conditions of the particular property with which we concern ourselves.
General conceptions formed without this thorough knowledge, are Bacon's
"notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ." Yet such premature conceptions we
must be continually making up, in our progress to something better. They
are an impediment to the progress of knowledge, only when they are
permanently acquiesced in. When it has become our habit to group things
in wrong classes--in groups which either are not really classes, having
no distinctive points of agreement (absence of _clear_ ideas), or which
are not classes of which anything important to our purpose can be
predicated (absence of _appropriate_ ideas); and when, in the belief
that these badly made classes are those sanctioned by Nature, we refuse
to exchange them for others, and cannot or will not make up our general
conceptions from any other elements; in that case all the evils which
Bacon ascribes to his "notiones temerè abstractæ" really occur. This was
what the ancients did in physics, and what the world in general does in
morals and politics to the present day.

It would thus, in my view of the matter, be an inaccurate mode of
expression to say, that obtaining appropriate conceptions is a condition
precedent to generalization. Throughout the whole process of comparing
phenomena with one another for the purpose of generalization, the mind
is trying to make up a conception; but the conception which it is trying
to make up is that of the really important point of agreement in the
phenomena. As we obtain more knowledge of the phenomena themselves, and
of the conditions on which their important properties depend, our views
on this subject naturally alter; and thus we advance from a less to a
more "appropriate" general conception, in the progress of our
investigations.

We ought not, at the same time, to forget that the really important
agreement cannot always be discovered by mere comparison of the very
phenomena in question, without the aid of a conception acquired
elsewhere; as in the case, so often referred to, of the planetary
orbits.

The search for the agreement of a set of phenomena is in truth very
similar to the search for a lost or hidden object. At first we place
ourselves in a sufficiently commanding position, and cast our eyes round
us, and if we can see the object it is well; if not, we ask ourselves
mentally what are the places in which it may be hid, in order that we
may there search for it: and so on, until we imagine the place where it
really is. And here too we require to have had a previous conception, or
knowledge, of those different places. As in this familiar process, so in
the philosophical operation which it illustrates, we first endeavour to
find the lost object or recognise the common attribute, without
conjecturally invoking the aid of any previously acquired conception, or
in other words, of any hypothesis. Having failed in this, we call upon
our imagination for some hypothesis of a possible place, or a possible
point of resemblance, and then look, to see whether the facts agree with
the conjecture.

For such cases something more is required than a mind accustomed to
accurate observation and comparison. It must be a mind stored with
general conceptions, previously acquired, of the sorts which bear
affinity to the subject of the particular inquiry. And much will also
depend on the natural strength and acquired culture of what has been
termed the scientific imagination; on the faculty possessed of mentally
arranging known elements into new combinations, such as have not yet
been observed in nature, though not contradictory to any known laws.

But the variety of intellectual habits, the purposes which they serve,
and the modes in which they may be fostered and cultivated, are
considerations belonging to the Art of Education: a subject far wider
than Logic, and which this treatise does not profess to discuss. Here,
therefore, the present chapter may properly close.




