CHAPTER XII.

OF THE LOGIC OF PRACTICE, OR ART; INCLUDING MORALITY AND POLICY.


§ 1. In the preceding chapters we have endeavoured to characterize the
present state of those among the branches of knowledge called Moral,
which are sciences in the only proper sense of the term, that is,
inquiries into the course of nature. It is customary, however, to
include under the term moral knowledge, and even (though improperly)
under that of moral science, an inquiry the results of which do not
express themselves in the indicative, but in the imperative mood, or in
periphrases equivalent to it; what is called the knowledge of duties;
practical ethics, or morality.

Now, the imperative mood is the characteristic of art, as distinguished
from science. Whatever speaks in rules, or precepts, not in assertions
respecting matters of fact, is art: and ethics, or morality, is properly
a portion of the art corresponding to the sciences of human nature and
society.[19]

The Method, therefore, of Ethics, can be no other than that of Art, or
Practice, in general: and the portion yet uncompleted, of the task which
we proposed to ourselves in the concluding Book, is to characterize the
general Method of Art, as distinguished from Science.


§ 2. In all branches of practical business, there are cases in which
individuals are bound to conform their practice to a pre-established
rule, while there are others in which it is part of their task to find
or construct the rule by which they are to govern their conduct. The
first, for example, is the case of a judge, under a definite written
code. The judge is not called upon to determine what course would be
intrinsically the most advisable in the particular case in hand, but
only within what rule of law it falls; what the legislator has ordained
to be done in the kind of case, and must therefore be presumed to have
intended in the individual case. The method must here be wholly and
exclusively one of ratiocination, or syllogism; and the process is
obviously, what in our analysis of the syllogism we showed that all
ratiocination is, namely the interpretation of a formula.

In order that our illustration of the opposite case may be taken from
the same class of subjects as the former, we will suppose, in contrast
with the situation of the judge, the position of a legislator. As the
judge has laws for his guidance, so the legislator has rules, and maxims
of policy; but it would be a manifest error to suppose that the
legislator is bound by these maxims in the same manner as the judge is
bound by the laws, and that all he has to do is to argue down from them
to the particular case, as the judge does from the laws. The legislator
is bound to take into consideration the reasons or grounds of the maxim;
the judge has nothing to do with those of the law, except so far as a
consideration of them may throw light upon the intention of the
law-maker, where his words have left it doubtful. To the judge, the
rule, once positively ascertained, is final; but the legislator, or
other practitioner, who goes by rules rather than by their reasons, like
the old-fashioned German tacticians who were vanquished by Napoleon, or
the physician who preferred that his patients should die by rule rather
than recover contrary to it, is rightly judged to be a mere pedant, and
the slave of his formulas.

Now, the reasons of a maxim of policy, or of any other rule of art, can
be no other than the theorems of the corresponding science.

The relation in which rules of art stand to doctrines of science may be
thus characterized. The art proposes to itself an end to be attained,
defines the end, and hands it over to the science. The science receives
it, considers it as a phenomenon or effect to be studied, and having
investigated its causes and conditions, sends it back to art with a
theorem of the combination of circumstances by which it could be
produced. Art then examines these combinations of circumstances, and
according as any of them are or are not in human power, pronounces the
end attainable or not. The only one of the premises, therefore, which
Art supplies, is the original major premise, which asserts that the
attainment of the given end is desirable. Science then lends to Art the
proposition (obtained by a series of inductions or of deductions) that
the performance of certain actions will attain the end. From these
premises Art concludes that the performance of these actions is
desirable, and finding it also practicable, converts the theorem into a
rule or precept.


§ 3. It deserves particular notice, that the theorem or speculative
truth is not ripe for being turned into a precept, until the whole, and
not a part merely, of the operation which belongs to science, has been
performed. Suppose that we have completed the scientific process only up
to a certain point; have discovered that a particular cause will produce
the desired effect, but have not ascertained all the negative conditions
which are necessary, that is, all the circumstances which, if present,
would prevent its production. If, in this imperfect state of the
scientific theory, we attempt to frame a rule of art, we perform that
operation prematurely. Whenever any counteracting cause, overlooked by
the theorem, takes place, the rule will be at fault: we shall employ the
means and the end will not follow. No arguing from or about the rule
itself will then help us through the difficulty: there is nothing for it
but to turn back and finish the scientific process which should have
preceded the formation of the rule. We must re-open the investigation,
to inquire into the remainder of the conditions on which the effect
depends; and only after we have ascertained the whole of these, are we
prepared to transform the completed law of the effect into a precept, in
which those circumstances or combinations of circumstances which the
science exhibits as conditions, are prescribed as means.

It is true that, for the sake of convenience, rules must be formed from
something less than this ideally perfect theory; in the first place,
because the theory can seldom be made ideally perfect; and next,
because, if all the counteracting contingencies, whether of frequent or
of rare occurrence, were included, the rules would be too cumbrous to be
apprehended and remembered by ordinary capacities, on the common
occasions of life. The rules of art do not attempt to comprise more
conditions than require to be attended to in ordinary cases; and are
therefore always imperfect. In the manual arts, where the requisite
conditions are not numerous, and where those which the rules do not
specify are generally either plain to common observation or speedily
learnt from practice, rules may often be safely acted on by persons who
know nothing more than the rule. But in the complicated affairs of life,
and still more in those of states and societies, rules cannot be relied
on, without constantly referring back to the scientific laws on which
they are founded. To know what are the practical contingencies which
require a modification of the rule, or which are altogether exceptions
to it, is to know what combinations of circumstances would interfere
with, or entirely counteract, the consequences of those laws: and this
can only be learnt by a reference to the theoretic grounds of the rule.

By a wise practitioner, therefore, rules of conduct will only be
considered as provisional. Being made for the most numerous cases, or
for those of most ordinary occurrence, they point out the manner in
which it will be least perilous to act, where time or means do not exist
for analysing the actual circumstances of the case, or where we cannot
trust our judgment in estimating them. But they do not at all supersede
the propriety of going through (when circumstances permit) the
scientific process requisite for framing a rule from the data of the
particular case before us. At the same time, the common rule may very
properly serve as an admonition that a certain mode of action has been
found by ourselves and others to be well adapted to the cases of most
common occurrence; so that if it be unsuitable to the case in hand, the
reason of its being so will be likely to arise from some unusual
circumstance.


§ 4. The error is therefore apparent, of those who would deduce the line
of conduct proper to particular cases, from supposed universal practical
maxims; overlooking the necessity of constantly referring back to the
principles of the speculative science, in order to be sure of attaining
even the specific end which the rules have in view. How much greater
still, then, must the error be, of setting up such unbending principles,
not merely as universal rules for attaining a given end, but as rules of
conduct generally; without regard to the possibility, not only that some
modifying cause may prevent the attainment of the given end by the means
which the rule prescribes, but that success itself may conflict with
some other end, which may possibly chance to be more desirable.

This is the habitual error of many of the political speculators whom I
have characterized as the geometrical school; especially in France,
where ratiocination from rules of practice forms the staple commodity of
journalism and political oratory; a misapprehension of the functions of
Deduction which has brought much discredit, in the estimation of other
countries, upon the spirit of generalization so honourably
characteristic of the French mind. The common-places of politics, in
France, are large and sweeping practical maxims, from which, as ultimate
premises, men reason downwards to particular applications, and this they
call being logical and consistent. For instance, they are perpetually
arguing that such and such a measure ought to be adopted, because it is
a consequence of the principle on which the form of government is
founded; of the principle of legitimacy, or the principle of the
sovereignty of the people. To which it may be answered, that if these be
really practical principles, they must rest on speculative grounds; the
sovereignty of the people (for example) must be a right foundation for
government, because a government thus constituted tends to produce
certain beneficial effects. Inasmuch, however, as no government produces
all possible beneficial effects, but all are attended with more or fewer
inconveniences; and since these cannot usually be combated by means
drawn from the very causes which produce them; it would be often a much
stronger recommendation of some practical arrangement, that it does not
follow from what is called the general principle of the government, than
that it does. Under a government of legitimacy, the presumption is far
rather in favour of institutions of popular origin; and in a democracy,
in favour of arrangements tending to check the impetus of popular will.
The line of argumentation so commonly mistaken in France for political
philosophy, tends to the practical conclusion that we should exert our
utmost efforts to aggravate, instead of alleviating, whatever are the
characteristic imperfections of the system of institutions which we
prefer, or under which we happen to live.


§ 5. The grounds, then, of every rule of art, are to be found in the
theorems of science. An art, or a body of art, consists of the rules,
together with as much of the speculative propositions as comprises the
justification of those rules. The complete art of any matter, includes a
selection of such a portion from the science, as is necessary to show on
what conditions the effects, which the art aims at producing, depend.
And Art in general, consists of the truths of Science, arranged in the
most convenient order for practice, instead of the order which is the
most convenient for thought. Science groups and arranges its truths, so
as to enable us to take in at one view as much as possible of the
general order of the universe. Art, though it must assume the same
general laws, follows them only into such of their detailed consequences
as have led to the formation of rules of conduct; and brings together
from parts of the field of science most remote from one another, the
truths relating to the production of the different and heterogeneous
conditions necessary to each effect which the exigencies of practical
life require to be produced.

Science, therefore, following one cause to its various effects, while
art traces one effect to its multiplied and diversified causes and
conditions; there is need of a set of intermediate scientific truths,
derived from the higher generalities of science, and destined to serve
as the generalia or first principles of the various arts. The scientific
operation of framing these intermediate principles, M. Comte
characterizes as one of those results of philosophy which are reserved
for futurity. The only complete example which he points out as actually
realized, and which can be held up as a type to be imitated in more
important matters, is the general theory of the art of Descriptive
Geometry, as conceived by M. Monge. It is not, however, difficult to
understand what the nature of these intermediate principles must
generally be. After framing the most comprehensive possible conception
of the end to be aimed at, that is, of the effect to be produced, and
determining in the same comprehensive manner the set of conditions on
which that effect depends; there remains to be taken, a general survey
of the resources which can be commanded for realizing this set of
conditions; and when the result of this survey has been embodied in the
fewest and most extensive propositions possible, those propositions will
express the general relation between the available means and the end,
and will constitute the general scientific theory of the art; from which
its practical methods will follow as corollaries.


§ 6. But though the reasonings which connect the end or purpose of every
art with its means, belong to the domain of Science, the definition of
the end itself belongs exclusively to Art, and forms its peculiar
province. Every art has one first principle, or general major premise,
not borrowed from science; that which enunciates the object aimed at,
and affirms it to be a desirable object. The builder's art assumes that
it is desirable to have buildings; architecture (as one of the fine
arts), that it is desirable to have them beautiful or imposing. The
hygienic and medical arts assume, the one that the preservation of
health, the other that the cure of disease, are fitting and desirable
ends. These are not propositions of science. Propositions of science
assert a matter of fact: an existence, a coexistence, a succession, or a
resemblance. The propositions now spoken of do not assert that anything
is, but enjoin or recommend that something should be. They are a class
by themselves. A proposition of which the predicate is expressed, by the
words _ought_ or _should be_, is generically different from one which is
expressed by _is_, or _will be_. It is true that, in the largest sense
of the words, even these propositions assert something as a matter of
fact. The fact affirmed in them is, that the conduct recommended excites
in the speaker's mind the feeling of approbation. This, however, does
not go to the bottom of the matter; for the speaker's approbation is no
sufficient reason why other people should approve; nor ought it to be a
conclusive reason even with himself. For the purposes of practice, every
one must be required to justify his approbation: and for this there is
need of general premises, determining what are the proper objects of
approbation, and what the proper order of precedence among those
objects.

These general premises, together with the principal conclusions which
may be deduced from them, form (or rather might form) a body of
doctrine, which is properly the Art of Life, in its three departments,
Morality, Prudence or Policy, and Æsthetics; the Right, the Expedient,
and the Beautiful or Noble, in human conduct and works. To this art,
(which, in the main, is unfortunately still to be created,) all other
arts are subordinate; since its principles are those which must
determine whether the special aim of any particular art is worthy and
desirable, and what is its place in the scale of desirable things. Every
art is thus a joint result of laws of nature disclosed by science, and
of the general principles of what has been called Teleology, or the
Doctrine of Ends;[20] which, borrowing the language of the German
metaphysicians, may also be termed, not improperly, the Principles of
Practical Reason.

A scientific observer or reasoner, merely as such, is not an adviser
for practice. His part is only to show that certain consequences follow
from certain causes, and that to obtain certain ends, certain means are
the most effectual. Whether the ends themselves are such as ought to be
pursued, and if so, in what cases and to how great a length, it is no
part of his business as a cultivator of science to decide, and science
alone will never qualify him for the decision. In purely physical
science, there is not much temptation to assume this ulterior office;
but those who treat of human nature and society invariably claim it;
they always undertake to say, not merely what is, but what ought to be.
To entitle them to do this, a complete doctrine of Teleology is
indispensable. A scientific theory, however perfect, of the subject
matter, considered merely as part of the order of nature, can in no
degree serve as a substitute. In this respect the various subordinate
arts afford a misleading analogy. In them there is seldom any visible
necessity for justifying the end, since in general its desirableness is
denied by nobody, and it is only when the question of precedence is to
be decided between that end and some other, that the general principles
of Teleology have to be called in: but a writer on Morals and Politics
requires those principles at every step. The most elaborate and
well-digested exposition of the laws of succession and coexistence among
mental or social phenomena, and of their relation to one another as
causes and effects, will be of no avail towards the art of Life or of
Society, if the ends to be aimed at by that art are left to the vague
suggestions of the _intellectus sibi permissus_, or are taken for
granted without analysis or questioning.


§ 7. There is, then, a Philosophia Prima peculiar to Art, as there is
one which belongs to Science. There are not only first principles of
Knowledge, but first principles of Conduct. There must be some standard
by which to determine the goodness or badness, absolute and comparative,
of ends, or objects of desire. And whatever that standard is, there can
be but one: for if there were several ultimate principles of conduct,
the same conduct might be approved by one of those principles and
condemned by another; and there would be needed some more general
principle, as umpire between them.

Accordingly, writers on moral philosophy have mostly felt the necessity
not only of referring all rules of conduct, and all judgments of praise
and blame, to principles, but of referring them to some one principle;
some rule, or standard, with which all other rules of conduct were
required to be consistent, and from which by ultimate consequence they
could all be deduced. Those who have dispensed with the assumption of
such an universal standard, have only been enabled to do so by supposing
that a moral sense, or instinct, inherent in our constitution, informs
us, both what principles of conduct we are bound to observe, and also in
what order these should be subordinated to one another.

The theory of the foundations of morality is a subject which it would be
out of place, in a work like this, to discuss at large, and which could
not to any useful purpose be treated incidentally. I shall content
myself therefore with saying, that the doctrine of intuitive moral
principles, even if true, would provide only for that portion of the
field of conduct which is properly called moral. For the remainder of
the practice of life some general principle, or standard, must still be
sought; and if that principle be rightly chosen, it will be found, I
apprehend, to serve quite as well for the ultimate principle of
Morality, as for that of Prudence, Policy, or Taste.

Without attempting in this place to justify my opinion, or even to
define the kind of justification which it admits of, I merely declare my
conviction, that the general principle to which all rules of practice
ought to conform, and the test by which they should be tried, is that of
conduciveness to the happiness of mankind, or rather, of all sentient
beings: in other words, that the promotion of happiness is the ultimate
principle of Teleology.[21]

I do not mean to assert that the promotion of happiness should be
itself the end of all actions, or even of all rules of action. It is the
justification, and ought to be the controller, of all ends, but is not
itself the sole end. There are many virtuous actions, and even virtuous
modes of action (though the cases are, I think, less frequent than is
often supposed) by which happiness in the particular instance is
sacrificed, more pain being produced than pleasure. But conduct of which
this can be truly asserted, admits of justification only because it can
be shown that on the whole more happiness will exist in the world, if
feelings are cultivated which will make people, in certain cases,
regardless of happiness. I fully admit that this is true: that the
cultivation of an ideal nobleness of will and conduct, should be to
individual human beings an end, to which the specific pursuit either of
their own happiness or of that of others (except so far as included in
that idea) should, in any case of conflict, give way. But I hold that
the very question, what constitutes this elevation of character, is
itself to be decided by a reference to happiness as the standard. The
character itself should be, to the individual, a paramount end, simply
because the existence of this ideal nobleness of character, or of a near
approach to it, in any abundance, would go further than all things else
towards making human life happy; both in the comparatively humble sense,
of pleasure and freedom from pain, and in the higher meaning, of
rendering life, not what it now is almost universally, puerile and
insignificant--but such as human beings with highly developed faculties
can care to have.


§ 8. With these remarks we must close this summary view of the
application of the general logic of scientific inquiry to the moral and
social departments of science. Notwithstanding the extreme generality of
the principles of method which I have laid down, (a generality which, I
trust, is not, in this instance, synonymous with vagueness) I have
indulged the hope that to some of those on whom the task will devolve of
bringing those most important of all sciences into a more satisfactory
state, these observations may be useful; both in removing erroneous, and
in clearing up the true, conceptions of the means by which, on subjects
of so high a degree of complication, truth can be attained. Should this
hope be realized, what is probably destined to be the great intellectual
achievement of the next two or three generations of European thinkers
will have been in some degree forwarded.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Some arguments and explanations, supplementary to those in the text,
will be found in _An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_,
chap. xxvi.

[2] Supra, p. 137.

[3] When this chapter was written, Mr. Bain had not yet published even
the first part ("The Senses and the Intellect") of his profound Treatise
on the Mind. In this, the laws of association have been more
comprehensively stated and more largely exemplified than by any previous
writer; and the work, having been completed by the publication of "The
Emotions and the Will," may now be referred to as incomparably the most
complete analytical exposition of the mental phenomena, on the basis of
a legitimate Induction, which has yet been produced.

Many striking applications of the laws of association to the explanation
of complex mental phenomena, are also to be found in Mr. Herbert
Spencer's "Principles of Psychology."

[4] In the case of the moral sentiments the place of direct experiment
is to a considerable extent supplied by historical experience, and we
are able to trace with a tolerable approach to certainty the particular
associations by which those sentiments are engendered. This has been
attempted, so far as respects the sentiment of justice, in a little work
by the present author, entitled _Utilitarianism_.

[5] The most favourable cases for making such approximate
generalizations are what may be termed collective instances; where we
are fortunately enabled to see the whole class respecting which we are
inquiring, in action at once; and, from the qualities displayed by the
collective body, are able to judge what must be the qualities of the
majority of the individuals composing it. Thus the character of a nation
is shown in its acts as a nation; not so much in the acts of its
government, for those are much influenced by other causes; but in the
current popular maxims, and other marks of the general direction of
public opinion; in the character of the persons or writings that are
held in permanent esteem or admiration; in laws and institutions, so far
as they are the work of the nation itself, or are acknowledged and
supported by it; and so forth. But even here there is a large margin of
doubt and uncertainty. These things are liable to be influenced by many
circumstances: they are partly determined by the distinctive qualities
of that nation or body of persons, but partly also by external causes
which would influence any other body of persons in the same manner. In
order, therefore, to make the experiment really complete, we ought to be
able to try it without variation upon other nations: to try how
Englishmen would act or feel if placed in the same circumstances in
which we have supposed Frenchmen to be placed; to apply, in short, the
Method of Difference as well as that of Agreement. Now these experiments
we cannot try, nor even approximate to.

[6] "To which," says Dr. Whewell, "we may add, that it is certain from
the history of the subject, that in that case the hypothesis would never
have been framed at all."

Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, pp. 277-282) defends Bacon's
rule against the preceding strictures. But his defence consists only in
asserting and exemplifying a proposition which I had myself stated, viz.
that though the largest generalizations may be the earliest made, they
are not at first seen in their entire generality, but acquire it by
degrees, as they are found to explain one class after another of
phenomena. The laws of motion, for example, were not known to extend to
the celestial regions, until the motions of the celestial bodies had
been deduced from them. This however does not in any way affect the
fact, that the middle principles of astronomy, the central force for
example, and the law of the inverse square, could not have been
discovered, if the laws of motion, which are so much more universal, had
not been known first. On Bacon's system of step-by-step generalization,
it would be impossible in any science to ascend higher than the
empirical laws; a remark which Dr. Whewell's own Inductive Tables,
referred to by him in support of his argument, amply bear out.

[7] Vol. i. p. 494 to the end of the chapter.

[8] _Biographia Literaria_, i. 214.

[9] Supra, vol. i. p. 500.

[10] _Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy_, pp.
137-140.

[11] The quotations in this paragraph are from a paper written by the
author, and published in a periodical in 1834.

[12] _Cours de Philosophie Positive_, iv. 325-9.

[13] Since reprinted entire in _Dissertations and Discussions_, as the
concluding paper of the first volume.

[14] This great generalization is often unfavourably criticised (as by
Dr. Whewell for instance) under a misapprehension of its real import.
The doctrine, that the theological explanation of phenomena belongs only
to the infancy of our knowledge of them, ought not to be construed as if
it was equivalent to the assertion, that mankind, as their knowledge
advances, will necessarily cease to believe in any kind of theology.
This was M. Comte's opinion; but it is by no means implied in his
fundamental theorem. All that is implied is, that in an advanced state
of human knowledge, no other Ruler of the World will be acknowledged
than one who rules by universal laws, and does not at all, or does not
unless in very peculiar cases, produce events by special interpositions.
Originally all natural events were ascribed to such interpositions. At
present every educated person rejects this explanation in regard to all
classes of phenomena of which the laws have been fully ascertained;
though some have not yet reached the point of referring all phenomena to
the idea of Law, but believe that rain and sunshine, famine and
pestilence, victory and defeat, death and life, are issues which the
Creator does not leave to the operation of his general laws, but
reserves to be decided by express acts of volition. M. Comte's theory is
the negation of this doctrine.

Dr. Whewell equally misunderstands M. Comte's doctrine respecting the
second, or metaphysical stage of speculation. M. Comte did not mean that
"discussions concerning ideas" are limited to an early stage of inquiry,
and cease when science enters into the positive stage. (_Philosophy of
Discovery_, pp. 226 et seq.) In all M. Comte's speculations as much
stress is laid on the process of clearing up our conceptions, as on the
ascertainment of facts. When M. Comte speaks of the metaphysical stage
of speculation, he means the stage in which men speak of "Nature" and
other abstractions as if they were active forces, producing effects;
when Nature is said to do this, or forbid that; when Nature's horror of
a vacuum, Nature's non-admission of a break, Nature's _vis medicatrix_,
were offered as explanations of phenomena; when the qualities of things
were mistaken for real entities dwelling in the things; when the
phenomena of living bodies were thought to be accounted for by being
referred to a "vital force;" when, in short, the abstract names of
phenomena were mistaken for the causes of their existence. In this sense
of the word it cannot be reasonably denied that the metaphysical
explanation of phenomena, equally with the theological, gives way before
the advance of real science.

That the final, or positive stage, as conceived by M. Comte, has been
equally misunderstood, and that, notwithstanding some expressions open
to just criticism, M. Comte never dreamed of denying the legitimacy of
inquiry into all causes which are accessible to human investigation, I
have pointed out in a former place.

[15] Buckle's _History of Civilization_, i. 30.

[16] I have been assured by an intimate friend of Mr. Buckle that he
would not have withheld his assent from these remarks, and that he never
intended to affirm or imply that mankind are not progressive in their
moral as well as in their intellectual qualities. "In dealing with his
problem, he availed himself of the artifice resorted to by the Political
Economist, who leaves out of consideration the generous and benevolent
sentiments, and founds his science on the proposition that mankind are
actuated by acquisitive propensities alone," not because such is the
fact, but because it is necessary to begin by treating the principal
influence as if it was the sole one, and make the due corrections
afterwards. "He desired to make abstraction of the intellect as the
determining and dynamical element of the progression, eliminating the
more dependent set of conditions, and treating the more active one as if
it were an entirely independent variable."

The same friend of Mr. Buckle states that when he used expressions which
seemed to exaggerate the influence of general at the expense of special
causes, and especially at the expense of the influence of individual
minds, Mr. Buckle really intended no more than to affirm emphatically
that the greatest men cannot effect great changes in human affairs
unless the general mind has been in some considerable degree prepared
for them by the general circumstances of the age; a truth which, of
course, no one thinks of denying. And there certainly are passages in
Mr. Buckle's writings which speak of the influence exercised by great
individual intellects in as strong terms as could be desired.

[17] Essay on Dryden, in Miscellaneous Writings, i. 186.

[18] In the _Cornhill Magazine_ for June and July 1861.

[19] It is almost superfluous to observe, that there is another meaning
of the word Art, in which it may be said to denote the poetical
department or aspect of things in general, in contradistinction to the
scientific. In the text, the word is used in its older, and I hope, not
yet obsolete sense.

[20] The word Teleology is also, but inconveniently and improperly,
employed by some writers as a name for the attempt to explain the
phenomena of the universe from final causes.

[21] For an express discussion and vindication of this principle, see
the little volume entitled "Utilitarianism."


THE END.
