CHAPTER VIII.

OF CLASSIFICATION BY SERIES.


§ 1. Thus far, we have considered the principles of scientific
classification so far only as relates to the formation of natural
groups; and at this point most of those who have attempted a theory of
natural arrangement, including, among the rest, Dr. Whewell, have
stopped. There remains, however, another, and a not less important
portion of the theory, which has not yet, as far as I am aware, been
systematically treated of by any writer except M. Comte. This is, the
arrangement of the natural groups into a natural series.[24]

The end of Classification, as an instrument for the investigation of
nature, is (as before stated) to make us think of those objects
together, which have the greatest number of important common properties;
and which therefore we have oftenest occasion, in the course of our
inductions, for taking into joint consideration. Our ideas of objects
are thus brought into the order most conducive to the successful
prosecution of inductive inquiries generally. But when the purpose is to
facilitate some particular inductive inquiry, more is required. To be
instrumental to that purpose, the classification must bring those
objects together, the simultaneous contemplation of which is likely to
throw most light upon the particular subject. That subject being the
laws of some phenomenon or some set of connected phenomena; the very
phenomenon or set of phenomena in question must be chosen as the
groundwork of the classification.

The requisites of a classification intended to facilitate the study of a
particular phenomenon, are, first, to bring into one class all Kinds of
things which exhibit that phenomenon, in whatever variety of forms or
degrees; and secondly, to arrange those Kinds in a series according to
the degree in which they exhibit it, beginning with those which exhibit
most of it, and terminating with those which exhibit least. The
principal example, as yet, of such a classification, is afforded by
comparative anatomy and physiology, from which, therefore, our
illustrations shall be taken.


§ 2. The object being supposed to be, the investigation of the laws of
animal life; the first step, after forming the most distinct conception
of the phenomenon itself, possible in the existing state of our
knowledge, is to erect into one great class (that of animals) all the
known Kinds of beings where that phenomenon presents itself; in however
various combinations with other properties, and in however different
degrees. As some of these Kinds manifest the general phenomenon of
animal life in a very high degree, and others in an insignificant
degree, barely sufficient for recognition; we must, in the next place,
arrange the various Kinds in a series, following one another according
to the degrees in which they severally exhibit the phenomenon; beginning
therefore with man, and ending with the most imperfect kinds of
zoophytes.

This is merely saying that we should put the instances, from which the
law is to be inductively collected, into the order which is implied in
one of the four Methods of Experimental Inquiry discussed in the
preceding Book; the fourth Method, that of Concomitant Variations. As
formerly remarked, this is often the only method to which recourse can
be had, with assurance of a true conclusion, in cases in which we have
but limited means of effecting, by artificial experiments, a separation
of circumstances usually conjoined. The principle of the method is, that
facts which increase or diminish together, and disappear together, are
either cause and effect, or effects of a common cause. When it has been
ascertained that this relation really subsists between the variations, a
connexion between the facts themselves may be confidently laid down,
either as a law of nature or only as an empirical law, according to
circumstances.

That the application of this Method must be preceded by the formation of
such a series as we have described, is too obvious to need being pointed
out; and the mere arrangement of a set of objects in a series, according
to the degrees in which they exhibit some fact of which we are seeking
the law, is too naturally suggested by the necessities of our inductive
operations, to require any lengthened illustration here. But there are
cases in which the arrangement required for the special purpose, becomes
the determining principle of the classification of the same objects for
general purposes. This will naturally and properly happen, when those
laws of the objects which are sought in the special inquiry enact so
principal a part in the general character and history of those
objects--exercise so much influence in determining all the phenomena of
which they are either the agents or the theatre--that all other
differences existing among the objects are fittingly regarded as mere
modifications of the one phenomenon sought; effects determined by the
co-operation of some incidental circumstance with the laws of that
phenomenon. Thus in the case of animated beings, the differences between
one class of animals and another may reasonably be considered as mere
modifications of the general phenomenon, animal life; modifications
arising either from the different degrees in which that phenomenon is
manifested in different animals, or from the intermixture of the effects
of incidental causes peculiar to the nature of each, with the effects
produced by the general laws of life; those laws still exercising a
predominant influence over the result. Such being the case, no other
inductive inquiry respecting animals can be successfully carried on,
except in subordination to the great inquiry into the universal laws of
animal life. And the classification of animals best suited to that one
purpose, is the most suitable to all the other purposes of zoological
science.


§ 3. To establish a classification of this sort, or even to apprehend it
when established, requires the power of recognising the essential
similarity of a phenomenon, in its minuter degrees and obscurer forms,
with what is called the _same_ phenomenon in the greatest perfection of
its development; that is, of identifying with each other all phenomena
which differ only in degree, and in properties which we suppose to be
caused by difference of degree. In order to recognise this identity, or
in other words, this exact similarity of quality, the assumption of a
type-species is indispensable. We must consider as the type of the
class, that among the Kinds included in it, which exhibits the
properties constitutive of the class, in the highest degree; conceiving
the other varieties as instances of degeneracy, as it were, from that
type; deviations from it by inferior intensity of the characteristic
property or properties. For every phenomenon is best studied (_cæteris
paribus_) where it exists in the greatest intensity. It is there that
the effects which either depend on it, or depend on the same causes with
it, will also exist in the greatest degree. It is there, consequently,
and only there, that those effects of it, or joint effects with it, can
become fully known to us, so that we may learn to recognise their
smaller degrees, or even their mere rudiments, in cases in which the
direct study would have been difficult or even impossible. Not to
mention that the phenomenon in its higher degrees may be attended by
effects or collateral circumstances which in its smaller degrees do not
occur at all, requiring for their production in any sensible amount a
greater degree of intensity of the cause than is there met with. In man,
for example, (the species in which both the phenomenon of animal and
that of organic life exist in the highest degree,) many subordinate
phenomena develop themselves in the course of his animated existence,
which the inferior varieties of animals do not show. The knowledge of
these properties may nevertheless be of great avail towards the
discovery of the conditions and laws of the general phenomenon of life,
which is common to man with those inferior animals. And they are, even,
rightly considered as properties of animated nature itself; because they
may evidently be affiliated to the general laws of animated nature;
because we may fairly presume that some rudiments or feeble degrees of
those properties would be recognised in all animals by more perfect
organs, or even by more perfect instruments, than ours; and because
those may be correctly termed properties of a class, which a thing
exhibits exactly in proportion as it belongs to the class, that is, in
proportion as it possesses the main attributes constitutive of the
class.


§ 4. It remains to consider how the internal distribution of the series
may most properly take place: in what manner it should be divided into
Orders, Families, and Genera.

The main principle of division must of course be natural affinity; the
classes formed must be natural groups: and the formation of these has
already been sufficiently treated of. But the principles of natural
grouping must be applied in subordination to the principle of a natural
series. The groups must not be so constituted as to place in the same
group things which ought to occupy different points of the general
scale. The precaution necessary to be observed for this purpose is, that
the _primary_ divisions must be grounded not on all distinctions
indiscriminately, but on those which correspond to variations in the
degree of the main phenomenon. The series of Animated Nature should be
broken into parts at the points where the variation in the degree of
intensity of the main phenomenon (as marked by its principal characters,
Sensation, Thought, Voluntary Motion, &c.) begins to be attended by
conspicuous changes in the miscellaneous properties of the animal. Such
well-marked changes take place, for example, where the class Mammalia
ends; at the points where Fishes are separated from Insects, Insects
from Mollusca, &c. When so formed, the primary natural groups will
compose the series by mere juxtaposition, without redistribution; each
of them corresponding to a definite portion of the scale. In like manner
each family should, if possible, be so subdivided, that one portion of
it shall stand higher and the other lower, though of course contiguous,
in the general scale; and only when this is impossible is it allowable
to ground the remaining subdivisions on characters having no
determinable connexion with the main phenomenon.

Where the principal phenomenon so far transcends in importance all other
properties on which a classification could be grounded, as it does in
the case of animated existence, any considerable deviation from the rule
last laid down is in general sufficiently guarded against by the first
principle of a natural arrangement, that of forming the groups according
to the most important characters. All attempts at a scientific
classification of animals, since first their anatomy and physiology were
successfully studied, have been framed with a certain degree of
instinctive reference to a natural series, and have accorded in many
more points than they have differed, with the classification which would
most naturally have been grounded on such a series. But the accordance
has not always been complete; and it still is often a matter of
discussion, which of several classifications best accords with the true
scale of intensity of the main phenomenon. Cuvier, for example, has been
justly criticized for having formed his natural groups with an undue
degree of reference to the mode of alimentation, a circumstance directly
connected only with organic life, and not lending to the arrangement
most appropriate for the purposes of an investigation of the laws of
animal life, since both carnivorous and herbivorous or frugivorous
animals are found at almost every degree in the scale of animal
perfection. Blainville's classification has been considered by high
authorities to be free from this defect; as representing correctly, by
the mere order of the principal groups, the successive degeneracy of
animal nature from its highest to its most imperfect exemplification.


§ 5. A classification of any large portion of the field of nature in
conformity to the foregoing principles, has hitherto been found
practicable only in one great instance, that of animals. In the case
even of vegetables, the natural arrangement has not been carried beyond
the formation of natural groups. Naturalists have found, and probably
will continue to find it impossible to form those groups into any
series, the terms of which correspond to real gradations in the
phenomenon of vegetative or organic life. Such a difference of degree
may be traced between the class of Vascular Plants and that of Cellular,
which includes lichens, algæ, and other substances whose organization is
simpler and more rudimentary than that of the higher order of
vegetables, and which therefore approach nearer to mere inorganic
nature. But when we rise much above this point, we do not find any
sufficient difference in the degree in which different plants possess
the properties of organization and life. The dicotyledons are of more
complex structure, and somewhat more perfect organization, than the
monocotyledons: and some dicotyledonous families, such as the Compositæ,
are rather more complex in their organization than the rest. But the
differences are not of a marked character, and do not promise to throw
any particular light upon the conditions and laws of vegetable life and
development. If they did, the classification of vegetables would have to
be made, like that of animals, with reference to the scale or series
indicated.

Although the scientific arrangements of organic nature afford as yet the
only complete example of the true principles of rational classification,
whether as to the formation of groups or of series, those principles are
applicable to all cases in which mankind are called upon to bring the
various parts of any extensive subject into mental co-ordination. They
are as much to the point when objects are to be classed for purposes of
art or business, as for those of science. The proper arrangement, for
example, of a code of laws, depends on the same scientific conditions as
the classifications in natural history; nor could there be a better
preparatory discipline for that important function, than the study of
the principles of a natural arrangement, not only in the abstract, but
in their actual application to the class of phenomena for which they
were first elaborated, and which are still the best school for learning
their use. Of this the great authority on codification, Bentham, was
perfectly aware: and his early _Fragment on Government_, the admirable
introduction to a series of writings unequalled in their department,
contains clear and just views (as far as they go) on the meaning of a
natural arrangement, such as could scarcely have occurred to any one who
lived anterior to the age of Linnæus and Bernard de Jussieu.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Supra, book iii. ch. ii. § 3, 4, 5.

[2] Mr. Bailey has given by far the best statement of this theory. "The
general name," he says, "raises up the image sometimes of one individual
of the class formerly seen, sometimes of another, not unfrequently of
many individuals in succession; and it sometimes suggests an image made
up of elements from several different objects, by a latent process of
which I am not conscious." (Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind,
1st series, letter 22.) But Mr. Bailey must allow that we carry on
inductions and ratiocinations respecting the class, by means of this
idea or conception of some one individual in it. This is all I require.
The name of a class calls up some idea, through which we can, to all
intents and purposes, think of the class as such, and not solely of an
individual member of it.

[3] I have entered rather fully into this question in chap. xvii. of _An
Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_, headed "The Doctrine
of Concepts or General Notions," which contains my last views on the
subject.

[4] Other examples of inappropriate conceptions are given by Dr. Whewell
(_Phil. Ind. Sc._ ii. 185) as follows:--"Aristotle and his followers
endeavoured in vain to account for the mechanical relation of forces in
the lever, by applying the _inappropriate_ geometrical conceptions of
the properties of the circle: they failed in explaining the _form_ of
the luminous spot made by the sun shining through a hole, because they
applied the _inappropriate_ conception of a circular _quality_ in the
sun's light: they speculated to no purpose about the elementary
composition of bodies, because they assumed the _inappropriate_
conception of _likeness_ between the elements and the compound, instead
of the genuine notion of elements merely _determining_ the qualities of
the compound." But in these cases there is more than an inappropriate
conception; there is a false conception; one which has no prototype in
nature, nothing corresponding to it in facts. This is evident in the
last two examples, and is equally true in the first; the "properties of
the circle" which were referred to, being purely fantastical. There is,
therefore, an error beyond the wrong choice of a principle of
generalization; there is a false assumption of matters of fact. The
attempt is made to resolve certain laws of nature into a more general
law, that law not being one which, though real, is inappropriate, but
one wholly imaginary.

[5] Professor Bain.

[6] This sentence having been erroneously understood as if I had meant
to assert that belief is nothing but an irresistible association, I
think it necessary to observe that I express no theory respecting the
ultimate analysis either of reasoning or of belief, two of the most
obscure points in analytical psychology. I am speaking not of the powers
themselves, but of the previous conditions necessary to enable those
powers to exert themselves: of which conditions I am contending that
language is not one, senses and association being sufficient without it.

[7] Mr. Bailey agrees with me in thinking that whenever "from something
actually present to my senses conjoined with past experience, I feel
satisfied that something has happened, or will happen, or is happening,
beyond the sphere of my personal observation," I may with strict
propriety be said to reason: and of course to reason inductively, for
demonstrative reasoning is excluded by the circumstances of the case.
(_The Theory of Reasoning_, 2nd ed. p. 27.)

[8] _Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 35-37.

[9] _Nov. Org. Renov._, pp. 39, 40.

[10] P. 217, 4to edition.

[11] "E, ex, extra, extraneus, étranger, stranger."

Another etymological example sometimes cited is the derivation of the
English _uncle_ from the Latin _avus_. It is scarcely possible for two
words to bear fewer outward marks of relationship, yet there is but one
step between them; _avus_, _avunculus_, _uncle_.

So _pilgrim_, from _ager_: _per agrum_, _peragrinus_, _peregrinus_,
_pellegrino_, _pilgrim_.

[12] P. 226-7.

[13] _Essays_, p. 214.

[14] Ibid. 215.

[15] Such cases give a clear insight into the process of the
degeneration of languages in periods of history when literary culture
was suspended; and we are now in danger of experiencing a similar evil
through the superficial extension of the same culture. So many persons
without anything deserving the name of education have become writers by
profession, that written language may almost be said to be principally
wielded by persons ignorant of the proper use of the instrument, and who
are spoiling it more and more for those who understand it. Vulgarisms,
which creep in nobody knows how, are daily depriving the English
language of valuable modes of expressing thought. To take a present
instance: the verb _transpire_ formerly conveyed very expressively its
correct meaning, viz. to _become known_ through unnoticed channels--to
exhale, as it were, into publicity through invisible pores, like a
vapour or gas disengaging itself. But of late a practice has commenced
of employing this word, for the sake of finery, as a mere synonym of _to
happen_: "the events which have _transpired_ in the Crimea," meaning the
incidents of the war. This vile specimen of bad English is already seen
in the despatches of noblemen and viceroys: and the time is apparently
not far distant when nobody will understand the word if used in its
proper sense. It is a great error to think that these corruptions of
language do no harm. Those who are struggling with the difficulty (and
who know by experience how great it already is) of expressing oneself
clearly with precision, find their resources continually narrowed by
illiterate writers, who seize and twist from its purpose some form of
speech which once served to convey briefly and compactly an unambiguous
meaning. It would hardly be believed how often a writer is compelled to
a circumlocution by the single vulgarism, introduced during the last few
years, of using the word _alone_ as an adverb, _only_ not being fine
enough for the rhetoric of ambitious ignorance. A man will say "to which
I am not alone bound by honour but also by law," unaware that what he
has unintentionally said is, that he is _not alone_ bound, some other
person being bound with him. Formerly if any one said, "I am not alone
responsible for this," he was understood to mean, (what alone his words
mean in correct English,) that he is not the sole person responsible;
but if he now used such an expression, the reader would be confused
between that and two other meanings; that he is not _only responsible_
but something more; or that he is responsible _not only for this_ but
for something besides. The time is coming when Tennyson's Œnone could
not say "I will not die alone," lest she should be supposed to mean that
she would not only die but do something else.

The blunder of writing _predicate_ for _predict_ has become so widely
diffused that it bids fair to render one of the most useful terms in the
scientific vocabulary of Logic unintelligible. The mathematical and
logical term "to eliminate" is undergoing a similar destruction. All who
are acquainted either with the proper use of the word or with its
etymology, know that to eliminate a thing is to thrust it out; but those
who know nothing about it, except that it is a fine-looking phrase, use
it in a sense precisely the reverse, to denote, not turning anything
out, but bringing it in. They talk of _eliminating_ some truth, or other
useful result, from a mass of details. I suspect that this error must at
first have arisen from some confusion between _to eliminate_ and _to
enucleate_.

Though no such evil consequences as take place in these instances, are
likely to arise from the modern freak of writing _sanatory_ instead of
sanitary, it deserves notice as a charming specimen of pedantry
engrafted upon ignorance. Those who thus undertake to correct the
spelling of the classical English writers, are not aware that the
meaning of _sanatory_, if there were such a word in the language, would
have reference not to the preservation of health, but to the cure of
disease.

[16] _Historical Introduction_, vol. i. pp. 66-8.

[17] _History of Scientific Ideas_, ii. 110, 111.

[18] _Hist. Sc. Id._ ii. 111-113.

[19] _Nov. Org. Renov._ pp. 286, 287.

[20] _Hist. Sc. Id._ ii. 120-122.

[21] I say probably, not certainly, because this is not the
consideration by which a botanist determines what shall or shall not be
admitted as a species. In natural history those objects belong to the
same species, which are, or consistently with experience might have
been, produced from the same stock. But this distinction, in most, and
probably in all cases, happily accords with the other. It seems to be a
law of physiology, that animals and plants do really, in the
philosophical as well as the popular sense, propagate their kind;
transmitting to their descendants all the distinctions of Kind (down to
the most special or lowest Kind) which they themselves possess.

[22] _Nov. Org. Renov._ p. 274.

[23] _Hist. Sc. Id._ i. 133.

[24] Dr. Whewell, in his reply (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 270) says
that he "stopped short of, or rather passed by, the doctrine of a series
of organized beings," because he "thought it bad and narrow philosophy."
If he did, it was evidently without understanding this form of the
doctrine; for he proceeds to quote a passage from his "History," in
which the doctrine he condemns is designated as that of "a mere linear
progression in nature, which would place each genus in contact only with
the preceding and succeeding ones." Now the series treated of in the
text agrees with this linear progression in nothing whatever but in
being a progression.

It would surely be possible to arrange all _places_ (for example) in the
order of their distance from the North Pole, though there would be not
merely a plurality, but a whole circle of places at every single
gradation in the scale.




