The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Story of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland and of the new Gospel of Interpretation
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Story of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland and of the new Gospel of Interpretation

Author: Edward Maitland

Editor: Samuel Hopgood Hart


        
Release date: January 16, 2012 [eBook #38590]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/38590

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ron Stephens and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ron Stephens and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









    THE STORY

    OF

    ANNA KINGSFORD AND
    EDWARD MAITLAND

    AND OF

    THE NEW GOSPEL OF
    INTERPRETATION

    BY

    EDWARD MAITLAND.
    EDITED BY SAMUEL HOPGOOD HART.


    "The days of the Covenant of Manifestation are passing away;
    The Gospel of Interpretation cometh."

    "There shall nothing new be told; but that which is ancient
    shall be interpreted."

           *       *       *       *       *

    "Now is the Gospel of Interpretation come, and the kingdom
    of the Mother of God."--_C.W.S._, Part I. No. ii. (part 2) 10. 11.
    and Part II. No. xiii. 31.

    THIRD AND ENLARGED EDITION.

    PRICE THREE SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.

    BIRMINGHAM:
    THE RUSKIN PRESS, STAFFORD STREET.
    1905.




    _1st Edition ... Christmas, 1893._
    _2nd Edition ... Christmas, 1894._
    _3rd Edition ... Christmas, 1905._




PREFACE

TO THE FIRST AND SECOND EDITIONS.


This book is designed (1) in satisfaction of the widely-expressed desire
for a more particular account than has yet been rendered concerning the
genesis of the writings claiming to constitute a "New Gospel of
Interpretation"; and (2) in fulfilment of the duty incumbent on me as
the survivor of the two recipients of such Gospel to spare no means
which may minister to its recognition and acceptance by the world, for
whose benefit it has been vouchsafed.

Although largely biographical in character, this book is not a history
of individuals, but of a Work, and involves only such personal
references as are necessary to such history. It is not, however, a full
or a final account that is contained in it. Such an account can be given
only in the form of the regular biography which is in course of
preparation. This book is an instalment only of that biography, being
put forth in advance of it, partly, as said above, to meet a present
need, and partly, to prevent a total loss of the record in the event of
my failure to complete it--a contingency of which, in view of the
magnitude of the task and my advanced age, I am bound to take account.

    E.M.




PREFACE

TO THE THIRD EDITION.


Since the publication in 1893 of this book which, as stated in Chapter
VII., was "intended but as an epitome and instalment" of a far larger
book then in course of preparation, the full and final account of the
"New Gospel of Interpretation" has been given to the world. In 1896
Edward Maitland published his _magnum opus_, "The Life of Anna
Kingsford," in two large volumes of 420 pages, "illustrated with
portraits, views, and facsimiles." This is, and will always be, the
biography _par excellence_ of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, and it
is absolutely indispensable for those who would know all that there is
to be known of them and their work and of the "New Gospel of
Interpretation." As that book, however, on account of its great length,
must always be a costly book, and therefore beyond the means of many who
would like to have some reliable information concerning Anna Kingsford
and Edward Maitland and their work, and as there are many who, on
account of their time for reading being limited or their inclination to
read being little, require information within the compass of a small
book or go without it altogether, there will, notwithstanding the
publication of the "Life of Anna Kingsford," be a demand for this
shorter "Story," which is so admirably suited to meet the needs or
requirements of these classes of persons; for, be it noted, the
publication of "The Life of Anna Kingsford" has not in any way
depreciated the value of this book in this sense that, having been
written by one of the two recipients of the "New Gospel of
Interpretation," it is a first authority second to none for the
statements therein contained.

The change in the title of the book from "The Story of the New Gospel of
Interpretation" to the present title calls for some explanation and
justification, because the former title was an excellent one in many
respects, and the book has become known to many by that title. The
"Gospel of Interpretation" is the name or description which was given by
its Divine Inspirers, the Hierarchy of the Spheres Celestial, to the
work of which this book tells the story, in token of its relation to the
previous "Gospel of Manifestation." The former title implied, as the
Author pointed out in his preface, that that which this book propounded
was "not really a new Gospel, but one of Interpretation only"; and this
is not really new, but, as the Author has also pointed out, "so old as
to have become forgotten and lost, being the purely spiritual sense, as
discerned from the purely spiritual standpoint originally intended and
insisted on by Scripture itself as its true sense and standpoint, and
those which alone render Scripture intelligible"[1]. But notwithstanding
this, and notwithstanding that on the front page it was expressly stated
that "There shall nothing new be told; but that which is ancient shall
be interpreted," the former title failed to convey to the minds of some
the meaning that it was intended to convey, and it gave no indication of
the biographical nature of the work. Many who otherwise would have read
the book refrained from doing so because they thought that a new Gospel,
inconsistent with and perhaps opposed to if not intended to supersede
the old Gospel, was propounded. It is necessary, therefore, for me to
state, if possible more explicitly than it was stated in the previous
editions of this book, that this is not an attempt to create a new
Gospel differing from that of Jesus Christ[2]. Anna Kingsford's and
Edward Maitland's mission and aim was to interpret the Christ, not to
rival or supersede Him. The "New Gospel" is, first and foremost,
_interpretative_, and is destructive only in the sense of
reconstructive. "It tells nothing new; it simply restores and reinforces
the old, even the Gnosis, which, as the doctrine of the Church unfallen,
is that also of the Church fallen, though the latter has lost the key to
its interpretation"[3]. Nor is the teaching represented by this book
opposed to the existence of an objective Church. Anna Kingsford and
Edward Maitland fully recognised the necessity of such an organisation
for the formulation, propagation, and exposition of religion. Their
opposition was "only to the recognition by the Church of the objective,
historical, and materialistic aspect of religion, _to the exclusion_ of
that which really constitutes religion, namely, its subjective,
spiritual, and substantial aspect, wherein alone it appeals to the mind
and soul, and is efficacious for redemption." The aim of the New Gospel
"is defined exactly," said Edward Maitland, "in the following citation
from St. Dionysius the Areopagite 'not to destroy, but to construct; or,
rather, to destroy by construction; to conquer error by the full
presentment of truth.' As will be obvious, such a design does not
necessarily involve the destruction of anything that exists whether of
symbol or ritual, or ecclesiastical organisation, but only their
regeneration by means of their translation into their spiritual and
divinely intended sense. And it is precisely because that sense has been
lost--as declared in Scripture it had long been, and would yet long be,
lost--that a new 'Gospel of Interpretation' has been vouchsafed in
fulfilment of the promises in Scripture to that effect; and this from
the source of the original Divine revelation, namely, the Church
Celestial, and by the method which always was that of such revelation,
namely, the intuition operating under special illumination.... Even the
priest, though hitherto deservedly regarded as the 'enemy of man,' will
not be destroyed under the new _regime_ whose inauguration we are
witnessing. For in becoming interpreter as well as administrator, he
will be prophet as well as priest, and speak out the things of God and
the soul instead of concealing them under a veil. So will the 'veil be
taken away,' and Cain, the priest, instead of killing Abel, the prophet,
as hitherto, will unite with him, becoming prophet and priest in one.
And instead of any longer corrupting the 'woman' Intuition, and
suppressing the 'man' Intellect, he will purify and exalt her, and
enable her to fulfil her proper function as 'the Mother of God' in man,
and will recognise the intellect, when duly conjoined with her, as the
heir of all things. Thus, becoming interpreter as well as administrator,
prophet as well as priest, and recognising interpretation as the
corollary of the understanding, the prophet-priest of the regeneration
will give to men freely of the waters of life, that only true bread of
Heaven, which is the food of the understanding, instead of the
indigestible 'stones' and poisonous 'serpents' of doctrines, the
profession of which, by divorcing assent from conviction, involves that
moral and intellectual suicide, to induce others to join him in
committing which Cardinal Newman wrote his 'Grammar of Assent,' True it
is 'faith that saves,' but the faith that is without understanding is
not faith, but credulity"[4]. It is for the above-mentioned reasons that
the title of this book has been changed. The title must be subservient
to the book, and it is hoped that, the change having been made, there
will not be any further misunderstanding--even on the part of those who
are most superficial--as to the nature and object of "The Story of the
New Gospel of Interpretation."

Edward Maitland did not long survive the completion of the great task
that he undertook when he set himself to write a full account of his
life and that of his colleague. He retained his full mental vigour until
the publication of "The Life of Anna Kingsford"; but after that he
rapidly declined, and on the 2nd October, 1897, at the close of his
seventy-third year, a little over nine years after the death of Anna
Kingsford[5], he passed away peacefully at "The Warders" at Tonbridge,
the home (at that time) of his friends Colonel and Mrs. Currie, with
whom, and under whose loving care, he spent the last few months of his
life--a life concerning which, as also that of Anna Kingsford, I will
not say anything here, for this book will testify. Blessed are the souls
whom the just commemorate before God.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many who read these pages will not rest until they know more of those
great prophets the story of whose lives is here told, and of the Divine
Gnosis that it was their high mission to proclaim. I have indicated
whence they can obtain this information. This "Story," interesting as it
is and much as there is in it, is little more than an indication of some
of the facts that are fully stated and dealt with in "The Life of Anna
Kingsford," and there is much of importance that (as it could not
possibly receive proper treatment in a book of this size) was passed
over here to be related in the larger biography. I have not thought it
expedient to alter the character of or to add much to this book, but I
have enlarged it by incorporating therein, from "The Life of Anna
Kingsford," some additional matter which is of interest, and which
should add to the value of the book. The most important additions are
the account of Anna Kingsford's vision of "The Doomed Train," on p.p.
43-47; the account of Anna Kingsford's vision of Adonai, on pp. 64-68;
the "Exhortation of Hermes to his Neophytes," on pp. 110-112; the verses
"Concerning the Passage of the Soul," on pp. 169-170; and the
illumination of Anna Kingsford concerning the "Work of Power," on
pp. 180-181. I have also amplified the text in some places when, on
comparing it with corresponding passages in "The Life of Anna
Kingsford," I found that I could do so with advantage. These
amplifications are not otherwise noted. Finally, I have added some notes
where I thought that further explanation was desirable or would prove
acceptable.

    SAML. HOPGOOD HART.

    Croydon, December, 1905.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] E.M. Letter in "Light" of 29th August, 1891.

[2] See further as to this, an article by A.K. and E.M. in "Light" of
23rd September, 1882, reprinted in Life A.K. Vol. II. p. 77.

[3] E.M. Letter in "Light" of 22nd July, 1893.

[4] E.M. Letter in "Light" of 17th December, 1892.

[5] A.K. died on the 22nd February, 1888




INTRODUCTION.


There are certain introductory remarks which, in view of the prevailing
tendency to reject prior to examination whatever conflicts with strongly
cherished preconceptions--as anything purporting to be a "new Gospel" is
undoubtedly calculated to do--may be made with advantage. Those remarks
are as follows:--

(1) As its title implies[6], that which is propounded is not really a
new Gospel, but one of Interpretation only, which is precisely what is
admitted by all serious and thoughtful persons to be the supreme need of
the times. It was said, for instance, by the late Matthew Arnold, "At
the present moment there are two things about the Christian religion
which must be obvious to every percipient person: one, that men cannot
do without it; the other, that they cannot do with it as it is."

(2) As also its title implies[6] nothing new is told in it, but that
only which is old is interpreted; and the appeal on its behalf is not to
authority, whether of Book, Tradition, or Institution, but to the
Understanding--a quality which accords not only with the spirit of the
times, but also--as shewn herein--with that of religion itself, properly
so called.

(3) Scripture manifestly comprises two conflicting systems of doctrine
and practice, having for their representatives respectively the priest
and the prophet, one only of which systems, and this the system
reprobated in Scripture itself, has hitherto obtained recognition from
Christendom. It is the purpose of the New Gospel of Interpretation to
expound the system represented by the prophet and approved in Scripture,
with a view to replacing the other.

(4) For those who attach value to the prophecies contained in the Bible,
so far from there being an _a priori_ improbability against the delivery
of a new revelation in interpretation, confirmation, or completion of
the former revelation, and in correction of the false presentment of it,
the probability ought to be all in favour of such an event. This is
because Scripture abounds in predictions of a restoration both of
faculty and of knowledge, as to take place at the present time and under
the existing conditions of Church and World; and this of such kind as
shall constitute a second and spiritual manifestation of the Christ in
rectification of the perversion of the import of His first and personal
manifestation, and in arrest of the great Apostacy, not only from the
true faith of Christ but from religion itself, of which that perversion
has been the cause.

(5) So far from the idea of a new revelation which shall have for its
end the disclosure, as the true sense of Scripture and Dogma, of a
sense differing so widely from that hitherto accepted as to be virtually
destructive of it,--so far from this idea being universally repugnant to
orthodox ecclesiastics, it has found warm recognition from one of the
foremost of modern churchmen. This is the late Cardinal Newman.

Said Dr Newman in his _Apologia pro vita sua_, speaking of his earlier
days, "The broad philosophy of Clement and Origen carried me away; the
philosophy, not the theological doctrine.... Some portions of their
teaching, magnificent in themselves, came like music to my inward ear,
as if the response to ideas, which, with little external to encourage
them, I had cherished so long. These were based on the mystical or
sacramental principle, and spoke of the various Economies or
Dispensations of the Eternal. I understood these passages to mean that
the exterior world, physical and historical, was but the manifestation
to our senses of realities greater than itself. Nature was a parable:
Scripture was an allegory:.... The process of change had been slow; it
had been done not rashly, but by rule and measure, 'at sundry times and
in divers manners,' first one disclosure and then another, till the
whole evangelical doctrine was brought into full manifestation. And thus
room was made for the anticipation of further and deeper disclosures of
truths still under the veil of the letter, and in their season to be
revealed. The visible world still remains without its divine
interpretation: Holy Church in her sacraments and her hierarchical
appointments, will remain, even to the end of the world, after all but a
symbol of those heavenly facts which fill eternity. Her mysteries are
but the expressions, in human language, of truths to which the human
mind is unequal"[7].

Dr Newman is credited also with the remark, made on visiting Rome for
his investiture, that he saw no hope for religion save in a new
revelation.

These are utterances the value of which is in no way diminished by the
fact that their utterer failed to bring his own life into accordance
with them. He could write, indeed, the hymn "Lead, kindly light"; but
when the "kindly light" was vouchsafed him of those suggestions of a
system of thought concealed within the Christian Symbology, "magnificent
in themselves" and making "music to his inward ear," which he found in
the patristic writings; instead of following that lead, and striving to
exhume the treasures of divine truth thus buried and hidden from sight,
for the salvation of a world perishing for want of them,--he turned his
back upon it, and--entering the Church of Rome--wrote his "Grammar of
Assent," calling upon others to follow him in committing the suicide,
intellectual and moral, of renouncing the understanding and divorcing
profession from conviction.

This was a catastrophe the explanation of which is not far to seek. Dr
Newman had in him the elements which go to make both priest and prophet.
But the former proved the stronger; and the Cain, the priest in him,
suppressed the Abel, the prophet in him. Thus was he a type of the
Church as hitherto she has been. But, happily, not as henceforth she
will be. For "now is the Gospel of Interpretation come, and the kingdom
of the Mother of God," even the "Woman," Intuition,--the mind's feminine
mode, wherein it represents the perceptions and recollections of the
Soul--who is ever "Mother of God" in man, and whose sons the prophets
ever are, the greatest of them being called emphatically, for the
fulness and purity of his intuition, the "Son of the Woman" and she a
"virgin."

    E.M.

FOOTNOTES:

[6] The original title of this book was "The Story of the New Gospel of
Interpretation." See preface to the present edition. S.H.H.

[7] Apologia pro vita sua, by J. H. Newman. New edition of 1893, pp. 26,
27.




FRONTISPIECES.


     I.--PORTRAIT OF DR. ANNA KINGSFORD.
    _Born, Sep. 16th, 1846; Died, Feb. 22nd, 1888._

    II.--PORTRAIT OF EDWARD MAITLAND (_B.A., Cantab_).
    _Born, Oct. 27th, 1824; Died, Oct, 2nd, 1897._

TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                 PAGE

    PREFACE TO THE FIRST AND SECOND EDITIONS                          v.

    PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION                              vii.-xiii.

    INTRODUCTION                                                xv.-xix.

    TABLE OF CONTENTS                                          xx.-xxii.

    ABBREVIATIONS                                                 xxiii.


    CHAPTER I.

    THE VOCATION.

    The Instruments--Their early lives--Their consciousness of a special
      mission, and intimations of a call--Their training in respect of
      circumstance, character, and faculty, until brought together
      for their Joint work.                                         1-36


    CHAPTER II.

    THE INITIATION.

    A baptism of the Spirit--"At last I have found a man through whom
      I can speak!"--Intimation of the nature and aim of their work--The
      Doomed train, "No one on the engine!"--Instantaneous
      transfer of inspiration--"Woman, what have I to do with
      thee?"--The recovery of a Gospel scene, and its import--"The
      woman taken in adultery"--Vision of Adonai--Source of the
      opening sentences in St. John's Gospel--Chapter from the recovered
      Gnosis--The Generation of the Word.                          37-70


    CHAPTER III.

    THE COMMUNICATION.

    The perfect love that casts out fear." In the presence of celestial
      visitants--A parable of the Intuition--"The Wonderful
      Spectacles"--The Greek element in the work--Hermes and John the
      Baptist--The "heresy of Prometheus"--The Fig-tree, a symbol of the
      inward understanding; the time come for it to bear fruit--The
      Seeress's faculty--Her relations with Hermes--"Thou art the
      Rock" addressed to Hermes--The parable of the Fig-tree--The
      Mystic Woman of Holy Writ--"Go thy way, Daniel....
      Thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days"--The
      prophecy of the book of Esther--The Angel Genius, his account
      of himself and his office--Divine revelation the supreme common
      sense--The source and method of the New Revelation--Its chief
      recipient "not a medium or a seer, but a prophet"--An instruction
      and a caution concerning the survival of tendencies encouraged
      in past lives--Communion with souls of the departed--The
      conditions of such intercourse--An instruction concerning
      Inspiration and Prophesying--The prophecy of "the kingdom of
      the Mother of God."                                         71-108


    CHAPTER IV.

    THE ANTAGONISATION.

    "Ye are not yet perfected"--Our respective _Auras_--An
      exhortation--The Seven Spirits of God, their co-operation
      necessary for a perfect work--"You belong to us now, to do our
      work and not your own"--Enforced silence--"The Powers of the Air;"
      their mode of attack--A strange visitant and his communication--A
      strained situation--Visions of guidance--The "refractory team,"
      and the "Two Stars"--The promised land reached only through
      the wilderness--"The Word a Word of mystery, and they who
      guard it Seven"--"One Neophyte could not save himself"--A
      Horoscope--A descent into hell--Counsels of Perfection--A
      "Merry Christmas"--A timely arrival--Neoplatonic recognition
      of Hermes--The one Truth, never without a witness in the
      world--The key of knowledge restored--Problems solved--The mystic
      "Woman" of Holy Writ.                                      109-141


    CHAPTER V.

    THE RECAPITULATION.

    The key to the mystery of the Bible; the "Veil of Moses"
      withdrawn--The secret laid bare of the world's sacrificial system,
      and the feud between priest and prophet--The Memory of the
      Soul--The Standpoint of the Bible--All that is true is
      Spiritual--The revelation of "that wicked one"--The seals broken
      and the books opened--The New Gospel of
      Interpretation--Sacerdotalism the "Jerusalem which killed the
      prophets"--The suppressed doctrines--Reincarnation the corollary
      and condition of Regeneration and implicit in the
      Bible--"Ye _must_ be born again of Virgin Mary and Holy
      Ghost"--The doctrines of the Trinity and Divine Incarnation as now
      interpreted, necessary and self-evident truths--Evolution the
      manifestation of a divine inherency; accomplished only by the
      realisation of Divinity--The process of regeneration, and therein
      of salvation, interior to the individual--Adam and Christ the
      initial and final stages in the spiritual evolution of every
      man--The "Christ within" of St Paul--The _Credo_ an epitome of the
      spiritual history of the Sons of God.                      142-162


    CHAPTER VI.

    THE EXEMPLIFICATION.

    Spontaneity of the Seeress's faculty--Specific illuminations, in
      illustration, chiefly, of the process of Regeneration; concerning
      (1) Holy Writ; (2) Redemption; (3) Sin and death; (4) The Twelve
      Gates of Regeneration; (5) The Passage of the Soul; (6) The
      Mystic Exodus; (7) The Spiritual Phoibos and the order of the
      Christs; (8) The Previous Lives of Jesus, and Reincarnation;
      (9) The Work of Power; the land and tongue of the New
      Revelation, why ours.                                      163-183


    CHAPTER VII.

    THE PROMULGATION AND RECOGNITION.

    Accordance of all the dates with those prophesied--Other
      coincidences--Why our work has remained so long unknown to the
      generality--Notable recognitions, by representative Kabalists,
      Mystics, Occultists and Divines, Catholic, Anglican, and
      others--Spiritualism, Theosophy, and the New Gospel of
      Interpretation as fellow-agents in the unfoldment of the world's
      spiritual consciousness, and the unsealing of the world's Bibles,
      prophesied to take place at this epoch--"Abraham, Isaac, and
      Jacob," the Hebrew equivalents for Brahma, Isis, and Iacchos, to
      denote the mysteries of India, Egypt, and Greece, the Spirit, the
      Soul, and the Body, and therein the Gnosis of which the Christ is
      the fulfilment and personal demonstration, and the restoration of
      which was prophesied by Jesus as to mean the Regeneration of the
      Church and the establishment of the divine kingdom on
      earth--Mysticism and Occultism, the distinction between them, and
      the necessity of both physical and spiritual science to a perfect
      system of thought and rule of life--Conclusion.            184-204




ABBREVIATIONS.


     A.K., for Anna Kingsford.

     B.O.A.I., for "The Bible's Own Account of Itself," by E.M.; second
     edition, 1905.

     C.W.S., for "Clothed With The Sun," being the book of the
     Illuminations of A.K.; edited by E.M., 1889.

     D. and D.-S., for "Dreams and Dream-Stones," by A.K., edited by
     E.M.; second edition, 1888.

     E.C.U., for "The Esoteric Christian Union," founded by E.M. in
     1891.

     E. and I., for "England and Islam; or, The Counsel of Caiaphas," by
     E.M., 1877.

     E.M., for Edward Maitland.

     Life A.K., for "The Life of Anna Kingsford," by E.M., 1896.

     P.W., for "The Perfect Way; or, The Finding of Christ," by A.K. and
     E.M.; third edition, revised, 1890.

     Statement, E.C.U., for "The New Gospel of Interpretation; being an
     Abstract of the Doctrine and Statement of the Objects of the
     Esoteric Christian Union," by E.M.; revised and enlarged edition,
     1892.




    BIRMINGHAM:
    THE RUSKIN PRESS, RUSKIN HOUSE,
    STAFFORD STREET.
    1905.

[Illustration: Edward Maitland]

[Illustration: Anna Kingsford]




THE

STORY OF ANNA KINGSFORD AND

EDWARD MAITLAND

AND

OF THE NEW GOSPEL OF

INTERPRETATION.




CHAPTER I.

THE VOCATION.


My colleague in the work, the history of which I am about to render some
account, was the late Anna Kingsford, _nee_ Bonus, M.D. of the
University of Paris.

There was a link between her husband's family and mine, but we were not
personally acquainted until, in the summer of 1873, she was led by
reading one of my books[8] to open a correspondence with me, which
disclosed so striking a community between us of ideas, aims, and
methods, that I accepted an invitation to visit her at her husband's
rectory at Pontesbury, Salop, in Shropshire, for the sake of a fuller
discussion of them. This visit which lasted nearly a fortnight, took
place in February, 1874[9].

The account I received of her history was in this wise. Born at
Stratford, in Essex, on the 16th September, 1846, long after the last of
her many brothers and sisters, and endowed with the most fragile of
constitutions and liabilities the most distressing of bodily weakness
and suffering, and differing widely, moreover, in temperament from all
with whom she was associated, her young life had enjoyed but a scanty
share of human sympathy, and was largely one of solitude and meditation,
and such as to foster the highly artistic, idealistic, and mystic
tendencies with which she was born. Singularly energetic of will, and
conscious of powers both transcending in degree and differing in kind
from any that she recognised in others, she assiduously exercised her
faculties in many and various directions in the hope of discovering the
special direction in which her mission lay. For, from her earliest
childhood she had been conscious of a mission, for the accomplishment of
which she had expressly come into the earth-life. And she claimed even
to have distinct recollection of having been strongly dissuaded from
coming, on account of the terrible suffering which awaited her in the
event of her assuming a body of flesh. Indeed, so little conscious was
she of the reality of her human parentage that she was wont to look upon
herself as a suppositious child of fairy origin; and on her first visit
to the pantomime, when the fairies made their appearance on the stage,
she declared that they were her proper people, and cried and struggled
to get to them with such vehemence that it was necessary to remove her
from the theatre. Among her amusements, her chief delight was in the
ample gardens around her homes at Stratford and Blackheath, where she
would hold familiar converse with the flowers, putting into their petals
tiny notes for her lost relatives, the fairies, who in return would
visit her in her dreams and assure her of their continued affection, and
counsel her to have patience and courage.

The chief occupation of her girlhood was the writing of poems and
tales[10] which were tinged with an exquisite mysticism, and showed a
ripeness of soul and maturity of feeling and knowledge wholly
unaccountable for by her years, her experiences, or her physical
heredity. At school she always obtained the first prizes for
composition, and her faculty of improvisation was the delight of her
companions; the subjects of these her earlier romances being lovely
princesses, gallant knights, castles, dragons, and the like, when--as
may readily be supposed--her tall and slender frame, long golden hair,
delicacy of complexion, deep-set hazel eyes, beauty of feature, the brow
and the mouth being especially notable, the brightness of her looks,
vivacity of her manner, her musical voice, and the easy eloquence of her
diction,--all combined to make her an ideal heroine for her own
romances. She could hardly, however, be said to be a _persona grata_
with her pastors and masters. For while her independence of character
and strength of will were apt to bring her into conflict with rules and
regulations of which she failed to recognise the need, her thirst for
knowledge, especially on religious subjects, prompted her to the
proposition of questions which were highly embarrassing to her teachers;
and nothing that they could say succeeded in convincing her that her
duty lay in believing what she was told, and not in understanding it.
She very early learnt to resent the disabilities of her sex, and to
insist that they were not real but artificial, the result of masculine
selfishness and injustice. This hatred of injustice and its correlative
cruelty, especially towards animals, attained in her the force and
dignity of a passion, her sensitiveness on this score making the chief
mental misery of her life.

Of one gift possessed by her she early learnt to repress the
manifestation. This was the faculty for seeing apparitions and divining
the characters and fortunes of people. For she was a born seer. But the
inability of her elders to comprehend the faculty, and their consequent
ascription of it to pathological causes, were wont to lead to references
to the family doctor with results so eminently disagreeable and even
injurious to her, as soon to suggest the wisdom of keeping silence
respecting her experiences.

Her first published compositions were written at the age of
thirteen[11], the editors who accepted her contributions to their
magazines being under the impression that they came from a grown-up
person and not from the mere child that she was. They cost her, she
assured me, little labour, especially the poems, but seemed to come to
her ready-made, and to flow through her spontaneously. And whatever the
country in which their scene lay, the local colouring and descriptions
were always faithful and vivid, as if the places and their inhabitants
were familiar and even actually visible to her.

It was not, however, to any encouragement of her peculiar gifts that
such excellency as she exhibited was due. Rather were they severely
repressed, especially in respect of drawing, singing and music, lest she
should be tempted to follow them as a profession; a fear which had been
excited by the suggestions of her masters that she would be certain of
success in any of those lines.

Her innate consciousness of a mission seemed to her to indicate her as
destined for some redemptive work, not only for others, but also for
herself. For, while the instincts of the Champion and the Saviour were
potent in her, she was dimly conscious of its possessing also an
expiatory element, in virtue of which her own salvation would largely
depend upon her endeavours to save others. She had as yet no theory
whereby to explain this or any other of the problems she was to herself.
All that she knew was that she possessed, or rather was possessed of,
these feelings and impulses. It was easy to see by her account of
herself that she was as one driven of the Spirit long before the Spirit
definitely revealed itself to her. The two departments of humanity which
she felt especially impelled to succour and save were her own sex and
the animals. For she would recognise no hard and fast line between
masculine and feminine, human and animal, or even between animal and
plant. In her eyes everything that lived was humanity, only in different
stages of its unfoldment. Even the flowers were persons for her.

As she approached womanhood she found herself looking forward to
marriage far less for its own sake than as a means of emancipation from
restrictions on her choice of a career. Her father died while she was
yet wanting two or three years of her majority, leaving her mistress of
an income ample for a single woman. And when at length she became
engaged to Algernon Godfrey Kingsford, a cousin to whom she had some
time been attached, it was on the understanding that she should remain
unfettered in this respect. He held at the time a post in the Civil
Service; but soon after their marriage, which took place on the last day
of 1867, determined to read for holy orders. This gave her an
opportunity for making herself acquainted with Anglican theology, of
which--thirsting for knowledge of all kinds--she eagerly availed
herself, accompanying him in all his studies, and greatly facilitating
them by her admirable scholarly methods. This proved to be the first
great step in her religious and intellectual training for her destined
mission.

One of the occupations of her early married life was the editing of a
lady's magazine, which she purchased with a view of making it an
instrument for the dissemination of her ideas especially in regard to
her sex. And she accordingly took an active part in the movement then
recently originated for the enfranchisement of women, achieving an
extraordinary success as a public speaker. But, becoming convinced that
their cause would be best advanced by the practical demonstration of
their fitness for the promotion they sought, and also feeling her own
need for the discipline of a severe intellectual training to balance the
emotional side of her nature, she soon withdrew from active
participation in the movement. She moreover recognised as a grave
mistake the disposition evinced by her fellow-workers to suppress their
womanliness in favour of a factitious masculinity, under the impression
that they would thereby exalt their sex; her idea being, that their true
policy lay in magnifying rather than in depreciating their womanhood.
Meanwhile she had given birth to a daughter, her only child.

Her magazine was given up after a couple of years, the results failing
to justify the expenditure of time, labour and money, requisite for its
continuance. Not that it lacked adequate support; but the principles on
which she insisted on conducting it proved to be incompatible with
commercial success. She resolutely refused all advertisements of
articles, whether of food or of clothing, of which she disapproved; and
she had adopted the pythagorean regimen and discarded as unhygienic
sundry articles of attire ordinarily deemed indispensable by her sex. It
was in her magazine that she first struck the note which proved the
initiation of the holy warfare since waged against the horrors of the
physiological laboratory, a warfare in which she bore a foremost part
and developed the malady of which she died.

In 1870, a long and severe illness, which compelled her return to her
mother's house at Hastings to be nursed, led to her entry upon another
phase in her inner life, and a further stage in the process of her
education for her mission. She had early recoiled from the faith in
which she had been reared. This was Protestantism in its most unlovely
form, cold, harsh, narrow, dogmatic. Her closer acquaintance with it as
a clergyman's wife had done nothing to mitigate her judgment of it.
Explaining nothing and lacking fervour and poetry, it left head and
heart alike unsatisfied. Her residence as an invalid at Hastings brought
her into intimacy with some devout Catholics, the effect of which was to
intensify the repugnance already set up. She attended the Catholic
services, and visited the sisters in the convent, reading their books of
devotion and even making an extended study of Catholic doctrine, for she
would do nothing by halves. She found what satisfied her heart and
artistic tastes. But the chief determining cause of the change upon
which she at length resolved, was her reception by night of sundry
visitations, purporting to be of angelic nature, and enjoining on her,
for the sake of the mission to which she was called--the knowledge of
which, she was told, would in due time be revealed to her--that she join
the Roman communion. Well aware that the confession of such experiences,
whether to her relations or to a minister of her own Church, would
elicit only a smile of pity or contempt, with a recommendation to seek
medical advice, and involve other contingencies equally distasteful, she
resolved to see how the same confession would be treated by a Catholic
priest. The result of the essay was that she was listened to with
respect and sympathy, and informed that the Church fully recognised such
visitations as coming within the divine order, and as being a token of
high spiritual favour and grace; and while it refrained from pronouncing
positively on them, considered that they ought not to be lightly
disregarded. She was soon afterwards received into the Roman Church,
being baptised on September 14, 1870. On June 9, 1872, she was confirmed
by Archbishop Manning, who admonished her to utilise her attractions in
making converts. And on each occasion she received additional names, in
virtue of which she now bore the names of all the five women who were by
the Cross and at the Sepulchre.

None the less, however, did she retain her independence of mind and
conduct. She accepted no direction, and professed no tenet that she did
not understand. And it was soon made clear to her that the Spirit, of
whom she was being impelled, did not intend her to regard her adoption
of Catholicism as more than a step in her education for the work
required of her. For the following year saw her bent on seeking a
medical degree, under the impression that such a step was in some way
related to the mission of which she had received such and so many
mysterious intimations. And she had scarcely commenced her study of
medicine when this impression was reinforced by the following incident,
the scene of which was her home in Shropshire, in the parish of which
her husband had then recently become incumbent, and where I first
visited them.

This was the receipt of a letter from a lady who was a stranger to her,
written from a distant part of the country, and saying that she, the
writer, had read with profound interest and admiration a story[12] of
Mrs Kingsford which, after appearing in her magazine, had been published
as a book, and that after reading it she had received from the Holy
Spirit a message for her which was to be delivered in person. After some
hesitation as to what reply to make, Mrs Kingsford--whose account I am
following exactly--agreed to receive her; an appointment was made, and
the stranger duly presented herself. She was tall, erect, distinguished
looking, with hair of iron-grey and strangely brilliant eyes, and was
perfectly calm and collected of demeanour. The message was to the effect
that Mrs Kingsford was to remain in retirement for five years,
continuing the studies and mode of life on which she had entered,
whatever they might be--for that the messenger did not know--and to
suffer nothing and no one to draw her aside from them. That when these
probationary five years were past, the Holy Spirit would bring her
forth from her seclusion, and a great work would be given her to do. All
this was uttered with a rapt and inspired expression, as though she had
been a Sibyl pronouncing an oracle. After delivering her message, the
messenger kissed her on both cheeks and departed, first asking only
whether she thought her mad; a question to which for a moment Mrs
Kingsford found it somewhat difficult to make reply. But only for a
moment. For then there rushed on her the conviction that it was all
genuine and true, and was but a fresh unfoldment of the mystery of her
life and destiny, and in full accordance with her own foreshadowings
from the beginning.

Some four years later, at a time when Mrs Kingsford was in great straits
for want of a suitable home in London in which to carry on her studies,
the same lady was similarly commissioned on her behalf, while totally
ignorant both of her whereabouts and her need, and with results entirely
satisfactory. On which occasion I had the privilege of making her
acquaintance, and the satisfaction of finding her not merely perfectly
sane, but a person entitled to the highest consideration, noted for her
pious devotion to works of beneficence involving complete
self-abnegation; and in short a veritable "Mother in Israel."

The event above related occurred in the spring of 1873, the summer of
which year saw Mrs Kingsford impelled to do what led to the most crucial
of the events upon which her destined mission hinged, namely, to write
to me the letter which led to my visit to her home. In the autumn of the
same year she passed her matriculation examination at the Apothecaries'
Hall with success so great as to fill her with high hopes of a
triumphant passage through the course of her student-life. But
immediately afterwards her hopes were dashed, for the English medical
authorities saw fit to close their schools to women, and the way to her
anticipated career was shut against her.

Such was the position when, in February, 1874, I visited the Shropshire
rectory, and such in brief the history which was gradually unfolded to
me as my evident sympathy and appreciation gained the confidence of the
still young couple, whose senior I was by some twenty years. Both
husband and wife were at their wits' end, the situation being aggravated
by a circumstance which was first brought to my knowledge on my
suggestion of the postponement of her design until such time as the
medical authorities should come to their right minds and re-open their
schools to women. The circumstance in question was her terrible
liability on the ground of ill-health, and especially of asthma, to
which she was a martyr, life in the country being impossible to her for
the greater part of the year, when it was only in some large city that
she was able to breathe. With the schools closed against her in England,
her thoughts turned towards France, the University of Paris being open
to women. But for obvious reasons her husband, who could not absent
himself from his duties to accompany her, would not consent to her going
thither unless under suitable protection. For himself he had but one
wish, that she should follow her bent and fashion her life as seemed
best to her; for he recognised her as entitled by her endowments and
aspirations, as well as by the terms of their engagement, to full
liberty of action, while the conditions of her health claimed all
consideration from him. If, indeed, the Gods had destined her for a
mission requiring freedom of action combined with the shelter and
support of a husband's name, it seemed to me that in him they had
created a man expressly for the office. For some time, however, the
difficulty seemed insuperable, and one that would yield to no amount of
deliberation, even with the best will of all concerned.

Meanwhile her self-revelations continued, being evidently prompted, at
least as much by the desire to obtain some explanation of herself for
herself, to whom she was, she avowed, a complete puzzle, as by the
desire to elicit answering confidences from me. And they became with
each disclosure more and more striking, until I could hardly resist the
conviction that she was possessed of some faculty in virtue of which she
was able to have direct perception of conclusions to which I had won my
way by dint of long and arduous thinking, and in some instances in
advance of me. She had read my mental history between the lines of my
books, and was fully prepared to learn that I too had a consciousness,
analogous to her own, of a mission in life perhaps also analogous to her
own.

This, I was able to assure her, was indeed the case, and that all my
books had been written in the idea of finding my way to it by dint of
free, unfettered thinking. For, brought up in the strictest of
evangelical sects, I had even as a lad begun to be revolted by the creed
in which I was reared, and had very early come to regard its tenets,
especially of total depravity and vicarious atonement, as a libel
nothing short of blasphemous against both God and man, and to feel that
no greater boon could be bestowed on the world than its emancipation
from the bondage of a belief so degrading and so destructive of any
lofty ideal. I had felt strongly that only in such measure as I might be
the means of its abolition would my life be a success and a satisfaction
to myself. It even seemed to me that my own credit was involved in the
matter; and that in disproving such beliefs I should be vindicating my
own character. For if God were evil, as those doctrines made Him, I
could by no possibility be good, since I must have my derivation from
Him. And I knew that, however weak and unwise I might be, I was not
evil.

Then, too, my life, like hers, had been one of much isolation and
meditation. I had felt myself a stranger even with my closest intimates.
For I was always conscious of a difference which separated me from them,
and of a side to which they could not have access. I had graduated at
Cambridge with the design of taking orders; but only to find that I
could not do so conscientiously, and to feel that to commit myself to
any conditions incompatible with absolute freedom of thought and
expression would be a treachery against both myself and my kind;--for it
was for no merely personal end that I wanted to discover the truth. I
longed to get away from all my surroundings in order, first, to think
myself out of all that I had been taught, and so to make my mind as a
clean sheet whereon to receive true impressions and at first hand; and,
next, to think myself into a condition and to a level wherein I could
see all things--myself, nature, and God--face to face, with vision
undimmed and undistorted by beliefs which, being inherited only and
traditional, instead of the result of conviction honestly arrived at,
were factitious and unreal; no living outcome of my own growth and
observation, but a veritable straitwaistcoat, stifling life and
restraining development. And so it had come that--as related in my first
novel, "The Pilgrim and the Shrine"[13], which was essentially
autobiographical--I had eagerly fallen in with a proposal to join an
expedition to the then newly-discovered placers of California, an
enterprise which, besides promising to gratify the love for adventure,
physical as well as mental, which was strong in me, would postpone if
not solve the difficulty of my position. It possessed, moreover, the
high recommendation of taking me to the world of the fresh,
unsophisticated West, instead of to that East which had been made almost
hateful to me by its association with the tenets by which existence had
been poisoned for me.

So, setting my face towards the sunset, I became one of the band of
"Forty-niners" in California, and remained abroad in the continents and
isles of the Pacific, from America passing to Australia, until the
intended year of my absence had grown into nearly ten years, and I had
experienced well-nigh every vicissitude and extreme which might serve to
heighten the consciousness, toughen the fibre, and try the soul of man.
But throughout all, the idea of a mission remained with me, gathering
force and consistency, until it was made clear to me that not
destruction merely, but construction, not the exposure of error but the
demonstration of truth, was comprised in it. For I saw that it was
possible to reduce religion to a series of first principles, necessary
truths and self-evident propositions, and that only in such measure as
it was thus reduced and discerned, was it really true and really
believed;--in short, that faith and knowledge are identical. To accept a
religion on the ground that one had been born in it, and apart from its
appeal to the mind and moral conscience, and thus to make it dependent
upon the accident of birth and parentage, was to resemble the African
savage who for the same reason worships Mumbo Jumbo. How, moreover,--I
asked myself--could a religion which was not in accord with first
principles, represent a God, Who, to be God, must Himself be the first
of, and must comprise all principles; must account logically for all the
facts of consciousness, be it unfolded as far as it may? Granting that,
as the poet says, "an honest man's the noblest work of God," it was for
me no less true that "an honest God's the noblest work of man." And it
was precisely such a being that I longed to elaborate out of, or
discover in, my own consciousness, confident that the achievement meant
the solution of all problems, the rectification of all difficulties, the
satisfaction of all aspirations, intellectual, moral, and spiritual.
Following such trains of thought, I arrived at the assurance that I had
within my own consciousness both the truth itself and the verification
of the truth, and that it remained only to find these.

Returning to England in 1857, and, after an interval, devoting myself to
literature, all that I wrote, whether essay or fiction, represented the
endeavour by probing the consciousness to the utmost in every direction
to discover a central, radiant, and indefeasible point from which all
things could be deduced, and on which, as a pivot they must depend and
revolve. I read largely, and went much among people, always in search of
aid in my quest; but only with the result of finding that neither from
books nor from persons could I even begin to get what I sought, but only
from thought.

Meanwhile everything seemed ordered with a view to the end ultimately
attained. For, so far from having left behind me for ever the
vicissitudes, and struggles, and trials, and ordeals, in which the
wildernesses of the western and southern worlds had been so fruitful, I
was found of them in the old world to which I had returned; and this in
number, kind, and degree, such as to make it appear as if what I had
borne before had been inflicted expressly for the purpose of enabling me
to bear what was put upon me now. And it was only when I had learnt by
experience that the very capacity for thought is enhanced by feeling no
less than by thinking, that the "ministry of pain" found its
explanation. For the feeling required of me proved to be that of the
inner, not merely of the outer man, of the soul, not merely of the body;
and the faculty, to be the intuition, and not merely the intellect.
Hence I was made to learn by experience, long before the fact was
formulated for me in words, that only "by the bruising of the outer, the
inner is set free," and "man is alive only so far as he has felt."

Everything seemed contrived expressly in order to force me in this
inward direction. Even in my literary work, nothing of the "trade"
element was permitted to intrude. I could not write except when writing
to or from my own centre. Faculty itself was shut off, if turned to any
other purpose. Everything I wrote must minister to and represent a step
in my own unfoldment.

I can confidently affirm that the only books which really helped me
were, with scarcely an exception, those which I wrote myself. Of the
exceptions the chief was Emerson. His essays had been my _vade mecum_ in
all my world-wide wanderings. And there were three sentences of his
which, to use his own phrase, "found" me as no others had done. They
were these: "The talent is the call"; "I the imperfect adore my own
perfect"; and, "Beware when God lets loose a thinker on the earth." Like
Emerson himself, I had yet to learn that man's own perfect is God, and
self-culture is God-culture, provided the self be the inmost self. The
two other books which most helped me were Bailey's "Festus," and
Carlyle's "Hero-Worship." And I owed something to Tucker's "Light of
Nature." By which it will be seen that my affinity was always for the
prophets rather than the priests of literature; for the intuitionalists
rather than the externalists.

Gradually two leading ideas took definite form in my mind, which,
however, proved to be but two aspects or applications of one and the
same idea. And that idea proved to be the keynote of all that I was
seeking after. For it finally solved the problems of existence, of
religion, of the Bible, of Being itself. Hence the necessity of this
reference to it.

This idea was that of a duality subsisting in every unity, such as I had
nowhere read or heard of. I was, of course, aware that the theological
doctrine of the Trinity involved a Duality. But not of a kind to find a
response in my mind. And being unable to assimilate it as it stood, I
ignored it; putting it aside until it should present itself to me in an
aspect in which it was intelligible. I felt, however vaguely, that the
Duality I sought was in the Bible, though it had been missed by the
official expositors of that book. And the conviction that it was in some
way connected with my life-work was so strong that I constructed for the
covers of my two first books a monogram symbolical of Genesis i. 27. And
I looked to the unfoldment of what I felt to be the secret significance
of that utterance for the explication of all the mysteries the solution
of which engrossed me. The thought did not seem to originate in any of
my experiences, but rather to be part of my original stock of innate
ideas, supposing that there are such ideas, and to derive confirmation
and explanation from my experiences.

Those experiences were in this wise. It had been my privilege to have
the friendship of several women of a type so noble that to know them was
at once an education and a religion; women whose perfection of character
had served more than anything else to make me believe in God, when all
other grounds had failed. I could in no wise account for them on the
hypothesis of a fortuitous concourse of unintelligent atoms. And not
only did I find that the higher the type the more richly they were
endowed with precisely the faculty of which I myself was conscious as
distinguishing me from my fellows; I found also that I was unable to
recognise any woman as of a high type as woman save in so far as she was
possessed of it. I had failed to find any who possessed the knowledge I
craved, and who were thereby able to help me in my thought. They helped
me nevertheless, but it was by _being_ what they were, rather than by
_knowing_ and _doing_, be they admirable as they might in these
respects. I recognised in them that which supplemented and complemented
my mental self in such wise as to suggest unbounded possibilities of
results to accrue from the intimate association of two minds thus
attuned to each other, and duly unfolded by thought and study. It
needed, it seemed to me, but the reverberation and intensification of
thought, induced by the apposition of two minds thus related, for the
production of the divine child Truth in the very highest spheres of
thought. So that the results would by no means be restricted to the mere
sum of the associated capacities of the two minds themselves. And in
view of such high possibilities I found myself appropriating and
applying the ejaculation which Virgil puts into the mouth of Anna when
urging the union of her sister Dido with AEneas--

                  "Quae surgere regna
    Conjugio tali!"

and I felt with Tennyson that

    "They two together well might move the world."

So boundless seemed to me the kingdoms of Truth, Goodness, and Beauty
which would spring from such conjunction.

It goes without saying that such relationship was contemplated by me
only as the accompaniment of a happy re-marriage. [For I had married in
Australia only to be widowered after a year's wedlock.] But such a
prospect was so long withheld as to make me dubious of its
realisation[14]. Nevertheless, some inner voice was ever saying: "Wait;
wait. Everything comes to him who waits, provided only he do so in faith
and patience, looking to the highest." But that I did wait, and
accordingly kept myself free for what ultimately was assigned to me, was
due far less to the expectation of finding that for which I waited, than
to the vivid consciousness which I had of the bitterness that would come
of finding it, only to be withheld from it through a previous disposal
of myself in some other and incompatible quarter. This was an impression
which served largely to keep my life as free as I desired my thought to
be. But that the as yet undisclosed arbiters of my destiny deemed it
insufficient as a deterrent, appeared from their reinforcement of it in
a manner which effectually debarred me from marriage save on the
condition, impossible to me, of a mercenary alliance. This was a
reversal of fortune through a succession of losses so serious as to be
the cause of reducing my means to the minimum compatible with existence
at all in my own station, which soon afterwards happened. That there
were yet further reasons for this imposition on me of the rule of
poverty, arising out of the nature of the work required of me, was in
due time made manifest, and also what those reasons were. They need not
be specified here, excepting only this one. It made impossible the
ascription to my destined colleague of mercenary motives for her
association with me. In this I came to recognise a delicate providence
for which I felt I could not be too thankful. In the meantime, even
while smarting severely from this dispensation, and others yet more
bitter which were heaped on me for no apparent cause or fault of my own
that I could discern, the thought that most of all served to sustain me
under what I felt would have utterly broken down in heart or head, or in
both of these organs, any other person whatever of whom I had
knowledge,--that thought was the surmise or suspicion that all these
things, hard to bear as they were, and undeserved as they seemed, might
prove to be blessings in disguise, in ministering to the realisation of
the controlling ambition of my life by educating me for it; and that
according to the manner in which I bore them might be the result.

There is yet one more personal disclosure essential to this part of my
relation. It concerns my own mental standpoint at the time at which my
narrative has arrived. Bent as I was on penetrating the secret of things
at first hand, and by means of a thought absolutely free, I was never
for a moment disposed to turn, as my so-called free-thinking
contemporaries one and all had turned, a scornful back upon whatever
related to or savoured of the current religion. Scripture and dogma were
not for me necessarily either false or inscrutable because their
official exponents had presented them in an aspect which outraged my
reason and revolted my conscience. I felt bound--if only in justice to
them and myself--at least to find out what they did mean before finally
discarding them. And in this act of justice I was strangely sustained
by a sense of the possibility that the truth, if any, contained in them,
was no other than that of which I was in search. This is to say, that in
all my investigations I kept before me the idea that, if I could discern
the actual nature of existence and the intended sense of the Bible and
Christianity, independently of each other, they might prove on
comparison to be identical; in which case the latter would really
represent a true revelation. Meanwhile, I found myself constrained to
believe, as an axiomatic proposition, that the higher and nobler the
conception I framed in my imagination of the nature of existence, and
the more in accordance with my ideas of what, to be perfect, the
constitution of the universe ought to be, the nearer I should come to
the actual truth.

Similarly with religion. For a religion to be true, it must, I felt
absolutely assured, be ideally perfect after the most perfect ideal that
we can frame. This is to say, that not only must it be in itself such as
to satisfy both head and heart, mind and moral conscience, spirit and
soul; it must also be perfectly simple, obviously reasonable, coherent,
self-evident, founded in the nature of things, incapable--when once
comprehended--of being conceived of as otherwise, absolutely equitable,
eternally true, and recognisable as being all these, invariable in
operation, independent of all accidents of time, place, persons and
events, and comparable to the demonstration of a mathematical problem in
that it needs no testimony or authority beyond those of the mind; and
requiring for its efficacious observance, nothing that is extraneous or
inaccessible to the subject-individual, but within his ability to
recognise and fulfil, provided only that he so will. It must also be
such as to enable him by the observance of it to turn his existence to
the highest possible account imaginable by him, be his imagination as
developed as it may: and all this as independently of any being other
than himself, as if he were the sole personal entity in the universe,
and were himself the universe. That is to say, the means of a man's
perfectionment must inhere in his own system, and he must be competent
of himself effectually to apply them. It is further necessary, because
equitable, that he be allowed sufficient time and opportunity for the
discovery, understanding and application of such means.

Such are the terms and conditions of an ideally perfect religion, as I
conceived of them. It is a definition which excludes well-nigh, if not
quite, all the characteristics ordinarily regarded as appertaining to
religion, and notably to that of Christendom. For in excluding
everything extraneous to the actual subject-individual, and requiring
religion to be self-evident and necessarily true, it excludes as
superfluous and irrelevant, history, tradition, authority, revelation,
as ordinarily conceived of, ecclesiastical ordinance, priestly
ministration, mediatorial function, vicarious satisfaction, and even the
operation of Deity as subsisting without and apart from the man, all of
which are essential elements in the accepted conception of religion.
Nevertheless, profound as was my distrust of the faithfulness of the
orthodox presentation, I could not reconcile myself to a renunciation of
the originals on which that presentation was founded, until I had
satisfied myself that I had fathomed their intended and real meaning.

I had, moreover, very early conceived a personal affection for Jesus as
a man, so strong as to serve as a deterrent both from abandoning the
faith founded on Him, and from accepting it as it is as worthy of Him.

Such was my standpoint, intellectual and religious, at the period in
question. The time came when it found full justification; our results
being such as to verify it in everyone of its manifold aspects. And not
this only. The doctrine which had so mysteriously evolved itself out of
my consciousness to attain by slow degrees the position of a controlling
influence in my life, the doctrine, namely of a Duality subsisting in
the Original Unity of Underived Being, and as inhering therefore in
every unit of derived being, this doctrine proved to be the key to the
mysteries both of Creation and of Redemption, as propounded in the Bible
and manifested in the Christ; the key also to the nature of man,
disclosing the facts both of his possession of divine potentialities as
his birthright, and his endowment with the faculty whereby to discern
and to realise them. And while it proved constructive in respect of
Divine Truth, it proved destructive in respect of the falsification of
that truth which had passed for orthodoxy, by disclosing the source, the
motive, the method and the agents of that falsification.

But these things were still in the future. At the time with which we are
now concerned, I had commenced a book to represent the standpoint just
described, "The Keys of the Creeds." The first and initial draft of
that book was written under the sympathetic eye of one of the order of
noble women to which reference has been made, and owed much to the
enhancement of faculty derived by me from such conjunction of minds. The
second and final draft was written under like relationship with another
member of the self-same order, even she who proved to be my destined
collaborator in the work of which this book recounts the story. It was
published in 1875. It is necessary only to say further of the book thus
produced, that notwithstanding certain defects of expression, due
chiefly to an insufficient acquaintance with the terminology of
metaphysics, it proved an invaluable help to very many, as was amply
shown by the letters of grateful appreciation received from them by me.
The keynote was that which afterwards found expression in the
utterance,--

"There is no enlightenment from without: the secret of things is
revealed from within.

"From without cometh no Divine Revelation: but the Spirit within beareth
witness"[15].

For the lesson it contained was the lesson that the phenomenal world
cannot disclose its own secret. To find this, man must seek in that
substantial world which lies within himself, since all that is real is
within the man. From which it followed that if there is no within, or if
that within be inaccessible, either there is no reality, or man has no
organon of knowledge, and is by constitution agnostic. Meanwhile, the
very fact of my possession of an ideal exempt from the limitations of
the apparent, constituted for me a strong presumption in favour of the
reality of the ideal.

The moment of contact between my destined colleague and myself, was as
critical for one as for the other, only that in my case the crisis was
intellectual. I could see to the end of the argument I was then
elaborating; and that it landed me close to the dividing barrier between
the two worlds of sense and spirit, supposing the latter to have any
being[16]. But I neither saw beyond, nor knew how to ascertain whether
or not there is a beyond. We were discussing the question of there being
an inner sense in Scripture, such as my book suggested; and whether,
supposing it to have such a sense, it required for its discernment any
faculty more recondite than a subtle imagination; and if it did, is
there such a faculty? and what is its nature? By which it will be seen
that I was still in ignorance of the nature of the faculty I found in
myself and recognised as especially subsisting in women, and which, for
me, really made the woman.

The reply rendered by her to these questionings constituted the proof
positive that I had at length discovered the mind which my own had so
long craved as its sorely needed complement. In response to them she
gave me a manuscript in her own writing, asking me to read it and tell
her frankly what I thought of it. Having read and re-read it, I
enquired how and where she had got it. She replied by asking what I
thought of it. I answered, "If there is such a thing as divine
revelation, I know of nothing that comes nearer to my ideal of what it
ought to be. It is exactly what the world is perishing for want of--a
reasonable faith." She then told me that it had come to her in her
sleep, but whence or how she did not know; nor could she say whether she
had seen it or heard it, but only that it came suddenly into her mind,
without her having ever heard or thought of such teaching before. It was
an exposition of the Story of the Fall, exhibiting it as a parable
having a significance purely spiritual, wholly reasonable, and of
universal application, physical persons, things, and events described in
it disappearing in favour of principles, processes, and states
appertaining to the soul; no mere local history, therefore, but an
eternal verity. The experience, she went on to tell me, was far from
exceptional; she had received many things which had greatly struck and
pleased her in the same way, and sometimes while in the waking state in
a sort of day-dream. It was subsequently incorporated into our book,
"The Perfect Way."

Her account of her faculty, of which she related several instances,
produced a profound impression on me. It differed altogether from any
that I had heard of as claimed by the votaries of "Spiritualism," a
creed to which neither of us had assented; such little experience as we
had of it having failed to convince us of the genuineness of its
phenomena; though she, on her part, confessed to having been somewhat at
a loss to account for some things she had seen. But though not
spiritualists, we were not materialists. Rather were we idealists, who
had yet to learn and, as the event proved, were destined shortly to
learn, that the Ideal _is_ the Real, and is Spiritual.

The event also proved that in order to learn it and to know it
positively by experience, there were two conditions to be fulfilled, on
both of which she had already entered, but I had yet to enter. One of
these conditions was physical, the other was emotional. The former
consisted in the renunciation of flesh-food in favour of a diet derived
from the vegetable kingdom. The latter condition consisted in the
kindling of our enthusiasm for the ideal into a flame of such ardour and
intensity as to make it the dominant passion of our lives, and one in
which all others would be swallowed up. It was to be an enthusiasm at
once for Humanity, for Perfection, for God.

Had we been in any degree instructed in spiritual or occult science, we
should have known that the renunciation of flesh-food, though in itself
a physical act, has ever been recognised by initiates as the prime
essential in the unfoldment of the spiritual faculties; since only when
man is purely nourished can he attain clearness and fulness of spiritual
perception. As it was, neither of us had ever heard of occult science,
or of the necessity of such a regimen to the perfectionment of faculty.
She had adopted it on grounds physiological, chemical, hygienic,
aesthetic, and moral; not on grounds mental or spiritual. I now undertook
to adopt it partly on the same grounds which had influenced her, and
partly with a view to enhance and consolidate the sympathy subsisting
between us. The mental and spiritual advantages of the regimen made
themselves known to us by experience.

The other condition found its fulfilment through the knowledge I derived
from her of the methods of the physiologists. That savages, sorcerers,
brigands, religious fanatics, and corrupt priesthoods had always been
wont to make torture their gain or their pastime, I was well aware, and
believed that evolution would sweep them and their practices away in its
course. But the discovery now first made to me that identical
barbarities are systematically perpetrated by the leaders of modern
science on the pretext of benefiting humanity, in an age which claims to
represent the summit of such evolution as has yet been accomplished; and
that after all its boasts, the best that science can do for the world is
to convert it into a hell and its population into fiends, by the
deliberate renunciation of the distinctive sentiments of humanity,--this
was a discovery which filled me with unspeakable horror and amazement,
at once raising to a white heat the enthusiasm of love for the ideal
already kindled within me, and adding to it a like enthusiasm of
detestation for its opposite. From which it came that I found myself
under the impulsion simultaneously of two mighty influences, the one
attracting, the other repelling, but both operating in the same
direction. For while by the former I was drawn upwards by the beauty of
an ideal indefinitely enhanced by its contrast with the foul actual
below, by the latter I was impelled upwards by the hideousness of that
actual. The sight of the moral abyss disclosed to me in Vivisection, as
I perused volume after volume of the annals of the practice written by
the perpetrators themselves, and now first made accessible to me,
effectually purged out of my system any particle of dilettanteism that
might have still lurked in it, compelling me to regard as of the utmost
urgency all and more than all that I had hitherto contemplated doing
deliberately.

This was the construction of a system of thought which by force of its
appeal to both those two indispensable constituents of humanity, the
head and the heart, shall compel acceptance from all persons really
human, and in presence of which the whole system of which Vivisection
was the typical outcome and symbol should vanish from off the earth.
This system was Materialism of which only now did I discern the full
significance. The systematic organisation of wholesale, protracted,
uncompensatable torture, for ends purely selfish, was--I saw with
absolute distinctness--not an accidental and avoidable outcome of
Materialism, but its logical and inevitable outcome. And it was to the
eradication of Materialism that, from that moment, I dedicated myself.
It was a rescue work for both man and beast, seeing that humanity itself
was menaced with extinction. For the materialist, of course, that which
makes the man is the form. For me it was the character, and it was this,
the character of mankind present and to come, that was at stake. For man
demonised is no longer man. In the overthrow of Materialism, I saw
absolutely, was salvation alone to be found, whether for man or beast.
The consideration that only as an abstainer from flesh-food I could with
entire consistency contend against vivisection, was a potent factor in
determining my change of diet. True, the distinction between death and
torture was a broad one. But the statistics I now for the first time
perused, of the slaughter-house and the cattle-traffic, showed beyond
question, that torture, and this prolonged and severe, is involved in
the use of animals for food as well as for science. And over and above
this was the instinctive perception of the probability that neither
would they who had them killed, whether for food, for sport, or for
clothing, be allowed the privilege of rescuing them from the hands of
the physiologist; nor would the animals be allowed to accept their
deliverance at the hands of those who thus used them. They who would
save others, we felt, must first make sacrifice in themselves. And in
the presence of the joy of working to effect such salvation, sacrifice
would cease to be sacrifice.

This, too, we noted, and with no small satisfaction--that to make the
rescue of the animals an immediate and urgent motive, was in no way to
abandon the original motive of hatred to the tenet of vicarious
atonement. For we recognised vivisection itself as but the extension to
the domain of science, of the very principle by which we had been
inexpressibly revolted in the domain of religion;--the principle of
seeking one's own salvation by the sacrifice of another, and that the
innocent. And so we learnt that "New Scientist is but Old Priest writ
differently,"--to vary Milton's expression; and that in both domains the
tenet had its root in Materialism. When the time came for our mission to
be more particularly defined, our satisfaction was unbounded on
receiving the charge, "We mean you to lay bare the secrets of the
world's sacrificial system." It expressed with absolute conciseness and
exactitude all that we had in our minds, far better than we could have
expressed it.

The importance of this question of vivisection in vitalising us for the
work before us, will be seen by the following fact. The time came when
we knew that the work committed to us was that revelation anew of the
Christ which was to constitute His Second Advent, inasmuch as it was the
interpretation of the truth of which He was the manifestation. It was to
be a spiritual coming; in the "clouds of heaven," the heaven of the
"kingdom within" of man's restored understanding. And, as at His first
advent so at His second, He was to have His birth among the animals.

And so it verily was. For--as I have elsewhere stated[17]--"Their
terrible wrongs, culminating at the hands of their scientific
tormentors, were the last drops which filled to overflowing with
anguish, indignation and wrath, hearts already brimming with the sense
of the world's degradation and misery, wringing from them the cry which
rent the heavens for His descent, and in direct and immediate response
to which He came.

"For the New Gospel of Interpretation was vouchsafed in express
recognition of the determined endeavour, by means of a thought
absolutely fearless and free, to scale the topmost heights, fathom the
lowest depths, and penetrate to the inmost recesses of Consciousness, in
search of the solution of the problem of Existence, under the assured
conviction that, when found, it would prove to be one that would make
above all things Vivisection impossible, if only by demonstrating the
constitution of things to be such that, terrible as is the lot of the
victims of the practice here, they are not without compensation
hereafter, while the lot of their tormentors will be unspeakably worse
than even that of their victims here. And so it proved, with absolute
certainty to be the case, to the full vindication at the same time of
the Divine Justice and the Divine Love;" no experience being withheld
which would qualify us to bear positive testimony thereto. For, although
at the outset we were, as I have said, in no wise believers in the
possibility of such experiences, the time came, and came quickly, when
the veil was withdrawn, and the secrets of the Beyond were disclosed to
us in plenitude, in its every sphere, from the abyss of hell to the
heights of heaven. And we learnt that this had become possible through
the passionate energy with which, in our search for the highest truth,
for the highest ends, and in purest love to redeem, we had directed our
thought inwards and upwards, living at the same time the life requisite
to qualify us for such perceptions. Thus did we obtain practical
realisation of the promise that they who do the divine will, by living
the divine life, shall know of the divine doctrine. Our whole mental
attitude had been one of prayer in its essential sense; which is not
that of _saying_ prayers, but as it came to be defined for us--"the
intense direction of the will and desire towards the Highest; an
unchanging intent to know nothing but the Highest." Because "to think
inwardly, to pray intensely, and to imagine centrally, is to hold
converse with God." And we had done this without knowing it was prayer,
or calling it by that name. For, knowing only the conventional
conception of prayer, we had recoiled from it as from other conventional
conceptions of things religious.

Now, however, we found that we had done instinctively and spontaneously
precisely what was necessary to bring us into relations at once with our
spiritual selves and with the world of those who consist only of the
spiritual self. For, by thus becoming vitalised and sensitive in that
part of man's system which endures and passes on, we had come into open
conditions with the world of those who have thus endured and passed on,
and are no longer of the terrestrial, but of the celestial, having
surmounted all lower and intermediate planes. All this came to us
without anticipation on our part, or any conscious seeking for it; but
yet without causing dismay or surprise when it came. For it came so
gradually as to seem to be but the natural and orderly result of the
unfoldment of our own spiritual consciousness, and excited only feelings
of joy and thankfulness at finding our method and aspirations crowned
with so high a success. Thus was it made absolutely clear to us that, so
far from divine revelation involving miracle, or requiring for its
instruments persons other in kind than the ordinary, it is a prerogative
of man, belonging to him as man; and requiring for its reception only
that he be fully man, alive and sensitive in his own innermost and
highest, in his centre as in his circumference. Thus living on the quick
and finding no others who did so, it seemed to us as if we alone were
the quick, and all others were dead.

We noted yet another way in which we supplemented and complemented each
other. It was in this wise. As I was bent on the construction of a
system of thought which should be at once a science, a philosophy, a
morality, and a religion, and recognisable by the understanding as
indubitably true; she was bent on the construction of a rule of life
equally obvious and binding, and recognisable by the sentiments as alone
according with them, its basis being that sense of perfect justice which
springs from perfect sympathy.

By which it will be seen that while it was her aim to establish a
perfect practice, which might or might not consist with a perfect
doctrine, it was my aim to establish a perfect doctrine which would
inevitably issue in a perfect practice, by at once defining it and
supplying an all-compelling motive for its observance.

These, as we at once recognised, were the two indispensable halves of
one perfect whole. But we had yet to learn the nature and source of the
compelling motive for its enforcement.

The deficiency was made good by the discovery of the fact of man's
permanence as an individual. The revelation of this truth was the
demonstration to us of the inanity--not to use a stronger term--of the
system called "Positivism." In ignoring the soul, that system lacks the
motive and repudiates the source of the sentiments on which it insists,
and to the experiences of which those sentiments are due.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] The book was "By and By: An Historical Romance of the Future," its
object being to show a state of society in which the intuition is
supreme, and individuals follow their own ideals. It represents a step
in E.M.'s unfoldment, but not his final conclusions. In 1873 A.K.,
having read a review of this book in the _Examiner_ (which also
contained a notice of one of her tales), communicated with E.M. (Life
A.K. Vol. I. p. 27.)

[9] This was not the first time that E.M. met A.K. He had met her once
before, in January, 1874, in a picture gallery in London. "It was but
for a short time, and during a single afternoon"; but it was "sufficient
to convince" him of "the unusual character of the personality" with
which he had come into contact. (Life A.K. Vol. I. p. 32.)

[10] Her "very first published production" was a poem in a religious
magazine, when she was "but nine years old." (Life A.K. Vol. I. p. 29.)

[11] "Beatrice: A Tale of the Early Christians," was written by A.K. in
1859, for the _Churchman's Companion_, "but the publisher thought it
worthy to make a separate volume, and offered to bring it out in that
form, and to give her a present for it," which offer was accepted. (Life
A.K. Vol. I. p. 4.)

[12] The Story was "In my Lady's Chamber," and purported to be a
"speculative romance touching a few questions of the day." It was
afterwards published separately as by "Colossa." (Life A.K. Vol. I. pp.
21, 22.)

[13] The first edition of "The Pilgrim and the Shrine" was published in
1867.

[14] E.M. did not marry again. He had one child, Charles Bradley
Maitland, and he died on the 16th February, 1901.

[15] See p. 100

[16] E.M. says that "The Keys of the Creeds" brought his thought up to
the extreme limits of a thought merely intellectual, to transcend which
it would be necessary to penetrate the barrier between the worlds of
sense and of spirit. (Life A.K. Vol. I. p. 54.)

[17] Statement E.C.U. p. 80.




