The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Buried Temple
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Buried Temple

Author: Maurice Maeterlinck

Translator: Alfred Sutro


        
Release date: November 4, 2006 [eBook #19711]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/19711

Credits: Produced by Al Haines






Produced by Al Haines










The Buried Temple


By

Maurice Maeterlinck




Translated by Alfred Sutro




LONDON : GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.

RUSKIN HOUSE, 40 MUSEUM STREET, W.C. 1




Published in April 1902

Reprinted:--
  POCKET EDITION, March 1911
  November 1911
  July 1919
  December 1921
  October 1924



Twenty first Thousand

(All rights reserved)

Printed in Great Britain




NOTE

Of the five essays in this volume, two only, those on "The Past" and
"Luck," were written in 1901.  The others, "The Mystery of Justice,"
"The Evolution of Mystery," and "The Kingdom of Matter," are anterior
to "The Life of the Bee," and appeared in the _Fortnightly Review_ in
1899 and 1900.  The essay on "The Past" appeared in the March number of
the _Fortnightly Review_ and of the New York _Independent_; and parts
of "The Mystery of Justice" in this last journal and _Harper's
Magazine_.  The author's thanks are due to Messrs. Chapman & Hall,
Messrs. Harper & Brothers, and the proprietors of _The Independent_ for
their permission to republish.




CONTENTS

   I. THE MYSTERY OF JUSTICE
  II. THE EVOLUTION OF MYSTERY
 III. THE KINGDOM OF MATTER
  IV. THE PAST
   V. LUCK




I

THE MYSTERY OF JUSTICE

1

I speak, for those who do not believe in the existence of a unique,
all-powerful, infallible Judge, for ever intent on our thoughts, our
feelings and actions, maintaining justice in this world and completing
it in the next.  And if there be no Judge, what justice is there?  None
other than that which men have made for themselves by their laws and
tribunals, as also in the social relations that no definite judgment
governs?  Is there nothing above this human justice, whose sanction is
rarely other than the opinion, the confidence or mistrust, the approval
or disapproval, of our fellows?  Is this capable of explaining or
accounting for all that seems so inexplicable to us in the morality of
the universe, that we at times feel almost compelled to believe an
intelligent Judge must exist?  When we deceive or overcome our
neighbour, have we deceived or overcome all the forces of justice?  Are
all things definitely settled then, and may we go boldly on: or is
there a graver, deeper justice, one less visible perhaps, but less
subject to error; one that is more universal, and mightier?

That such a justice exists we all of us know, for we all have felt its
irresistible power.  We are well aware that it covers the whole of our
life, and that at its centre there reigns an intelligence which never
deceives itself, which none can deceive.  But where shall we place it,
now that we have torn it down from the skies?  Where does it weigh good
and evil, happiness and disaster?  Whence does it issue to deal out
reward and punishment?  These are questions that we do not often ask
ourselves, but they have their importance.  The nature of justice, and
all our morality, depend on the answer; and it cannot be fruitless
therefore to inquire how that great idea of mystic and sovereign
justice, which has undergone more than one transformation since history
began, is being received to-day in the mind and the heart of man.  And
is this mystery not the loftiest, the most passionately interesting, of
all that remain to us: does it not intertwine with most of the others?
Do its vacillations not stir us to the very depths of our soul?  The
great bulk of mankind perhaps know nothing of these vacillations and
changes, but for the evolution of thought it suffices that the eyes of
the few should see; and when the clear consciousness of these has
become aware of the transformation, its influence will gradually attain
the general morality of men.


2

In these pages we shall naturally have much to say of social justice:
of the justice, in other words, that we mutually extend to each other
through life; but we shall leave on one side legal or positive justice,
which is merely the organisation of one side of social justice.  We
shall occupy ourselves above all with that vague but inevitable
justice, intangible and yet so effective, which accompanies and sets
its seal upon every action of our life; which approves or disapproves,
rewards or punishes.  Does this come from without?  Does an inflexible,
undeceivable moral principle exist, independent of man, in the universe
and in things?  Is there, in a word, a justice that might be called
mystic?  Or does it issue wholly from man; is it inward even though it
act from without; and is the only justice therefore psychologic?  These
two terms, mystic and psychologic justice, comprehend, more or less,
all the different forms of justice, superior to the social, that would
appear to exist to-day.


3

It is scarcely conceivable that any one who has forsaken the easy, but
artificially illumined, paths of positive religion, can still believe
in the existence of a physical justice arising from moral causes,
whether its manifestations assume the form of heredity or disease, of
geologic, atmospheric, or other phenomena.  However eager his desire
for illusion or mystery, this is a truth he is bound to recognise from
the moment he begins earnestly and sincerely to study his own personal
experience, or to observe the external ills which, in this world of
ours, fall indiscriminately on good and wicked alike.  Neither the
earth nor the sky, neither nature nor matter, neither air nor any force
known to man (save only those that are in him) betrays the slightest
regard for justice, or the remotest connection with our morality, our
thoughts or intentions.  Between the external world and our actions
there exist only the simple and essentially non-moral relations of
cause and effect.  If I am guilty of a certain excess or imprudence, I
incur a certain danger, and have to pay a corresponding debt to nature.
And as this imprudence or excess will generally have had an immoral
cause--or a cause that we call immoral because we have been compelled
to regulate our life according to the requirements of our health and
tranquillity--we cannot refrain from establishing a connection between
this immoral cause and the danger to which we have been exposed, or the
debt we have had to pay; and we are led once more to believe in the
justice of the universe, the prejudice which, of all those that we
cling to, has its root deepest in our heart.  And in our eagerness to
restore this confidence we are content deliberately to ignore the fact
that the result would have been exactly the same had the cause of our
excess or imprudence been--to use the terms of our infantine
vocabulary--heroic or innocent.  If on an intensely cold day I throw
myself into the water to save a fellow-creature from drowning, or if,
seeking to drown him, I chance to fall in, the consequences of the
chill will be absolutely the same; and nothing on this earth or beneath
the sky--save only myself, or man if he be able--will enhance my
suffering because I have committed a crime, or relieve my pain because
my action was virtuous.


4

Let us consider another form of physical justice: heredity.  There
again we find the same indifference to moral causes.  And truly it were
a strange justice indeed that would throw upon the son, and even the
remote descendant, the burden of a fault committed by his father or his
ancestor.  But human morality would raise no objection: man would not
protest.  To him it would seem natural, magnificent, even fascinating.
It would indefinitely prolong his individuality, his consciousness and
existence; and from this point of view would accord with a number of
indisputable facts which prove that we are not wholly self-contained,
but connect, in more than one subtle, mysterious fashion, with all that
surrounds us in life, with all that precedes us, or follows.

And yet, true as this may be in certain cases, it is not true as
regards the justice of physical heredity, which is absolutely
indifferent to the moral causes of the deed whose consequences the
descendants have to bear.  There is physical relation between the act
of the father, whereby he has undermined his health, and the consequent
suffering of the son; but the son's suffering will be the same whatever
the intentions or motives of the father, be these heroic or shameful.
And, further, the area of what we call the justice of physical heredity
would appear to be very restricted.  A father may have been guilty of a
hundred abominable crimes, he may have been a murderer, a traitor, a
persecutor of the innocent or despoiler of the wretched, without these
crimes leaving the slightest trace upon the organism of his children.
It is enough that he should have been careful to do nothing that might
injure his health.


5

So much for the justice of Nature as shown in physical heredity.  Moral
heredity would appear to be governed by similar principles; but as it
deals with modifications of the mind and character infinitely more
complex and more elusive, its manifestations are less striking, and its
results less certain.  Pathology is the only region which admits of its
definite observation and study; and there we observe it to be merely
the spiritual form of physical heredity, which is its essential
principle: moral heredity being only a sequel, and revealing in its
elementary stage the same indifference to real justice, and the same
blindness.  Whatever the moral cause of the ancestor's drunkenness or
debauch, the same punishment may be meted out in mind and body to the
descendants of the drunkard or the debauchee.  Intellectual blemish
will almost always accompany material blemish.  The soul will be
attacked simultaneously with the body; and it matters but little
whether the victim be imbecile, mad, epileptic, possessed of criminal
instincts, or only vaguely threatened with slight mental derangement:
the most frightful moral penalty that a supreme justice could invent
has followed actions which, as a rule, cause less harm and are less
perverse than hundreds of other offences that Nature never dreams of
punishing.  And this penalty, moreover, is inflicted blindly, not the
slightest heed being paid to the motives underlying the actions,
motives that may have been excusable perhaps, or indifferent, or
possibly even admirable.

It would be absurd, however, to imagine that drunkenness and debauchery
are the only agents in moral heredity.  There are a thousand others,
all more or less unknown.  Certain moral qualities appear to be
transmitted as readily as though they were physical.  In one race, for
instance, we will almost constantly discover certain virtues which have
probably been acquired.  But who shall say how much is due to heredity,
and how much to environment and example?  The problem becomes so
complicated, the facts so contradictory, that it is impossible, amidst
the mass of innumerable causes, to follow the track of one particular
cause to the end.  Let it suffice to say that in the only clear,
striking, definitive cases where an intentional justice could have
revealed itself in physical or moral heredity, no trace of justice is
found.  And if we do not find it in these, we are surely far less
likely to find it in others.


6

We may affirm therefore that not above us, or around us, or beneath us,
neither in this life nor in our other life which is that of our
children, is the least trace to be found of an intentional justice.
But, in the course of adapting ourselves to the laws of life, we have
naturally been led to credit with our own moral ideas those principles
of causality that we encounter most frequently; and we have in this
fashion created a very plausible semblance of effective justice, which
rewards or punishes most of our actions in the degree that they
approach, or deviate from, certain laws that are essential for the
preservation of the race.  It is evident that if I sow my field, I
shall have an infinitely better prospect of reaping a harvest the
following summer than my neighbour, who has neglected to sow his,
preferring a life of dissipation and idleness.  In this case,
therefore, work obtains its admirable and certain reward; and as work
is essential for the preservation of our existence, we have declared it
to be the moral act of all acts, the first of all our duties.  Such
instances might be indefinitely multiplied.  If I bring up my children
well, if I am good and just to those round about me, if I am honest,
active, prudent, wise, and sincere in all my dealings, I shall have a
better chance of meeting with filial piety, with respect and affection,
a better chance of knowing moments of happiness, than the man whose
actions and conduct have been the very reverse of mine.  Let us not,
however, lose sight of the fact that my neighbour, who is, let us say,
a most diligent and thrifty man, might be prevented by the most
admirable of reasons--such as an illness caught while nursing his wife
or his friend--from sowing his ground at the proper time, and that he
also would reap no harvest.  _Mutatis mutandis_, similar results would
follow in the other instances I have mentioned.  The cases, however,
are exceptional where a worthy or respectable reason will hinder the
accomplishment of a duty; and we shall find, as a rule, that sufficient
harmony exists between cause and effect, between the exaction of the
necessary law and the result of the complying effort, to enable our
casuistry to keep alive within us the idea of the justice of things.


7

This idea, however, deeply ingrained though it be in the hearts and
minds of the least credulous and least mystic of men, can surely not be
beneficial.  It reduces our morality to the level of the insect which,
perched on a falling rock, imagines that the rock has been set in
motion on its own special behalf.  Are we wise in allowing certain
errors and falsehoods to remain active within us?  There may have been
some in the past which, for a moment, were helpful; but, this moment
over, men found themselves once again face to face with the truth, and
the sacrifice had only been delayed.  Why wait till the illusion or
falsehood which appeared to do good begins to do actual harm, or, if it
do no harm, at least retards the perfect understanding that should
obtain between the deeply felt reality and our manner of interpreting
and accepting it?  What were the divine right of kings, the
infallibility of the Church, the belief in rewards beyond the grave,
but illusions whose sacrifice reason deferred too long?  Nor was
anything gained by this dilatoriness beyond a few sterile hopes, a
little deceptive peace, a few consolations that at times were
disastrous.  But many days had been lost; and we have no days to lose,
we who at last are seeking the truth, and find in its search an
all-sufficient reason for existence.  Nor does anything retard us more
than the illusion which, though torn from its roots, we still permit to
linger among us; for this will display the most extraordinary activity
and be constantly changing its form.

But what does it matter, some will ask, whether man do the thing that
is just because he thinks God is watching; because he believes in a
kind of justice that pervades the universe; or for the simple reason
that to his conscience this thing seems just?  It matters above all.
We have there three different men.  The first, whom God is watching,
will do much that is not just, for every god whom man has hitherto
worshipped has decreed many unjust things.  And the second will not
always act in the same way as the third, who is indeed the true man to
whom the moralist will turn, for he will survive both the others; and
to foretell how man will conduct himself in truth, which is his natural
element, is more interesting to the moralist than to watch his
behaviour when enmeshed in falsehood.


8

It may seem idle to those who do not believe in the existence of a
sovereign Judge to discuss so seriously this inadmissible idea of the
justice of things; and inadmissible it does indeed become when
presented thus in its true colours, as it were, pinned to the wall.
This, however, is not our way of regarding it in every-day life.  When
we observe how disaster follows crime, how ruin at last overtakes
ill-gotten prosperity; when we witness the miserable end of the
debauchee, the short-lived triumph of iniquity, it is our constant
habit to confuse the physical effect with the moral cause; and however
little we may believe in the existence of a Judge, we nearly all of us
end by a more or less complete submission to a strange, vague faith in
the justice of things.  And although our reason, our calm observation,
prove to us that this justice cannot exist, it is enough that an event
should take place which touches us somewhat more nearly, or that there
should be two or three curious coincidences, for conviction to fade in
our heart, if not in our mind.  Notwithstanding all our reason and all
our experience, the merest trifle recalls to life within us the
ancestor who was convinced that the stars shone in their eternal places
for no other purpose than to predict or approve a wound he was to
inflict on his enemy upon the field of battle, a word he should speak
in the assembly of the chiefs, or an intrigue he would bring to a
successful issue in the women's quarters.  We of to-day are no less
inclined to divinise our feelings for the benefit of our interests; the
only difference being that, the gods having no longer a name, our
methods are less sincere and less precise.  When the Greeks, powerless
before Troy, felt the need of supernatural signal and support, they
went to Philoctetes, deprived him of Hercules' bow and arrows, and
abandoned him, ill, naked, and defenceless, on a desert island.  This
was the mysterious Justice, loftier than that of man; this was the
command of the gods.  And similarly do we, when some iniquity seems
expedient to us, cry loudly that we do it for the sake of posterity, of
humanity, of the fatherland.  On the other hand, should a great
misfortune befall us, we protest that there is no justice, and that
there are no gods; but let the misfortune befall our enemy, and the
universe is at once repeopled with invisible judges.  If, however, some
unexpected, disproportionate stroke of good fortune come to us, we are
quickly convinced that we must possess merits so carefully hidden as to
have escaped our own observation; and we are happier in their discovery
than at the windfall they have procured us.


9

"One has to pay for all things," we say.  Yes, in the depths of our
heart, in all that pertains to man, justice exacts payment in the coin
of our personal happiness or sorrow.  And without, in the universe that
enfolds us, there is also a reckoning; but here it is a different
paymaster who measures out happiness or sorrow.  Other laws obtain;
there are other motives, other methods.  It is no longer the justice of
the conscience that presides, but the logic of nature, which cares
nothing for our morality.  Within us is a spirit that weighs only
intentions; without us, a power that only balances deeds.  We try to
persuade ourselves that these two work hand in hand.  But in reality,
though the spirit will often glance towards the power, this last is as
completely ignorant of the other's existence as is the man weighing
coals in Northern Europe of the existence of his fellow weighing
diamonds in South Africa.  We are constantly intruding our sense of
justice into this non-moral logic; and herein lies the source of most
of our errors.


10

And further, what right have we to complain of the indifference of the
universe, what right to declare it incomprehensible, and monstrous?
Why this surprise at an injustice in which we ourselves take so active
a part?  It is true that there is no trace of justice to be found in
disease, accident, or most of the hazards of external life, which fall
indiscriminately on the good and the wicked, the hero and traitor, the
poisoner and sister of charity.  But we are far too eager to include
under the title "Justice of the Universe" many a flagrant act that is
exclusively human, and infinitely more common and more destructive than
disease, the hurricane, or fire.  I do not allude to war; it might be
urged that we attribute this rather to the will of the people or kings
than to Nature.  But poverty, for instance, which we still rank with
irremediable ills such as shipwreck or plague; poverty, with all its
crushing sorrows and transmitted degeneration--how often may this be
ascribed to the injustice of the elements, and how often to the
injustice of our social condition, which is the crowning injustice of
man?  Need we, at the sight of unmerited wretchedness, look to the
skies for a reason, as though a flash of lightning had caused it?  Need
we seek an impenetrable, unfathomable judge?  Is this region not our
own; are we not here in the best explored, best known portion of our
dominion; and is it not we who organise misery, we who spread it
abroad, as arbitrarily, from the moral point of view, as fire and
disease scatter destruction or suffering?  Is it reasonable that we
should wonder at the sea's indifference to the soul-state of its
victims, when we who have a soul, the pre-eminent organ of justice, pay
no heed whatever to the innocence of the countless thousands whom we
ourselves sacrifice, who are our wretched victims?  We choose to regard
as beyond our control, as a force of fatality, a force that rests
entirely within our own hands.  But does this excuse us?  Truly we are
strange lovers of an ideal justice, we are strange judges!  A judicial
error sends a thrill of horror from one end of the world to another;
but the error which condemns three-fourths of mankind to misery, an
error as purely human as that of any tribunal, is attributed by us to
some inaccessible, implacable power.  If the child of some honest man
we know be born blind, imbecile, or deformed, we will seek everywhere,
even in the darkness of a religion we have ceased to practise, for some
God whose intention to question; but if the child be born poor--a
calamity, as a rule, no less capable than the gravest infirmity of
degrading a creature's destiny--we do not dream of interrogating the
God who is wherever we are, since he is made of our own desires.
Before we demand an ideal judge, we shall do well to purify our ideas,
for whatever blemish there is in these will surely be in the judge.
Before we complain of Nature's indifference, or ask at her hands an
equity she does not possess, let us attack the iniquity that dwells in
the homes of men; and when this has been swept away, we shall find that
the part we assign to the injustice of fate will be less by fully
two-thirds.  And the benefit to mankind would be far more considerable
than if it lay in our power to guide the storm or govern the heat and
the cold, to direct the course of disease or the avalanche, or contrive
that the sea should display an intelligent regard to our virtues and
secret intentions.  For indeed the poor far exceed in number those who
fall victims to shipwreck or material accident, just as far more
disease is due to material wretchedness than to the caprice of our
organism, or to the hostility of the elements.


11

And for all that, we love justice.  We live, it is true, in the midst
of a great injustice; but we have only recently acquired this
knowledge, and we still grope for a remedy.  Injustice dates such a
long way back; the idea of God, of destiny, of Nature's mysterious
decrees, had been so closely and intimately associated with it, it is
still so deeply entangled with most of the unjust forces of the
universe, that it was but yesterday that we commenced the endeavour to
isolate such elements contained within it as are purely human.  And if
we succeed; if we can distinguish them, and separate them for all time
from those upon which we have no power, justice will gain more than by
all that the researches of man have discovered hitherto.  For indeed in
this social injustice of ours, it is not the human part that is capable
of arresting our passion for equity; it is the part that a great number
of men still attribute to a god, to a kind of fatality, or to imaginary
laws of Nature.


12

This last inactive part shrinks every day.  Nor is this because the
mystery of justice is about to disappear.  A mystery rarely disappears;
as a rule, it only shifts its ground.  But it is often most important
and most desirable that we should bring about this change of abode.  It
may be said that two or three such changes almost stand for the whole
progress of human thought: the dislodgment of two or three mysteries
from a place where they did harm, and their transference to a place
where they become inoffensive and capable of doing good.  Sometimes
even, there is no need for the mystery to change its place; we have
only to identify it under another name.  What was once called "the
gods," we now term "life."  And if life be as inexplicable as were the
gods, we are at least the gainers to the extent that none has the right
to speak or do wrong in its name.  The aim of human thought can
scarcely be to destroy mystery, or lessen it, for that seems
impossible.  We may be sure that the same quantity of mystery will ever
enwrap the world, since it is the quality of the world, as of mystery,
to be infinite.  But honest human thought will seek above all to
determine what are the veritable irreducible mysteries.  It will
endeavour to strip them of all that does not belong to them, that is
not truly theirs, of the additions made by our errors, our fears, and
our falsehoods.  And as the artificial mysteries vanish, so will the
ocean of veritable mystery stretch out further and further: the mystery
of life, its aim and its origin; the mystery of thought; the mystery
that has been called "the primitive accident," or the "perhaps
unknowable essence of reality."


13

Where had men conceived the mystery of justice to lodge?  It pervaded
the world.  At one moment it was supposed to rest in the hands of the
gods, at another it engulfed and mastered the gods themselves.  It had
been imagined everywhere except in man.  It had dwelt in the sky, it
had lurked behind rocks, it had governed the air and the sea, it had
peopled an inaccessible universe.  Then at last we peered into its
imaginary retreats, we pressed close and examined; and its throne of
clouds tottered, it faded away; but at the very moment we believed it
had ceased to be, behold it reappeared, and raised its head once more
in the very depths of our heart; and yet another mystery had sought
refuge in man, and embodied itself in him.  For it is in ourselves that
the mysteries we seek to destroy almost invariably find their last
shelter and their most fitting abode, the home which they had forsaken,
in the wildness of youth, to voyage through space; as it is in
ourselves that we must learn to meet and to question them.  And truly
it is no less wonderful, no less inexplicable, that man should have in
his heart an immutable instinct of justice, than it was wonderful and
inexplicable that the gods should be just, or the forces of the
universe.  It is as difficult to account for the essence of our memory,
our will, or intelligence, as it was to account for the memory, will,
or intelligence of the invisible powers or laws of Nature; and if, in
order to enhance our curiosity, we have need of the unknown or
unknowable; if, in order to maintain our ardour, we require mystery or
the infinite, we shall not lose a single tributary of the unknown and
unknowable by at last restoring the great river to its primitive bed;
nor shall we have closed a single road that leads to the infinite, or
lessened by the minutest fraction the most contested of veritable
mysteries.  Whatever we take from the skies we find again in the heart
of man.  But, mystery for mystery, let us prefer the one that is
certain to the one that is doubtful, the one that is near to the one
that is far, the one that is in us and of us to the harmful one from
without.  Mystery for mystery, let us no longer parley with the
messengers, but with the sovereign who sent them; no longer question
those feeble ones who silently vanish at our first inquiry, but rather
look into our heart, where are both question and answer; the answer
which it has forgotten, but, some day perhaps, shall remember.


14

Then we shall be able to solve more than one disconcerting problem as
to the distribution, often very equitable, of reward and punishment
among men.  And by this we do not mean only the inward, moral reward
and punishment, but also the reward and punishment that are visible and
wholly material.  There was some measure of reason in the belief held
by mankind from its very origin, that justice penetrates, animates as
it were, every object of this world in which we live.  This belief has
not been explained away by the fact that our great moral laws have been
forcibly adapted to the great laws of life and matter.  There is more
beyond.  We cannot refer all things, in all circumstances, to a simple
relation of cause and effect between crime and punishment.  There is
often a moral element also; and though events have not placed it there,
though it is we alone who have created it, it is not the less powerful
and real.  Of a physical justice, properly so called, we deny the
existence; but besides the wholly inward psychologic justice, to which
we shall soon refer, there is also a psychologic justice which is in
constant communication with the physical world; and it is this justice
that we attribute to we know not what invisible and universal
principle.  And while it is wrong to credit Nature with moral
intentions, and to allow our actions to be governed by fear of
punishment or hope of reward that she may have in store for us, this
does not imply that, even materially, there is no reward for good, or
punishment for evil.  Such reward and punishment undoubtedly exist, but
they issue not from whence we imagine; and in believing that they come
from an inaccessible spot, that they master us, judge us, and
consequently dispense us from judging ourselves, we commit the most
dangerous of errors; for none has a greater influence upon our manner
of defending ourselves against misfortune, or of setting forth to
attempt the legitimate conquest of happiness.


15

Such justice as we actually discover in Nature does not issue from her,
but from ourselves, who have unconsciously placed it there, through
becoming one with events, animating them and adapting them to our uses.
Accident, disease, the thunderbolt, which strike to right or to left,
without apparent reason or warning, wholly indifferent as to what our
thoughts may be, are not the only elements in our life.  There are
other, and far more frequent, cases when we have direct influence on
the things and persons around us, and invest these with our own
personality; cases when the forces of nature become the instruments of
our thoughts, which, when unjust, will make improper use of them,
thereby calling forth retaliation and inviting punishment and disaster.
But in Nature there is no moral reaction; for this emanates from our
own thoughts or the thoughts of other men.  It is not in things, but in
us, that the justice of things resides.  It is our moral condition that
modifies our conduct towards the external world; and if we find this
antagonistic, it is because we are at war with ourselves, with the
essential laws of our mind and our heart.  The attitude of Nature
towards us is uninfluenced by the justice or injustice of our
intentions; and yet these will almost invariably govern our attitude
towards Nature.  Here once more, as in the case of social justice, we
ascribe to the universe, to an unintelligible, eternal, fatal
principle, a part that we play ourselves; and when we say that justice,
heaven, nature, or events are rising in revolt against us to punish or
to avenge, it is in reality man who is using events to punish man, it
is human nature that rises in revolt, and human justice that avenges.


16

In a former essay I referred to Napoleon's three crowning acts of
injustice: the three celebrated crimes that were so fatally unjust to
his own fortune.  The first was the murder of the Duc d'Enghien,
condemned by order, without trial or proof, and executed in the
trenches of Vincennes; an assassination that sowed insatiable hatred
and vengeance in the path of the guilty dictator.  Then the detestable
intrigues whereby he lured the too trustful, easy-going Bourbons to
Bayonne, that he might rob them of their hereditary crown; and the
horrible war that ensued, a war that cost the lives of three hundred
thousand men, swallowed up all the morality and energy of the empire,
most of its prestige, almost all its convictions, almost all the
devotion it inspired, and engulfed its prosperous destiny.  And finally
the frightful, unpardonable Russian campaign, wherein his fortune came
at last to utter shipwreck amid the ice of the Berezina and the
snow-bound Polish steppes.

"These prodigious catastrophes," I said, "had numberless causes; but
when we have slowly traced our way through all the more or less
unforeseen circumstances, and have marked the gradual change in
Napoleon's character, have noted the acts of imprudence, folly, and
violence which this genius committed; when we have seen how
deliberately he brought disaster to his smiling fortune, may we not
almost believe that what we behold, standing erect at the very
fountain-head of calamity, is no other than the silent shadow of
misunderstood human justice?  Human justice, wherein there is nothing
supernatural, nothing very mysterious, but built up of many thousand
very real little incidents, many thousand falsehoods, many thousand
little offences of which each one gave rise to a corresponding act of
retaliation--human justice, and not a power that suddenly, at some
tragic moment, leaps forth like Minerva of old, fully armed, from the
formidable, despotic brow of destiny.  In all this there is only one
thing of mystery, and that is the eternal presence of human justice;
but we are aware that the nature of man is very mysterious.  Let us in
the meanwhile ponder this mystery.  It is the most certain of all, it
is the profoundest, it is the most helpful, it is the only one that
will never paralyse our energy for good  And though that patient,
vigilant shadow be not as clearly defined in every life as it was in
Napoleon's, though justice be not always as active or as undeniable, we
shall none the less do wisely to study a case like this whenever
opportunity offers.  It will at least give rise to doubt within us, it
will stimulate inquiry; and these things are worth far more than the
idle, short-sighted affirmation or denial that we so often permit
ourselves: for in all questions of this kind our endeavour should not
be to prove, but rather to arouse attention, to create a certain grave,
courageous respect for all that yet remains unexplained in the actions
of men, in their subjection to what appear to be general laws, and in
the results that ensue."


17

Let us now try to discover in what way this great mystery of justice
does truly and inevitably work itself out within us.  The heart of him
who has committed an unjust act becomes the scene of ineffaceable
drama, the paramount drama of human nature; and it becomes the more
dangerous, and deadlier, in the degree of the man's greatness and
knowledge.

A Napoleon will say to himself, at such troubled moments, that the
morality of a great life cannot be as simple as that of an ordinary
one, and that an active, powerful will has rights which the feeble,
inert will cannot claim.  He will hold that he may the more
legitimately sweep aside certain conscientious scruples, inasmuch as it
is not ignorance or weakness that causes him to disregard these, but
the fact that he views them from a standpoint higher than that of the
majority of men; and further, that his aim being great and glorious,
this passing deliberate callousness of his is therefore truly a victory
won by his strength and his intellect, since there can be no danger in
doing wrong when it is done by one who does it knowingly, and has his
very good reason.  All this, however, does not for a moment delude that
which lies deepest within us.  An act of injustice must always shake
the confidence a man had in himself and his destiny; at a given moment,
and that generally of the gravest, he has ceased to rely upon himself
alone; and this will not be forgotten, nor will he ever again be wholly
himself.  He has confused, and probably corrupted, his fortune by the
introduction of strange powers.  He has lost the exact sense of his
personality and of the force that is in him.  He can no longer clearly
distinguish between what is his own and comes from himself, and what he
is constantly borrowing from the pernicious collaborators whom his
weakness has summoned.  He has ceased to be the general who has none
but disciplined soldiers in the army of his thoughts; he becomes the
usurping chief around whom are only accomplices.  He has forsworn the
dignity of the man who will have none of the glory at which his heart
can only smile as sadly as an ardent, unhappy lover will smile at a
faithless mistress.

He who is truly strong will examine with eager care the praise and
advantages that his actions have won for him, and will silently reject
whatever oversteps a certain line that he has drawn in his
consciousness.  And the stronger he is, the more nearly will this line
approach the one that has already been drawn by the secret truth that
lies at the bottom of all things.  An act of injustice is almost always
a confession of weakness; and very few such confessions are needed to
reveal to the enemy the most vulnerable spot of the soul.  He who
commits an unjust deed that he may gain some measure of glory, or
preserve the little glory he has, does but admit that what he desires
or what he possesses is beyond his deserving, and that the part he has
sought to play exceeds his powers of loyal fulfilment.  And if,
notwithstanding all, he persist in his endeavour, his life will soon be
beset by falsehoods, errors, and phantoms.

And at last, after a few acts of weakness, of treachery, of culpable
self-indulgence, the survey of our past life can bring discouragement
only, whereas we have great need that our past should inspire and
sustain us.  For therein alone do we truly know what we are; it is only
our past that can come to us, in our moments of doubt, and say: "Since
you were able to do that thing, it shall lie in your power to do this
thing also.  When that danger confronted you, when that terrible grief
laid you prostrate, you had faith in yourself, and you conquered.  The
conditions to-day are the same; do you but preserve your faith in
yourself, and your star will be constant."  But what reply shall we
make if our past can only whisper: "Your success has been solely due to
injustice and falsehood, wherefore it behoves you once more to deceive
and to lie"?  No man cares to let his eyes rest on his acts of
disloyalty, weakness, or treachery; and all the events of bygone days
which we cannot contemplate calmly and peacefully, with satisfaction
and confidence, trouble and restrict the horizon which the days that
are not yet are forming far away.  It is only a prolonged survey of the
past that can give to the eye the strength it needs in order to sound
the future.


18

No, it was not the inherent justice of things that punished Napoleon
for his three great acts of injustice, or that will punish us for our
own in a less startling, but not less painful, fashion.  Nor was it an
unyielding, incorruptible, irresistible justice, "attaining the very
vault of heaven."  We are punished because our entire moral being, our
mind no less than our character, is incapable of living and acting
except in justice.  Leaving that, we leave our natural element; we are
carried, as it were, into a planet of which we know nothing, where the
ground slips from under our feet, and all things disconcert us; for
while the humblest intellect feels itself at home in justice, and can
readily foretell the consequences of every just act, the most profound
and penetrating mind loses its way hopelessly in the injustice itself
has created, and can form no conception of what results shall ensue.
The man of genius who forsakes the equity that the humble peasant has
at heart will find all paths strange to him; and these will be stranger
still should he overstep the limit his own sense of justice imposes:
for the justice that soars aloft, keeping pace with the intellect,
creates new boundaries around all it throws open, while at the same
time strengthening and rendering more insurmountable still the ancient
barriers of instinct.  The moment we cross the primitive frontier of
equity all things seem to fail us; one falsehood gives birth to a
hundred, and treachery returns to us through a thousand channels.  If
justice be in us we may march along boldly, for there are certain
things to which the basest cannot be false; but if injustice possess us
we must beware of the justest of men, for there are things to which
even these cannot remain faithful.  As our physical organism was
devised for existence in the atmosphere of our globe, so is our moral
organism devised for existence in justice.  Every faculty craves for
it, and is more intimately bound up with it than with the laws of
gravitation, of light or heat; and to throw ourselves into injustice is
to plunge headlong into the hostile and the unknown.  All that is in us
has been placed there with a view to justice; all things tend thither
and urge us towards it: whereas, when we harbour injustice, we battle
against our own strength; and at last, at the hour of inevitable
punishment, when, prostrate, weeping and penitent, we recognise that
events, the sky, the universe, the invisible are all in rebellion, all
justly in league against us, then may we truly say, not that these are,
or ever have been, just, but that we, notwithstanding ourselves, have
contrived to remain just even in our injustice.


19

We affirm that Nature is absolutely indifferent to our morality, and
that were this morality to command us to kill our neighbour, or to do
him the utmost possible harm, Nature would aid us in this no less than
in our endeavour to comfort or serve him.  She as often would seem to
reward us for having made him suffer as for our kindness towards him.
Does this warrant the inference that Nature has no morality--using the
word in its most limited sense as meaning the logical, inevitable
subordination of the means to the accomplishment of a general mission?
This is a question to which we must not too hastily reply.  We know
nothing of Nature's aim, or even whether she have an aim.  We know
nothing of her consciousness, or whether she have a consciousness; of
her thoughts, or whether she think at all.  It is with her deeds and
her manner of doing that we are solely concerned.  And in these we find
the same contradiction between our morality and Nature's mode of action
as exists between our consciousness and the instincts that Nature has
planted within us.  For this consciousness, though in ultimate analysis
due to her also, has nevertheless been formed by ourselves, and, basing
itself upon the loftiest human morality, offers an ever stronger
opposition to the desires of instinct.  Were we to listen only to these
last, we should act in all things like Nature, which would invariably
seem to justify the triumph of the stronger, the victory of the least
scrupulous and best equipped; and this in the midst of the most
inexcusable wars, the most flagrant acts of injustice or cruelty.  Our
one object would be our own personal triumph; nor should we pay the
least heed to the rights or sufferings of our victims, to their
innocence or beauty, moral or intellectual superiority.  But, in that
case, why has Nature placed within us a consciousness and a sense of
justice that have prevented us from desiring those things that she
desires?  Or is it we ourselves who have placed them there?  Are we
capable of deriving from within us something that is not in Nature; are
we capable of giving abnormal development to a force that opposes her
force; and if we possess this power, must not Nature have reasons of
her own for permitting us to possess it?  Why should there be only in
us, and nowhere else in the world, these two irreconcilable tendencies,
that in every man are incessantly at strife, and alternately
victorious?  Would one have been dangerous without the other?  Would it
have overstepped its goal, perhaps; would the desire for conquest,
unchecked by the sense of justice, have led to annihilation, as the
sense of justice without the desire for conquest might have lured us to
inertia?  Which of these two tendencies is the more natural and
necessary, which is the narrower and which the vaster, which is
provisional and which eternal?  Where shall we learn which one we
should combat and which one encourage?  Ought we to conform to the law
that is incontestably the more general, or should we cherish in our
heart a law that is evidently exceptional?  Are there circumstances
under which we have the right to go forth in search of the apparent
ideal of life?  Is it our duty to follow the morality of the species or
race, which seems irresistible to us, being one of the visible sides of
Nature's obscure and unknown intentions; or is it essential that the
individual should maintain and develop within him a morality entirely
opposed to that of the race or species whereof he forms part?


20

The truth is that the question which confronts us here is only another
form of the one which lies at the root of evolutionary morality, and is
probably scientifically unsolvable.  Evolutionary morality bases itself
on the justice of Nature--though it dare not speak out the word; on the
justice of Nature, which imposes upon each individual the good or evil
consequences of his own character and his own actions.  But when, on
the other hand, it is necessary for evolutionary morality to justify
actions which, although intrinsically unjust, are necessary for the
prosperity of the species, it falls back upon what it reluctantly terms
Nature's indifference or injustice.  Here we have two unknown aims,
that of humanity and that of Nature; and these, wrapped as they are in
a mystery that may some day perhaps pass away, would seem to be
irreconcilable in our mind.  Essentially, all these questions resolve
themselves into one, which is of the utmost importance to our
contemporary morality.  The race would appear to be becoming conscious,
prematurely it may be, and perhaps disastrously, not, we will say, of
its rights, for that problem is still in suspense, but of the fact that
morality does not enter into certain actions that go to make history.

This disquieting consciousness would seem to be slowly invading our
individual life.  Thrice, and more or less in the course of one year,
has this question confronted us, and assumed vast proportions: in the
matter of America's crushing defeat of Spain (although here the issues
were confused, for the Spaniards, besides their present blunders, had
been guilty of so many acts of injustice in the past, that the problem
becomes very involved); in the case of an innocent man sacrificed to
the preponderating interests of his country; and in the iniquitous war
of the Transvaal.  It is true that the phenomenon is not altogether
without precedent.  Man has always endeavoured to justify his
injustice; and when human justice offered him no excuse or pretext, he
found in the will of the gods a law superior to the justice of man.
But our excuse or pretext of to-day is fraught with the more peril to
our morality inasmuch as it reposes on a law, or at least a habit, of
Nature, that is far more real, more incontestable and universal than
the will of an ephemeral and local god.

Which shall prevail in the end, justice or force?  Does force contain
an unknown justice that will absorb our human justice, or is the
impulse of justice within us, that would seem to resist blind force,
actually no more than a devious emanation from that force, tending to
the same end; and is it only the point of deviation that escapes us?
This is not a question that we can answer, we who ourselves form part
of the mystery we seek to solve; the reply could come only from one who
might be gazing upon us from the heights of another world: one who
should have learned the aim of the universe and the destiny of man.  In
the meanwhile, if we say that Nature is right, we say that the instinct
of justice, which she has placed in us, and which therefore also is
nature, is wrong; whereas if we approve this instinct, our approval is
necessarily derived from the exercise of the very faculty that is
called in question.


21

That is true; but it is no less true that the endeavour to sum up the
world in a syllogism is one of the oldest and vainest habits of man.
In the region of the unknown and unknowable, logic-chopping has its
perils; and in the present case all our doubts would seem to arise from
another hazardous syllogism.  We tell ourselves--boldly at times, but
more often in a whisper--that we are Nature's children, and bound
therefore in all things to conform to her laws and copy her example.
And since Nature regards justice with indifference, since she has
another aim, which is the sustaining, the renewing, the incessant
development of life, it follows. . . .  So far we have not formulated
the conclusion, or, at least, this conclusion has not yet openly dared
to force its way into our morality; but, although its influence has
hitherto only been remotely felt in that familiar sphere which includes
our relations, our friends, and our immediate surroundings, it is
slowly penetrating into the vast and desolate region whither we
relegate all those whom we know not and see not, who for us have no
name.  It is already to be found at the root of many of our actions; it
has entered our politics, our industry, our commerce; indeed it affects
almost all we do from the moment we emerge from the narrow circle of
our domestic hearth, the only place for the majority of men where a
little veritable justice is still to be found, a little benevolence, a
little love.  It will call itself economic or social law, evolution,
competition, struggle for life; it will masquerade under a thousand
names, forever perpetrating the selfsame wrong.  And yet nothing can be
less legitimate than such a conclusion.  Apart from the fact that we
might with equal justification reverse the syllogism, and cause it to
declare that there must be a certain justice in Nature, since we, her
children, are just, we need only consider it as it stands to realise
how doubtful and contestable is at least one of its premisses.

We have seen in the preceding chapters that Nature does not appear to
be just from our point of view; but we have absolutely no means of
judging whether she be not just from her own.  The fact that she pays
no heed to the morality of our actions does not warrant the inference
that she has no morality, or that ours is the only one there can be.
We are entitled to say that she is indifferent as to whether our
intentions be good or evil, but have not the right to conclude that she
has therefore no morality and no equity; for that would be tantamount
to affirming that there are no more mysteries or secrets, and that we
know all the laws of the universe, its origin and its end.  Her mode of
action is different from our own, but, I say it once more, we know not
what her reason may be for acting in this different fashion; and we
have no right to imitate what seems to us iniquitous and cruel, so long
as we have no precise knowledge of the profound and salutary reasons
that may underlie such action.  What is the aim of Nature?  Whither do
the worlds tend that stretch across eternity?  Where does consciousness
begin, and is its only form that which it assumes in ourselves?  At
what point do physical laws become moral laws?  Is life unintelligent?
Have we sounded all the depths of Nature, and is it only in our
cerebro-spinal system that she becomes mind?  And finally, what is
justice when viewed from other heights?  Is the intention necessarily
at its centre; and can no regions exist where intentions no longer
shall count?  We should have to answer these questions, and many
others, before we could tell whether Nature be just or unjust from the
point of view of masses whose vastness corresponds to her own.  She
disposes of a future, a space, of which we can form no conception; and
in these there exists, it may be, a justice proportioned to her
duration, to her extent and aim, even as our own instinct of justice is
proportioned to the duration and narrow circle of our own life.  The
wrong that she may for centuries commit she has centuries wherein to
repair; but we, who have only a few days before us, what right have we
to imitate what our eye cannot see, understand, or follow?  By what
standard are we to judge her, if we look away from the passing hour?
For instance, considering only the imperceptible speck that we form in
the worlds, and disregarding the immensity that surrounds us, we are
wholly ignorant of all that concerns our possible life beyond the tomb;
and we forget that, in the present state of our knowledge, nothing
authorises us to affirm that there may not be a kind of more or less
conscious, more or less responsible after-life, that shall in no way
depend on the decisions of an external will.  He would indeed be rash
who should venture to maintain that nothing survives, either in us or
in others, of the efforts of our good intentions and the acquirements
of our mind.  It may be--and serious experiments, though they do not
seem to prove the phenomenon, may still allow us to class it among
scientific possibilities--it may be that a part of our personality, of
our nervous force, may escape dissolution.  How vast a future would
then be thrown open to the laws that unite cause to effect, and that
always end by creating justice when they come into contact with the
human soul, and have centuries before them!  Let us not forget that
Nature at least is logical, even though we call her unjust; and were we
to resolve on injustice, our difficulty would be that we must also be
logical; and when logic comes into touch with our thoughts and our
feelings, our intentions and passions, what is there that
differentiates it from justice?


22

Let us form no too hasty conclusion; too many points are still
uncertain.  Should we seek to imitate what we term the injustice of
Nature, we would run the risk of imitating and fostering only the
injustice that is in ourselves.  When we say that Nature is unjust, we
are in effect complaining of her indifference to our own little
virtues, our own little intentions, our own little deeds of heroism;
and it is our vanity, far more than our sense of equity, that considers
itself aggrieved.  Our morality is proportioned to our stature and our
restricted destiny; nor have we the right to forsake it because it is
not on the scale of the immensity and infinite destiny of the universe.

And further, should it even be proved that Nature is unjust at all
points, the other question remains intact: whether the command be laid
upon man to follow Nature in her injustice.  Here we shall do well to
let our own consciousness speak, rather than listen to a voice so
formidable that we hear not a word it utters, and are not even certain
whether words there be.  Reason and instinct tell us that it is right
to follow the counsels of Nature; but they tell us also that we should
not follow those counsels when they clash with another instinct within
us, one that is no less profound: the instinct of the just and the
unjust.  And if instincts do indeed draw very near to the truth of
Nature, and must be respected by us in the degree of the force that is
in them, this one is perhaps the strongest of all, for it has struggled
alone against all the others combined, and still persists within us.
Nor is this the hour to reject it.  Until other certitudes reach us, it
behoves us, who are men, to continue just in the human way and the
human sphere.  We do not see far enough, or clearly enough, to be just
in another sphere.  Let us not venture into a kind of abyss, out of
which races and peoples to come may perhaps find a passage, but
whereinto man, in so far as he is man, must not seek to penetrate.  The
injustice of Nature ends by becoming justice for the race; she has time
before her, she can wait, her injustice is of her girth.  But for us it
is too overwhelming, and our days are too few.  Let us be satisfied
that force should reign in the universe, but equity in our heart.
Though the race be irresistibly, and perhaps justly, unjust, though
even the crowd appear possessed of rights denied to the isolated man,
and commit on occasions great, inevitable, and salutary crimes, it is
still the duty of each individual of the race, of every member of the
crowd, to remain just, while ever adding to and sustaining the
consciousness within him.  Nor shall we be entitled to abandon this
duty till all the reasons of the great apparent injustice be known to
us; and those that are given us now, preservation of the species,
reproduction and selection of the strongest, ablest, "fittest," are not
sufficient to warrant so frightful a change.  Let each one try by all
means to become the strongest, most skilful, the best adapted to the
necessities of the life that he cannot transform; but, so far, the
qualities that shall enable him to conquer, that shall give the fullest
play to his moral power and his intelligence, and shall truly make him
the happiest, most skilful, the strongest, and "fittest"--these
qualities are precisely the ones that are the most human, the most
honourable, and the most just.


23

"Within me there is more," runs the fine device inscribed on the beams
and pediment of an old patrician mansion at Bruges, which every
traveller visits; filling a corner of one of those tender and
melancholy quays, that are as forlorn and lifeless as though they
existed only on canvas.  And so too might man exclaim, "Within me there
is more;" every law of morality, every intelligible mystery.  There may
be many others, above us and below us; but if these are to remain for
ever unknown, they become for us as though they were not; and should
their existence one day be revealed to us; it can only be because they
already are in us, already are ours.  "Within me there is more;" and we
are entitled to add, perhaps, "I have nothing to fear from that which
is in me."

This much at least is certain, that the one active, inhabited region of
the mystery of justice is to be found within ourselves.  Other regions
lack consistency; they are probably imaginary, and must inevitably be
deserted and sterile.  They may have furnished mankind with illusions
that served some purpose, but not always without doing harm; and though
we may scarcely be entitled to demand that all illusions should be
destroyed, they should at least not be too manifestly opposed to our
conception of the universe.  To-day we seek in all things the illusion
of truth.  It is not the last, perhaps, or the best, or the only one
possible; but it is the one which we at present regard as the most
honourable and the most necessary.  Let us limit ourselves therefore to
recognising the admirable love of justice and truth that exists in the
heart of man.  Proceeding thus, yielding admiration only where it is
incontestably due, we shall gradually acquire some knowledge of this
passion, which is the distinguishing note of man; and one thing, most
important of all, we shall most undoubtedly learn--the means whereby we
can purify it, and still further increase it.  As we observe its
incessant activity in the depths of our heart, the only temple where it
can truly be active: as we watch it blending with all that we think,
and feel, and do, we shall quickly discover which are the things that
throw light upon it, and which those that plunge it in darkness; which
are the things that guide it, and which those that lead it astray; we
shall learn what nourishes it and what atrophies, what defends and what
attacks.

Is justice no more than the human instinct of preservation and defence?
Is it the purest product of our reason; or rather to be regarded as
composed of a number of those sentimental forces which so often are
right, though directly opposed to our reason--forces that in themselves
are a kind of unconscious, vaster reason, to which our conscious reason
invariably accords its startled approval when it has reached the
heights whence those kindly feelings long had beheld what itself was
unable to see?  Is justice dependent on intellect, or rather on
character?  Questions, these, that are perhaps not idle if we indeed
would know what steps we must take to invest with all its radiance and
all its power the love of justice that is the central jewel of the
human soul.  All men love justice, but not with the same ardent,
fierce, and exclusive love; nor have they all the same scruples, the
same sensitiveness, or the same deep conviction.  We meet people of
highly developed intellect in whom the sense of what is just and unjust
is yet infinitely less delicate, less clearly marked, than in others
whose intellect would seem to be mediocre; for here a great part is
played by that little-known, ill-defined side of ourselves that we term
the character.  And yet it is difficult to tell how much more or less
unconscious intellect must of necessity go with the character that is
unaffectedly honest.  The point before us, however, is to learn how
best to illumine, and increase within us, our desire for justice; and
it is certain that, at the start, our character is less directly
influenced by the desire for justice than is our intellect, the
development of which this desire in a large measure controls; and the
co-operation of the intellect, which recognises and encourages our good
intention, is necessary for this intention to penetrate into, and
mould, our character.  That portion of our love of justice, therefore,
which depends on our character, will benefit by its passage through the
intellect; for in proportion as the intellect rises, and acquires
enlightenment, will it succeed in mastering, enlightening, and
transforming our instincts and our feelings.

But let us no longer believe that this love must be sought in a kind of
superhuman, and often inhuman, infinite.  None of the grandeur and
beauty that this infinite may possess would fall to its portion; it
would only be incoherent, inactive, and vague.  Whereas by seeking it
in ourselves, where it truly is; by observing it there, listening to
it, marking how it profits by every acquirement of our mind, every joy
and sorrow of our heart, we soon shall learn what we best had do to
purify and increase it.


24

Our task within these limits will be sufficiently long and mysterious.
To increase and purify within us the desire for justice: how shall this
thing be done?  We have some vague conception of the ideal that we
would approach; but how changeable still, and illusory, is this ideal!
It is lessened by all that is still unknown to us in the universe, by
all that we do not perceive or perceive incompletely, by all that we
question too superficially.  It is hedged round by the most insidious
dangers; it falls victim to the strangest oblivion, the most
inconceivable blunders.  Of all our ideals it is the one that we should
watch with the greatest care and anxiety, with the most passionate,
pious eagerness and solicitude.  What seems irreproachably just to us
at the moment is probably the merest fraction of what would seem just
could we shift our point of view.  We need only compare what we were
doing yesterday with what we do to-day; and what we do to-day would
appear full of faults against equity, were it granted to us to rise
still higher, and compare it with what we shall do to-morrow.  There
needs but a passing event, a thought that uses, a duty to ourselves
that takes definite form, an unexpected responsibility that is suddenly
made clear, for the whole organisation of our inward justice to totter
and be transformed.  Slow as our advance may have been, we still should
find it impossible to begin life over again in the midst of many a
sorrow whereof we were the involuntary cause, many a discouragement to
which we unconsciously gave rise; and yet, when these things came into
being around us, we appeared to be in the right, and did not consider
ourselves unjust.  And even so are we convinced to-day of our excellent
intentions, even so do we tell ourselves that we are the cause if no
suffering and no tears, that we stay not a murmur of happiness, shorten
no moment of peace or of love; and it may be that there passes,
unperceived of us, to our right or our left, an illimitable injustice
that spreads over three-fourths of our life.


25

I chanced to-day to take up a copy of the "Arabian Nights," in the very
remarkable translation recently published by Dr. Mardrus; and I
marvelled at the extraordinary picture it gives of the ancient,
long-vanished civilisations.  Not in the Odyssey or the Bible, in
Xenophon or Plutarch, could their teaching be more clearly set forth.
There is one story that the Sultana Schahrazade tells--it is one of the
very finest the volume contains--that reveals a life as pure and as
admirable as mankind ever has known; a life replete with beauty,
happiness, and love; spontaneous and vivid, intelligent, nourishing,
and refined; an abundant life that, to a certain point, comes as near
truth as a life well can.  It is, in many respects, almost as perfect
in its moral as in its material civilisation.  And the pillars on which
this incomparable structure of happiness rests--like pillars of light
supporting the light--are formed of ideas of justice so exquisitely
delicate, counsels of wisdom so deeply penetrating, that we of to-day,
being less fine in grain, less eager and buoyant, have lost the power
to formulate, or to discern, them.  And for all that, this abode of
felicity, that harbours a moral life so active and vigorous, so
graciously grave, so noble--this palace, wherein the purest and holiest
wisdom governs the pleasures of rejoicing mankind, is in its entirety
based on so great an injustice, is enclosed by so vast, so profound, so
frightful an iniquity, that the wretchedest man of us all would shrink
in dismay from its glittering, gem-bestrewn threshold.  But of this
iniquity they who linger in that marvellous dwelling have not the
remotest suspicion.  It would seem that they never draw near to a
window; or that, should one by some chance fly open and reveal to their
sorrowful gaze the misery strewn in the midst of the revels and
feasting, they still would be blind to the crime which was infinitely
more revolting, infinitely more monstrous, than the most appalling
poverty--the crime of the slavery, and the even more terrible
degradation, of their women.  For these, however exalted their
position, and at the moment even when they are speaking to the men
round about them of goodness and justice--when they are reminding them
of their most touching and generous duties--these women never are more
than objects of pleasure, to be bought or sold, or given away in a
moment of gratitude, ostentation, or drunkenness, to any barbarous or
hideous master.


26

"They tell us," says the beautiful slave Nozhatan, as, concealed behind
a curtain of silk and of pearls, she speaks to Prince Sharkan and the
wise men of the kingdom; "they tell us that the Khalif Omar set forth
one night, in the company of the venerable Aslam Abou-Zeid, and that he
beheld, far away from his palace, a fire that was burning; and drew
near, as he thought that his presence might perhaps be of service.  And
he saw a poor woman who was kindling wood underneath a cauldron; and by
her side were two little wretched children, groaning most piteously.
And Omar said, 'Peace unto thee, O woman!  What dost thou here, alone
in the night and the cold?'  And she answered, 'Lord, I am making this
water to boil, that my children may drink, who perish of hunger and
cold; but for the misery we have to bear Allah will surely one day ask
reckoning of Omar the Khalif.'  And the Khalif, who was in disguise,
was much moved, and he said to her, 'But dost thou think, O woman, that
Omar can know of thy wretchedness, since he does not relieve it?'  And
she answered, 'Wherefore then is Omar the Khalif, if he be unaware of
the misery of his people and of each one of his subjects?'  Then the
Khalif was silent, and he said to Aslam Abou-Zeid, 'Let us go quickly
from hence.'  And he hastened until he had reached the storehouse of
his kitchens, and he entered therein and drew forth a sack of flour
from the midst of the other sacks, and also a jar that was filled to
the brim with sheep-fat, and he said to Abou-Zeid, 'O Abou-Zeid, help
thou me to charge these on my back.'  But Abou-Zeid refused, and he
cried, 'Suffer that I carry them on my back, O Commander of the
Faithful.'  And Omar said calmly to him, 'Wilt thou also, O Abou-Zeid,
bear the weight of my sins on the day of resurrection?'  And Abou-Zeid
was obliged to lay the jar filled with fat, and the sack of flour, on
the Khalif's back.  And Omar hastened, thus laden, until he had once
again reached the poor woman; and he took of the flour, and he took of
the fat, and placed these in the cauldron, over the fire; and with his
own hands did he then get ready the food, and he quickened the fire
with his breath; and as he bent over, his beard being long, the smoke
from the wood forced its way through the beard of the Khalif.  And at
last, when the food was prepared, Omar offered it unto the woman and
the two little children; and with his breath did he cool the food while
they ate their fill.  Then he left them the sack of flour and the jar
of fat; and he went on his way, and said unto Aslam Abou-Zeid, 'O
Abou-Zeid, the light from this fire I have seen to-day has enlightened
me also.'"


27

And it is thus that, a little further on, there speaks to a very wise
king one of five pensive maidens whom this king is invited to purchase:
"Know thou, O king," she says, "that the most beautiful deed one can do
is the deed that is disinterested.  And so do they tell us that in
Israel once were two brothers, and that one asked the other, 'Of all
the deeds thou hast done, which was the most wicked?'  And his brother
replied, 'This.  As I passed a hen-roost one day, I stretched out my
arm and I seized a chicken and strangled it, and then flung it back
into the roost.  That is the wickedest deed of my life.  And thou, O my
brother, what is thy wickedest action?'  And he answered, 'That I
prayed to Allah one day to demand a favour of him.  For it is only when
the soul is simply uplifted on high that prayer can be beautiful.'"

And one of her companions, captive and slave like herself, also speaks
to the king: "Learn to know thyself," she says.  "Learn to know
thyself!  And do thou not act till then.  And do thou then only act in
accordance with all thy desires, but having great care always that thou
do not injure thy neighbour."

To this last formula our morality of today has nothing to add; nor can
we conceive a precept that shall be more complete.  At most we could
widen somewhat the meaning of the word "neighbour," and raise, render
somewhat more subtle and more elastic, that of the word "injure."  And
the book in which these words are found is a monument of horror,
notwithstanding all its flowers and all its wisdom  a monument of
horror and blood and tears, of despotism and slavery.  And they who
pronounce these words are slaves.  A merchant buys them I know not
where, and sells them to some old hag who teaches them, or causes them
to be taught, philosophy, poetry, all Eastern sciences, in order that
one day they may become gifts worthy of a king.  And when their
education is finished, and their beauty and wisdom call forth the
admiration of all who approach them, the industrious, prudent old woman
does indeed offer them to a very wise, very just king.  And when this
very wise, very just king has taken their virginity from them, and
seeks other loves, he will probably bestow them (I have forgotten the
end of this particular story, but it is the invariable destiny of all
the heroines of these marvellous legends) on his viziers.  And these
viziers will give them away in exchange for a vase of perfume or a belt
studded with jewels; or perhaps despatch them to a distant country,
there to conciliate a powerful protector, or a hideous, but dreaded,
rival.  And these women, so fully conscious of themselves, whose gaze
can penetrate so deeply into the consciousness of others--these women
who forever are pondering the loftiest, grandest problems of justice,
of the morality of men and of nations--never throw one questioning
glance on their fate, or for an instant suspect the abominable
injustice whereof they are the victims.  Nor do those suspect it either
who listen to them, and love and admire them, and understand them.  And
we who marvel at this--we who also reflect on justice and virtue, on
pity and love--are we so sure that they who come after us shall not
some day find, in our present social condition, a spectacle no less
disconcerting?


28

It is difficult for us to imagine what the ideal justice will be, for
every thought of ours that tends towards it is clogged by the injustice
wherein we still live.  Who shall say what new laws or relations will
stand revealed when the misfortunes and inequalities due to the action
of man shall have been swept away; when, in accordance with the
principles of evolutionary morality, each individual shall "reap the
results, good or bad, of his own nature, and of the consequences that
ensue from that nature"?  At present things happen otherwise; and we
may unhesitatingly declare that, as far as the material condition of
the vast bulk of mankind is concerned, the connection between conduct
and consequences--to use Spencer's formula--exists only in the most
ludicrous, arbitrary, and iniquitous fashion.  Is there not some
audacity in our imagining that our thoughts can possibly be just when
the body of each one of us is steeped to the neck in injustice?  And
from this injustice no man is free, be it to his loss or his gain:
there is not one whose efforts are not disproportionately rewarded,
receiving too much or too little; not one who is not either advantaged
or handicapped.  And endeavour as we may to detach our mind from this
inveterate injustice, this lingering trace of the sub-human morality
needful for primitive races, it is idle to think that our thoughts can
be as strenuous, independent, or clear as they might have been had the
last vestige of this injustice disappeared; it is idle to think that
they can achieve the same result.  The side of the human mind that can
attain a region loftier than reality is necessarily timid and
hesitating.  Human thought is capable of many things; it has, in the
course of time, brought startling improvement to bear upon what seemed
immutable in the species or the race.  But even at the moment when it
is pondering the transformation of which it has caught a distant
glimpse, the improvement that it so eagerly desires, even then it is
still thinking, feeling, seeing like the thing that it seeks to alter,
even then it lies captive beneath the yoke.  All its efforts
notwithstanding, it is practically that which it would change.  For the
mind of man lacks the power to forecast the future; it has been formed
rather to explain, judge, and co-ordinate that which was, to help,
foster, and make known what already exists, but so far cannot be seen;
and when it ventures into what is not yet, it will rarely produce
anything very salutary or very enduring.  And the influence of the
social condition in which we exist lies heavy upon it.  How can we
frame a satisfactory idea of justice, and ponder it loyally, with the
needful tranquillity, when injustice surrounds us on every side?
Before we can study justice, or speak of it with advantage, it must
become what it is capable of being: a social force, irreproachable and
actual.  At present all we can do is to invoke its unconscious, secret,
and, as it were, almost imperceptible efforts.  We contemplate it from
the shores of human injustice; never yet has it been granted us to gaze
on the open sea beneath the illimitable, inviolate sky of a conscience
without reproach.  If men had at least done all that it was possible
for them to do in their own domain, they would then have the right to
go further, and question elsewhere; and their thoughts would probably
be clearer, were their consciences more at ease.


29

And further, a heavy reproach lies on us and chills our ardour whenever
we try to grow better, to increase our knowledge, our love, our
forgiveness.  Though we purify our consciousness and ennoble our
thoughts, though we strive to render life softer and sweeter for those
who are near us, all our efforts halt at our threshold, and have no
influence on what lies outside our door; and the moment we leave our
home we feel that we have done nothing, that there is nothing for us to
do, and that we are taking part, ourselves notwithstanding, in the
great anonymous injustice.  Is it not almost ludicrous that we, who
within our four walls strive to be noble and faithful, pitiful, simple
and loyal; we whose consciousness balances the nicest, most delicate
problems, and rejects even the suspicion of a bitter thought, have no
sooner gone into the street and met faces that are unfamiliar, than, at
that very instant, and without the least possibility of our having it
otherwise, all pity, equity, love, should be completely ignored by us?
What dignity, what loyalty, can there be in this double life, so wise
and humane, uplifted and thoughtful, this side the threshold, and
beyond it so callous, so instinctive and pitiless!  For it is enough
that we should feel the cold a little less than the labourer who passes
by, that we should be better fed or clad than he, that we should buy
any object that is not strictly indispensable, and we have
unconsciously returned, through a thousand byways, to the ruthless act
of primitive man despoiling his weaker brother.  There is no single
privilege we enjoy but close investigation will prove it to be the
result of a perhaps very remote abuse of power, of an unknown violence
or ruse of long ago; and all these we set in motion again as we sit at
our table, stroll idly through the town, or lie at night in a bed that
our own hands have not made.  Nay, what is even the leisure that
enables us to improve, to grow more compassionate and gentler, to think
more fraternally of the injustice others endure--what is this, in
truth, but the ripest fruit of the great injustice?


30

These scruples, I know, must not be carried too far: they would either
induce a spirit of useless revolt, possibly disastrous to the species
whose mild and mighty sluggishness we are bound to respect; or they
would lead us back to I know not what mystic, inert renouncement,
directly opposed to the most evident and unchanging desires of life.
Life has laws that we call inevitable; but we are already becoming more
sparing in our use of the word.  And here especially do we note the
change that has come over the attitude of the wise and upright man.
Marcus Aurelius--than whom perhaps none ever craved more earnestly for
justice, or possessed a soul more wisely impressionable, more nobly
sensitive--Marcus Aurelius never asked himself what might be happening
outside that admirable little circle of light wherein his virtue and
consciousness, his divine meekness and piety, had gathered those who
were near him, his friends and his servants.  Infinite iniquity, he
knew full well, stretched around him on every side; but with this he
had no concern.  To him it seemed a thing that must be, a thing
mysterious and sacred as the mighty ocean; the boundless domain of the
gods, of fatality, of laws unknown and superior, irresistible,
irresponsible, and eternal.  It did not lessen his courage; on the
contrary, it enhanced his confidence, his concentration, and spurred
him upwards, like the flame that, confined to a narrow area, rises
higher and higher, alone in the night, urged on by the darkness.  He
accepted the decree of fate, that allotted slavery to the bulk of
mankind.  Sorrowfully but with full conviction, did he submit to the
irrevocable law; wherein he once again gave proof of his piety and his
virtue.  He retired into himself, and there, in a kind of sunless,
motionless void, became still more just, still more humane.  And in
each succeeding century do we find a similar ardour, self-centred and
solitary, among those who were wise and good.  The name of more than
one immovable law might change, but its infinite part remained ever the
same; and each one regarded it with the like resigned and chastened
melancholy.  But we of to-day--what course are we to pursue?  We know
that iniquity is no longer necessary.  We have invaded the region of
the gods, of destiny, and unknown laws.  These may still control
disease or accident, perhaps, no less than the tempest, the
lightning-flash, and most of the mysteries of death--we have not yet
penetrated to them--but we are well aware that poverty, wretchedness,
hopeless toil, slavery, famine, are completely outside their domain.
It is we who organise these, we who maintain and distribute them.
These frightful scourges, that have grown so familiar, are wielded by
us alone; and belief in their superhuman origin is becoming rarer and
rarer.  The religious, impassable ocean, that excused and protected the
retreat into himself of the sage and the man of good, now only exists
as a vague recollection.  To-day Marcus Aurelius could no longer say
with the same serenity: "They go in search of refuges, of rural
cottages, of mountains and the seashore; thou too art wont to cherish
an eager desire for these things.  But is this not the act of an
ignorant, unskilled man, seeing that it is granted thee at whatever
hour thou pleasest to retire within thyself?  It is not possible for
man to discover a retreat more tranquil, less disturbed by affairs,
than that which he finds in his soul; especially if he have within him
those things the contemplation of which suffices to procure immediate
enjoyment of the perfect calm, which is no other, to my mind, than the
perfect agreement of soul."

Other matters concern us to-day than this agreement of soul; or let us
rather say that what we have to do is to bring into agreement there
that from which the soul of Marcus Aurelius was free--three-fourths of
the sorrows of mankind, in a word--which have become real to us,
intelligible, human, and urgent, and are no longer regarded as the
inexplicable, immutable, intangible decrees of fatality.


31

This does not imply, however, that we should abandon the old sages'
desire for "agreement"; and even though we may not be entitled to
expect such perfect "agreement" as they derived from their pardonable
egoism, we may still look for agreement of a provisional, conditional
kind.  And although such "agreement" be not the last word of morality,
it is none the less indispensable that we should begin by being as just
as we possibly can within ourselves and to those round about us, our
neighbours, our friends, and our servants.  It is at the moment when we
have become absolutely just to these, and within our own consciousness,
that we realise our great injustice to all the others.  The method of
being more practically just towards these last is not yet known to us;
to return to great, heroic renouncements would effect but little, for
these are incapable of unanimous action, and would probably run counter
to the profoundest laws of nature, which rejects renouncement in every
form save that of maternal love.

This practical justice, therefore, remains the secret of the race.  Of
such secrets it has many, which it reveals one by one, at such moments
of history as become truly critical; and the solutions it offers to
insuperable difficulties are almost always unexpected, and of strangest
simplicity.  The hour approaches, perhaps, when it will speak once
more.  Let us hope, without being too sanguine; for we must bear in
mind that humanity has yet by no means emerged from the period of
"sacrificed generations."  History has known no others; and it is
possible that, to the end of time, all generations may call themselves
sacrificed.  Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that the sacrifices,
however unjust and useless they still may be, are growing ever less
inhuman and less inevitable; and that the laws which govern them are
becoming better and better known, and would seem to draw nearer and
nearer to those that a lofty mind might accept without being pitiless.


32

It must be admitted, however, that a majestic, redoubtable slowness
attends the movements of these "ideas of the species."  Centuries had
to pass before it dawned upon primitive men, who fled from each other,
or fought when they met at the mouth of their caverns, that they would
do well to form into groups, and unite in defence against the mighty
enemies who threatened them from without.  And besides, these "ideas"
of the species will often be widely different from those that the
wisest man might hold.  They would seem to be independent, spontaneous,
often based on facts of which no trace is shown by the human reason of
the epoch that witnessed their birth; and indeed there is no graver or
more disturbing problem before the moralist or sociologist than that of
determining whether all his efforts can hasten by one hour or divert by
one hair's-breadth the decisions of the great anonymous mass which
proceeds, step by step, towards its indiscernible goal.

Long ago--so long indeed that this is one of the first affirmations of
science when, quitting the bowels of the earth, the glaciers and
grottoes, it ceased to call itself geology and palaeontology and became
the history of man--humanity passed through a crisis not wholly unlike
that which now lies ahead of it, or is actually menacing it at the
moment; the difference being only that in those days the dilemma seemed
vastly more tragic and more unsolvable.  It may truly be said that
mankind never has known a more perilous or more decisive hour, or a
period when it drew nearer its ruin; and the fact that we exist to-day
would appear to be due to the unexpected expedient which saved the race
at the moment when the scourge that fed on man's very reason, on all
that was best and most irresistible in his instinct of justice and
injustice, was actually on the point of destroying the heroic
equilibrium between the desire to live and the possibility of living.

I refer to the acts of violence, rapine, outrage, murder, which were of
natural occurrence among the earliest human groups.  These crimes,
which will probably have been of the most frightful description, must
have very seriously endangered the existence of the race; for vengeance
is the terrible, and, as it were, the epidemic form which the craving
for justice at first assumes.  Now this spirit of vengeance, abandoned
to itself and forever multiplying--revenge followed by the revenge of
revenge--would finally have engulfed, if not the whole of mankind, at
least all those of the earliest men who were possessed of energy or
pride.  We find, however, that among these barbarous races, as among
most of the existing savage tribes whose habits are known to us, there
comes a time, usually at the period when their weapons are growing too
deadly, when this vengeance suddenly halts before a singular custom,
known as the "blood-tribute," or the "composition for murder;" which
allows the homicide to escape the reprisals of the victim's friends and
relations by payment to them of an indemnity, that, from being
arbitrary at the start, soon becomes strictly graduated.

In the whole history of these infant races, in whom impulse and heroism
were the predominant factors, there is nothing stranger, nothing more
astounding, than this almost universal custom, which for all its
ingenuity would seem almost too long-suffering and mercantile.  May we
attribute it to the foresight of the chiefs?  We find it in races among
whom authority might almost be said to be entirely lacking.  Did it
originate among the old men, the thinkers, the sages, of the primitive
groups?  That is not more probable.  For underlying this custom there
is a thought which is at the same time higher and lower than could be
the thought of an isolated prophet or genius of those barbarous days.
The sage, the prophet, the genius--above all, the untrained genius--is
rather inclined to carry to extremes the generous and heroic tendencies
of the clan or epoch to which he belongs.  He would have recoiled in
disgust from this timid, cunning evasion of a natural and sacred
revenge, from this odious traffic in friendship, fidelity, and love.
Nor is it conceivable, on the other hand, that he should have attained
sufficient loftiness of spirit to be able to let his gaze travel beyond
the noblest and most incontestable duties of the moment, and to behold
only the superior interest of the tribe or the race: that mysterious
desire for life, which the wisest of the wise among us to-day are
generally unable to perceive or to justify until they have wrought
grave and painful conquest over their isolated reason and their heart.

No, it was not the thought of man which found the solution.  On the
contrary, it was the unconsciousness of the mass, compelled to act in
self-defence against thoughts  too  intrinsically, individually human
to satisfy the irreducible exigencies of life on this earth.  The
species is extremely patient, extremely long-suffering.  It will bear
as long as it can and carry as far as it can the burden which reason,
the desire for improvement, the imagination, the passions, vices,
virtues, and feelings natural to man, may combine to impose upon it.
But the moment the burden becomes too overwhelming, and disaster
threatens, the species will instantaneously, with the utmost
indifference, fling it aside.  It is careless as to the means; it will
adopt the one that is nearest, the simplest, most practical, being
doubtless perfectly satisfied that its own idea is the justest and
best.  And of ideas it has only one, which is that it wishes to live;
and truly this idea surpasses all the heroism, all the generous dreams,
that may have reposed in the burden which it has discarded.

And indeed, in the history of human reason, the greatest and the
justest thoughts are not always those which attain the loftiest
heights.  It happens somewhat with the thoughts of men as with a
fountain; for it is only because the water has been imprisoned and
escapes through a narrow opening that it soars so proudly into the air.
As it issues from this opening and hurls itself towards the sky, it
would seem to despise the great, illimitable, motionless lake that
stretches out far beneath it.  And yet, say what one will, it is the
lake that is right.  For all its apparent motionlessness, for all its
silence, it is tranquilly accomplishing the immense and normal task of
the most important element of our globe; and the jet of water is merely
a curious incident, which soon returns into the universal scheme.  To
us the species is the great, unerring lake; and this even from the
point of view of the superior human reason that it would seem at times
to offend.  Its idea is the vastest of all, and contains every other;
it embraces limitless time and space.  And does not each day that goes
by reveal more and more clearly to us that the vastest idea, no matter
where it reside, always ends by becoming the most just and most
reasonable, the wisest and the most beautiful?


33

There are times when we ask ourselves whether it might not be well for
humanity that its destinies should be governed by the superior men
among us, the great sages, rather than by the instinct of the species,
that is always so slow and often so cruel.

It is doubtful whether this question could be answered to-day in quite
the same fashion as formerly.  It would surely have been highly
dangerous to confide the destinies of the species to Plato or
Aristotle, Marcus Aurelius, Shakespeare, or Montesquieu.  At the very
worst moments of the French Revolution the fate of the people was in
the hands of philosophers of none too mean an order.  It cannot be
denied, however, that in our time the habits of the thinker have
undergone a great change.  He has ceased to be speculative or Utopian;
he is no longer exclusively intuitive.  In politics as in literature,
in philosophy as in all the sciences, he displays less imagination, but
his powers as an observer have grown.  He inclines rather to
concentrate his attention on the thing that is, to study it and strive
at its organisation, than to precede it, or to endeavour to create what
is not yet, or never shall be.  And therefore he may possibly have some
claim to more authoritative utterance; nor would so much danger attend
his more direct intervention.  It must be admitted, however, that there
is no greater likelihood now than in former times of such intervention
being permitted him.  Nay, there is less, perhaps; for having become
more circumspect and less blinded by narrow convictions, he will be
less audacious, less imperious, and less impatient.  And yet it is
possible that, finding himself in natural sympathy with the species
which he is content merely to observe, he will by slow degrees acquire
more and more influence; so that here again, in ultimate analysis, it
is the species that will be right, the species that will decide: for it
will have guided him who observes it, and therefore, in following him
whom it has guided, it will truly only be following its own
unconscious, formless desires, which shall have been expressed by him,
and by him brought into light.


34

Until such time as the species shall discover the new and needful
experiment--and this it will quickly do when the danger becomes more
acute; nay, for all we know, the expedient may have already been found,
and, entirely unsuspected of us, be already transforming part of our
destinies--until such time, while bound to act in external matters as
though our brothers' salvation depended entirely on our exertions, it
is open to us, no less than to the sages of old, to retire occasionally
within ourselves.  We in our turn shall perhaps find there "one of
those things" of which the contemplation shall suffice to bring us
instantaneous enjoyment, if not of the perfect calm, at least of an
indestructible hope.  Though nature appear unjust, though nothing
authorise us to declare that a superior power, or the intellect of the
universe, rewards or punishes, here below or elsewhere, in accordance
with the laws of our consciousness or with other laws that we shall
some day admit; and, finally, though between man and man, in other
words, in our relations with our fellows, our admirable desire for
equity translate itself into a justice that is always incomplete, at
the mercy of every error of reason, of every ambush laid by personal
interest, and of all the evil habits of a social condition that still
is sub-human, it is none the less certain that an image of that
invisible and incorruptible justice, which we have vainly sought in the
sky or the universe, reposes in the depths of the moral life of every
man.  And though its method of action be such as to cause it to pass
unperceived of most of our fellows, often even of our own
consciousness, though all that it does be hidden and intangible, it is
none the less profoundly human and profoundly real.  It would seem to
hear, to examine, all that we say and think and strive for in our
exterior life; and if it find a little sincerity beneath, a little
earnest desire for good, it will transform these into moral forces that
shall extend and illumine our inner life, and help us to better
thoughts, better speech, better endeavour in the time to come.  It will
not add to, or take from, our wealth; it will bring no immunity from
disease or from lightning; it will not prolong by one hour the life of
the being we cherish; but if we have learned to reflect and to love,
if, in other words, heart and brain have both done their duty, it will
establish in heart and brain a contentment that, though perhaps
stripped of illusion, shall still be inexhaustible and noble; it will
confer a dignity of existence, and an intelligence, that shall suffice
to sustain our life after the loss of our wealth, after the stroke of
disease or of lightning has fallen, after the loved one has for ever
quitted our arms.  A good thought or deed brings a reward to our heart
that it cannot, in the absence of an universal judge of nature, extend
to the things around.  It endeavours to create within us the happiness
it is unable to produce in our material life.  Denied all external
outlet, it fills our soul the more.  It prepares the space that soon
shall be required by our developing intellect, our expanding peace and
love.  Helpless against the laws of nature, it is all-powerful over
those that govern the happy equilibrium of human consciousness.  And
this is true of every stage of thought, of every class of action.  A
vast distance might seem to divide the labourer who brings up his
children honourably, lives his humble life and honourably does the work
that falls to his lot, from the man who steadfastly perseveres in moral
heroism; but each of these is acting and living on the same plane as
the other, and the same loyal, consoling region receives them both.
And though it be certain that what we say and do must largely influence
our material happiness, yet, in ultimate analysis, it is only by means
of the spiritual organs that even material happiness can be fully and
permanently enjoyed.  Hence the preponderating importance of thought.
But of supreme importance, from the point of view of the reception we
shall offer to the joys and sorrows of life, is the character, the
frame of mind, the moral condition, that the things we have said and
done and thought will have created within us.  Here is evidence of
admirable justice; and the intimate happiness that our moral being
derives from the constant striving of the mind and heart for good,
becomes the more comprehensible when we realise that this happiness is
only the surface of the goodly thought or feeling that is shining
within our heart.  Here may we indeed find that intelligent, moral bond
between cause and effect that we have vainly sought in the external
world; here, in moral matters, reigning over the good and evil that are
warring in the depths of our consciousness, may we in truth discover a
justice exactly similar to the one which we could desire to recognise
in physical matters.  But whence do we derive this desire if not from
the justice within us; and is it not because this justice is so mighty
and active in our heart that we are reluctant to believe in its
non-existence in the universe?


35

We have spoken at great length of justice; but is it not the great
mystery of man, the one that tends to take the place of most of the
spiritual mysteries that govern his destiny?  It has dethroned more
than one god, more than one nameless power.  It is the star evolved
from the nebulous mass of our instincts and our incomprehensible life.
It is not the word of the enigma; and when, in the fulness of time, it
shall become clearer to us, and shall truly reign all over the earth,
there will come to us no greater knowledge of what we are, or why we
are, whence we come or whither we go; but we shall at least have obeyed
the first word of the enigma, and shall proceed, with a freer spirit
and a more tranquil heart, to the search for its last secret.

Finally, it comprises all the human virtues; and none but itself can
offer the welcoming smile whereby these are ennobled and purified, none
but itself can accord them the right to penetrate deep into our moral
life.  For every virtue must be maleficent and steeped in artifice that
cannot support the fixed and eager regard of justice.  And so do we
find it too at the heart of our every ideal.  It is at the centre of
our love of truth, at the centre of our love of beauty.  It is kindness
and pity, it is generosity, heroism, love; for all these are the acts
of justice of one who has risen sufficiently high to perceive that
justice and injustice are not exclusively confined to what lies before
him, to the narrow circle of obligations chance may have imposed, but
that they stretch far beyond years, beyond neighbouring destinies,
beyond what he regards as his duty, beyond what he loves, beyond what
he seeks and encounters, beyond what he approves or rejects, beyond his
doubts and his fears, beyond the wrong-doing and even the crimes of the
men, his brothers.




