II

THE EVOLUTION OF MYSTERY

It is not unreasonable to believe that the paramount interest of life,
all that is truly lofty and remarkable in the destiny of man, reposes
almost entirely in the mystery that surrounds us; in the two mysteries,
it may be, that are mightiest, most dreadful of all--fatality and
death.  And indeed there are many whom the fatigue induced in their
minds by the natural uncertainties of science has almost compelled to
accept this belief.  I too believe, though in a somewhat different
fashion, that the study of mystery in all its forms is the noblest to
which the mind of man can devote itself; and truly it has ever been the
occupation and care of those who in science and art, in philosophy and
literature, have refused to be satisfied merely to observe and portray
the trivial, well-recognised truths, facts, and realities of life.  And
we find that the success of these men in their endeavour, the depth of
their insight into all that they know, has most strictly accorded with
the respect in which they held all they did not know, with the dignity
that their mind or imagination was able to confer on the sum of
unknowable forces.  Our consciousness of the unknown wherein we have
being gives life a meaning and grandeur which must of necessity be
absent if we persist in considering only the things that are known to
us; if we too readily incline to believe that these must greatly
transcend in importance the things that we know not yet.


2

It behoves every man to frame for himself his own general conception of
the world.  On this conception reposes his whole human and moral
existence.  But this general conception of the world, when closely
examined, is truly no more than a general conception of the unknown.
And we must be careful; we have not the right, when ideas so vast
confront us, ideas the results of which are so highly important, to
select the one which seems most magnificent to us, most beautiful, or
most attractive.  The duty lies on us to choose the idea which seems
truest, or rather the only one which seems true; for I decline to
believe that we can sincerely hesitate between the truth that is only
apparent and the one that is real.  The moment must always come when we
feel that one of these two is possessed of more truth than the other.
And to this truth we should cling: in our actions, our words, and our
thoughts; in our art, in our science, in the life of our feelings and
intellect.  Its definition, perhaps, may elude us.  It may possibly
bring not one grain of reassuring conviction.  Nay, essentially,
perhaps, it may be but the merest impression, though profounder and
more sincere than any previous impression.  These things do not matter.
It is not imperative that the truth we have chosen should be
unimpeachable or of absolute certainty.  There is already great gain in
our having been brought to experience that the truths we had loved
before did not accord with reality or with faithful experience of life;
and we have every reason, therefore, to cherish our truth with
heartiest gratitude until its own turn shall come to experience the
fate it inflicted on its predecessor.  The great mischief, the one
which destroys our moral existence and threatens the integrity of our
mind and our character, is not that we should deceive ourselves and
love an uncertain truth, but that we should remain constant to one in
which we no longer wholly believe.


3

If we sought nothing more than to invest our conception of the unknown
with the utmost possible grandeur and tragedy, magnificence and might,
there would be no need of such restrictions.  From many points of view,
doubtless, the most beautiful, most touching, most religious attitude
in face of mystery is silence, and prayer, and fearful acceptance.
When this immense, irresistible force confronts us--this inscrutable,
ceaselessly vigilant power, humanly super-human, sovereignly
intelligent, and, for all we know, even personal--must it not, at first
sight, seem more reverent, worthier, to offer complete submission,
trying only to master our terror, than tranquilly to set on foot a
patient, laborious investigation?  But is the choice possible to us;
have we still the right to choose?  The beauty or dignity of the
attitude we shall assume no longer is matter of moment.  It is truth
and sincerity that are called for to-day for the facing of all
things--how much more when mystery confronts us!  In the past, the
prostration of man, his bending the knee, seemed beautiful because of
what, in the past, seemed to be true.  We have acquired no fresh
certitude, perhaps; but for us, none the less, the truth of the past
has ceased to be true.  We have not bridged the unknown; but still,
though we know not what it is, we do partially know what it is not; and
it is before this we should bow, were the attitude of our fathers to be
once more assumed by us.  For although it has not, perhaps, been
incontrovertibly proved that the unknown is neither vigilant nor
personal, neither sovereignly intelligent nor sovereignly just, or that
it possesses none of the passions, intentions, virtues and vices of
man, it is still incomparably more probable that the unknown is
entirely indifferent to all that appears of supreme importance in this
life of ours.  It is incomparably more probable that if, in the vast
and eternal scheme of the unknown, a minute and ephemeral place be
reserved for man, his actions, be he the strongest or weakest, the best
or the worst of men, will be as unimportant there as the movements of
the obscurest geological cell in the history of ocean or continent.
Though it may not have been irrefutably shown that the infinite and
invisible are not for ever hovering round us, dealing out sorrow or joy
in accordance with our good or evil intentions, guiding our destiny
step by step, and preparing, with the help of innumerable forces, the
incomprehensible but eternal law that governs the accidents of our
birth, our future, our death, and our life beyond the tomb, it is still
incomparably more probable that the invisible and infinite, intervene
as they may at every moment in our life, enter therein only as
stupendous, blind, indifferent elements; and that though they pass over
us, in us, penetrate into our being, and inspire and mould our life,
they are as careless of our individual existence as air, water, or
light.  And the whole of our conscious life, the life that forms our
one certitude, that is our one fixed point in time and space, rests
upon "incomparable probabilities" of this nature; but rarely are they
as "incomparable" as these.


4

The hour when a lofty conviction forsakes us should never be one of
regret.  If a belief we have clung to goes, or a spring snaps within
us; if we at last dethrone the idea that so long has held sway, this is
proof of vitality, progress, of our marching steadily onwards, and
making good use of all that lies to our hand.  We should rejoice at the
knowledge that the thought which so long has sustained us is proved
incapable now of even sustaining itself.  And though we have nothing to
put in the place of the spring that lies broken, there need still be no
cause for sadness.  Far better the place remain empty than that it be
filled by a spring which the rust corrodes, or by a new truth in which
we do not wholly believe.  And besides, the place is not really empty.
Determinate truth may not yet have arrived, but still, in its own deep
recess, there hides a truth without name, which waits and calls.  And
if it wait and call too long in the void, and nothing arise in the
place of the vanished spring, it still shall be found that, in moral no
less than in physical life, necessity will be able to create the organ
it needs, and that the negative truth will at last find sufficient
force in itself to set the idle machinery going.  And the lives that
possess no more than one force of this kind are not the least
strenuous, the least ardent, or the least useful.

And even though our belief forsake us entirely, it still will take with
it nothing of what we have given, nor will there be lost one single
sincere, religious, disinterested effort that we have put forth to
ennoble this faith, to exalt or embellish it.  Every thought we have
added, each worthy sacrifice we have had the courage to make in its
name, will have left its indelible mark on our moral existence.  The
body is gone, but the palace it built still stands, and the space it
has conquered will remain for ever unenclosed.  It is our duty, and one
we dare not renounce, to prepare homes for truths that shall come, to
maintain in good order the forces destined to serve them, and to create
open spaces within us; nor can the time thus employed be possibly
wasted.


5

These thoughts have arisen within me through my having been compelled,
a few days ago, to glance through two or three little dramas of mine,
wherein lies revealed the disquiet of a mind that has given itself
wholly to mystery; a disquiet legitimate enough in itself, perhaps, but
not so inevitable as to warrant its own complacency.  The keynote of
these little plays is dread of the unknown that surrounds us.  I, or
rather some obscure poetical feeling within me (for with the sincerest
of poets a division must often be made between the instinctive feeling
of their art and the thoughts of their real life), seemed to believe in
a species of monstrous, invisible, fatal power that gave heed to our
every action, and was hostile to our smile, to our life, to our peace
and our love.  Its intentions could not be divined, but the spirit of
the drama assumed them to be malevolent always.  In its essence,
perhaps, this power was just, but only in anger; and it exercised
justice in a manner so crooked, so secret, so sluggish and remote, that
its punishments--for it never rewarded--took the semblance of
inexplicable, arbitrary acts of fate.  We had there, in a word, more or
less the idea of the God of the Christian blent with that of ancient
fatality, lurking in nature's impenetrable twilight, whence it eagerly
watched, contested, and saddened the projects, the feelings, the
thoughts and the happiness of man.


6

This unknown would most frequently appear in the shape of death.  The
presence of death--infinite, menacing, for ever treacherously
active--filled every interstice of the poem.  The problem of existence
was answered only by the enigma of annihilation.  And it was a callous,
inexorable death; blind, and groping its mysterious way with only
chance to guide it; laying its hands preferentially on the youngest and
the least unhappy, since these held themselves less motionless than
others, and that every too sudden movement in the night arrested its
attention.  And around it were only poor little trembling, elementary
creatures, who shivered for an instant and wept, on the brink of a
gulf; and their words and their tears had importance only from the fact
that each word they spoke and each tear they shed fell into this gulf,
and were at times so strangely resonant there as to lead one to think
that the gulf must be vast if tear or word, as it fell, could send
forth so confused and muffled a sound.


7

Such a conception of life is not healthy, whatever show of reason it
may seem to possess; and I would not allude to it here were it not for
the fact that we find this idea, or one closely akin to it, governing
the hearts of most men, however tranquil, or thoughtful, or earnest
they may be, at the approach of the slightest misfortune.  There is
evidently a side to our nature which, notwithstanding all we may learn
and master and the certitudes we may acquire, destines us never to be
other than poor, weak, useless creatures, consecrated to death, and
playthings of the vast and indifferent forces that surround us.  We
appear for an instant in limitless space, our one appreciable mission
the propagation of a species that itself has no appreciable mission in
the scheme of a universe whose extent and duration baffle the most
daring, most powerful brain.  This is a truth; it is one of those
profound but sterile truths which the poet may salute as he passes on
his way; but it is a truth in the neighbourhood of which the man with
the thousand duties who lives in the poet will do well not to abide too
long.  And of truths such as this many are lofty and deserving of all
our respect, but in their domain it were unwise to lay ourselves down
and sleep.  So many truths environ us that it may safely be said that
few men can be found, of the wickedest even, who have not for counsel
and guide a grave and respectable truth.  Yes, it is a truth--the
vastest, most certain of truths, if one will--that our life is nothing,
and our efforts the merest jest; our existence, that of our planet,
only a miserable accident in the history of worlds; but it is no less a
truth that, to us, our life and our planet are the most important, nay,
the only important phenomena in the history of worlds.  And of these
truths which is the truer?  Does the first of necessity destroy the
second?  Without the second, should we have had the courage to
formulate the first?  The one appeals to our imagination, and may be
helpful to it in its own domain; but the other directly interests our
actual life.  It is well that each have its share.  The truth that is
undoubtedly truest from the human point of view must evidently appeal
to us more than the truth which is truest from the universal point of
view.  Ignorant as we are of the aim of the universe, how shall we tell
whether or no it concern itself with the interests of our race?  The
probable futility of our life and our species is a truth which regards
us indirectly only, and may well, therefore, be left in suspense.  The
other truth, that indicates clearly the importance of life, may perhaps
be more restricted, but it has a direct, incontestable, actual bearing
upon ourselves.  To sacrifice or even subordinate it to an alien truth
must surely be wrong.  The first truth should never be lost sight of;
it will strengthen and illumine the second, whose government will thus
become more intelligent and benign: the first truth will teach us to
profit by all that the second does not include.  And if we allow it to
sadden our heart or arrest our action, we have not sufficiently
realised that the vast but precarious space it fills in the region of
important truths is governed by countless problems which as yet are
unsolved; while the problems whereon the second truth rests are daily
resolved by real life.  The first truth is still in the dangerous,
feverish stage, through which all truths must pass before they can
penetrate freely into our heart and our brain; a stage of jealousy,
truculence, which renders the neighbourhood of another truth
insupportable to them.  We must wait till the fever subsides; and if
the home that we have prepared in our spirit be sufficiently spacious
and lofty, we shall find very soon that the most contradictory truths
will be conscious only of the mysterious bond that unites them, and
will silently join with each other to place in the front rank of all,
and there help and sustain, that truth from among them which calmly
went on with its work while the others were fretfully jangling; that
truth which can do the most good, and brings with it the uttermost hope.


The strangest feature of the present time is the confusion which reigns
in our instincts and feelings--in our ideas, too, save at our most
lucid, most tranquil, most thoughtful moments--on the subject of the
intervention of the unknown or mysterious in the truly grave events of
life.  We find, amidst this confusion, feelings which no longer accord
with any precise, living, accepted idea; such, for instance, as concern
the existence of a determinate God, conceived as more or less
anthropomorphic, providential, personal, and unceasingly vigilant.  We
find feelings which, as yet, are only partially ideas; as those which
deal with fatality, destiny, the justice of things.  We find ideas
which will soon turn into feelings; those that treat of the law of the
species, evolution, selection, the will-power of the race, &c.  And,
finally, we discover ideas which still are purely ideas, too uncertain
and scattered for us to be able to predict at what moment they will
become feelings, and thus materially influence our actions, our
acceptance of life, our joys, and our sorrows.


9

If in actual life this confusion is not so apparent, it is only because
actual life will but rarely express itself, or condescend to make use
of image or formula to relate its experience.  This state of mind,
however, is clearly discernible in all those whose self-imposed mission
it is to depict real life, to explain and interpret it, and throw light
on the hidden causes of good and evil destiny.  It is of the poets I
speak, of dramatic poets above all, who are occupied with external and
active life; and it matters not whether they produce novels, tragedies,
the drama properly so called, or historical studies, for I give to the
words poets and dramatic poets their widest significance.

It cannot be denied that the possession of a dominant idea, one that
may be said to exclude all others, must confer considerable power on
the poet, or "interpreter of life;" and in the degree that the idea is
mysterious, and difficult of definition or control, will be the extent
of this power and its conspicuousness in the poem.  And this is
entirely legitimate, so long as the poet himself has not the least
doubt as to the value of his idea; and there are many admirable poets
who have never hesitated, paused, or doubted.  Thus it is that we find
the idea of heroic duty filling so enormous a space in the tragedies of
Corneille, that of absolute faith in the dramas of Calderon, that of
the tyranny of destiny in the works of Sophocles.


10

Of these three ideas, that of heroic duty is the most human and the
least mysterious; and although far more restricted to-day than at the
time of Corneille--for there are few such duties which it would not now
be reasonable, and even heroic, perhaps, to call into question, and it
becomes ever more and more difficult to find one that is truly
heroic--conditions may still be imagined under which recourse thereto
may be legitimate in the poet.

But will he discover in faith--to-day no more than a shadowy memory to
the most fervent believer--that inspiration and strength, by whose aid
Corneille was able to depict the God of the Christians as the august,
omnipresent actor of his dramas, invisible but untiringly active, and
sovereign always?  Or is it possible still for a reasonable being,
whose eyes rest calmly on the life about him, to believe in the tyranny
of fate; of that sluggish, unswerving, preordained, inscrutable force
which urges a given man, or family, by given ways to a given disaster
or death?  For though it be true that our life is subject to many an
unknown force, we at least are aware that these forces would seem to be
blind, indifferent, unconscious, and that their most insidious attacks
may be in some measure averted by the wisest among us.  Can we still be
allowed, then, to believe that the universe holds a power so idle, so
wretched, as to concern itself solely in saddening, frustrating, and
terrifying the projects and schemes of man?

Immanent justice is another mysterious and sovereign force, whereof use
has been made; but it is only the feeblest of writers who have ventured
to accept this postulate in its entirety: only those to whom reality
and probability were matters of smallest moment.  The affirmation that
wickedness is necessarily and visibly punished in this life, and virtue
as necessarily and visibly rewarded, is too manifestly opposed to the
most elementary daily experience, too wildly inconsistent a dream, for
the true poet ever to accept it as the basis of his drama.  And, on the
other hand, if we refer to a future life the bestowal of reward and
punishment, we are merely entering by another gate the region of divine
justice.  For, indeed, unless immanent justice be infallible,
permanent, unvarying, and inevitable, it becomes no more than a
curious, well-meaning caprice of fate; and from that moment it no
longer is justice, or even fate: it shrinks into merest chance--in
other words, almost into nothingness.

There is, it is true, a very real immanent justice; I refer to the
force which enacts that the vicious, malevolent, cruel, disloyal man
shall be morally less happy than he who is honest and good,
affectionate, gentle, and just.  But here it is inward justice whose
workings we see; a very human, natural, comprehensible force, the study
of whose cause and effect must of necessity lead to psychological
drama, where there no longer is need of the vast and mysterious
background which lent its solemn and awful perspective to the events of
history and legend.  But is it legitimate deliberately to misconceive
the unknown that governs our life in order that we may reconstruct this
mysterious background?


11

While on this subject of dominant and mysterious ideas, we shall do
well to consider the forms that the idea of fatality has taken, and for
ever is taking: for fatality even to-day still provides the supreme
explanation for all that we cannot explain; and it is to fatality still
that the thoughts of the "interpreter of life" unceasingly turn.

The poets have endeavoured to transform it, to make it attractive, to
restore its youth.  They have contrived, in their works, a hundred new
and winding canals through which they may introduce the icy waters of
the great and desolate river whose banks have been gradually shunned by
the dwellings of men.  And of those most successful in making us share
the illusion that they were conferring a solemn, definitive meaning on
life, there are few who have not instinctively recognised the sovereign
importance conferred on the actions of men by the irresponsible power
of an ever august and unerring destiny.  Fatality would seem to be the
pre-eminent tragical force; it no sooner appears in a drama than it
does of itself three-fourths of all that needs doing.  It may safely be
said that the poet who could find to-day, in material science, in the
unknown that surrounds us, or in his own heart, the equivalent for
ancient fatality--a force, that is, of equally irresistible
predestination, a force as universally admitted--would infallibly
produce a masterpiece.  It is true, however, that he would have, at the
same time, to solve the mighty enigma for whose word we are all of us
seeking, so that this supposition is not likely to be realised very
soon.


12

This is the source, then, whence the lustral water is drawn with which
the poets have purified the cruellest of tragedies.  There is an
instinct in man that worships fatality, and he is apt to regard
whatever pertains thereto as incontestable, solemn, and beautiful.  His
cry is for freedom; but circumstances arise when he rather would tell
himself that he is not free.  The unbending, malignant goddess is more
acceptable often than the divinity who only asks for an effort that
shall avert disaster.  All things notwithstanding, it pleases us still
to be ruled by a power that nothing can turn from its purpose; and
whatever our mental dignity may lose by such a belief is gained by a
kind of sentimental vanity in us, which complacently dwells on the
measureless force that for ever keeps watch on our plans, and confers
on our simplest action a mysterious, eternal significance.  Fatality,
briefly, explains and excuses all things, by relegating to a sufficient
distance in the invisible or the unintelligible all that it would be
hard to explain, and more difficult still to excuse.


13

Therefore it is that so many have turned to the dismembered statue of
the terrible goddess who reigned in the dramas of Euripides, Sophocles,
and Aeschylus, and that the scattered fragments of her limbs have
provided more than one poet with the marble required for the fashioning
of a newer divinity, who should be more human, less arbitrary, and less
inconceivable than she of old.  The fatality of the passions, for
instance, has thus been evolved.  But for a passion truly to be fatal
in a soul aware of itself, for the mystery to reappear that shall make
crime pardonable by investing it with loftiness and lifting it high
above the will of man: for these we require the intervention of a God,
or some other equally irresistible, infinite force.  Wagner, therefore,
in "Tristram and Iseult," makes use of the philtre, as Shakespeare of
the witches in "Macbeth," Racine of the oracle of Calchas in
"Iphigenia" and of Venus' hatred in "Phedre."  We have travelled in a
circle, and find ourselves back once more at the very heart of the
craving of former days.  This expedient may be more or less legitimate
in archaic or legendary drama, where there is room for all kinds of
poetic fantasy; but in the drama which pretends to actual truth we
demand another intervention, one that shall seem to us more genuinely
irresistible, if crimes like Macbeth's, such a deed of horror as that
to which Agamemnon consented: perhaps, too, the kind of love that
burned in Phedre, shall achieve their mysterious excuse, and acquire a
grandeur and sombre nobility that intrinsically they do not possess.
Take away from Macbeth the fatal predestination, the intervention of
hell, the heroic struggle with an occult justice that for ever is
revealing itself through a thousand fissures of revolting nature, and
Macbeth is merely a frantic, contemptible murderer.  Take away the
oracle of Calchas, and Agamemnon becomes abominable.  Take away the
hatred of Venus, and what is Phedre but a neurotic creature, whose
"moral quality" and power of resistance to evil are too pronouncedly
feeble for our intellect to take any genuine interest in the calamity
that befalls her?



14

The truth is that these supernatural interventions to-day satisfy
neither spectator nor reader.  Though he know it not, perhaps, and
strive as he may, it is no longer possible for him to regard them
seriously in the depths of his consciousness.  His conception of the
universe is other.  He no longer detects the working of a narrow,
determined, obstinate, violent will in the multitude of forces that
strive in him and about him.  He knows that the criminal whom he may
meet in actual life has been urged into crime by misfortune, education,
atavism, or by movements of passion which he has himself experienced
and subdued, while recognising that there might have been circumstances
under which their repression would have been a matter of exceeding
difficulty.  He will not, it is true, always be able to discover the
cause of these misfortunes or movements of passion; and his endeavour
to account for the injustice of education or heredity will probably be
no less unsuccessful.  But, for all that, he will no longer incline to
attribute a particular crime to the wrath of a God, the direct
intervention of hell, or to a series of changeless decrees inscribed in
the book of fate.  Why ask of him, then, to accept in a poem an
explanation which he refuses in life?  Is the poet's duty not rather to
furnish an explanation loftier, clearer, more widely and profoundly
human than any his reader can find for himself?  For, indeed, this
wrath of the gods, intervention of hell, and writing in letters of
fire, are to him no more to-day than so many symbols that have long
ceased to content him.  It is time that the poet should realise that
the symbol is legitimate only when it stands for accepted truth, or for
truth which as yet we cannot, or will not, accept; but the symbol is
out of place at a time when it is truth itself that we seek.  And,
besides, to merit admission into a really living poem, the symbol
should be at least as great and beautiful as the truth for which it
stands, and should, moreover, precede this truth, and not follow a long
way behind.


15

We see, therefore, how surpassingly difficult it must have become to
introduce great crimes, or cruel, unbridled, tragical passions, into a
modern work, above all if that work be destined for stage presentation;
for the poet will seek in vain for the mysterious excuse these crimes
or passions demand.  And yet, for all that, so deeply is this craving
for mysterious excuse implanted within us, so satisfied are we that man
is, at bottom, never as guilty as he may appear to be, that we are
still fully content, when considering passions or crimes of this
nature, to admit some kind of fatal intervention that at least may not
seem too manifestly unacceptable.

This excuse, however, will be sought by us only when the persons guilty
of crimes which are contrary to human nature, when the victims of
misfortunes which they could not foresee, and which seem undeserved to
us, inexplicable, wholly abnormal, are more or less superior beings,
possessed of their fullest share of consciousness.  We are loath to
admit that an extraordinary crime or disaster can have a purely human
cause.  In spite of all, we persistently seek in some way to explain
the inexplicable.  We should not be satisfied if the poet were simply
to say to us: "You see here the wrong that was done by this strong,
this conscious, intelligent man.  Behold the misfortune this hero
encountered; this good man's ruin and sorrow.  See, too, how this sage
is crushed by tragic, irremediable wickedness.  The human causes of
these events are evident to you.  I have no other explanation to offer,
unless it be perhaps the indifference of the universe towards the
actions of man."  Our dissatisfaction would vanish if he could succeed
in conveying to us the sensation of this indifference, if he could show
it in action; but, as it is the property of indifference never to
interfere or act, that would seem to be more or less unachievable.


16

But when we turn to the by no means inevitable jealousy of Othello, or
to the misfortunes of Romeo and Juliet, which were surely not
preordained, we discover no need of explanation, or of the purifying
influence of fatality.  In another drama, Ford's masterpiece, "'Tis
Pity She's a Whore," which revolves around the incestuous love of
Giovanni for his sister Annabella, we are compelled either to turn away
in horror, or to seek the mysterious excuse in its habitual haunt on
the shore of the gulf.  But even here, the first painful shock over, we
find it is not imperative.  For the love of brother for sister, viewed
from a standpoint sufficiently lofty, is a crime against morality, but
not against human nature; and there is at least some measure of
palliation in the youth of the pair, and in the passion that blinds
them.  Othello, too, the semi-barbarian who does Desdemona to death,
has been goaded to madness by the machinations of Iago; and even this
last can plead his by no means gratuitous hatred.  The disasters that
weighed so heavily on the lovers of Verona were due to the inexperience
of the victims, to the manifest disproportion between their strength
and that of their enemies; and although we may pity the man who
succumbs to superior human force, his downfall does not surprise us.
We are not impelled to seek explanation elsewhere, to ask questions of
fate; and unless he appear to fall victim to superhuman injustice, we
are content to tell ourselves that what has happened was bound to
happen.  It is only when disaster occurs after every precaution is
taken that we could ourselves have devised, that we become conscious of
the need for other explanation.


17

We find it difficult, therefore, to conceive or admit as naturally,
humanly possible that a crime shall be committed by a person who
apparently is endowed with fullest intelligence and consciousness; or
that misfortune should befall him which seems in its essence to be
inexplicable, undeserved, and unexpected.  It follows, therefore, that
the poet can only place on the stage (this phrase I use merely as an
abbreviation: it would be more correct to say, "cause us to assist at
some adventure whereof we know personally neither the actors nor the
totality of the circumstances") faults, crimes, and acts of injustice
committed by persons of defective consciousness, as also disasters
befalling feeble beings unable to control their desires--innocent
creatures, it may be, but thick-sighted, imprudent, and reckless.
Under these conditions there would seem to be no call for the
intervention of anything beyond the limit of normal human psychology.
But such a conception of the theatre would be at absolute variance with
real life, where we find crimes committed by persons of fullest
consciousness, and the most inexplicable, inconceivable, unmerited
misfortunes befalling the wisest, the best, most virtuous and prudent
of men.  Dramas which deal with unconscious creatures, whom their own
feebleness oppresses and their own desires overcome, excite our
interest and arouse our pity; but the veritable drama, the one which
probes to the heart of things and grapples with important truths--our
own personal drama, in a word, which for ever hangs over our life--is
the one wherein the strong, intelligent, and conscious commit errors,
faults, and crimes which are almost inevitable; wherein the wise and
upright struggle with all-powerful calamity, with forces destructive to
wisdom and virtue: for it is worthy of note that the spectator, however
feeble, dishonest even, he may be in real life, still enrols himself
always among the virtuous, just, and strong; and when he reflects on
the misfortunes of the weak, or even witnesses them, he resolutely
declines to imagine himself in the place of the victims.


18

Here we attain the limit of the human will, the gloomy boundary-line of
the influence that the most just and enlightened of men is able to
exert on events that decide his future happiness or sorrow.  No great
drama exists, or poem of lofty aim, but one of its heroes shall stray
to this frontier where his destiny waits for the seal.  Why has this
wise, this virtuous man committed this fault or this crime?  Why has
that woman, who knows so well the meaning of all that she does,
hazarded the gesture which must so inevitably summon everlasting
sorrow?  By whom have the links been forged of the chain of disaster
whose fetters have crushed this innocent family?  Why do all things
crumble around one, and fall into ruins, while the other, his
neighbour, less active and strong, less skilful and wise, finds ever
material by him to build up his life anew?  Why do tenderness, beauty,
and love flock to the path of some, where others meet hatred only, and
malice, and treachery?  Why persistent happiness here, and yonder,
though merits be equal, nought but unceasing disaster?  Why is this
house for ever beset with the storm, while over that other there shines
the peace of unvarying stars?  Why genius, and riches, and health on
this side, and yonder disease, imbecility, poverty?  Whence has the
passion been sent that has wrought such terrible grief, and whence the
passion that proved the source of such wonderful joy?  Why does the
youth whom yesterday I met go on his tranquil road to profoundest
happiness, while his friend, with the same methodical, peaceful,
ignorant step, proceeds on his way to death?


19

Life will often place such problems before us; but how rarely are we
compelled to refer their solution to the supernatural, mysterious,
superhuman, or preordained!  It is only the fervent believer who will
still be content to see there the finger of divine intervention.  Such
of us, however, as have entered the house where the storm has raged, as
well as the house of peace, have rarely departed without most clearly
detecting the essentially human reasons of both peace and storm.  We
who have known the wise and upright man who has been guilty of error or
crime, are acquainted also with the circumstances which induced his
action, and these circumstances seem to us in no way supernatural.  As
we draw near to the woman whose gesture brought misery to her, we learn
very soon that this gesture might have been avoided, and that, in her
place, we should have refrained.  The friends of the man around whom
all fell into ruins, and of the neighbour who ever was able to build up
his life anew, will have observed before that the acorn sometimes will
fall on to rock, and sometimes on fertile soil.  And though poverty,
sickness, and death still remain the three inequitable goddesses of
human existence, they no longer awake in us the superstitious fears of
bygone days  We regard them to-day as essentially indifferent,
unconscious, blind.  We know that they recognise none of the ideal laws
which we once believed that they sanctioned; and it only too often has
happened that at the very moment we were whispering to ourselves of
"purification, trial, reward, punishment," their undiscerning caprice
gave the lie to the too lofty, too moral title which we were about to
bestow.


20

Our imagination, it is true, is inclined to admit, perhaps to desire,
the intervention of the superhuman; but, for all that, there are few,
even among the most mystic, who are not convinced that our moral
misfortunes are, in their essence, determined by our mind and our
character; and, similarly, that our physical misfortunes are due in
part to the workings of certain forces which often are misunderstood,
and in part to the generally ill-defined relation of cause to effect:
nor is it unreasonable to hope that light may be thrown on these
problems as we penetrate further into the secrets of nature.  We have
here a certitude upon which our whole life depends; a certitude which
is shaken only when we consider our own misfortunes, for then we shrink
from analysing or admitting the faults we ourselves have committed.
There is a hopefulness in man which renders him unwilling to grant that
the cause of his misfortune may be as transparent as that of the wave
which dies away in the sand or is hurled on the cliff, of the insect
whose little wings gleam for an instant in the light of the sun till
the passing bird absorbs its existence.


21

Let me suppose that a neighbour of mine, whom I know very intimately,
whose regular habits and inoffensive manners have won my esteem, should
successively lose his wife in a railway accident, one son at sea,
another in a fire, the third and last by disease.  I should, of course,
be painfully shocked and grieved; but still it would not occur to me to
attribute this series of disasters to a divine vengeance or an
invisible justice, to a strange, ill-starred predestination, or an
active, persistent, inevitable fatality.  My thoughts would fly to the
myriad unfortunate hazards of life; I should be appalled at the
frightful coincidence of calamity; but in me there would be no
suggestion of a superhuman will that had hurled the train over the
precipice, steered the ship on to rocks, or kindled the flames; I
should hold it incredible that such monstrous efforts could have been
put forth with the sole object of inflicting punishment and despair
upon a poor wretch, because of some error he might have committed--one
of those grave human errors which yet are so petty in face of the
universe; an error which perhaps had not issued from either his heart
or his brain, and had stirred not one blade of grass on the earth's
whole surface.


22

But he, this neighbour of mine, on whom these terrible blows have
successively fallen, like so many lightning-flashes on a black night of
storm--will he think as I do; will these catastrophes seem natural to
him, and ordinary, and susceptible of explanation?  Will not the words
destiny, fortune, hazard, ill-luck, fatality, star--the word
Providence, perhaps--assume in his mind a significance they never have
assumed before?  Will not the light beneath which he questions his
consciousness be a different light from my own, will he not feel round
his life an influence, a power, a kind of evil intention, that are
imperceptible to me?  And who is right, he or I?  Which of us two sees
more clearly, and further?  Do truths that in calmer times lie hidden
float to the surface in hours of trouble; and which is the moment we
should choose to establish the meaning of life?

The "interpreter of life," as a rule, selects the troubled hours.  He
places himself, and us, in the soul-state of his victims.  He shows
their misfortunes to us in perspective; and so sharply, concretely,
that we have for the moment the illusion of a personal disaster.  And,
indeed, it is more or less impossible for him to depict them as they
would occur in real life.  If we had spent long years with the hero of
the drama which has stirred us so painfully, had he been our brother,
our father, our friend, we should have probably noted, recognised,
counted one by one as they passed, all the causes of his misfortune,
which then would not only appear less extraordinary to us, but
perfectly natural even, and humanly almost inevitable.  But to the
"interpreter of life" is given neither power nor occasion to acquaint
us with each veritable cause.  For these causes, as a rule, are
infinitely slow in their movement, and countless in number, and slight,
and of small apparent significance.  He is therefore led to adopt a
general cause, one sufficiently vast to embrace the whole drama, in
place of the real and human causes which he is unable to show us,
unable, too, himself to examine and study.  And where shall a general
cause of sufficient vastness be found, if not in the two or three words
we breathe to ourselves when silence oppresses us: words like fatality,
divinity, Providence, or obscure and nameless justice?


23

The question we have to consider is how far this procedure can be
beneficial, or even legitimate; as also whether it be the mission of
the poet to present, and insist on, the distress and confusion of our
least lucid hours, or to add to the clear-sightedness of the moments
when we conceive ourselves to enjoy the fullest possession of our force
and our reason.  In our own misfortunes there is something of good, and
something of good must therefore be found in the illusion of personal
misfortune.  We are made to look into ourselves; our errors, our
weaknesses, are more clearly revealed; it is shown to us where we have
strayed.  There falls a light on our consciousness a thousand times
more searching, more active, than could spring from many arduous years
of meditation and study.  We are forced to emerge from ourselves, and
to let our eyes rest on those round about us; we are rendered more
keenly alive to the sorrows of others.  There are some who will tell us
that misfortune does even more--that it urges our glance on high, and
compels us to bow to a power superior to our own, to an unseen justice,
to an impenetrable, infinite mystery.  Can this indeed be the best of
all possible issues?  Ah, yes, it was well, from the standpoint of
religious morality, that misfortune should teach us to lift up our eyes
and look on an eternal, unchanging, undeniable God, sovereignly
beautiful, sovereignly just, and sovereignly good.  It was well that
the poet who found in his God an unquestionable ideal should
incessantly hold before us this unique, this definitive ideal.  But
to-day, if we look away from the truth, from the ordinary experience of
life, on what shall our eager glance rest?  If we discard the more or
less compensatory laws of conscience and inward happiness, what shall
we say when triumphant injustice confronts us, or successful,
unpunished crime?  How shall we account for the death of a child, the
miserable end of an innocent man, or the disaster hurled by cruel fate
on some unfortunate creature, if we seek explanations loftier, more
definite, more comprehensive and decisive than those that are found
satisfactory in everyday life for the reason that they are the only
ones that accord with a certain number of realities?  Is it right that
the poet, in his eager desire to contrive a solemn atmosphere for his
drama, should arouse from their slumber sentiments, errors, prejudices
and fears, which we would attack and rebuke were we to discover them in
the hearts of our friends or our children?  Man has at last, through
his study of the habits of spirit and brain, of the laws of existence,
the caprices of fate and the maternal indifference of nature--man has
at last, and laboriously, acquired some few certitudes, that are worthy
of all respect; and is the poet entitled to seize on the moment of
anguish in order to oust all these certitudes, and set up in their
place a fatality to which every action of ours gives the lie; or powers
before which we would refuse to kneel did the blow fall on us that has
prostrated his hero; or a mystic justice that, for all it may sweep
away the need for many an embarrassing explanation, bears yet not the
slightest kinship to the active and personal justice we all of us
recognise in our own personal life?


24

And yet this is what the "interpreter of life" will more or less
deliberately do from the moment he seeks to invest his work with a
lofty spirit, with a deep and religious beauty, with the sense of the
infinite.  Even though this work of his may be of the sincerest, though
it express as nearly as may be his own most intimate truth, he believes
that this truth is enhanced, and established more firmly, by being
surrounded with phantoms of a forgotten past.  Might not the symbols he
needs, the hypotheses, images, the touchstone for all that cannot be
explained, be less frequently sought in that which he knows is not
true, and more often in that which will one day be a truth?  Does the
unearthing of bygone terrors, or the borrowing of light from a Hell
that has ceased to be, make death more sublime?  Does dependence on a
supreme but imaginary will ennoble our destiny?  Does justice--that
vast network woven by human action and reaction over the unchanging
wisdom of nature's moral and physical forces--does justice become more
majestic through being lodged in the hands of a unique judge, whom the
very spirit of the drama dethrones and destroys?


25

Let us ask ourselves whether the hour may not have come for the earnest
revision of the symbols, the images, sentiments, beauty, wherewith we
still seek to glorify in us the spectacle of the world.

This beauty, these feelings and sentiments, to-day unquestionably bear
only the most distant relation to the phenomena, thoughts, nay even the
dreams, of our actual existence; and if they are suffered still to
abide with us, it is rather as tender and innocent memories of a past
that was more credulous, and nearer to the childhood of man.  Were it
not well, then, that those whose mission it is to make more evident to
us the beauty and harmony of the world we live in, should march ever
onwards, and let their steps tend to the actual truth of this world?
Their conception of the universe need not be stripped of a single one
of the ornaments wherewith they embellish it; but why seek these
ornaments so often among mere recollections, however smiling or
terrible, and so seldom from among the essential thoughts which have
helped these men to build, and effectively organise, their spiritual
and sentient life?

It can never be right to dwell in the midst of false images, even
though these are known to be false.  The time will come when the
illusory image will usurp the place of the just idea it has seemed to
represent.  We shall not reduce the part of the infinite and the
mysterious by employing other images, by framing other and juster
conceptions.  Do what we may, this part can never be lessened.  It will
always be found deep down in the heart of men, at the root of each
problem, pervading the universe.  And for all that the substance, the
place of these mysteries, may seem to have changed, their extent and
power remain for ever the same.  Has not--to take but one instance--has
not the phenomenon of the existence, everywhere among us, of a kind of
supreme and wholly spiritual justice, unarmed, unadorned, unequipped,
moving slowly but never swerving, stable and changeless in a world
where injustice would seem to reign--has this phenomenon not cause and
effect as deep, as exhaustless--is it not as astounding, as
admirable--as the wisdom of an eternal and omnipresent Judge?  Should
this Judge be held more convincing for that He is less conceivable?
Are fewer sources of beauty, or occasions for genius to exercise
insight and power, to be found in what can be explained than in what
is, _a priori_, inexplicable?  Does not, for instance, a victorious but
unjust war (such as those of the Romans, of England to-day, the
conquests of Spain in America, and so many others) in the end always
demoralise the victor and thrust upon him errors, habits, and faults
whereby he is made to pay dearly for his triumph; and is not the
minute, the relentless labour of this psychological justice as
absorbing, as vast, as the intervention of a superhuman justice?  And
may not the same be said of the justice that lives in each one of us,
that causes the space left for peace, inner happiness, love, to expand
or contract in our mind and our heart in the degree of our striving
towards that which is just or is unjust?


26

And to turn to one mystery more, the most awful of all, that of
death--would any one pretend that our perception of justice, of
goodness and beauty, or our intellectual, sentient power, our eagerness
for all that draws near to the infinite, all-powerful, eternal, has
dwindled since death ceased to be held the immense and exclusive
anguish of life?  Does not each new generation find the burden lighter
to bear as the forms of death grow less violent and its posthumous
terrors fade?  It is the illness that goes before, the physical pain,
of which we are to-day most afraid.  But death is no longer the hour of
the wrathful, inscrutable judge; no longer the one and the terrible
goal, the gulf of misery and eternal punishment.  It is slowly
becoming--indeed, in some cases, it has already become--the wished-for
repose of a life that draws to its end.  Its weight no longer oppresses
each one of our actions; and, above all--for this is the most striking
change--it has ceased to intrude itself into our morality.  And is this
morality of ours less lofty, less pure, less profound, because of the
disinterestedness it has thus acquired?  Has the loss of an
overwhelming dread robbed mankind of a single precious, indispensable
feeling?  And must not life itself find gain in the importance wrested
from death?  Surely: for the neutral forces we hold in reserve within
us are waiting and ready; and every discouragement, sorrow, or fear
that departs has its place quickly filled by a certitude, admiration,
or hope.


27

The poet is inclined to personify fatality and justice, and give
outward form to forces really within us, for the reason that to show
them at work in ourselves is a matter of exceeding difficulty; and
further, that the unknown and the infinite, to the extent that they
_are_ unknown and infinite--_i.e._ lacking personality, intelligence,
and morality--are powerless to move us.  And here it is curious to note
that we are in no degree affected by material mystery, however
dangerous or obscure, or by psychological justice, however involved its
results.  It is not the incomprehensible in nature that masters and
crushes us, but the thought that nature may possibly be governed by a
conscious, superior, reasoning will; one that, although superhuman, has
yet some kinship with the will of man.  What we dread, in a word, is
the presence of a God; and speak as we may of fatality, justice, or
mystery, it is always God whom we fear: a being, that is, like
ourselves, though almighty, eternal, invisible, and infinite.  A moral
force that was not conceived in the image of man would most likely
inspire no fear.  It is not the unknown in nature that fills us with
dread; it is not the mystery of the world we live in.  It is the
mystery of another world from which we recoil; it is the moral and not
the material enigma.  There is nothing, for instance, more obscure than
the combination of causes which produce the earthquake, that most
terrible of all catastrophes.  But the earthquake, though it alarm our
body, will bring no fear to our mind unless we regard it as an act of
justice, of mysterious vengeance, of supernatural punishment.  And so
it is, too, with the thunderstorm, with illness, with death, with the
myriad phenomena and accidents of life.  It would seem as though the
true alarm of our soul, the great fear which stirs other instincts
within us than that of mere self-preservation, is only called forth by
the thought of a more or less determinate God, of a mysterious
consciousness, a permanent, invisible justice, or a vigilant, eternal
Providence.  But does the "interpreter of life," who succeeds in
arousing this fear, bring us nearer to truth; and is it his mission to
convey to us sorrow, and trouble, and painful emotion, or peace,
satisfaction, tranquillity, and light?


28

It is not easy, I know, to free oneself wholly from traditional
interpretation, for it often succeeds in reasserting its sway upon us
at the very moment we strain every nerve to escape from our bondage.
So has it happened with Ibsen, who, in his search for a new and almost
scientific form of fatality, erected the veiled, majestic, tyrannical
figure of heredity in the centre of the very best of his dramas.  But
it is not the scientific mystery of heredity which awakens within us
those human fears that lie so much deeper than the mere animal fear;
for heredity alone could no more achieve this result than could the
scientific mystery of a dreaded disease, a stellar or marine
phenomenon.  No, the fear that differs so essentially from the one
called forth by an imminent natural danger, is aroused within us by the
obscure idea of justice which heredity assumes in the drama; by the
daring pronouncement that the sins of the fathers are almost invariably
visited on the children; by the suggestion that a sovereign Judge, a
goddess of the species, is for ever watching our actions, inscribing
them on her tablets of bronze, and balancing in her eternal hands
rewards long deferred and never-ending punishment.  In a word, even
while we deny it, it is the face of God that reappears; and from
beneath the flagstone one had believed to be sealed for ever comes once
again the murmur of the very ancient flame of Hell.


29

This new form of fatality, or fatal justice, is less defensible, and
less acceptable too, than the ancient and elementary power, which,
being general and undefined, and offering no too strict explanation of
its actions, lent itself to a far greater number of situations.  In the
special case selected by Ibsen, it is not impossible that some kind of
accidental justice may be found, as it is not impossible that the arrow
a blind man shoots into a crowd may chance to strike a parricide.  But
to found a law upon this accidental justice is a fresh perversion of
mystery, for elements are thereby introduced into human morality which
have no right to be there; elements which we would welcome, which would
be of value, if they stood for definite truths; but seeing that they
are as alien to truth as to actual life, they should be ruthlessly
swept aside.  I have shown elsewhere that our experience fails to
detect the most minute trace of justice in the phenomena of heredity;
or, in other words, that it fails to discover the slightest moral
connection between the cause: the fault of the father, and the effect:
the punishment or reward of the child.

The poet has the right to fashion hypotheses, and to forge his way
ahead of reality.  But it will often happen that when he imagines
himself to be far in advance, he will truly have done no more than turn
in a circle; that where he believes that he has discovered new truth,
he has merely strayed on to the track of a buried illusion.  In the
case I have named, for the poet to have taught us more than experience
teaches, he should have ventured still further, perhaps, in the
negation of justice.  But whatever our opinion may be on this point, it
at least is clear that the poet who desires his hypotheses to be
legitimate, and of service, must take heed that they be not too
manifestly contrary to the experience of everyday life; for in that
case they become useless and dangerous--scarcely honourable even, if
the error be deliberately made.


30

And now, what are we to conclude from all this?  Many things, if one
will, but this above all: that it behoves the "interpreter of life," no
less than those who are living that life, to exercise greatest care in
their manner of handling and admitting mystery, and to discard the
belief that whatever is noblest and best in life or in drama must of
necessity rest in the part that admits of no explanation.  There are
many most beautiful, most human, most admirable works which are almost
entirely free from this "disquiet of universal mystery."  We derive no
greatness, sublimity, or depth from unceasingly fixing our thoughts on
the infinite and the unknown.  Such meditation becomes truly helpful
only when it is the unexpected reward of the mind that has loyally,
unreservedly, given itself to the study of the finite and the knowable;
and to such a mind it will soon be revealed how strangely different is
the mystery which precedes what one does not know from the mystery that
follows closely on what one has learned.  The first would seem to
contain many sorrows, but that is only because the sorrows are grouped
there too closely, and have their home upon two of three peaks that
stand too nearly together.  In the second is far less sadness, for its
area is vast; and when the horizon is wide, there exists no sorrow so
great but it takes the form of a hope.


31

Yes, human life, viewed as a whole, may appear somewhat sorrowful; and
it is easier, in a manner pleasanter even, to speak of its sorrows and
let the mind dwell on them, than to go in search of, and bring into
prominence, the consolations life has to offer.  Sorrows
abound--infallible, evident sorrows; consolations, or rather the
reasons wherefore we accept with some gladness the duty of life, are
rare and uncertain, and hard of detection.  Sorrows seem noble, and
lofty, and fraught with deep mystery; with mystery that almost is
personal, that we feel to be near to us.  Consolations appear
egotistical, squalid, at times almost base.  But for all that, and
whatever their ephemeral likeness may be, we have only to draw closer
to them to find that they too have their mystery; and if this seem less
visible and less comprehensible, it is only because it lies deeper and
is far more mysterious.  The desire to live, the acceptance of life as
it is, may perhaps be mere vulgar expressions; but yet they are
probably in unconscious harmony with laws that are vaster, more
conformable with the spirit of the universe, and therefore more sacred,
than is the desire to escape the sorrows of life, or the lofty but
disenchanted wisdom that for ever dwells on those sorrows.


32

Our impulse is always to depict life as more sorrowful than truly it
is; and this is a serious error, to be excused only by the doubts that
at present hang over us.  No satisfying explanation has so far been
found.  The destiny of man is as subject to unknown forces to-day as it
was in the days of old; and though it be true that some of these forces
have vanished, others have arisen in their stead.  The number of those
that are really all-powerful has in no way diminished.  Many attempts
have been made, and in countless fashions, to explain the action of
these forces and account for their intervention; and one might almost
believe that the poets, aware of the futility of these explanations in
face of a reality which, all things notwithstanding, is ever revealing
more and more of itself, have fallen back on fatality as in some
measure representing the inexplicable, or at least the sadness of the
inexplicable.  This is all that we find in Ibsen, the Russian novels,
the highest class of modern fiction, Flaubert, &c. (see "War and
Peace," for instance, _L'Education Sentimentale_, and many others).

It is true that the fatality shown is no longer the goddess of old, or
rather (at least to the bulk of mankind) the clearly determinate God,
inflexible, implacable, arbitrary, blind, although constantly watchful;
the fatality of to-day is vaster, more formless, more vague, less human
or actively personal, more indifferent and more universal.  In a word,
it is now no more than a provisional appellation bestowed, until better
be found, on the general and inexplicable misery of man.  In this sense
we may accept it, perhaps, though we do no more than give a new name to
the unchanging enigma, and throw no light on the darkness.  But we have
no right to exaggerate its importance or the part that it plays; no
right to believe that we are truly surveying mankind and events from a
point of some loftiness, beneath a definitive light, or that there is
nothing to seek beyond, because at times we become deeply conscious of
the obscure and invincible force that lies at the end of every
existence.  Doubtless, from one point of view, unhappiness must always
remain the portion of man, and the fatal abyss be ever open before him,
vowed as he is to death, to the fickleness of matter, to old age and
disease.  If we fix our eyes only upon the end of a life, the happiest
and most triumphant existence must of necessity contain its elements of
misery and fatality.  But let us not make a wrong use of these words;
above all, let us not, through listlessness or undue inclination to
mystic sorrow, be induced to lessen the part of what could be explained
if we would only give more eager attention to the ideas, the passions
and feelings of the life of man and the nature of things.  Let us
always remember that we are steeped in the unknown; for this thought is
the most fruitful of all, the most sustaining and salutary.  But the
neutrality of the unknown does not warrant our attributing to it a
force, or designs, or hostility, which it cannot be proved to possess.
At Erfurt, in his famous interview with Goethe, Napoleon is said to
have spoken disparagingly of the dramas in which fatality plays a great
part--the plays that we, in our "passion for calamity," are apt to
consider the finest.  "They belong," he remarked, "to an epoch of
darkness; but how can fatality touch us to-day?  Policy--_that_ is
fatality!"  Napoleon's dictum is not very profound: policy is only the
merest fragment of fatality; and his destiny very soon made it manifest
to him that the desire to contain fatality within the narrow bounds of
policy was no more than a vain endeavour to imprison in a fragile vase
the mightiest of the spiritual rivers that bathe our globe.  And yet,
incomplete as this thought of Napoleon's may have been, it still throws
some light on a tributary of the great river.  It was a little thing,
perhaps, but on these uncertain shores it is the difference between a
little thing and nothing that kindles the energy of man and confirms
his destiny.  By this ray of light, such as it was, he long was enabled
to dominate all that portion of the unknown which he declined to term
fatality.  To us who come after him, the portion of the unknown that he
controlled may well seem insufficient, if surveyed from an eminence,
and yet it was truly one of the vastest that the eye of man has ever
embraced.  Through its means every action of his was accomplished, for
evil or good.  This is not the place to judge him, or even to wonder
whether the happiness of a century might not have been better served
had he allowed events to guide him; what we are considering here is the
docility of the unknown.  For us, with our humbler destinies, the
problem still is the same, and the principle too; the principle being
that of Goethe: "to stand on the outermost limit of the conceivable;
but never to overstep this line, for beyond it begins at once the land
of chimeras, the phantoms and mists of which are fraught with danger to
the mind."  It is only when the intervention of the mysterious,
invisible, or irresistible becomes strikingly real, actually
perceptible, intelligent, and moral, that we are entitled to yield or
lay down our arms, meekly accepting the inactive silence they bring;
but their intervention, within these limits, is rarer than one
imagines.  Let us recognise that mystery of this kind exists; but,
until it reveal itself, we have not the right to halt, or relax our
efforts; not the right to cast down our eyes in submission, or resign
ourselves to silence.




